

Regina versus Kristian Latsos [2000] NSWSC 1287 (2 July 2000) 
REGINA v. Kristian LATSOS /96 
Friday 9 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Kristian Latsos has appealed against the severity of four sentences imposed upon him for the following offences: 
Supply of heroin (a total of 9.43 gm) to an undercover police operative seeking heroin on 3, 6 and 16 March 1995 - a concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.

Agreement to supply heroin (10 gm) on 16 March 1995 to an undercover police operative at his request during the supply on that day - a concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.

The applicant was arrested on both charges mentioned above on 16 March 1995 and granted bail.

Deemed supply of cocaine (3.69 gm) on 14 April 1996 at Pyrmont. Cocaine was thrown by the applicant from his car after being requested to stop by police on random breath test duties. The applicant had to be pursued and made to stop. A concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed. The applicant was granted bail on 14 April 1996.

Deemed supply of heroin (51.3 gm) on 3 July 1996 at North Sydney. The police pursued the applicant. He drove dangerously and ran his vehicle into the police vehicle. He tried to empty bags of white powder. Much of it did not escape out the window but blew around inside the car. In addition, the quantity of heroin mentioned was found in the car.

A minimum term of five years and an additional term of three years were imposed taking into account possession of heroin (1.42 gm) on 14 April 1996, goods in custody ($772) on 14 April 1996, possession of heroin (0.96 gm) on 3
July 1996 at Oatley, goods in custody ($350) on 3 July 1996 at Oatley, drive an unregistered vehicle on 14 April 1996 and drive dangerously on 3 July 1996.

The judge applied the principle of totality in determining the sentences. The judge was much troubled by the applicant committing the April 1996 and July offences while on bail for drug offences. This was an aggravating feature. The July 1996 offences were extraordinary.

Prior to these offences the applicant had only one other offence, namely, possessing a prohibited drug in 1994 for which he received a small fine.

The following factors favourable to the applicant were accepted by the judge: 
He was a young man aged twenty-three who had not previously been in gaol.

He had pleaded guilty; the Crown case was a very strong one.

There was no evidence of any concealed wealth.

Since his custody had commenced on 3 July 1996 he had taken some initial steps along the path of rehabilitation.

He had no prior criminal record of consequence.

He was a qualified tradesman.

The judge was prepared to accept, as appeared to be the case, that the applicant was a relatively small player in the drug scene dealing in small quantities. The applicant was not in the middle management grade.

It may be that he developed a drug habit which he could not support on his income as a plumber and that he started selling drugs to cover the cost of his own habit. This is speculative as the applicant did not give evidence.

The judge thought, correctly, that there were special circumstances and that the applicant would need supervising for longer than normal.

Both at the trial and in this Court there was a major contest as to what discount, if any, the applicant should be given for assisting the police.

On 13 April 1995 the applicant supplied certain information which proved to be of little use. On 18 September 1995 the applicant supplied further information from which the police were able to identify two suspected dealers. The activities of both were already well known to the police.

Following information supplied by the applicant on 9 October 1995, a search warrant was executed at the home of the suspected drug dealers. There was virtually a nil result as to drugs. A third person was charged with possessing a shortened firearm. No evidence was obtained against the suspected dealers and the effect of the search may well have been to cause them to suspend their activity. Absent active assistance from the applicant, the police decided not to proceed with any further operations as to the two suspects. The applicant claimed that his life would be in danger if he took a more active role and the suspects deduced that he was supplying information.

Viewed objectively, the information provided to the police was of little practical use. Some of it appears to have been incorrect leading to the abortive search and the alerting of the suspects. The police obtained no evidence as a result. The information confirmed what the police already knew in large part and did not significantly advance their store of knowledge.

The supply of information has to be encouraged. It will not always be productive. There should be a slight discount. The judge was correct in holding that no significant reduction could be made for the information supplied to the authorities. The judge referred to the information being supplied by the prisoner for his own benefit. There are relatively few cases where information is supplied that self interest is not an important factor.
Whilst the advancement of self interest may well bear upon whether any contrition is genuine, it does not disentitle an informant to a discount. The critical factors are the supply of useful information and the giving of evidence. The police need information and it often has to be obtained from those who are criminals or have criminal propensities or associates.

A minimum term of five years is a heavy sentence for a man of twenty-three who has never been to gaol before and whose only prior offence is a minor one. We are essentially dealing with three episodes of criminality: March 1995, April and July 1996. The serious aggravating feature is that not only did the applicant commit the April 1996 offence while on bail, but he also committed the July 1996 offences. He had legal advice as early as 13 April 1995. The materials recorded on tapes indicated that he was familiar with the way in which the drug trade functions but he does seem to be a relatively small time operative.
That is bad enough.

Having regard to the whole of the circumstances, I am of the opinion that the sentence imposed was excessive and that a correct sentence would be one of seven years with a minimum term of four years and an additional term of three years. I am satisfied that there are special circumstances and that a longer than usual term will be needed by way of supervised rehabilitation. I have taken into account the offences on Form 2 as earlier mentioned.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: Leave to appeal is granted, the appeal is allowed and the sentence imposed on the count of deemed supply of heroin on 3 July 1996 is quashed. In lieu thereof, the applicant is sentenced to seven years imprisonment comprising a minimum term of four years to commence on 2 July 1996 and to end on 1 July 2000 and an additional term of three years to commence on 2 July 2000. All other sentences are confirmed.
 * * * 
