

Kirton and Anor versus Nethery No. 2410/96 Estoppel - Sale of land [1996] NSWSC (6 September 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
McLELLAND CJ in EQ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 4, 8-9 July 1996 #DATE 15:7:1996 #ADD :9:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs    R W R Parker QC with J E Armfield 
S Epstein appeared for the Defendant
ORDER 
Claim dismissed
JUDGE1
McLELLAND CJ in EQ These proceedings have been brought on for final hearing as a matter of urgency and under severe time constraints with the co-operation of the parties, so that all those involved may know their respective positions as possible.
In these circumstances, in order to avoid unnecessary delay, I have confined my reasons for judgment in the main to matters essential to a decision of the case, and have omitted dealing with numerous other matters which were the subject of evidence and argument.
The defendant is the owner of a house property at Putney. On 7 May 1996 she engaged Richardson and Wrench, Gladesville (the agent) to submit the property for sale by public auction on 15 June 1996 and granted the agent exclusive selling rights for a period of three months from 15 May 1996. In accordance with [s.66R](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66r.html) of the [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) the agent was provided with a copy of the proposed contract which had been prepared by the defendant's solicitor Ms Casula.
 .
The agent arranged for an "open house" inspection of the property on
Saturday, 25 May 1996 which was supervised by its director
Mr Jabbour. On and after 25 May several offers to purchase the property before auction were communicated to Mr Jabbour by each of two couples namely the plaintiffs and Mr and Mrs Rumble. The plaintiffs, and presumably the Rumbles also, had obtained from the agent a copy of the proposed contract. Prior to 1 June all such offers had been refused by the defendant.
The plaintiffs assert that on 1 June, after another "open house" inspection attended by Mr Jabbour, they made an offer of $375,000.00 which was accepted by the defendant and that an agreement was made that contracts would be exchanged on Monday, 3 June, and that on the latter date exchange was deferred by agreement to 4 June. In fact, no exchange of contracts occurred between the defendant and the plaintiffs. On 4 June, in circumstances which it is unnecessary to recount in detail, a written contract for the sale of the property for $391,600.00 was entered into between the defendant and the
Rumbles. It has been suggested that this contract was not entered into until June 1996 when Ms Casula caused the vendor's counterpart to be physically delivered to the Rumbles' solicitor. The evidence establishes in my opinion that there was a constructive exchange of contracts on 4 June when both signed counterparts were in the custody of Ms
Casula. and there was an agreement between her and the Rumbles' solicitor by telephone to effect exchange at that time and for Ms
Casula to date the contracts accordingly, which she did, in consequence of which Ms Casula constituted herself as the Rumbles' solicitor's agent to hold the vendor's counterpart to the order of that solicitor (see
Domb versus Isoz [1980 Ch 548]
In these proceedings the plaintiffs claim that the defendant is under a legally binding obligation to sell the property to them for $375,000.00 on the terms and conditions of the proposed contract supplied to the agent, and seek to enforce that obligation.
The plaintiffs' case, as pleaded, is based both on contract and on equitable estoppel. However, the case in contract was abandoned at the hearing, and it is plain that [s.54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) would render any contract of the kind pleaded unenforceable for want of writing, whether it be regarded as an oral contract for sale of the property, or as an oral contract to sign (or exchange) a written agreement for sale of the property (see Daulia v Four Millbank
Nominees [1978 Ch 23] and McConville versus Australian
Telecommunication Commission [1991 NSW Conv R 59-410).]
I turn now to the question of equitable estoppel.
It is common ground that on 1 June the plaintiffs communicated to Mr
Jabbour an offer to buy the property for $372,000.00, Mr Jabbour informed them that that offer was refused, the plaintiffs then communicated to Mr Jabbour an increase of the offer to $375,000.00, Mr Jabbour told the plaintiffs that that figure was accepted by the defendant, and it was arranged between the plaintiffs and Mr Jabbour that the plaintiffs would attend at Mr Jabbour's office at 4:00 pm on Monday, June to exchange contracts and pay the 10% deposit. There is however a substantial dispute: as to whether at the time the plaintiffs communicated the offer of $372,000.00, Mr Jabbour made a statement to the following effect, "Assuming the vendor does agree to sell prior to auction and we come to an agreement on a price, are you in a position to pay the 10% deposit and exchange immediately? This is an auction property and it can't come off the market until we have a deposit and a contract and you waive the cooling off period.
Can you do that?", to which the plaintiffs assented; and as to whether Mr Jabbour had authority from the defendant to promise to sell the property to the plaintiffs otherwise than on condition that the property remained "on the market" until contracts had been exchanged, the deposit paid and the cooling off period waived (ie by the provision of a certificate under [s.66W](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66w.html) of the [Conveyancing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/)).
It is not necessary to resolve these disputed issues, because in my opinion even if both issues were to be resolved in favour of the plaintiffs, the plaintiffs would nevertheless not be entitled to the relief they claim for the reasons appearing below.
The asserted equitable estoppel is alleged to arise from the circumstance that to the defendant's knowledge the plaintiffs were induced by the defendant's agreement to sell the property to them for $375,000.00 (which was communicated to them at about 3:30 pm on 1 June), to refrain from attending an auction at 4:00 pm that day and bidding for another property in which they were interested, at Burwood. It is common ground that at or about the time the offer of $372,000.00 was communicated by the plaintiffs both Mr Jabbour and the defendant were told by one or other of the plaintiffs that they were interested in the Burwood property and intended to seek to purchase that property at auction at 4:00 pm that afternoon, if their offer for the Putney property was not accepted before then.
The plaintiffs rely on the principles derived from the decision of the
High Court in Waltons Stores (Interstate) versus Maher supra.
In argument counsel for the plaintiffs invoked, and counsel for the defendant accepted the validity of the following passage from my judgment in Murray's Meats v
Bevillesta (28 October 1993, unreported): "... So far as estoppel is concerned, it must be remembered that the facts of Waltons Stores were exceptional, and it is an essential element of the principle of estoppel as expounded in that case that the conduct of the party sought to be estopped be properly characterised as "unconscionable": see Austotel v
Franklins Self-Serve [16 NSWLR 582.] "Unconscionable" is a modern term for a species of what used to be called equitable fraud and connotes conduct found offensive to the objective judicial conscience by reference to established categories of unconscionability or by analogy to such established categories.
As has been said in the High Court of a related doctrine, it does not represent "a medium for the indulgence of idiosyncratic notions of fairness and justice" (cf Muschinski versus Dodds <case>; [160 CLR ] at 615). Nor, I would add, does it justify the supersession of accepted principles of law by reference to some form of palm-tree justice. ..."
I adhere to that statement and would emphasise that in this context the expression "unconscionable" is a legal term of art which, as Mason CJ pointed out in Commonwealth versus Verwayen 170 CLR 394 at 416, connotes something more than "morally reprehensible" (and see generally Breen versus Williams [(1995) 6 Med
LR 385] at 404 per Bryson J).
In my opinion the plaintiff's reliance on equitable estoppel as entitling them to relief in the present case is unsustainable.
The plaintiffs rely on the statement of the elements necessary to be proved to establish an equitable estoppel in the judgment of Brennan J in
Waltons Stores at 428-9. The first such element is that: "(1) the plaintiff assumed that a particular legal relationship then existed between the plaintiff and the defendant or expected that a particular legal relationship would exist between them and, in the latter case, that the defendant would not be free to withdraw from the expected legal relationship;".

The element thus summarised is the subject of extended discussion by his
Honour, particularly at pages 421-3 of the judgment. At 421 his Honour says: "... But if the party raising the estoppel is induced by the other party's promise to adopt an assumption or expectation, the promise must be intended by the promisor and understood by the promisee to affect their legal relations." 
On the same page his Honour says: "...it is important to observe that the doctrine has no application to an assumption or expectation induced by a promise which is not intended by the promisor and understood by the promisee to affect their legal relations." 
In the joint judgment of Mason CJ and Wilson J in the same case it is said that: "generally speaking, a plaintiff cannot enforce a voluntary promise because the promisee may reasonably be expected to appreciate that, to render it binding, it must form part of a binding contract" (at 403), and that: "a voluntary promise will not generally give rise to an estoppel because the promisee may reasonably be expected to appreciate that he cannot safely rely upon it. This problem is magnified ... where the parties were represented by their solicitors." (at 406).
As is well known, real estate in New South Wales is ordinarily sold by signing and exchanging counterpart contracts in the form approved by the Real
Estate Institute and the Law Society with such additions or variations as the circumstances may require.
So entrenched is this practice that there has been authoritatively held to be a (rebuttable) presumption that there is no binding contract until contracts are exchanged even where there is written evidence of a putative contract (see eg GR Securities versus Baulkham
Hills Private HoVital [1987 NSW Conv R 55-324] at 57016). The context in which the negotiations between the parties proceeded in the present case strongly supports the inference of a mutual expectation by all involved that there would be no binding contract until exchange. The second plaintiff (by whom the first plaintiff was no doubt guided on legal matters arising in this transaction) is a practising barrister of many years standing whose areas of practice include property law, conveyancing and equity. He can hardly have failed to appreciate, when notified of the defendant's acceptance of the $375,000.00 offer, that there was not, and would not be until exchange, any binding contract between the parties, and that the plaintiffs could not safely rely on any promise by the defendant to sell the property to them until such exchange had taken place. It would have been unreasonable for any person in the position of the plaintiffs to have failed to appreciate that in law the defendant was free to withdraw from the contemplated sale until contracts were exchanged.

There are other evidentiary matters pointing in the same direction. On the plaintiffs' case, if the defendant had an enforceable obligation to exchange contracts with the plaintiffs, then reciprocally the plaintiffs had an enforceable obligation to exchange contracts with the defendant. Yet the events of Monday, 3 June seem to contradict any belief by the plaintiffs that they were yet bound in law. On that day the first plaintiff requested Mr
Jabbour to defer until the following day the appointment to exchange contracts. The reason she gave was that the loan officer of the bank from which the plaintiffs expected to obtain the finance for the purchase had told her that it would be necessary to have a valuation of the property carried out and that he would organise this urgently. According to her own evidence the first plaintiff said to Mr Jabbour, "Fred, because the price is a bit more than we expected to pay, we need to get a valuation done for the loan. A valuer will be ringing you shortly to organise a time to look at the house".
Subsequently, an appointment was made for the valuer to inspect the house at :30 am the following day, 4 June. According to her own evidence the first plaintiff rang Mr Jabbour again and said, "We can't sign until the valuer has completed his work but we are serious about the house and we want to leave a holding deposit". It is difficult to reconcile the plaintiffs' desire to defer exchange of contracts with a belief on their part that they were already legally bound to the defendant.
I should add that when the first plaintiff did go to
Mr Jabbour's office after 5:00 pm on 3 June with a cheque for $500.00 as a "holding deposit", in exchange for which she obtained a receipt on which Mr Jabbour had written (inter alia) the words "deposit is subject to exchange of contracts", it was made clear to her by Mr Jabbour that until exchange of contracts was effected, the property was not secured for the plaintiffs and the defendant was at liberty to consider any other offer which may be made. In her own evidence the first plaintiff says that Mr Jabbour told her on this occasion "Other people have had pest inspections done and one of them might ring up and make an offer. I would have to pass that on but I won't be showing the property to anyone else."
For the above reasons, the claim based on equitable estoppel must fail. I do not intend to suggest that there were no other difficulties in the way of success of that claim.
The plaintiffs' claim must be dismissed and the defendant is entitled to an order on her cross-claim for removal of the plaintiffs' caveat. There appears to me to be no reason why costs should not follow the event.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/414.html  
