

Regina versus Soonius Matter No Cca 60244/97 [1998] NSWSC 760 (29 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
REGINA versus FRANCISCUS GERADUS JOSEF SOONIUS 
CCA 60244/97 May 1998 
Hulme J, Hidden J, Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
HULME, J: I will ask Greg James, J. to deliver the first judgment. 
GREG JAMES, J: On the evening of 15 July 1996 the appellant arrived at Sydney Kingsford Smith Airport, having travelled on Qantas flight two from London. He approached the Australian Customs Service officer, the Marshalling Officer, who was charged with the duties of processing inwards passenger immigration and customs formalities, at approximately 8.23 pm and was cleared for an unimpeded exit from customs. 
Shortly thereafter he approached another customs officer. There was evidence that he did so in the company of a woman passenger he had met on the flight.
He was carrying a black hard-sided suitcase, a green backpack and a white plastic carry bag. That customs officer matched the baggage tag on his ticket to that on the hard-sided suitcase, the side of which and one of the locks of which were open. The appellant admitted that it was his bag but claimed that it had become broken, and further admitted that he had packed the bag himself.

On the customs officer searching the bag, it appeared that the lid was unusually heavy and indeed the bag itself was unusually heavy, as was noted not only by that officer but other officers. On x-ray it appeared that the bag contained illicit contents. Thereafter the appellant was interviewed, and in various interviews admitted that he had come to Australia with "a lead-lined suitcase" allegedly for the purpose of removing from Australia, illicitly, a large quantity of cash.

Subsequent to these interviews he assisted the authorities by participating in a controlled delivery of the drugs that, not surprisingly, were located secreted inside the suitcase when the customs officers came to make a more detailed examination of it. The suitcase had concealed within it 29,450 tablets of 3/4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), known as Ecstasy, weighing in total 6.135 kilograms, comprising 3,340 kilograms of pure MDMA, the value of which on the retail market would be "an absolute maximum" of $70 for each tablet, that is, a total of $2,063,000, and at a wholesale bulk rate of about $15 per tablet, $400,000, "give or take, depends on supply and demand, time of year".

The appellant was charged with importing into Australia prohibited imports to which s.233B of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) applies, to wit narcotic drugs consisting of the MDMA located in the suitcase, which it was alleged was a quantity not less than the commercial quantity applicable to
MDMA. The commercial quantity for MDMA was .5 kilograms. The maximum penalty thereby applicable is life imprisonment with or without a fine.

Dealing with the conviction first: at trial, only one real issue of contest emerged. That was whether it was proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant knew that the suitcase he was carrying contained the drugs. On that issue evidence was called by the prosecution from a psychiatrist, and by the defence from the appellant and a psychiatrist. Of less direct relevance on this question, evidence was called from the appellant's neighbouring passenger during the flight, the woman who had accompanied him to the customs office, and also of interviews with customs and Australian Federal Police officers, including interviews shortly after his arrival, recorded on video tape.

The appellant denied knowledge of the drugs. The psychiatric evidence was of the appellant suffering from depression and personality disorder, but it did not establish that he had such a condition as would make it unlikely that he would have known of the drugs, but did establish a significant mental impairment. The Crown contended that in all the circumstances the appellant must have known of the drugs.

The appellant seeks leave to appeal against conviction and seeks leave to appeal in respect of the sentence of 11 years imprisonment with a non-parole period of six years to commence on 15 July 1996 imposed by the learned trial judge. The appellant is unrepresented in respect of the conviction appeal, and in his notice of appeal has asserted that the conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory and not supported by the evidence.

In addition, the appellant has provided to the court a number of written documents by way of submission which upon analysis appear to assert that the conviction was unsafe on the basis that the appellant lacked the necessary intention, in that he did not have the necessary knowledge of the contents of the suitcase.

Particularly, reference is made to his mental state at the time of the offence, not for the purpose of a defence of mental illness, but for the purpose of highlighting an asserted inadequacy of proof that he was aware to the requisite legal extent of the proscribed contents of the suitcase. Thus the relevance of the psychiatric evidence referred to above, which accepted that the appellant had the impairment I have already referred to, such that he might have been in a "dissociative state" and thus rendered more vulnerable to persuasion to commit the offence or to make an error of judgment, as it was expressed in the evidence.

In argument before us today the appellant in his oral submissions has really gone over the material that he presented to us in writing, drawing our attention to specific detail in support of that proposition. The appellant's account was that he believed the suitcase was not designed for the purpose of bringing anything into Australia, but notwithstanding that, he had tested the suitcase when it had been supplied to him by the person who he was, improbably, unable to identify fully, who had recruited him for an improbable task and was paying him for that task improbable amounts, by piercing it with a needle to ascertain what it contained before bringing it to Australia. On his account, of course, it should not have contained anything. This account given by the appellant was of the highest order of improbability, and I need not stay to examine the manifold deficiencies of it.

That account was not so bizarre in itself as necessarily to excite the professional attentions of the psychiatrists. His background medical situation and circumstances were, however. Yet none of the evidence either of Dr.
Roberts or of Dr. Nielssen went further relevantly than suggesting that the appellant's medical condition was such that he could be persuaded to do things without full awareness of the consequences.

The consequence was that his Honour sought assistance from counsel as to the significance of that evidence and the use to which it might be put in the summing-up. His Honour, without objection from either counsel, directed the jury:- "Where it really plays a part, as I understand it, in this case in this, that the counsel for the accused says in relation to the doctors that his susceptibility to undertake being talked into because of his immaturity and gullibility he would be susceptible to being used by people such as Rene or the person that was using him.

His judgment would be impaired in relation to what he was told and in relation to the substance as to what he was doing. This would be one of the reasons that this impairment of judgment that it is said he suffered from would be such that he would not make the enquiries that would expect an ordinary person to make. He should be such that he would be prepared to accept what people told him by way of explanation, if anything.

And it is because of that impairment that he has in relation to his mental condition, if you accept it, that that would be the reason he did not make the enquiries the Crown suggests that he should have made in the light of the circumstances that are proved. That whilst it might have put other people to enquiry it was not sufficient to put him to enquiry because of this impairment of this judgment, gullibility and the like. That is entirely a matter for you, in the circumstances, as to whether you accept the evidence as to his gullibility and his other impairments suggested by Dr. Roberts and Dr.
Nielssen in the light of their conferences with him." 
There was no doubt that the appellant had suffered from depression and was taking medication for that. There was no doubt that on the appellant's own account he had placed himself in a most difficult financial and personal situation which might well have supplied the motive for his bringing drugs to
Australia, or indeed, to smuggle cash out of Australia.

No objection was taken by counsel to the way in which his Honour put the matter, and indeed on my reading of the evidence it would seem to me that his
Honour was, if anything, putting the matter generously to the appellant.
However, I can find no basis on which there can be any valid criticism of the psychiatric evidence on any suggested fresh evidence basis, as was proposed as a basis of criticism by the appellant in his oral submissions today.

No complaint was made by counsel appearing at the trial of the way in which his Honour directed the jury concerning the mental element of the offence charged. The evidence of the other necessary elements of the offence was not in contest. As a logical proposition, the requisite mental element would have been satisfied if the appellant either knew or believed that the suitcase contained narcotic goods, and his Honour's directions considered in a practical context in the matter in my view cannot be faulted, particularly having regard to the observations made by the High Court of Australia in that line of cases commencing with Regina v. He Kaw Teh <case>; [(1984) 157 CLR 523]; Regina v. Kural <case>; [70
ALR 658]; Regina v. Saad <case>; [70
ALR 667]; and
Regina v. Pereira <case>; [(1988) 35 A Crim R 382.] 
The evidence included evidence of excessive weight of the suitcase. It included evidence of the suspicious circumstances and a preposterous story of how and why the appellant came to journey to Australia with a suitcase he asserted he believed to be "lead lined" but containing no contraband. The evidence included the test mentioned above performed by the appellant at an entirely inappropriate time unless he suspected he was carrying contraband, and performed in a way appropriate to detect drugs, not cash.

It included the absence of any instruction as to picking up the money except for an instruction to ring through to the principal a coded message as to the sun shining and the weather being bright, notwithstanding the arrival at night time, to enable the applicant to be met in Sydney immediately on his arrival.

The evidence included that the applicant was educated and intelligent, albeit with a tumultuous personal life, and that he was perceptive and appreciative of his situation in his conversations with and assistance to the officers. In addition, when the applicant gave evidence he was cross-examined. The cross- examination was most powerful in its attack upon the appellant's denial that he knew the contents of the suitcase. Considering all the evidence closely I am of the view that there is no significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. (Regina v. M [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at 494; see Regina v. McKnoulty [(1994) 77 A Crim R 333).] I feel no doubt as to the correctness of the verdict, nor do I see any basis upon which it could be said that it was not open to the jury on the evidence at trial to fail to entertain a doubt, or that on this evidence the jury must have had a reasonable doubt.

I can see no basis on which the appellant might reasonably complain about the absence of witnesses, including witnesses as to his state of mental health in
Holland, the psychiatrist from Holland whose report was used in evidence, the
Customs Marshalling Officer, the Qantas booking clerk, or the taped conversation, since I am unable to see on what the appellant has here advanced how their evidence might materially have assisted the appellant at his trial.

In my view the conviction must stand, and I see nothing in the other matters raised in his written material by the appellant which casts any doubt upon the appropriateness of the verdict or the procedure at trial. I see nothing in the criticisms by him of his own counsel or the criticism of the conduct of the trial by the learned trial judge which in any way would indicate any reasonable basis for complaint.

I see nothing in what was said in the oral argument referring to the solicitor's letter, Exhibit A, or the evidence of Customs Officer Covill, in the light of the jury question, which would assist the appellant.

Turning to sentence; on sentence the learned trial judge proceeded on the basis that the applicant was a courier for reward in a commercial transaction, but that the drug imported was not heroin or cocaine. On analysis it appears that his Honour had regard to the matters set out in [s.16A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/), and particularly to subjective matters including the applicant's age, family background including educational and sporting attainments, prior good character, offer of future assistance, and the fact that he would be serving a sentence far away from his family and probably in segregation.

His Honour sentenced the applicant to 11 years imprisonment with a non-parole period of six years to date from arrest, having deducted two years from the head sentence he would otherwise have imposed for the assistance furnished by the applicant. It would appear therefore that his Honour, without reference to the assistance, would have been prepared to sentence the applicant to a head sentence of 13 years.

His Honour does not appear to have given any credit for that assistance directly in respect of the non-parole period, which is however a period of lesser than usual proportion to the head sentence, a matter which may be explicable in part by recognition of the peculiar features of the applicant's case: see Regina v. Bernier (CCA, unreported 19 May 1988 at p 9). His
Honour was of the view that the applicant showed no remorse and was not entitled to any mitigation that a plea of guilty might have given him.

The most important factors in his Honour's deliberations were contained in the material before him, which on sentence included the written reports of the psychiatrist and a psychologist, supplementing the oral evidence given at trial. It was clear that at the time of the commission of the offence the applicant had suffered from psychological and psychiatric conditions such as to render him particularly vulnerable. His Honour said:- "Now, these are all matters that the authorities say should be taken into consideration on sentence, and they will be, but in the circumstances of this particular case in the light of the evidence at the trial I do not consider that deterrence both general and personal are matters that can be completely ignored. However, I take his condition into consideration on sentence." 
Presumably by this his Honour meant that the sentence would reflect reduced components of personal and general deterrence to accommodate the psychological and psychiatric conditions.

It is submitted on the applicant's behalf either that his Honour erred in starting a calculation process at too high a level, or in the light of comparable sentences for importation of commercial quantities of amphetamine, that his Honour failed to give appropriate weight to the applicant's psychiatric condition, since it is well established that the existence of a significant psychiatric condition at the time of the commission of the offence can be an important mitigating factor, depending on all the circumstances.

It is submitted that in the totality of the circumstances, having regard to the medical condition from which the applicant suffered, the sentence is manifestly excessive even for such a quantity, particularly compared to those imposed on other couriers.

As against that the Director points out that albeit the drug was a "mid-range" drug, the amount involved was more than six times the commercial quantity, and that his Honour appears to have made provision for the particular case at a lower than usual proportion of non-parole period to head sentence. It is curious that although this drug is said to be a mid-range drug and thus not to be directly compared with heroin or cocaine, the limits for commercial quantities are set at a dramatically lesser figure, and that such a sentence as this approaches that for couriers of one or more kilograms of heroin or cocaine.

There is no question but that this crime required condign punishment involving a substantial sentence. There can be no question but that the sentence passed, and sentences much less than it, would be substantial sentences meting out condign punishment. Those sentences would contain, as this sentence does contain, important elements of both general and personal deterrence.

The Director has drawn our attention to other cases including one in which a sentence of 10 years with a seven and a half year non-parole period in respect of 40.9 grams of Ecstasy has been upheld as appropriate, though stern: see
Regina v. Dizel (CCA, unreported 23 August 1996). Other cases referred to include Regina v. Schaal (Wood, J., unreported 8 September 1989); Regina v. Moore & Wiebe (CCA, unreported 11 August 1992); and Regina v.
Bowers (CCA, unreported 20 June 1997).

It is submitted that the sentence in this instant case, notwithstanding its particular peculiar features, is appropriate, working primarily on the basis of a comparison of quantities involved in this and other cases. The quantity and nature of the drug involved in such offences are no doubt very important, but cases are to be considered not by simply comparing quantities involved with final sentences imposed. The very provisions of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/), and in particular [s.16A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16a.html), speak against such a simplistic approach. The quantities involved must be considered along with all the matters to which a court's attention is directed by the Act and by principle.

The Director further submits that the psychiatric condition of the applicant in this case, whilst relevant, is not to be regarded as in any significant sense causative of the offending, and therefore of little weight in the upshot. This submission is made notwithstanding that the evidence accepted by his Honour on the issue appears to have established the applicant's particular vulnerability to be recruited for this offence, and that he, because of his ailment, would be a person less able to appreciate the substance and consequences of his behaviour. The submission that this ailment should be disregarded on the basis that vulnerable persons are more likely to be recruited and therefore are a more appropriate subject for general and personal deterrence is in the teeth of [s.16A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16a.html), and contrary to general sentencing principles which require a discrimination between those involved in criminality through vulnerability and those who can offer no excuse, explanation or mitigation for their involvement. Such an argument seeks to place all persons on an equal footing, notwithstanding the advantages and disadvantages that may have been applicable to each, and to reduce sentencing to an exercise in which subjective matters have little or no weight. The submission should be rejected.

The sentence is curiously structured, and his Honour gave no reasons for the unusual proportion of head sentence to non-parole period. Indeed it would appear, in particular from the lack of reasons dealing with the question of proportionality and such matters as s.16G of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/), that some unexpressed error has kept into the final result. In my view, having regard to the psychiatric evidence and the sentences reviewed by this court so recently in Bernier (supra), considering those very cases to which our attention has been drawn by the Crown, the sentence exceeds a range which is appropriate.

When one has regard to the findings his Honour made as to the psychiatric condition, the matters giving rise to the discount, the necessity for treatment, probable segregation, absence of family support and such matters, as will render the sentence a particular onerous one, having regard to the views of this court in Bernier (supra), in my view a sentence of nine years with a five year and three month non-parole period was warranted in law and should be imposed.

I would propose the appeal against conviction be dismissed, the application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted, the appeal on sentence upheld, the sentences imposed by the learned trial judge be quashed and in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced to imprisonment for nine years with a five year and three month non-parole period to date from 15 July 1996 and expiring on 14 October 2001.

HULME, J: I agree. 
HIDDEN, J: I also agree. 
HULME, J: The orders of the court are as Justice Greg James indicated. * * * 
