

Gregory V Hudson [1997] NSWSC 140 (17 April 1997) `GREGORY V HUDSON` `2493/96` ``Friday 4 April 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is the determination of a separate question arising in the estate of Royce Gregory deceased. The plaintiff is the deceased's widow and an applicant under the [Family Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/), the defendants are the executors of the will who have duly taken out probate. 
The question raised by the summons for separate determination is whether, on the true construction of Mr Gregory's will of 23 May 1995 and a discretionary trust deed of 3 June 1994, the disposition in clause 6 of the will is, or is not, valid. The point argued before me is whether the clause is a delegation of the testator's will making power.

Clause 6 of the will reads as follows:- "6. I GIVE DEVISE AND BEQUEATH to my Trustees the rest and residue of my real and personal estate of whatsoever nature and wheresoever situate UPON TRUST to pay my funeral and testamentary expenses and debts and all death probate estate succession and other like duties payable in respect of my estate and to hold the residue then remaining UPON TRUST to pay distribute or transfer such residue to the Trustee for the time being of the Royce 
Gregory Family Trust created by a certain Deed of Trust made the 3rd day of June 1994 between 
Ronald Kenneth Heinrich as Settlor and Datpie 
Pty Limited (now known as Royce Gregory Investments 
Pty Limited)(A.C.N. 064 336 232) as Trustee to hold such residue upon the trusts of the aforesaid 
Deed of Trust dated the 3rd day of June 1994 and as varied from time to time before or after my death." 
It is necessary to go to the trust deed to see the nature of the trusts. The deed is in what is a standard form for discretionary trusts. Under this standard form, a settlor, who is a stranger to the main actor in the drama, settles a nominal amount of money on trustees. There is then a discretion to pay the income of the fund to one or more of the beneficiaries as defined exclusively of the others in such shares or proportions as the trustee may determine (clause 2.2) or alternatively, to accumulate the income for at least a limited period. Then, on a vesting date which could be up to 70 years in the future, the trustee pays the capital to such one or more of the beneficiaries exclusive of the others in such shares or proportions as it in its absolute discretion shall determine. The beneficiaries are then described in such a way that, while the first few headings are persons related to the main actor, there is the potentiality for the main actor through his or her control of a corporate or friendly trustee to add almost all the world as potential beneficiaries.

In the deed in the present case, "Beneficiaries" are defined in clause 1.1 of the deed as meaning and including:- "(a) Royce Gregory (also known as Ernest Royce 
Gregory); 
Akiko Gregory; any issue (including children and remoter issue) of Royce Gregory or Akiko Gregory whenever born and including legally adopted children; any spouse of any Beneficiary falling within the class of Beneficiary referred to in Clause 1.1(c); any relative by blood or marriage of 
Royce Gregory or Akiko Gregory whom the Trustee may nominate in writing; any company nominated by the Trustee in writing incorporated in any country throughout the world in which any of the 
Beneficiaries referred to in Clauses .1(a),(b),(c),(d) or (e) may have some interest whether by shareholding or membership of the Board of Directors; (g) the trustee of any trust or settlement nominated by the Trustee in writing (but not any such trust which would result in a breach of the rule against perpetuities or rule against accumulations) of which any of the 
Beneficiaries referred to in Clauses .1(a),(b),(c),(d) or (e) is a beneficiary or object, whether present contingent or discretionary; any company or other body corporate or unincorporate nominated by the 
Trustee in writing the objects and functions of which are charitable and which does not carry on business for the purpose of profit or gain to its individual members; such other persons, trustees of trusts (but excluding any trusts which would result in a breach of the rule against perpetuities or the rule against accumulations) companies or charities as the Trustee shall before the 
Distribution Date appoint in writing to be Beneficiaries for the purposes of this Deed." 
Then follow key definitions including, "1.2 Child' 'Children' and 'Issue' includes ex uptial children and legally adopted children; .3 'Company' shall include a corporation wherever incorporated." 
Although I was taken carefully through the deed by Mr Broun of Queen's Counsel who appeared with Miss Cohen for the plaintiff, the only other provisions to which I need specifically refer are clauses 1.7, 11.1, 17, 20 and 22.

Clause 1.7 defines as "Ineligible Beneficiaries" the Settlor, the Settlor's legal personal representative and the children of the Settlor. Clause 11.1 states that "notwithstanding any other provision of this Deed nothing in this
Deed shall operate so as to cause any part of the income or capital of the
Trust Fund to become payable to or applicable for the benefit of any of the
Ineligible Beneficiaries." Clause 17 names the trust the "Royce Gregory Family
Trust", clause 20 makes the proper law that of New South Wales, and clause 22 provides that when John Hudson is a director of the Trustee he is to be paid a salary and be provided with a motor vehicle.

The matter was argued before me on the basis that, with such definition, it was possible for the trustee to add as beneficiaries almost the whole world with the exception of the Ineligible Beneficiaries. I am not completely convinced that this is so, but am prepared to approach the separate question on that basis. It is certainly arguable that the clause is not as extensive as is claimed. It may be, for instance, that para (e) of the definition of beneficiary only refers to a person who was alive before Mr or Mrs Gregory died, and it may be also that there is some fiduciary obligation on the trustee to look to the prime purpose of the trust, namely, it being a family trust before it would be justified in nominating a person outside the family to be a beneficiary. As all the persons who might be interested in the interpretation of the beneficiary clause are not before the court, it would not be appropriate to come to any final determination on this matter and thus
I am content to proceed as requested.

Mr Broun QC and Miss Cohen rely on the rule that a testator must exercise his or her power of testation personally and must not delegate that right. It is abundantly clear that in New South Wales and Australia generally (though not in the rest of the common law world), there is such a rule. In Horan v
James [[1982] 2 NSWLR 376] at 385,
Mahoney, JA said, "A man must exercise and not delegate his testamentary power. This principle has been established by decisions of the High Court of
Australia, the House of Lords and the Privy Council: ... A testator does not exercise his testamentary power if, in effect, he empowers his executors or others to say what persons or objects are to be his beneficiaries: see
Tatham versus Huxtable <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 639] at p 653; and a delegation may, in my opinion, be unacceptable because it delegates the power to determine the quantum of the benefit which a selected beneficiary may take ...".

The decision in Horan versus James and indeed, the High Court's decision in
Tatham versus Huxtable and Lutheran Church of Australia SA District Inc v
Farmers' Co-operative Executors & Trustees Ltd <case>; [(1970) 121 CLR 628], are, of course, binding on me. The mere fact that elsewhere in the common law world the supposed rule has been rejected is quite irrelevant to me sitting in this court. Thus, the decision of Hoffmann, J in
Re Beatty [[1990] 1 WLR 1503], and the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Re Nicholls ( [1987) 34 DLR ] and the strong reasons given as to why the High Court misread the law back in 1950 are quite irrelevant unless this case itself should go to the High Court of Australia.

The rule being clearly applicable in this State, the exercise is really to see its scope and what are the exceptions to it. These exceptions appear to have grown since Tatham versus Huxtable . Mr Broun QC warns that the court should be careful not to find so many exceptions that in reality the rule itself is whittled away to virtually nothing. Indeed, the same point is made by DM
Gordon in one of the early articles raising this controversy, "Delegation of Will-Making Power" [(1953) 69 LQR 334] at 342.

There are obviously some exceptions to the rule, but the problem is to glean what those exceptions are. Gordon, in the article referred to, analyses most of the leading cases up to 1953 and, at page 339, notes from that analysis that some judges "make no exceptions to the no-delegation rule; four ...
except only the power to select charities, only two ... make a further exception for other special powers, and [no law lord] makes any exception for general powers of appointment. All lay down principles inconsistent with general powers, and Lord Haldane and MacMillan (twice each) more directly imply that general powers are bad, by expressly stating that powers to choose charities and other special powers are the only exceptions to the no- delegation rule." However, Gordon recognized that Sargant, J in Re Hughes [[1921] 2 Ch 208], 212 and Clauson, J in Re Park [[1932] 1 Ch 580], do make an exception for general powers of appointment. A general power of appointment was held in New Zealand in Re McEwen [[1955] NZLR 575], to be a proper exception to the general rule against delegation of will-making power.

It is necessary to deal with a series of preliminary propositions before coming to the core of the case.
Although there are some powers which are conferred by statute, basically, powers of appointment owe their genesis to uses. Prior to 1535, a person could enfeoff a bevy of feoffees to the use of such persons as he the conveyor may by will appoint. Before 1535, this meant that the seisin and the legal fee simple vested in the bevy of feoffees who held on resulting use for the conveyor but should the conveyor by will deal with the equitable estate, then in equity the use would shift to the persons who were the appointees. As far as I can see, there could be no powers of appointment at law prior to 1535.
Indeed, to have such a power would be to break one of the rules of common law conveyancing that there were only three freehold estates in possession, life estates, fees tail and fees simple and none of these could be brought to an end prematurely save by condition or defeasance.

In 1535, when the Statute of Uses was enacted, it became possible to have an executory interest at law by way of shifting or springing use and a power of appointment would have effect at law so that if one had a conveyance in the form which I have already given, the estate at law would on exercise of the power of appointment shift from the conveyor to the person appointed. By virtue of the [Imperial Acts Application Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/iaaa1969240/), which came into force in New South Wales on 1 January 1971, the Statute of Uses was repealed. The only method of creating powers of appointment at law was brought to an end. All powers of appointment since then can only operate in equity.

There was not much argument presented to me on the effect of the repeal of the
Statute of Uses on the rule against the delegation of will-making power on powers of appointment or indeed on the creation of sub-trusts generally. It will be remembered that in Jane Tyrrel's case <case>; Dyer 155a; [73 ER 336], the court considered that one could not have a use upon a use because the second use would be repugnant to the first and void. I have assumed that one does not after the repeal of the Statute of Uses go back to this position, but should take the view that the repeal of the Statute of Uses was not intended to affect the law of trusts as it existed before 1971.
Another historical matter that must be mentioned is that although the [Wills Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/) of 1540 was the first legislation to authorize a person devising his socage land and two-thirds of his other land, in actual fact, by employing uses both before and after the Statute of Uses, a person effectively could devise land. So if a person during their lifetime enfeoffed a bevy of feoffees "for the use of such person as I shall appoint by my will", that person could then take advantage of the power to appoint new uses by will. Accordingly, the bevy of feoffees held on resulting use for the conveyor until the conveyor's will appointed new uses. After the Statute of Uses, of course, the uses were executed and the interest became interests at law. See, in general, Megarry's article "The
Statute of Uses and the Power to Devise" [(1941) 7 Cambridge Law Journal ]
Reading the cases in this area of the law shows how very careful one must be with terminology in connection with powers of appointment. In Re
Lawrence's Will Trusts [[1972] Ch 418], 427, Megarry, J said of powers of appointment, "A classification for one purpose is by no means necessarily decisive or even a guide to the classification for another purpose." See also Halsbury's Laws of England 4th ed Vol 36 para 805.
The point is dramatically illustrated by the way in which the cases have considered a power to appoint to all the world except X. In Platt versus Routh <case>; [(1840) 6 M & W 756], ; <case>; [151 ER 618], 631, such a power was, for revenue purposes, classified as a general power. This was affirmed by the House of Lords sub nomine Drake v
AG  <case>; [(1843) 10 Cl & Fin 257] These judgments were interpreted in Ireland by Smith, MR in Edie versus Babington [(1854) 3 Ir Ch R 568] at 576, as a basis for holding that, generally speaking, a power is general though there be a restriction against exercising it in favour of one person. This moved Farwell in the first edition of his
Concise Treatise on Powers (Stevens London 1874) at p 7 to state, "A power to appoint to whom the donee pleases except A is a general power".

However, in Re Byron's Settlement [[1891] 3 Ch 474], Kekewich, J held that a power which could benefit everybody except Mrs Reynold's present husband or any friend or relative of his was not a general power of appointment for the purpose of the English equivalent of what is <case> of the
NSW Wills, [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/). The third (1916) edition of Farwell then says at p 8, in the corresponding section to that from which I quoted from the first edition, "General powers are such as the donee can exercise in favour of such person or persons as he pleases, including himself. ... A power to appoint to whom the donee pleases except A has been held to be a general power so as to make the appointed fund assets for payment of debts (Edie versus Babington), but not to be a general power within [s 27](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/s27.html) of the [Wills Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/) (Re Byron) ... ; such a power is a general and absolute power within 36
Geo III c 52 (Drake versus AG...)." In Re Harvey [[1950] 1 All ER ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1950%5d%201%20All%20ER%20491 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Vaisey, J held that a power to appoint to the whole world apart from X was not a general power but if at the relevant time X did not exist it could be treated for all purposes as a general power. In Re McEwen supra,
Gresson, J held that such a power was a general power.

I will endeavour to use the words "general power of appointment" as equivalent to a right to appoint property to all the world including oneself, that is, virtually the equivalent of ownership.
It also must be remembered that where a trustee is given what appears to be a general power of appointment, if that trustee is to exercise the power only in a fiduciary capacity, he or she may not appoint to him or herself; see eg Re Edward's Will Trusts [[1947] 2 All ER 521] (reversed on other grounds [[1948] Ch 440).] 
It was necessary, I think, to have such a long preamble to these reasons because it is very easy to slide from one shade of meaning of a term to another shade of meaning and so cause even more confusion in this part of the law than there is at present.

I said earlier that there was no doubt that in Australia there was a non- delegation rule. It is an interesting academic exercise to contemplate what is the basis of the rule. Various bases have been put forward, none of them satisfactory. It does not concern me on my rung in the judicial hierarchy which theory is correct, but as I am told there are many millions of dollars involved in this case, and there may be a possibility of someone applying for special leave to appeal to the High Court of Australia because that is the only court which can overrule Tatham versus Huxtable, I should briefly review these theories even though my essential role is not to reason why the law has taken its current form, but merely to apply it.

I should note that I have carefully read the decision of Wolff, J at first instance in Tatham versus Huxtable <case>; [(1949) 51 WALR 39.] His Honour decided the case merely on the grounds of uncertainty and there is nothing in his published judgment which assists on the present point.

In Tatham versus Huxtable, Fullagar, J said at p 649, "The ultimate basis of the rule lies in the [Wills
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/), which provides that every person may dispose of all his property by will but that no will shall be valid unless it is in writing and executed by the testator in a particular manner". With great respect, this is hardly intellectually satisfying as FC Hutley, as his Honour then was, in his article "The
Delegation of Will-Making Powers" [[1956] SydLawRw ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/SydLawRw/1956/5.html "View Case" ); [(1956) 2 Sydney Law Review 93] at 94-95, convincingly points out. As I said above in preliminary proposition 2, there was power to make a will of land even before the [Wills Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/) of let alone the modern Wills Acts of the 19th century. Furthermore, <case> of the NSW Wills, [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) really only deals with the form of the disposition not the contents or designation of the beneficial ownership of the testator's property. Again, if as is suggested in some of the judgments, the next of kin have a statutory right to be left property unless there is a proper disposition by will, that right would come under <case> or s 61B of the Wills, [Probate and Administration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/), not <case> though this has never ever been favoured by any of the judicial decisions.

There is nothing to stop a person making the most capricious will. A person could make a will which said that he gave all his property to X to be held on trust, the terms of which were that X was to arrange for a 0055 telephone number and was to pay the whole of the testator's estate to the hundredth person who rang that number, or for the first child born at a certain hospital in 1998. There is nothing to stop the testator directing that his executor convert the whole of the money into bank notes and proceeding to the corner of
George and King Streets at 8 o'clock on a designated night and throwing the money away. The rule does not seem to be against random distribution of a person's property, it is against the act of delegating the power to dispose.
It is difficult to see how the formalities of the [Wills
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/) come into play though that is one basis for the decision of Tatham versus Huxtable.

The second basis is uncertainty. That was the view taken by Mr Sundberg, as his Honour then was, in his article "The Status and Authority of the
Decision in Tatham versus Huxtable" [(1974) 48 ALJ 527.] There have been various other discussions of the rationale of the principle in Tatham versus Huxtable. Hutley, JA remarked in Horan v
James at 381, that there is intellectual confusion in this area of the law and that the historical basis for the rule is more than dubious. He cites with approval a passage which is now found in Hardingham Neave and Ford, Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand, 2nd ed (Law Book Co 1989) [509] at p 125. See also the discussion in Geddes, Rowland and Studdert, Wills,
Probate and Administration Law in NSW (LBC 1996)[3.20] and Hardingham and Baxt, Discretionary Trusts 2nd ed (Butterworths 1984) [322]-[323].

Another problem in this area of the law is that cases tend to cite only part of previous authorities, which sometimes leads to confusion. For instance, in
Houston versus Burns [[1918] AC 337], 342, Viscount
Haldane actually said, "My Lords, by the law of Scotland, as by that of
England, a testator can defeat the claim of those entitled by law in the absence of a valid will to succeed to the beneficial interest in his estate only if he has made a complete disposition of that beneficial interest. He cannot leave it to another person to make such a disposition for him unless he has passed the beneficial interest to that person to dispose of as his own."
However, when that passage is cited in Tatham versus Huxtable , the first sentence is omitted and the second sentence becomes "The well established rule". The actual decision in Houston versus Burns was that in Scotland a bequest for such charitable or benevolent purposes as the trustees might think fit (being a non-charitable gift) was void for uncertainty.

Turning at long last to what are the exceptions to the general rule, there is no doubt at all that charitable gifts are an exception. In Tatham v
Huxtable itself, Fullagar, J said that apart from the case of charity (p ), "It seems quite consistent with legal principle to say that the creation by will of a general power of appointment (which has been said to confer the equivalent of ownership) is a testamentary disposition of property. It also seems consistent with legal principle to say the same of the creation of a special power of appointment among a class, where the class is described with certainty and ... there is, unless and until the power is exercised, a trust for the class or for persons who are to take in default of appointment."
Kitto, J also said at 655, "The proposition should, I think, be accepted that a testamentary disposition in favour of a person or persons to be selected by someone other than the testator himself, if it is not to fail as infringing the general rule forbidding the delegation of testamentary power, must either confer upon the person authorized to make the selection a general power equivalent to ownership or to find with certainty a class or group from which the selection is to be made." 
Maclean in his "Trusts and Powers" (Law Book Company 1989) at p 36, says of these passages, "The references to special powers appear to be references to special mere powers. Where a special power is a trust power there can never be an express or implied gift in default and, as a special trust power can be no less effective in the case of a will than a special mere power with no gift or trust in default, it follows that special trust powers must be valid if created by will." The learned author then goes on to point out that as there was no such thing as a valid general trust power, the only general power which is excepted from the delegation rule is a general power of appointment in favour of the whole world which is the equivalent of ownership.

Maclean at pp 41-42 gives a list of what may or may not be valid under the
Tatham versus Huxtable principle. However, he then points out that there has been a development in the law as to how far special trust powers are valid after Tatham versus Huxtable as a result of the decision of the House of
Lords in McPhail versus Doulton <case>; [[1971] AC .] See also the extended casenote on McPhail's case by Professor Hardingham in [(1972) 46 ALJ 78.] Thus, the test adopted for trust powers is "similar to that accepted by this House in Re Gulbenkian's Settlements [1970] AC 508 for powers, namely, that the trust is valid if it can be said with certainty that any given individual is or is not a member of the class" (p 456).

In Re Langley [[1974] 1 NSWLR 46], Mahoney, J held that a power of encroachment did not infringe the general rule forbidding delegation of testamentary power. In that case, a testator gave his estate on trust basically for his children, but provided that his widow might from time to time require the trustee to pay to her the whole or any part of the capital or income. Mahoney, J held that this was valid. He also said at p 56 that so long as a power was a power of the appointor to vest property in himself or herself it was a general power within the meaning of the exception to the delegation rule notwithstanding that the power might not be a general power of appointment for other purposes. Mahoney, J, who it will be remembered, was one of the Judges who formed the Court of Appeal in Horan versus James cited
Langley's case without any qualification in that case. The learned authors of Geddes, Rowland and Studdert say at p 52 that Mahoney, J resiled from this view in Horan versus James, but I do not consider, with respect, this is so. Indeed, Maclean's book at p 36 takes the view that the Langley case was rightly decided notwithstanding that the Supreme Court of
Victoria came to a contrary view in Re Norway (Adam, J 1983).
Mahoney,J's decision in Langley's case is also consistent with the
Canadian case of Re Banko  [(1958) 12 DLR (2d) 515], which also involved a power of encroachment.

The High Court next considered the matter in the Lutheran Church case to which I have already referred. In that case, the court had to consider a provision of a will which was as follows:- "My Trustees have discretionary power to transfer any mortgages, and property ... to the Lutheran 
Mission ... for building Homes for Aged Blind 
Pensioners after All expenses paid." 
There was no other dispositive provision. McTiernan and Menzies, JJ held that in giving her trustees discretionary power to transfer, the testatrix had invalidly delegated her powers of testation. On the other hand, Barwick, CJ and Windeyer, J considered that the gift was valid. The decision of Bray, CJ reported as Re Stapleton [[1969] SASR 115] that the gift was invalid was accordingly affirmed.

In the Lutheran Church case at 644, the statutory majority said of
Fullagar's judgment in Tatham versus Huxtable, "His Honour clearly enough regarded it as a departure from legal principle to treat as valid a special power of appointment in the absence of a trust in default of appointment. If, as Fullagar, J thought, a 'latitude' of view might justify treating such appointments as valid, it seems to us to afford no basis on which to treat an authority to dispose of the testator's property to a named person or institution as a true testamentary disposition of property. Such latitude of view would destroy the rule." 
Windeyer, J at 654, said that a bare power cannot be said to be invalid merely because of the absence of a gift over because if the power is not exercised it will pass to the next of kin. He said, "It is I think now too late for a court to declare a power in the nature of a power of appointment invalid as an attempted delegation of testamentary capacity." If, however, there is a trust power, then there will be as in the Lutheran Church case, a charitable trust.

A large number of authorities were cited to me on the question of delegation of will-making power especially as it applies in England to which I have not already referred. I will list these, though there is little purpose in discussing them at length. Chronologically, the list commences with Keates v Burton <case>; [(1808) Ves Jun 434]; [33 ER 587]; Stubbs versus Sargon <case>; [(1838) 3 My & Cr 507]; Re
Richards  [[1902] 1 Ch 76]; In re Ryder [[1914] 1 Ch 865]; Re
Carville [[1937] 4 All ER 464];
Wanklyn versus Minister of National Revenue [[1953] 3 DLR 705]; Re
Manisty's Settlement [[1974] Ch 17]; In re Hay's
Settlement Trusts [[1982] 1 WLR 202] and Re
Beckbessinger [[1993] 2 NZLR 362.] 
I need only expound on two cases in this list.

Stubbs versus Sargon concerned a gift on trust after a life estate to provide amongst the testatrix's partners who should be in partnership with her at the time of her death or to whom she might have disposed of her business in such shares or proportions as the trustee should think fit or deem advisable. This was held to be a valid gift as it was not too uncertain. In Re Beckbessinger there was a gift to trustees to be held by them in accordance with a confidential memorandum which had been given to them. That confidential memorandum gave the residue to the trustees absolutely to be applied to benefit interests which the testator had in Christchurch including providing a trophy to the local Lions Club and the local Trotting Club. The testator had not provided enough precision in defining the intended class to make it certain, and accordingly the gift was invalid. Tipping, J relied on the article by CT Emery "The Most Hallowed Principle - Certainty of Beneficiaries of Trusts and Powers of Appointment" in [(1982) 98 LQR 551.] It is not necessary for me to go into the law expounded by Mr Emery in relation to discretionary trusts so there is no argument directed to the invalidity of the discretionary trust in this case.

Mr Broun QC relies on Beckbessinger to support his argument that the present trust is so wide and gives insufficient guidance to the trustees. It does go partly in that direction, but the thrust of the authority for
Australia is weakened by its reliance on cases such as Re Beatty's Will
Trusts.

Mr Officer, QC, who appeared with Mr Lockhart for the defendants, put that this case was not about powers at all, but about trusts and that there is a very real difference. There can be no gainsaying that last statement as Delany says in her Equity and the Law of Trusts in Ireland (Sweet and Maxwell
Dublin 1996), at pp 53-54, "There is a fundamental distinction between trusts and powers; while trusts are of an imperative nature, powers are discretionary. ... The beneficiaries under a trust are the owners in equity of the trust property while the objects of a power have only the expectation that the power may be exercised in their favour. ... While the beneficiaries under a discretionary trust cannot demand that trustees exercise their discretion in their favour, they can seek to ensure that the trustees make a selection as to who will benefit under the terms of the trust. This compares with the situation in relation to a power of appointment where the donee of the power cannot be compelled to make a selection." She then goes on to say that "to confuse matters further, there is also a concept known as a power in the nature of a trust or a 'trust power'." 
Three matters must now be discussed, viz (a) is the present case one involving a mere power of appointment, a power coupled with a trust or a trust outright; does the rule against delegation apply where there is a trust imposed as opposed to a mere power or a trust power; and (c) what is really meant by law requiring a class of persons to benefit under a trust or a power to be defined with precision? 
It is significant that not only does the drafter of clause 6 of the will not use the word, "power" or any equivalent, he actually employs the word "trust" on more than one occasion. Furthermore, there is no reference to any power given to the trustees of the will to do anything, not even a direction or power to pay the residue over to the trustees of the discretionary trust.

In this branch of the law, courts do not infer that testators have meant to grant a power of appointment, particularly a general power of appointment, without express words. Thus in Re Krokowsky [896 P (2d) 247], the deceased gave certain specific gifts and then said "I hereby appoint Mary M Brown to act with power of attorney for me. With her wisdom she will carry out my wishes." The trial judge held that that was a general power of appointment.
However, the Arizona Supreme Court in banc held that a general power of appointment is an extraordinary power and must be plainly created and that the clause I have cited did not dispose of the property.

In the present case, I can see no escape from the proposition that the testator intended a trust and sub-trust rather than merely empowering the trustee of his will to make a distribution.

How then does the rule against delegation apply where the will sets up a trust? Usually, the rule does not apply at all. Thus, if a testator leaves property to the executor to convey it to the trustees for the Barristers'
Sailing Club, that will be the end of the matter.

In Re Johnson [(1961) 30 DLR (2d) 474], a testator gave money to the University of British Columbia "to be added to the trust created by me in my lifetime." Parol evidence was accepted as to the nature of this trust and, as the headnote states, "The inter vivos gifts constituted a trust which was in existence to receive gifts made by will, and, since the nature of the trust was known to the trustee, the gift by will is valid." Unfortunately, Wilson,J in Re Johnson got deflected into the law of half-secret trusts: nonetheless, the case is a valuable illustration. 
I should add that secret and half-secret trusts are a further apparent exception to the non-delegation rule, though, when properly analysed have nothing to do with it: Ledgerwood versus Perpetual Trustee Company Ltd (in which reasons for judgment were also handed down today).

Further illustration is provided by Morice versus Bishop of Durham  <case>; [(1805) 10 Ves Jun 522]; [32 ER 947], where there was a gift by will on trust for such objects of benevolence and liberality as the trustee in his own discretion shall most approve. Lord Eldon, LC said at 949, "If a testator expressly says, he gives upon trust, and says no more, it has been long established, that the next of kin will take. Then if he proceeds to express the trust, but does not sufficiently express it or expresses a trust, that cannot be executed, it is exactly the same as if he had said, he gave upon trust, and stopped there. ...
".

In Gerhardy versus South Australian Auxiliary for the British & Foreign
Bible Society Inc [(1982) 30 SASR 12], 23, Legoe,
J took the view that a special trust power which satisfied the test in
McPhail versus Doulton <case>; [[1971] AC ] as to certainty was an exception to the delegation rule. The gift considered by
Legoe, J was "My estate may be disposed of" to various charitable organisations "or any other Christian organisation which may need assistance".
The first part of the gift was found valid, the second part void for uncertainty.

In McCracken versus Attorney General  <case>; [[1995] 1 VR 67], JD Phillips, J had to deal with a will which gave the estate on trust for the payment of three legacies and then "to pay and divide the residue ... between such Christian organisations and societies in such manner as my said Trustee shall in his absolute discretion think fit." His Honour upheld the gift, though there were complicating factors as set out in section below.

A testator clearly has power to leave his or her property to a trust without infringing the rule against delegation, provided that the trust is for a person or a defined class of persons or is a valid charitable trust.

At the time when Tatham versus Huxtable was decided, the degree of certainty as to the designated class of beneficiaries was much stricter than it was after the House of Lords decision in McPhail versus Doulton. Fullagar,
J said in Tatham versus Huxtable at 649, with regard to special powers among a class, "Unless, however, there is a class designated with certainty, to say that the creation of a power to select beneficiaries amounts to a testamentary disposition of property is not merely to relax the principle to meet an exceptional case but to deny the principle absolutely." His Honour then virtually said that the English decisions in Re Park [[1932] 1 Ch ] and
Re Jones [[1949] Ch 105], where an extremely wide all-embracing group of possible beneficiaries were specified, were wrongly decided. Kitto, J said something similar at p 656, though his Honour did indicate a basis on which those decisions might be justified.

Despite the fact that in England (see Re Beatty [[1990] 1 WLR )] and in New Zealand, (Re McEwen), these cases have been accepted as authoritative, I am bound by other authority. In Horan versus James, both
Glass and Mahoney, JJA made it clear that in the light of Tatham v
Huxtable courts in this State should not follow Re Park or Re
Jones and hold that wide hybrid powers of appointment did infringe the rule against delegation of testamentary power.

The point is important in the instant case, because as Mr Broun QC points out, it would be possible, by the trustee for the time being adding to the class under the powers reserved to it in the settlement, to add virtually the whole world to the possible class of beneficiaries (excepting of course, the ineligible beneficiaries). He put that such a range of possible beneficiaries was too wide and breached the rule. I agree with this submission. The test in
McPhail versus Doulton , namely, that one must look to see whether any given individual is or is not a member of the class, does not operate in a situation where it is impossible to identify a class as such because the number of potential beneficiaries is so wide as not to be able to be classified. Mr
Broun QC suggested the test was that there must be some guidance given to the appointor or trustee as to how he or she would ascertain the potential beneficiaries. If there is such guidance he put, there may be a valid power or trust; on the other hand, if no guidance is given there can be no valid power or trust. There is no actual authority for this proposition. I believe it is a good rule of thumb, but no more than that. The key point is that where there is no class, it is just idle to speak of identifying who is within a class of beneficiaries.

The next point to make is that there is authority for the proposition that where one does have a trust for a large group of people the court, if it sees on the true construction of the settlement that there is a core of beneficiaries whom the testator or settlor wished to benefit, may direct distribution, perhaps equal distribution, amongst the core. An example is
Harding versus Glyn <case>; [(1793) 1 Atk 469]; [26 ER 299.] This particular line was not the subject of argument and I think it is best merely to flag it without further discussion. It may well be that this line of cases has been overtaken by a more modern approach in later times.

The Royce Gregory Family Trust is unarguably a valid trust (subject to what I say in my concluding remarks), there is no room for any argument that there is insufficient certainty as to the beneficiaries under the trust. If this is so, then we have the situation where the testator has set up a trust, the trust has appropriate content, and the trust must be enforced. There is no uncertainty as to what they are to do, and if the Royce Gregory Family Trust is a valid trust (and there has been no argument to the contrary), then there is no argument that the testator has exercised his testamentary power. Indeed,
Mr Officer, QC put that the matter was just that simple. Although I have spent a long time discussing the authorities because of the arguments of Mr Broun QC and the large amount of money involved, in the ultimate I must agree with Mr
Officer QC's submission.

In McCracken versus Attorney General, JD Phillips, J held the gift could not take effect as a discretionary class gift because the requisite certainty of object was lacking. As Ford and Lee say in the 3rd edition of their
Principles of the Law of Trusts [5240], for non-charitable trusts, a testator or settlor must describe the beneficiaries with language precise enough to enable a court to determine whether the trustee was properly administering the trust. In McCracken's case, the "class" from which the selection was to be made was insufficiently defined. The gift was only saved by the Victorian equivalent of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/s23.html) of the [Charitable Trusts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cta1993201/).

Part of the reason why this principle was adopted appears to be that there must always be someone who can approach the court to enforce the trust. With a charitable trust, the Attorney General is such a person. However, in the case of a non-charitable purpose trust, a person who considers that he or she is within the terms of the benefaction cannot approach the court because there is no right to do so. Of course, the next of kin or the persons entitled upon failure of the trust can approach the court so that this reason for adoption of the rule does not offer a complete rationale for it. Although as Ford and
Lee point out, there has been some erosion of the beneficiary principle, such exceptions have usually been made for trusts of a public character and not in the present type of case. Thus, a trust to a parish council for the purpose of providing a useful memorial to the testator was not a valid trust: Re
Endacott [1960] Ch 232.

In summary, reducing the foregoing to their simplest form, the position as to the rule against delegation of will- making powers is as follows:-
The rule is part of the law of New South Wales.
A person will not exercise the power personally where a power is given to an executor or some third person to choose the persons who are to benefit from the testator's bounty.
There are exceptions to that rule in the case of powers of appointment including powers of appointment where there is a trust to exercise the power in favour of (a) charitable purposes; (b) powers where the appointor can appoint to himself or herself so that the interest conferred is equivalent to ownership; and (c) special powers where the class of persons who can be benefited is defined with sufficient precision.
It is not a breach of the rule to give property by will to a pre-existing trust or to constitute a trust which is sufficiently constituted according to the rules of certainty in trust law.
There is a further apparent exception where secret or half-secret trusts are used.

During argument, I remarked that the discretionary trust set up in the instant case was one which makes a Judge in Equity in 1997 wonder why equity courts are bothering with this sort of trust at all. Trusts, and at an earlier time, uses, were enforced by courts of equity because it was against the conscience of the holder of the legal estate not to carry out the promise that had been made to hold the property concerned on the trust expressed in the instrument.
However, where the trustee can virtually designate who is to be the beneficiary, this ground has no validity at all. When one sees that discretionary trusts are used for the anti-social purpose of minimising taxation or defeating the rights of wives (see eg Re Davidson's Trust No 2 [[1994] FLC 92-469)], there does not seem to be any reason in conscience why a court of equity should take any notice of them at all. Counsel were surprised that any judge should take this view and accordingly I announced during the argument that I would not seek to develop it in this case, but I believe that the message should be put abroad that the time may well have come where equity will have to reconsider its attitude to enforcing this sort of trust.

To conclude, a person may give his or her property by will to trustees of a pre-existing discretionary trust. The testator has done no more than this in the instant case. Accordingly, the court answers the separate issue by order that clause 6 of the will of Royce Gregory made 23 May 1995 is a valid disposition. As the plaintiff has failed on the separate issue, I would have thought it was appropriate that she pay the costs of that issue. However, the proceedings should be put in my list for mention to make formal orders and also to give directions for the ongoing carriage of the proceedings. If anyone wishes to appeal from my decision, it will be necessary to obtain leave of an appellate court. Although leave is always difficult to obtain for appeals from an interlocutory order, it may be that an appellate court may think that this is an appropriate case for an appeal at this stage. Not only does this case deal with a complex problem of law, a lengthy [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) hearing may be able to be avoided if the plaintiff was successful in an appeal on the present point.

It will be necessary for formal short minutes of order, including orders as to costs, to be considered. Accordingly, I will have the matter listed before me at 9.30 am on Thursday 17 April 1997 for that purpose. This date may be varied by arrangement with my Associate so long as she is contacted at least seven days before the nominated date.
 * * * 
