

Regina versus Rjm Matter No Cca 60115/98 [1998] NSWSC 651 (30 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 14 January 1999 
REGINA versus RJM 
CCA 60115/98 November 1998 
Grove J, James J, Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Bellear DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60115/98 
DELIVERED: Monday 30 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: Monday 30 November 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus RJM 
JUDGMENT OF: Grove J, James J, Kirby J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - P M Strickland 
RESPONDENT - G I O Rowling 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - T A Murphy 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal allowed. 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SENTENCE - MISAPPREHENSION AS TO PRESCRIBED
STATUTORY MAXIMUM - REDUCED TO ALLOW FOR ERRONEOUS ASSUMPTION - s33B(b)
CRIMES ACT - CONCESSION BY CROWN THAT EVIDENCE COULD NOT SUPPORT CHARGE -
CONVICTION QUASHED ON THAT COUNT.

REGINA versus RJM 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This appeal concerns pleas of guilty entered by the appellant in Wagga Wagga District Court to charges preferred respectively contrary to section 61E(2) of the Crimes Act and section 33B(b) of the Crimes Act which might be referred to, for convenience, as committing an act of indecency and threatening injury to prevent investigation. The presiding judge sentenced the applicant on the first count of committing an act of indecency to a fixed sentence of 12 months imprisonment commencing on 27 October 1997 and expiring on 26 November 1998, and on the second count of threatening injury to prevent investigation to a total sentence of four and a half years comprising a minimum term commencing on 27 November 1998 and expiring on 26 May 2000, together with an additional term of three years. It is unnecessary for present purposes to recite the facts which were put before the District Court. 
The second count arose out of events in a country town during which the appellant made certain statements concerning a named police officer. It should be said that at the time there was in progress what is sometimes described as a siege. In any event, the appellant behaved so that certain fears were held for his own and perhaps other people's safety.

The Crown has filed a written submission in which it notes that it accepts that there was no evidence upon which a jury could have found the appellant guilty of the offence of threatening injury with intent to prevent investigation. It agrees that orders should be made which will ultimately lead to the entry of a judgment of acquittal on that count with the necessary companion circumstance that the sentence will be quashed.

As I have stated, the fixed term imposed in respect of the first count was to be served during dates which have now expired. In fact, the Court is aware that the appellant has served that sentence and, pending this appeal, bail was dispenses with on Thursday last, the day of expiry of that fixed term.
Counsel, however, contends that this court should intervene to replace that fixed term with a lesser sentence which is more appropriate to the circumstances.

The kernel of his argument is that it appears that the learned sentencing judge believed that the offence with which he was dealing carried a prescribed statutory maximum penalty of six years, whereas, in fact, the prescribed maximum was a term of imprisonment for two years. Accordingly, it is argued it must follow that the proportionality of the sentence in fact imposed was tainted with error.

Again, the Crown very fairly acknowledges that error below and in written submissions has accepted that the appellant should be resentenced upon the footing that the maximum penalty was two years rather than six years.

The offence involved a depredation upon a person who was a family member. The court's attention has been drawn to the circumstance that the appellant himself as a child had been a victim of sexual abuse, but there appears to be no evidence that that unfortunate history played any part or any significant part in provoking the offence for which the appellant ultimately stood for sentence.

Nevertheless, for the reasons which I have adumbrated, this court should in my opinion intervene.

I would propose the following orders. That in respect of the first count, application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted, the appeal allowed and the sentence imposed in the District Court quashed. In lieu thereof, the appellant sentenced to a fixed term of 8 months imprisonment to commence on 27 November 1997 and to expire (as it has) on 26 July 1998. I would specify that a fixed term is imposed because of all the circumstances which I have indicated.

In respect of the second count, I would propose the following orders: That the appellant be granted leave to withdraw a notice of abandonment earlier filed; that he be granted further leave to withdraw his plea of guilty entered in the
District Court; that the appeal be allowed and that the conviction and sentence be quashed and in lieu thereof on that count a verdict and judgment of acquittal entered.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the presiding judge and with the orders proposed by his Honour. 
KIRBY J: I likewise agree with both the judgment and the order. 
GROVE J: The orders of the Court, therefore, will be as I have proposed. * * * 
