

Rural and General Insurance Limited versus Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Nos. Ca 40360/95; Ed 2416/95 Defamation - Practice and Procedure [1995] NSWSC (12 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), CLARKE JA(2) AND HANDLEY JA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 19 June 1995 #DATE 19:6:1995 #ADD 12:10:1995 
Counsel for the Claimant:    T K Tobin QC and G Durie 
Solicitors for the Claimant: 
S A Benson 
Counsel for the Opponent:    M J Sexton and J C Gibson 
Solicitors for the Opponent:   R H Snape
ORDER
Summons dismissed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P: Four points were advanced in this application for leave to appeal.
The first was a suggested disharmony between the stated tests to be applied in the provision of an interlocutory injunction to prevent publication of a suggested defamation. The Court was taken to the decision of Hunt J in
Chappell versus TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR 153 (SC)], and the long-standing authority of Bonnard versus Perryman (1891) 2 Ch 269.
It was agreed - properly in my view - by counsel for the claimant that, if the Court were of the view that on whichever test was applicable the order which Bryson J made would be confirmed, then it would not be necessary in this case to explore the nuances between the two suggested tests or to resolve the suggested differences between them.
As I am of that view, I would withhold consideration of the precise formulation of the test to a future case where either leave is unnecessary or has been granted on other grounds or where it is necessary for the Court to approach a resolution of the suggested tension between the stated tests to resolve the case.
Secondly, it was said that Bryson J had contented himself, inappropriately, with the mere statement by the Australian Broadcasting
Corporation that it would defend any proceedings brought by the claimant and plead justification and fair comment. It was said that the opponent ought to have been obliged to place supporting evidence before the Court. The judgment of Ormiston J in National Mutual Life Association of Australasia Ltd versus GTV
Corporation Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1989) VR 747] at 754 was cited. However, I do not take
Ormiston J there to be laying down a general rule of unvarying application.
Indeed, his
Honour begins the passage which was quoted in support of the proposition, "In the context of the present case". It will be difficult to lay down a general rule requiring the laying out of detailed evidence of defences having regard to the exigencies of publication, particularly in the electronic media. I do not believe that this is a case in which it is appropriate to explore that question.
Thirdly, it was said in an affidavit by the General Manager of the claimant, Mr Timothy Pratten, and advanced by the claimant's counsel, that the claimant was really defending himself against criticism broadcast by the opponent with its hands tied because of constraints imposed on it by current proceedings before the Coroner. It was suggested that the claimant could not effectively meet the suggested imputations in the proposed broadcast by reason of the limitations imposed by the law of contempt. It is enough for me to say that having regard to the suggested imputations which have been placed before the Court in a document filed by the claimant,
I do not consider that the claimant would be under any relevant inhibition in meeting the principal complaints which are made about the subject broadcast. They could be addressed without any conceivable 'interference in the conduct of the coronial. inquest.
 .
Fourthly, it was urged that an important leave point was presented by the decision of the High Court of Australia in Theophanous v Herald Weekly Times <case>; [(1994) 124 ALR 1 (HC).] The argument was that, because of the constitutional defence of freedom of speech laid down in that case, and recognised by the
High
Court, a fortiori common law courts, approaching claims of defamation, would consider the ambit of the matter which the High Court there specified, including such considerations as the awareness or unawareness of the publisher of the falsity of the published remarks, of the recklessness of the publisher's conduct and of the reasonableness of public discussion.
I am not at all convinced that the holding in Theophanous is applicable to the case in hand. No discussion of a political or economic character appears to have been involved. However, the suggestion, as I understood it, was that the law has, by analogy, been extended.
Whether that argument is available at the trial will remain to be seen.
But I do not believe that it is one which Bryson J was obliged to take into consideration at the stage of the application for an interlocutory injunction.
There are some difficulties in certain respects of the expressed reasoning of Bryson J. However, I do not doubt that, if this Court were to reconsider afresh the exercise of discretion, it would reach the same view as his Honour did. I will therefore content myself with saying that I see no substantial errors, either of legal principle or of fact finding, which invite, or would justify, the intervention of this Court.
The opponent is well resourced.
No evidence has been put before the Court that the claimant would suffer any damage which the ordinary remedy for defamation - damages at common -law - would not adequately repair. The law - rightly in my view - restricts pre-publication relief of the kind sought by the claimant to very rare, exceptional cases. This is not one of them.
The order of the Court is that the summons for leave to appeal is dismissed. The claimant must pay the opponent's costs.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA I agree. I would add, with respect to the presiding
Judge, so far as I am concerned no error has been demonstrated in the judgment under challenge.
JUDGE3
HANDLEY JA I would refuse leave to appeal in this case and order the claimant to pay the opponent's costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/73.html  
