

Cross versus Mudgee Shire Council Matter No 10833/97 [1997] NSWSC 290 (6 August )

Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Cross versus Mudgee Shire Council /97 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Cross versus Mudgee Shire Council 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 18 March 1997. The plaintiff seeks leave pursuant to section 151D(2) of the Workers Compensation Act, 1987 (the Act). 
Two affidavits are relied on. One is sworn by the plaintiff himself. The other is sworn by his solicitor (Mr Harrison). It annexes a proposed Statement of
Claim. The plaintiff was cross-examined. The plaintiff has tendered Exhibits A and B (which consists of, inter alia, documentation from his solicitors - past and present). This material was tendered during re-examination.

I refer to certain of the relevant matters to be found in the material. This reference is not intended to be exhaustive of the relevant material.

As at 10 March 1992, the plaintiff was employed as a casual by the defendant (one day a week). He was working at the Mudgee Sale Yards. He tripped on a set of external metal stairs and fell on a rough uneven surface at the bottom of the stairs. He sustained a severe injury to his right knee. He knew it was severe at that time.

His employment was terminated shortly thereafter. He was out of work for about months. By January 1993, there had been, inter alia, a worsening of symptoms.

He first saw a solicitor on 18 February 1993 (Mr P Kruit of Mudgee). He does not explain why he did not seek legal advice at an earlier time. There may have been a number of attendances prior to 8 March 1993. He was given advice concerning his workers compensation entitlements. He decided not to pursue any compensation claim at that time. He says that he was not given any advice about Common Law claims. He did not inquire as to limitation periods. The plaintiff says that he received further contact from Mr Kruit on 10 May 1995.
His affidavit does not disclose what was said to him by Mr Kruit. The plaintiff says that he did not take any further action. A copy of Mr Kruit's file is Exhibit A. Its contents suggest that Mr Kruit did not hear from the plaintiff after 8 March 1993.

It seems that he has been regularly receiving medical treatment. His treating specialist has been Dr Wood. He has undergone surgery. The major operation was had in November 1994 (a bone graft). On 7 November 1995, he had his last operation. On 8 December 1995, he was advised that he needed a total joint replacement or a high tibial osteotomy. He has been told that Dr Wood wants to delay the replacement for as long as possible. He has been told that Dr Wood cannot guarantee the success of an osteotomy.

He saw Mr Harrison on 16 February 1996. He was advised that he was out of time to commence Common Law proceedings. Prior to that time, he had thought he had six years in which to bring proceedings. He was told that he could bring an application for leave. He was told that, if such a claim was to be pursued, action should be taken "very soon". He made a decision not to pursue a Common
Law claim. Instead, he decided to pursue his workers compensation entitlements (these were the entitlements that he had decided not to pursue in 1993). He made this decision some time prior to 25 July 1996. At that time, he was again reminded of the need for promptness in pursuing a Common Law claim.

He heard that there were going to be changes to the Act ("cutting down" entitlements). He formed the view along the way. He returned to see Mr
Harrison on 25 February 1997. He further discussed his options and a conference was arranged with Counsel (correspondence from Mr Harrison has been tendered as Exhibit B). He saw Counsel on 6 March 1997. He then gave instructions to make this application for leave.

The Court has a discretionary power to grant leave. The discretion is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The plaintiff bears the onus of satisfying the Court that an order should be made.

The limitation period expired in 1995. There has been considerable delay. The seriousness of his injury has been known from the outset. He has not said that he was unaware of Common Law rights. Legal advice was received as early as
February 1993. He has made decisions not to pursue entitlements after receiving legal advice (inter alia, after receiving advice as to his entitlement to Common Law damages, he made an election to pursue his compensation entitlements). It seems that the making of the decision not to pursue Common Law damages may have taken some months. It was not until the following year that he decided to go back and see Mr Harrison again.

There has been a continuing lack of diligence. There has been delay after being advised of the need to act promptly. There is delay which really cannot be satisfactorily explained. There is delay which has not been explained. The effect of delay has been considered recently in Brisbane South Regional
Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866.] I need not repeat what was said in the judgments in that case.

There is no evidence of actual prejudice. The plaintiff has been receiving compensation since March 1992. There is presumptive prejudice (see Taylor).
In the circumstances of this case, that may be a matter of not much weight.

He may have a right of action against Mr Kruit. The authorities demonstrate that the existence of such a right is not a matter which should be given great weight.

The plaintiff may have a viable cause of action with a potential to recover significant damages. Its viability was not debated by the parties. If leave is not granted, he will not be able to pursue that claim. If leave is granted, the defendant will be deprived of the benefit of the limitation defence.

The question of onus was also considered in Taylor. Again, I need not repeat what was said in that case. In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the onus has been discharged. I am not satisfied that the justice of the case requires an extension.

I dismiss the Summons. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
