

Gpi Leisure Corporation Ltd (In Liq) versus Yuill and Ors Matter No 1907/94 [1998] NSWSC 72 (6 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 April 1998 `

GPI LEISURE CORPORATION LTD (IN LIQ) V BRIAN RICHARD YUILL & ORS` ` 1907/94` `6 March 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `
 `
 `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: This is a notice of motion for declarations filed on behalf of two companies that I will jointly call "Spedley", namely Spedley Securities Ltd (in Liquidation) and Spedley Holdings Ltd (in Liquidation). 
The background to the matters raised by the notice of motion is that there was a Deed, which I construed in my judgment of 6 August 1997, between, inter alia, Spedley and the respondent to the notice of motion, which is the plaintiff, and although the present point was touched upon in those reasons, the reasons on this particular point are rather enigmatic.

The factual situation has changed to a degree since I gave those reasons and so once again Spedley seeks a declaration as to the construction of part of cl .2.2 of the relevant Deed.

Clause 9.2.2 (b) provided that in certain situations an indemnity in an earlier part of the Deed is not to apply and that in relation to legal costs and disbursements the party in the plight of the plaintiff shall pay that part of Spedley's account: "as relates to: any costs and disbursements approved by (the plaintiff) prior to their being incurred; and any legal adviser who was selected by (the plaintiff) and retained by or whose retainer by Spedley was approved by (the plaintiff)." 
The essential dispute before me is whether the word "and" between (i) and (ii) should be read conjunctively or disjunctively.

Mr Sullivan QC and Dr Bell for Spedley say essentially that the provision should be read disjunctively. They say that if either of two situations apply, viz (a) that the costs and disbursements have been approved by the plaintiff, or (b) the legal adviser retained by Spedley was approved by the plaintiff, then Spedley is entitled to be indemnified against legal costs.

The facts are that the plaintiff has approved of Messrs Dibbs Crowther and
Osborne being the legal advisers of Spedley and, I think, certain nominated counsel are also within the approval. Those solicitors have at least politely demanded that Spedley pay their costs and disbursements to date for quite a significant amount. Spedley says that unless a declaration is made the solicitors may become more insistent on payment so that the state of affairs has arrived where, to use the expression I used in another connection in my earlier judgment, Spedley is imminently liable to pay those costs.

Mr Weber for the plaintiff says that the evidence does not show that Spedley is imminently liable to pay the costs, one has to get past the polite demand stage to a situation such as the creditor issuing a statutory demand or a notice of intended action under the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/), or the like, before there is a sufficient equity for this Court to intervene. He also says that, in any event, the word "and" means just what it says, that both what is set out in (i) and (ii) must occur before Spedley can claim indemnification.

As to the first point, that is whether there is an imminent liability to pay, it seems to me that the flavour of cases such as Woolmington versus Bronze Lamp
Restaurant Pty Ltd [[1984] 2 NSWLR 242] at 243 is that probably there is a sufficiently imminent threat for equity to intervene.
I do not need to consider this point deeply because for other reasons Spedley must fail on the motion.

There are a series of arguments put as to why the word "and" should be read other than conjunctively. The submissions were put in a written document, which I will leave with the papers, and they were also expanded by Mr Sullivan
QC in oral argument.

The arguments in pars 12 to 17 of the applicants' written submissions are essentially as follows:-
Reading "and" in a disjunctive sense makes perfect sense with the consequence that the plaintiff is obliged to meet Spedleys' costs and disbursements if either the plaintiff approved those costs and expenses prior to them being incurred or if it approved the lawyer.
To give "and" a conjunctive operation did violence to the language of the subclause because subclause (ii) would be wholly superfluous or redundant and courts of construction should steer away from any such result.
An odd result would be produced by reading the word "and" conjunctively.
The parties must have intended that their contract would have practical and commercial convenience and if "and" were read conjunctively rather than disjunctively the practical consequence would be that in respect of each item of expenditure Spedley would have to seek the plaintiff's prior approval.

The remaining parts of the submissions just fleshed those matters out.

The simple answers given by Mr Weber to those submissions were that "and" meant "and", that the so-called commercial inconveniences were merely commercial inconveniences in the operation of the contract by Spedley, and that no commercially responsible party would ever agree to allow another party to run up a legal bill without any control as to the way the case was run just because they had agreed that the lawyer who was chosen by the other party was a competent lawyer.

Mr Weber reinforced that submission by pointing to part of the evidence presented by Spedley, namely p 63 of Mr Kang's affidavit of 3 March 1998, which showed that the estimated costs of discovery alone were $33,150 a day, albeit for a ten hour day, and there was a charge to return boxes to storage of $3,250, a total estimate of something like $175,000 merely for discovery.

It would be quite clear to anyone that discovery might well be a process that will occupy a large amount of time of competent lawyers. Thus Mr Weber puts that merely by consenting to certain lawyers taking the case, no commercially realistic party would consider that such consent extended to costs of the magnitude of costs incurred even for the exercise of discovery, let alone what is going to happen if and when the matter ever comes for trial.

The word "and", according to Sir Richard Blackburn in Re The Licensing
Ordinance [(1968) 13 FLR 143] to 147, can never mean "or". However, he acknowledges that there are a series of English cases and, indeed, there are also some in Australia, where that result was actually reached. However, Blackburn J says that when one looks at the cases they fall into two categories: viz (a) where to give "and" its natural meaning the result was so extraordinary as to create virtual unintelligibility; or (b) where there was a list which can plainly be seen to be a class of alternatives.

Outside that area courts have never been taken with the proposition that "and" can mean "or". A further illustration is another Northern Territory decision
Gillespie versus Ford [(1978) 19 ALR 102] at 107 where Forster CJ avoided the word "disjunctive" by using the words "dispersive effect" and see also Re Kotses [(1995) 132 ALR 409], 411.

However, it is open to parties to misuse the English language as much as they like in their documents and there could be situations where, despite what
Blackburn J says, the proper construction of the document would be that "and" does mean "or".

However, that is not a conclusion one lightly reaches, a fortiori where the document appears to have been carefully prepared.

When one looks at the page of typescript in which cl 9.2.2 is inscribed, one can see that the drafter has used "or" or "and" quite deliberately in a proper sense on at least four occasions. This, to my mind, reinforces the view that one should not here read "and" as "or".

Taking Blackburn J's exceptions, the only one that could be relevant is the first - is there unintelligibility if one reads "and" as meaning "and"? I do not consider that even Mr Sullivan QC went that far. His submissions were directed to commercial reality rather than unintelligibility.

The situation to my mind is that the words are quite intelligible if one reads "and" as "and", provided that, as I mentioned in my earlier reasons, one realises that in neither (i) nor (ii) is there any absolute right of veto, and that both (i) and (ii) must be read subject to both parties complying with their duty to co-operate so as to make the contract work.

I believe this is what I meant when I said in my earlier judgment that the true construction was somewhere between what Spedley was putting and what the plaintiff was putting, although semantically what the plaintiff is putting is correct.

Mr Sullivan QC says that there is an absurd result if each item of costs and expenses has to be approved by the plaintiff prior to its being incurred. In that stark form I might agree with the proposition, but when one reads into the implied term to co-operate in making the contract work that sort of difficulty falls away. Particularly would it do so under the present law, which may not have applied at the time when the Deed was entered into, whereby the law actually requires that solicitors give to their clients notice of the costs and disbursements intended to be incurred to give the client the opportunity of either agreeing or disagreeing.

The operation of (i) is no more absurd than the operation of that particular part of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/). It seems to me that the provision quite fairly means, without doing any injustice to the words actually used, that not only is the legal adviser to be approved by the plaintiff (subject to its implied term not to be capricious and to make the contract work), but also that the costs and disbursements that are going to be incurred must be approved in quantum.

It may be that it is not the exact quantum that needs to be approved. I will reserve that question to a later date, if need be. Certainly, it is not the case, as Spedley seeks to make in its notice of motion, that once the legal adviser has been approved then there is no need for any further approval by the plaintiff before Spedley incurs any legal costs and disbursements it reasonably considers it should incur.

For these reasons in my view the notice of motion should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
