

Brett Michael Hart versus Regina [1997] NSWSC 191 (14 May 1997) 
Brett Michael HART versus REGINA /97; DC 96/11/0777 
WEDNESDAY 14 MAY 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STEIN JA, STUDDERT J, LEVINE J 
CATCHWORDS: Application under <case>(a) [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against interlocutory judgment refusing to allow change of plea of guilty. Applicant unrepresented when plea entered. Discretion to allow change of plea 
EX TEMPORE/ RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
RESULT: Leave granted. Plea of guilty set aside and applicant permitted to enter plea of not guilty.
 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: This is an application under [section 5F(3)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) for leave to appeal an interlocutory judgment or order made in proceedings to which the section applies. The order in question was the rejection of the applicant's application to change his plea by his Honour Judge Freeman in the District Court on 19 February 1997. The applicant had earlier entered a plea of guilty before P J Phelan DCJ to a charge of maliciously discharging a firearm with intent to do grievous bodily harm to one Arthur Beard on 17 March 1996. Mr Hart had pleaded not guilty before the Magistrate at the committal. 
On the applicant's behalf Mr Green QC has provided us with a useful chronology of what occurred after the alleged offence. Soon after the incident to which the charge relates the applicant, with his girlfriend, fled the State to
Melbourne where, on 28 March, he was arrested and interviewed by police. He was then brought back to New South Wales and on 2 April 1996 was again interviewed by police. He was in custody until the committal commenced on 26
August 1996. Unfortunately the proceedings could not be disposed of on that day although some evidence was taken. It was necessary for the matter to be adjourned to 31 October 1996 and the applicant was bailed to appear on that day. However, he again absconded to Melbourne where he was re-arrested shortly before Christmas (on 23 December 1996) and returned to Sydney. On 6 January the first of three appearances occurred before the District Court with which this application is concerned.

Before Judge Phelan on 6 January 1997 Mr Hart was unrepresented, although he had been represented in the committal proceeding by a solicitor, Mr West, from the Legal Aid Commission. When the applicant came before His Honour on 6
January he was asked certain questions by the judge concerning whether he had any legal representation. He answered: 
ACCUSED: Well, actually I had thought about considering entering a guilty plea.

HIS HONOUR: You thought a guilty plea? 
ACCUSED: Yeah.

HIS HONOUR: Do you think it is wise to consult some legal adviser before you-- 
ACCUSED: I do have a solicitor but since being caught again and put back into custody I've had no contact with him. I assumed that he might have been here today.

In those circumstances, the court understandably adjourned the matter to allow the applicant to contact his solicitor. The matter was adjourned until Friday of that week, 10 January, 1997. He returned on the 10th before Judge Phelan.
The applicant was still unrepresented and his Honour asked him: 
HIS HONOUR: Have you been able to take some advice or can you indicate what you are doing? 
ACCUSED: I've been unsuccessful in contacting my solicitor but I'm still going to enter a plea of guilty.

HIS HONOUR: You are going to enter a plea of guilty. You want your solicitor to represent you at that particular plea? 
The answer was in the affirmative.

During the exchange which took place on that day and before the arraignment and entry of pleas of guilty by the applicant, the Judge also said to Mr Hart: 
HIS HONOUR: Just so that I can acquaint Mr Hart with what is alleged. Do you know much about the Crown case? 
ACCUSED: I did, your Honour. If your Honour will give me a moment I'll-- 
HIS HONOUR: No, I am not particularly interested in that except he is not doing himself an injustice by pleading without the benefit of his solicitor.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: No, your Honour. I'd call it a fairly strong Crown case.

His Honour then made some remarks which are relied on as part of Mr Green's argument before us today. His Honour said: 
HIS HONOUR: The matters specified, Mr Hart, are as follows: 17 March 1996, St
Patrick's Day 1996, at Leichhardt you maliciously discharged a firearm.
Maliciously means deliberately fired it or you acted with a firearm so negligently that the consequences could have been readily foreseen. Do you understand maliciously? 
ACCUSED: Yes.

The emphasis in that explanation by his Honour is to be placed on the word `negligently'. His Honour then ascertained that the defendant wished to plead guilty and he was arraigned and entered pleas of guilty to each of the four charges in the indictment, including the first of maliciously discharging a firearm with intent to do grievous bodily harm.

After the pleas were entered there was again some discussion wherein the applicant informed his Honour that he had been unsuccessful in contacting his solicitor. He gave the name of Mr West at the Legal Aid Commission.
Accordingly, his Honour stood the sentencing over to 13 February 1997, no doubt to allow legal representation to be arranged.

On 13 February 1997 it appears that the applicant was in the list before Viney
DCJ and, by coincidence, Mr West was appearing in the list. When Mr West saw his client he asked his Honour to stand the matter down so he could take some instructions. This occurred and Mr West had a short conversation with the applicant. Mr West, of course, knew nothing about what had occurred earlier in
January.

During the course of the conversation Mr West says that the applicant told him that he had pleaded guilty earlier in the week. When Mr West asked why, he said that he had been distraught after his return from Melbourne, depressed, felt hopeless, did not care about anything and simply wanted the matter over with, or words to that effect.

Also during the conversation Mr West says that the applicant stated (as he had before) that the shooting was an accident. The consequence of the discussion was that the applicant instructed Mr West to appear on his behalf to seek to have the plea changed.

Mr West has also given evidence to this Court (for which we granted leave) that he believed that the applicant had a good case and that the ballistics evidence at the committal proceeding had helped the applicant. Be that as it may, I think it reasonably can be accepted that the ballistics evidence at the committal was not inconsistent with an accident having occurred.

The matter was adjourned by Judge Viney to 19 February 1997 when Mr West appeared on the applicant's behalf before Freeman DCJ. It is from the order of
Judge Freeman that this interlocutory appeal is brought. Mr West applied to change his client's plea and evidence was taken on the application, Mr West having made some preliminary remarks to his Honour as to the basis of the application before Mr Hart was called. These reasons included the fact that his client had been unrepresented at the time the pleas were entered; that he denied the offences and had done so from the time of his arrest and had maintained that position throughout the committal proceedings.

When Mr Hart was called to give evidence on the application he was asked questions in chief by Mr West and cross-examined by the Crown Prosecutor. I will not refer to the detail of that examination, it suffices to refer to a small portion thereof.

After acknowledging that he was not legally represented on the day when the pleas were entered Mr Hart was asked: 
WEST: Q. In relation to the first two matters on the indictment, that is the matters in relation to the firearms offences, what do you say about why you entered pleas of guilty to those matters on that day? 
A. Basically because I had no legal representation and at the time I was - just - I wished to get things over and done with.

HIS HONOUR: Q. What do you mean, basically because you had no legal representation? You had either done these things or you had not.

A. Well, since coming back into custody I was unable to contact any legal-- 
Q. But why would you say you had done something simply because you did not have a lawyer there holding your hand? 
A. Well, I honestly didn't see that I was going to beat the charge so at the time I thought it was maybe best to just plead guilty, get things out of the way.

The applicant also maintained that in a letter he wrote to the police and in video tape interviews with police in Victoria and New South Wales, he had stated that he did not discharge the firearm with intent to cause any harm, rather, the discharge of the weapon came about by accident. Neither the letter nor the video tapes of the recorded interviews were available to the District
Court. Mr Hart also told the Court he was unable to contact the solicitor between 6 and 10 January 1997, the latter date being when he entered the plea of guilty.

In cross-examination he stated that he knew what the charges were and added, `but I wasn't too sure of exactly what kind of a sentence they could put on that charge'.

He added in answer to a question of the Crown Prosecutor: 
Q. So what you're telling his Honour is that your concern about the sentence is a factor that's operating on your mind in wanting to reverse the plea today? 
A. And the fact that I was unsure of exactly how serious the first charge was after having the attempted murder knocked off.

His Honour's decision on the application is short and for that reason I will read it on to the record. He said: ... ... it seems to me that he [the applicant] did make a fully informed choice on 10 January. That he has since become regretful of that and, in the light of the seriousness of the offence which he knowingly pleaded guilty to,
I do not think grounds have been made out to withdraw the plea.

We granted leave to the applicant to rely upon an affidavit with respect to the application before the Court, as well as Mr West's evidence given today.
In the affidavit Mr Hart deposed that he had been unable to contact his solicitor between 6 and 10 January 1997 and this added to what he referred to in para 12 as his feelings of hopelessness when he appeared in Court on 10
January. He deposes he did not see the point in fighting anything especially since he did not have a solicitor to represent him when he pleaded guilty. He says `I did not mean to admit that I had deliberately shot at my uncle because
I did not'. (para 14 ) 
In approaching cases of change of plea, the essential issue is whether there has been a miscarriage of justice (see Regina versus Chiron (1980) NSWLR 218 at and also at 235). Whether there has been a miscarriage of justice usually raises a question as to whether the circumstances in which the plea was entered indicate that it was not really attributable to a genuine consciousness of guilt (see Regina versus Warfield [(1993) 34 NSWLR 200] at 214).

The position was usefully discussed by Badgery-Parker J in Regina versus Davies (unreported, CCA 16 December 1993 at pages 7 to 8). Part of what his Honour had to say is as follows: 
If the integrity of the plea is bona fide questioned because it appears that the person who entered that plea was not in possession of all the facts and did not entertain a genuine consciousness of guilt, then in my opinion the plea of guilty ought to be set aside and a new trial ordered if (but only if, and the onus lies upon the appellant) it is clear that there is, in the words of Sholl J 'an issuable question of guilt' - to put it more simply, if there is a real question to be tried. If the plea was not entered into with full knowledge of the facts and as a genuine recognition of guilt, and if the material before the Court of Criminal Appeal shows that there is a real question about the guilt of the accused, then the proper course must be to set aside the plea.

For my [part
I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/index.html#p1) accept the submission of Mr Green QC that the absence of legal representation is a significant factor. The applicant entered his plea of guilty on 10
January 1997 without the opportunity of taking legal advice. Although he told his Honour that he understood the charges, other answers that he gave are indicative that he did not. It is of relevance to note that to which he deposes in para 15 of his affidavit referring to his Honour's explanation of the offence and use of the word `negligently'. In both electronic records of interview that the applicant gave to the police (which were extensive), he contended that the gun discharged accidentally and he had only intended to scare his uncle. In relation to that statement, which appears on a number of occasions in both of the interviews, it may be relevant to note that the ballistics evidence given on the committal is at least as consistent with an accident as not. Neither of the records of interview were available to Judge
Freeman, nor indeed to Judge Phelan, when the plea was entered. Thus on the application to change the plea Judge Freeman was in no position, in my assessment, to be able to properly consider the strength, or otherwise, of the applicant's defence.

The presiding judge has a discretion as to whether a plea of guilty should be permitted to be withdrawn. It is trite to state that the discretion must be exercised judicially. Here, the plea of guilty was entered in circumstances which I conclude affected its integrity as an admission of guilt, Chow versus DPP [(1992) 28 NSWLR 593] at 595. The circumstances are such that the integrity of the plea has been undermined.

In my opinion, there has been a miscarriage of justice because the plea of guilty was entered by an unrepresented accused in circumstances where he had been unable to obtain legal advice; where he had consistently asserted his innocence and where, as soon as he was able to obtain legal advice, he sought to rely on his defence. There was always a real issue to be tried and the plea of guilty was entered without any genuine consciousness of guilt. The applicant has discharged the onus placed upon him to demonstrate that the integrity of the plea has been undermined.

In my opinion, leave should be granted, and the plea of guilty to the charge of maliciously discharging a firearm with intent should be set aside and the applicant be permitted to change his plea to this count of the indictment to `not guilty'.

STUDDERT J: I agree.

LEVINE J: I agree.

STEIN JA: Accordingly, the Court makes the orders which I proposed a few moments ago.
 * * * 
