

Yolla Abboud versus John Patrick Neville and Ors [1996] NSWSC 359 (16 August )

YOLLA ABBOUD versus JOHN PATRICK NEVILLE & 1 ORS /95 
Wednesday, 7 August 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings for loss and damages allegedly suffered by the plaintiff as a result of representations said to have been made to her by the defendants in the course of negotiations and contracting for the purchase by her of the defendants' restaurant business. The causes of action are founded in terms of proscribed conduct under the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) and the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) and in fraud. 
The proceedings were commenced in the Federal Court of Australia in 1993 and from that Court were transferred to the District Court of New South Wales (the
District Court proceedings) by order of Whilom J of 12 August 1993. On 17
February 1995, this Court ordered the removal of the District Court proceedings to the Commercial Division.

The defendants have cross-claimed against the plaintiff and her husband,
Leslie Abboud (Abboud), claiming damages for alleged conspiracy "to defraud and to injure the cross-claimants". The alleged injurious acts relied upon were the allegations of fraud made against the defendants in the Federal
Court, the District Court proceedings and in these proceedings.

The subject business was a restaurant business of the defendants, John Patrick
Neville (Neville) and his wife, Alison Linsley Neville (A L Neville), conducted by them under the name of the Heritage Terrace Restaurant (the
Heritage Terrace) situated in stage one of a redevelopment of a large retail shopping centre known as the Penrith Plaza (the Plaza). The development, leasing and management of the centre was under the control of various corporations known as the Lend Lease group. Throughout these reasons I refer to a member of that group as Lend Lease without distinguishing amongst one or other of the group's development, leasing or management arms. The Heritage
Terrace opened for business on Monday, 2 March 1992. Prior to that, the defendants had conducted a restaurant business for approximately six years under the name of the Heritage Restaurant and Coffee Inn (the Heritage Inn) in what was known as the old Penrith Plaza. The Heritage Inn closed on Saturday February 1992. The defendants operated the Heritage Terrace under lease and licence arrangements with Lend Lease (the Heritage Terrace lease). At the time of entering into the Heritage Terrace lease, the defendants held rights under an agreement to lease with Lend Lease to conduct a kiosk serving "hot and cold beverages, salads, light snacks and patisserie lines" in stage two of the redevelopment of the Plaza upon its completion. The kiosk business was opened by A L Neville on 30 March 1993 and was known as Zackery's.

By agreement bearing date 20 October 1992 (the original contract), the plaintiff agreed to purchase the Heritage Terrace business for the sum of $480,000 plus the value of stock, estimated at $5,000. Special conditions of the original contract included the following: "1. Completion of this Agreement is subject to and conditional upon:- a) The Provisional Transfer of an On-Licence (Restaurant) License (sic) No.
 to the Purchaser or her Nominee.

The Purchaser shall provide the Vendors' Solicitor with the following documents on or by 2 November, 1992:-
Transferee's Affidavit in Support of the Licence Transfer;
Bank cheque payable to the Local Court, Penrith for the sum of $100.00.
 b) The gross turnover of the business for the period 21 October, 1992 to 3
November, 1992 inclusive being not less than THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ($30,000.00) ("the trial period").

The Vendor shall permit the Purchaser or her Nominees access to the business observing the day to day trading. The parties hereto shall sign daily cash register tapes to verify the daily takings.

The Purchaser shall not be entitled to object to the daily takings in the event of the Purchaser or her nominee failing to attend the premises on a daily basis.
 "Gross Turnover" shall mean and include all cash receipts and credit purchases made by customers of the business during the trial period.

In the event that the Gross Turnover in the trial period is less than THIRTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS ($30,000.00) either party shall be entitled to rescind this
Agreement and the provisions of Clause 27 shall apply.
The Purchaser has been advised by the Vendor prior to the date hereof that the Vendor has secured a lease over business premises in the next stage of
Penrith Plaza for the establishment of a Kiosk to retail patisserie items, hot and cold drinks and light snacks.
The Purchaser has been provided with financial records of the business and has satisfied herself as to the commercial viability of the business. The
Purchaser acknowledges that she has, in entering this Agreement, not relied upon any statement, representation, warranty or condition made or given by the
Vendors or anyone on their behalf in respect of the subject matter of this
Agreement or the takings of the business other than those that are expressly herein contained." 
Pursuant to special condition 1(b), the plaintiff, assisted by Abboud, took part in the trial there contemplated and signed off each day the "daily cash register tapes to verify the daily takings". Those tapes were called the Z tapes and simply recorded the total of transactions entered into the cash register during the course of the day. The Z tapes did not particularise the individual transactions so totalled. Those were separately recorded on tape by the register. The Z tapes for the trial period totalled $29,037. Although entitled to rescind the original contract, the plaintiff did not do so and entered into a deed of variation with the defendants, bearing date 13 November (the variation deed), under which the original agreement was varied, inter alia, by reducing the price to $450,000. The variation deed recited the facts of the trial period and provided for the trial period in the following terms: "(Recitals:) 
C. The trial period did not see a gross turnover of $30,000.00 being achieved whereas the figure of $29,037.00.
 was obtained.

D. The Purchaser wishes to proceed with the purchase of the business and the
Vendors wish to sell subject to the terms herewith appearing.
 (Operative Clause:)
The Agreement shall no longer be conditional upon a trial period and the
Purchaser shall not be entitled to claim compensation or raise any requisition in respect to such period. The Purchaser acknowledges her acceptance of the gross turnover during the trial period of $29,037.00." 
The relief sought by the plaintiff in her amended summons included the following: "2. A declaration that the First Defendant and the Second Defendant, in trade or commerce, engaged in conduct that was misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive in contravention of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s52.html) of the TPAct.
An order pursuant to [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s82.html) of the TPAct, that each of the Defendants pay to the Plaintiff the amount of loss suffered by the Plaintiff by reason of the conduct of each of the Defendants which was in contravention of TPAct.
Alternatively to the declaration and order sought in 2 and 3: 
A declaration in respect of each of the Defendants that each of the
Defendants has, in trade or commerce, engaged in conduct that was misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive in contravention of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the FTAct.

An order pursuant to [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s68.html) of the FTAct., that each one of the Defendants pay to the Plaintiff the amount of loss suffered by the Plaintiff by reason of the conduct of each of the
Defendants which was in contravention of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of
FTAct.
Damages." 
The representations relied upon by the plaintiff were set out in the SUMMARY
OF PLAINTIFF'S CONTENTIONS as follows: "3. On several occasions during the period 30th of September, 1992 to 13th
November, 1992, the Defendants represented to the Plaintiff, inter alia, that: a) The gross takings of the business during the period commencing the few months prior to 30th September, 1992 (but at least since August, 1992) untill the date the Representations were made are at about $15,000 per week.
 b) the average gross taking of the Business is between $16,000 and $17,000 per week from the period 2nd of March 1992 untill (sic) the date the
Representations were made.
 "The Representations" 
PARTICULARS 
The Representations were express and/or implied and were made orally by the First Respondent in Telephone conversation with Leslie Abboud on 30th
September, 6th October and 4 November, 1992.

The Representations were express and/or implied and were made orally by the First Respondent in conversation with the Applicant and/or Leslie Abboud, at Penrith Plaza on several occassions (sic) during the period 3rd of
October, to 13th of November, 1992.
On about 27th October; 1992, the Defendants represented to the Plaintiff that the takings of the Business during the first week of the trial period, that being from 21st October to 27th October, 1992 inclusive were $15,175.
 ("The First Trial Takings Representation") 
PARTICULARS 
The First Trial takings Representations was express and were made orally by the First Defendant in conversation with the Plaintiff and/or Leslie
Abboud, at Penrith Plaza.
On about 3rd November, 1992, the Defendants represented to the Plaintiff that the takings of the Business during the second week of the trial period, that being from 28th October, to 3rd November, 1992 inclusive were $13,864.
 ("The Second Trail (sic) takings Representation") 
PARTICULARS 
The Second Trial takings Representation was express and were made orally by the First Defendant in conversation with the Plaintiff and/or Leslie
Abboud, at Penrith Plaza.
On about 13th November, 1992, the Defendants represented to the Plaintiff that the takings of the Business during the two weeks of the trial period, that being from 21st October, to 3rd November, 1992 inclusive were $29,037.
 ("The Third Trial takings Representation") 
PARTICULARS 
The Third Trial Takings Representation was express and made in writing, namely in a deed dated November, 1992 between the Plaintiff and the
Defendants.
During the last week of September, 1992 the Defendants represented to the
Plaintiff that the gross takings of the Business since about 3 March, 1992 were greater than $13,600 per week, ("The Tax Returns Representation") 
PARTICULARS 
The tax Returns Representation is to be implied from the comparison of gross takings figures for the Business as recorded for the tax years 1990, 1991 and in the copies of the tax returns that were provided to Leslie Abboud by
Rosen Sachs & Company." 
The allegation of falsity in respect of those representations was pleaded as follows: "13. The Representations and the Representation referred to in paragraphs 4, , 6 and 7 herein were untrue in that the weekly gross taking of the business during the period of time commencing the few months prior to 30th September, (but at least since August, 1992) untill (sic) the 13th November, 1992 and the average gross takings were about $12,000." 
The case in fraud was pleaded in par 15 of the CONTENTIONS in the following terms: "15. The Representations and the First Trial Takings Representation and the
Second Trail (sic) takings Representation and the Third Trial Takings
Representation and the Tax Returns Representation were false and the
Defendants knew them to be false or, alternatively, were recklessly indifferent as to whether they were true or false.

PARTICULARS 
The Defendants operated the Business on daily basis and had direct knowledge of the true position regarding income and expenses of the Business, 
During the period 2 March, 1992 to 13 November, 1992 the value of goods purchased by the Business was not sufficient to generate gross takings greater than $12,000 per week." 
The defendants denied the allegations of oral representations as follows: "The defendants say that the first defendant said to the plaintiff's husband on or about 3 October 1992 that the business was then averaging between $13,000.00 and $13,500.00 per week and that, as the business headed towards
Christmas, it should do $15,000.00, $16,000.00 or $17,000.00 per week." (Par 3) 
As to the trial period, par 4 of the defence contained the following: "The defendants say that during the trial period the cash register (after minor agreed adjustments) recorded the takings for the first week as $15,175.00 and for the second week as $13,864.00. The defendants further say that these takings were agreed by the plaintiff as being accurate." (Par 4) 
In relation to the tax return representations, the defendants admitted that the plaintiff had access to their 1990, 1991 and 1992 income tax returns.

During the course of these reasons, I have occasion to bring into question in varying degrees the credibility of various witnesses. Unless I have specifically adverted to the conduct of a witness, I have not been assisted in any material way in making adverse findings on credibility, or reliability by my observation of the witnesses. Where those observations have been material, lies in the markedly different cultural and commercial background and style of the plaintiff and Abboud when contrasted with that of the defendants. I think that aspect has particular significance when examining the performance of the
Heritage Terrace prior to and following the variation deed.

A L Neville is a middle aged person who had a very long business experience related to preparation of food for retail sale. From the age of 20 she had assisted her parents in their catering business, later becoming a waitress in a club in which her mother was employed as a chef. Subsequently to that date, she worked for several years as a waitress in a restaurant and took courses in
Asian and Basic cooking, Cordon Bleu cooking and International Gourmet cooking at TAFE. She was a visiting speaker at Penrith TAFE and the Heritage Inn was visited from time to time by teachers and students from that institution to enable them to observe its operation.

The Heritage Inn was purchased by her and Neville as a going concern in March
It was a long established family business with catering capacity of forty-five to fifty, employing five to six persons. Within months of purchase, the business was relocated within the old Penrith Plaza and its seating capacity increased to seventy-two and employees increased to about ten. It traded six days per week and was unlicensed. Members of the defendants' family assisted in the Heritage Inn, with their children of school age assisting each week day after school to close of business.

Up until the end of 1988, Neville assisted in the Heritage Inn on Thursday nights and Saturdays in addition to having responsibility for the business accounts. He had gained financial experience in fulfilling the responsibilities, at different times, of national service manager, state sales manager and state general manager of certain motor vehicle distribution corporations. After December 1988, he worked full-time in the Heritage Inn and, upon its closure, in the Heritage Terrace. He continued to look after the financial accounts of the defendants' partnership. A L Neville, for all practical purposes, had no contact with the partnership's accountants, Rosen
Sachs & Co. (Rosen Sachs), in which firm Jack Rosen (Rosen) was the partner responsible for the preparation of the accounts and of the income tax returns of the partnership and of each of the defendants: although the actual performance of this accounting work was delegated to an employee, David Leon
Abeshouse (Abeshouse).

Prior to the establishment of the Heritage Terrace, A L Neville spent one month touring North America visiting major shopping centres, accompanied by directors of Lend Lease which organised the tour with the redevelopment of the old Penrith Plaza in mind. This involved her reporting back to Lend Lease at the conclusion of the tour. Several hundred thousand dollars were outlaid in the design and fitout of the Heritage Terrace.

A L Neville described the Heritage Terrace as "much more up market" than the
Heritage Inn. The Heritage Terrace had a restaurant licence under the [Liquor
Act, 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) . It had seating capacity for one hundred and ten customers with an additional "external seating" of twenty which, at the time of the commencement of the Heritage Terrace business, was not practicable to use due to the failure of Lend Lease to complete adjacent landscaping. Trading after the first two months of operation was seven days a week. The business continued to be operated as a family concern with occasional help from two children of the defendants, while a daughter, Sarah-Jane Grant (Grant), and A L Neville's sister were regular employees. The defendants worked up to sixty hours per week in the business. A L Neville described herself as having "control of the
Restaurant" as to which, in her evidence in chief, she stated as follows: "14. My husband and I took particular care in the cleaning of our restaurant after the close of business each day including the vacuuming and washing of floors, cleaning of toilets, cleaning of kitchen filters and cleaning of the coffee machine etc. The cleaning took us about one and a half hours to complete.
My husband normally operated the coffee machine and cash register during the day. I would mostly balance the till at the end of the day. My husband did the monthly balancing, book entries and was the person who had contact with our accountants, Rosen & Sachs.
We took particular care in the menu of our restaurant. I took care to research the costing of each item on the Menu and Specials Board. I had the
Menu prepared by an independent consultant prior to the business opening on 2
March 1992.
From my observations and the practice of the business my sister Margaret and my daughter Sarah ordered the stock each day that was necessary to conduct the kitchen and I ordered the dining room stock. I took particular care in selecting new quality items and mainly used local shops for my fresh food stuffs to prevent wastage and preserve quality.

I was fussy about the presentation of my restaurant including the flower arrangements, the music selection and the dress and personal hygiene of my staff.

I required each of my staff to wear dresses below the knee, stockings, covered shoes with personal grooming of utmost importance. I required the same standard to be displayed by my family.
I was responsible for the roster of the staff. I employed all staff on a casual basis. My attitude was that I preferred staff to work 3 to 4 days a week (up to a maximum of 30 hours) so as they would have plenty of time left for family commitments and would be enthusiastic once at work. We employed up to 20 staff at times but normally operated on around 15 to 16 casual staff. On the average day we employed around eight (8) staff. The staff apart from my family were not privy to the financial management of our restaurant." (Exhibit 1) 
I accept that as an accurate general statement of the general running of the
Heritage Terrace.

She stated that she had "a close rapport with about seventy per cent (70%) of the people who came to the Restaurant". She confirmed this in cross- examination, stating that she "had a good clientele" with "a good rapport with ... most of them" and that "the best clients were in there most days" (T469).
I have no doubt that the family nature of the business and the length of time that the defendants, particularly A L Neville, had been associated with a restaurant business in the Plaza resulted in the majority of the clientele being personal customers to A L Neville.

The negotiations for the sale of the Heritage Terrace business were conducted by Neville and Abboud.

It is clear from the evidence of the defendants, which I accept, that the sale of the Heritage Terrace business arose out of a combination of events which came to a head after the March opening of the Heritage Terrace. The evidence of the defendants is that they initially intended to operate both the Heritage
Terrace and Zackery's when that business commenced in stage two of the Plaza.
However, during 1992 the marital relationship between the defendants had deteriorated to a level which brought in doubt the practicality of the defendants continuing in that business relationship. Further to that, in
August 1992 A L Neville underwent emotional strain consequent upon the murder of her niece. By the time negotiations got under way with Abboud, the Heritage
Terrace business had been on the market for some months, having been put in the hands of an agent for sale at $600,000 on 25 June 1992. At the time of the sale to the plaintiff, the defendants had been informed by Lend Lease that the opening date for stage two had been brought forward. This, combined with the other matters personal to the defendants, leaves me in little doubt that they were keen sellers.

In evaluating the evidence, I have found it necessary to regard Neville as untrustworthy in business matters. He was instrumental in presenting false partnership accounts to Abeshouse and in the submission of false tax returns relating to the partnership and the personal returns of the defendants. He stood by and allowed A L Neville to swear false answers to interrogatories. He practiced deception upon A L Neville making cash withdrawals from the takings of the Heritage Terrace business without her knowledge. Each of those matters are dealt with in more detail later in these reasons, but, in my opinion, they are sufficient to warrant an extremely cautious approach to his evidence in these proceedings.

Abboud was a solicitor by profession with a background in small business. At the time of the hearing he had an interest in a delicatessen which he had acquired in 1988. Since about 1986, he had been the owner of a retail suburban shop selling chicken meat. In about 1987 or 1988, he had bought and sold another suburban retail chicken shop. In addition to his experience with litigation as a solicitor, he had personal involvement with litigation involving allegations of misleading representations, in one case as a witness and, in the other, as defendant in which, to use his words, he was "vindicated". He had no restaurant experience prior to his wife's acquisition of the Heritage Terrace. He acted for the plaintiff in negotiations for the purchase of the Heritage Terrace and was a witness and the solicitor for the plaintiff in these proceedings. Although I have reason to criticise some material aspects of his evidence, I have no doubt that he regards himself as having been deliberately and seriously misled by Neville during negotiations for the acquisition of the Heritage Terrace.

The plaintiff was thirty-two when she purchased the Heritage Terrace business.
She was well educated, having attended university in Lebanon studying law for two years before coming to Australia where she attended the University of
Sydney for a year which qualified her as a school teacher. After two weeks of teaching at Normanhurst Boys High School, she resigned and became a District
Officer with the Department of Social Services. She described her business experience prior to the purchase of the Heritage Terrace as including the assistance of Abboud in the conduct of the retail shops in which he had an interest. This was done without payment of any salary. She established in 1989 a preschool business in suburban Sydney which she operated successfully until its sale in August 1992. It was then that she set about looking for a business in which to invest those proceeds. This task was entrusted completely to
Abboud. Initially in cross-examination, the plaintiff described her restaurant experience prior to October 1992 as consisting of "helping a friend ... in his restaurant". Her evidence in relation to this experience was the subject of extensive cross-examination and is addressed in more detail in these reasons.
So far as that evidence is relevant to the business experience of the plaintiff, I think it is fair to say that she was quite inexperienced in the operation of a business such as the Heritage Terrace. In her relationship with
Abboud I think it is clear from the evidence, she occupied a dependant role to the point of doing whatever Abboud advised her to do. While I have occasion to offer some criticism of the evidence of the plaintiff, I have been left in no doubt as to the genuineness of her belief that she was deceived by the defendants. The case has been conducted by the defendants expressly on the basis that any misleading or deception of Abboud was a misleading or deception of the plaintiff and that any reliance by Abboud upon the defendant's representations was reliance by the plaintiff.

In my opinion, the keystone in the arch of the plaintiff's case lies in her allegations that the takings of the Heritage Terrace during the trial period were fraudulently manipulated by the defendants. If she failed, to make good that allegation, or in the face of a positive finding that it was a bona fide trial, it is difficult to see how a case of actionable misrepresentation could be erected around the trial period. This approach to the case is underscored by the finding, which appears later in these reasons, that there was no actionable representation by the defendants that the average takings of the
Heritage were "between $16,000 and $17,000 per week".

The plaintiff sought to establish that the operation of the Heritage terrace during the trial period was fraudulently conducted by the defendants in the following ways: by the manipulation of the cash register by Neville so as to record non- existent transactions, coupled with evidence of an admission by him of misconduct in the operation of the restaurant during the trial period: by the presence of an atypical number of customers attending the Heritage
Terrace as a result of the encouragement by the defendants of customers to attend the restaurant for the purpose of inflating the takings.

In respect of the records of takings kept by the defendants prior to the trial period, the plaintiff invited the Court to find that certain of those records, which still existed, were themselves the product of fraud by the defendants.

The evidence disclosed that after the sale of the plaintiff's pre-school business, Abboud began searching on her behalf for a suitable business acquisition. In support of a loss of opportunity case, the plaintiff gave evidence that, had she not purchased the Heritage Terrace business, she "would have purchased another restaurant and coffee shop which was generating between $15,000 and $17,000 per week in gross sales per week". It was put to her in cross-examination that this was a statement made for the purposes of the case and did not reflect the reality of the situation at the time of the acquisition of this business. I think there is much to be said for that challenge to the plaintiff's evidence (T130.24). Abboud looked at other businesses on behalf of the plaintiff in addition to that of the defendants, including a retail men's shop and a patisserie retail shop selling cakes and coffee, which was also situated in the stage one development of the Plaza and which was on the market for $700,000.

In the course of Abboud's inquiries concerning the suitability of the patisserie business he spoke by telephone to Timothy Martin Moore (Moore), who was employed by Lend Lease as the Centre Manager of the Plaza. Prior to being contacted by Abboud, Moore had been informed by Neville of the defendants' desire to sell the Heritage Terrace business. When Abboud enquired of him concerning the patisserie, Moore took the opportunity of referring Abboud to the defendants. Abboud fixed that telephone conversation as occurring on 25
September 1992. On the same day, Abboud had a telephone conversation with
Neville in which he introduced himself and referred to his conversation with
Moore, in response to which Neville suggested that Abboud inspect the Heritage
Terrace. On the following day, Saturday, 26 September 1992, Abboud visited the
Heritage Terrace, but due to the pressure of business, was requested by
Neville to return later that day "when things quietened down". Those basic facts are not in dispute.

The evidence of Abboud in his statement of evidence dated 13 March 1995 (Exhibit B) (Abboud's principal statement) is that on his return to the restaurant at about 4:00 pm he had the following conversation with Neville: "He said: "This is a very busy Restaurant, the Restaurant has been in the
Centre for 16 years. My wife bought the Restaurant about 6 years ago and the
Restaurant was relocated to its present position in March this year. I have been working in the Restaurant for the last two years." 
I said: "What is the business taking and how much do you want for it?" 
He said: "I will organise for my accountant on Monday to give you copies of the tax returns and after you have had a look at the tax returns, ring me up and we will discuss the price and other financial matters about the business." 
Mr Neville also said words to the following effect:- "The Restaurant is easy to run. The staff know how to order supplies and the staff generally runs the Restaurant. Whoever purchases the Restaurant will just have to operate the till and the coffee machine." " 
In Neville's statement of evidence dated 11 August 1994 (Exhibit 4) (Neville's statement), he gave a somewhat different version of that meeting. However, it is clear from the cross-examination of Neville (T536 et seq.) that Abboud's recollection of this conversation is correct so far as it goes. In Neville's statement he gave evidence that the following further conversation took place at the meeting: " I said "What do you do?" 
He said "I'm a solicitor but have two food outlets in different shopping centres. Has Christmas trading started at your centre yet?" 
I said "It is picking up strongly".

He said "Is it overtrading (sic)?" 
I said "Yes it is and carparking (sic) is a problem....." " (Par 21) 
In Abboud's statement in reply dated 13 March 1995 (Exhibit T) (Abboud's reply statement) he denied that there was any reference to Christmas trading in that conversation with Neville. Indeed, in the several statements of Abboud which form part of his evidence in chief there was scant reference, in his detailing of his negotiations with Neville, to any likelihood of increase in current takings with the advent of Christmas trading. It was Neville's evidence that at a subsequent meeting with Abboud on 3 October 1992, he again raised the question of Christmas trading in the following terms: "As we head towards Christmas we should do $15,000.00, $16,000.00, $17,000.00 per week and over Christmas weeks should do around $25,000.00 plus if it is anything like our old business." 
In Abboud's reply statement, he denied that such a statement was made by
Neville, while acknowledging that in a telephone conversation with Neville, probably on 6 October 1992, he said to Neville: "I want to be in before Christmas to make sure we get the (turnover) from the
Christmas trade" 
In Abboud's statement of evidence dated 24 January 1994 (Exhibit A) (Abboud's first statement), he attributed to Neville a statement immediately following the trial period which included the following: "The business is doing $15000 per week and will do much better leading up to
Christmas." 
Abboud's principal statement, which is more detailed than Abboud's first statement, did not repeat that evidence. Instead, in Abboud's principal statement he attributed to Neville the assertion that: "The restaurant is doing $15,000 per week and the average is higher". I have occasion later in these reasons to return to this topic of Christmas trading.

According to the evidence of Abboud, he obtained from Rosen access to the defendants' partnership income tax returns for the years ended 30 June 1990, and 1992 as arranged with Neville on 26 September. Neville fixes that arrangement as occurring on the following Saturday, 3 October 1992. I think the cross-examination of Neville demonstrated his confusion on this matter. In his oral evidence in chief, Abboud gave the following evidence in relation to those returns: "Q. Now, after you received copies of the income tax returns that you say had been provided to Roman Saxs and Company (sic) for tax years ended 1991/92. I take it you reviewed those returns? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you calculated the gross weekly of the business from those returns? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. And did you at the same time carry out any other calculations? 
A. Yes, as I understood from John Neville the business relocated to this new position on 2 March 1992 and Neville had already told me that the business had improved considerably once it related (sic) to this position in March 92, and it had a greater turnover. I looked at 91 tax return and calculated that the average weekly taking was $11,500. Up until March 29 the business had not changed in any form or shape. I concluded that it was still taking during the period 1 July 91 to 1 July 92 $11,500 per week. The average taking for the 92 year which is a composite of the two businesses, starting 1 July 91 to 30 June had increased the average takings to $13,608 for the 92 tax year.

This increase was due to the relocation of the business on the 2 March 92, and the weeks thereafter until the 30 June 92. Now, I calculated that there was .72 weeks from the 1 July 92, that there was 34.72 weeks up until the 1
March 92, from 1 July 91, and that there was 17.28 weeks for the period of 2
March 92 until the 30 June 82. If you take the takings for the first period, being the 1 July 91 till the 1 March 92, it's 34.72 time $11,550.

If you wanted to determine the average takings for the second period being from the 2 March 1992 until the 30 June 92 you would use `Y', that is the unknown times 17.28 and this calculation should equal to 13,608 times 52. And you do the mathematics which I will calculate to determine why 34.72 times $11,550 which gives 401,016 plus 17.28 Y, which equals 13,608 times 52, gives
To determine why you would go 17.28 Y is equal 707616 minus 401,016 which comes up to 306,600 and Y would be $306,600 divided by 17.28 which gives, Y would be $17,743.00. I concluded that the average weekly takings for the period 2 March 92 to 30 June 92 was $17,743.00 per week which was in accordance with what John Neville had told me being the average 16 to 17,000 per week.

Q. When do you say you carried out this calculation? 
A. Immediately after I received the taxation returns from which would have been either 28 or 29 September 1992." (T6.45 - 7.37) 
This calculation was supported by a file note of Abboud (Exhibit AJ).

It was submitted by counsel for the defendants that Abboud was "not beyond fabricating" his file notes. I do not regard his file notes as fabricated. I regard them as notes which tend to be self-serving and, on occasion, call for close comparison with the contents of corresponding file notes of others.

However, I think Abboud was mistaken in his evidence that he made this calculation on "28 or 29 September" and that it "was in accordance with what .... Neville had told (him) being the average 16,000 to 17,000 per week ....".
According to the evidence of Abboud, no such statement had been made by
Neville at that time. Abboud's evidence was that the first time that any representation was made by Neville that the average takings of the business were in the vicinity of $17,000 per week occurred in a telephone conversation of 30 September 1992. The Abboud principal statement contains the following evidence of that conversation: "I said: "The tax returns show that the business was taking about $13,600 per week in the year ending June, 1992." 
He said: "The period ending June, 1992 includes the trading at the old location. We moved to the new Restaurant in March, 1992 and when we moved the trading had picked up." 
I said: "How much has the Restaurant been taking in the last few months?" 
He said: "The Restaurant is taking about $15,000 per week and since we opened in the present location, the average is between $16,000 to $17,000 per week." 
I said: "How much is the rent" 
He said: "$10,422.00, $10,534, $10, 534 that makes it about $10,500.00 per month. We take drawings of $25,000 a year and there is about $3,000 worth of stock." 
I said: "How much are you asking for the business".

He said: "We are thinking about $530,000 plus stock. You think about it and get back to me". " (Exhibit B) 
Abboud produced a file note which he said was a contemporaneous note made by him of this telephone conversation with Neville. It lends support to some of the above quoted evidence. In particular it contains the note "Doing $15,000 p w but average $16,000 to $17,000 p w", and refers to the rental figure and the
Neville offer price and stock figure. According to Abboud, he had a further telephone conversation with Neville on 1 October 1992 in which he submitted an offer of $450,000. Neville responded by proposing a meeting with Abboud on
Saturday 3 October 1992 at the Heritage Terrace.

The plaintiff and Abboud attended the restaurant on that day for lunch.
Because Neville was engaged in restaurant activities, they left and returned some hours later when a conversation took place between Neville and Abboud at which the plaintiff was not present. There is no dispute about those outline facts. Abboud's evidence of that conversation in his principal statement was as follows: "He said: "All this is brand new, it cost us over $400,000 to set up this
Restaurant. The Restaurant is taking $15,000 per week and since we have opened in this location the average weekly takings have been between $16,000 and $17,000." 
I said: "Will you take $450,000 for the business?" 
He said: "No, but I'll get back to you." " 
In Neville's statement there is contained evidence of a far more extensive conversation. According to Neville, he produced a general ledger of the
Heritage Terrace business for the period from March 1992 to June 1992 and for the months of July, August and September 1992 in addition to staff records, bank statements and fitout costs summaries. His evidence of the conversation between him and Abboud is as follows: "I said "Les, here are some of my records that cover the business. We have only been here since March 1992. Prior to this, we had a smaller coffee shop in the old Plaza. That business had less seats, less staff, was not licensed, traded only 6 days and the menu was different. We are averaging between $13,000.00 to $13,500.00 per week here but it is too early to know what the final settled down figures will be. As we head towards Christmas we should do $15,000.00, $16,000.00, $17,000.00 per week and over Christmas weeks should do around $25,000.00 plus if it is anything like our old business. In the week that we opened here in March this year, which is traditionally the worst time of the year, we turned over in excess of $28,000.00.

Les, have a look at these records".

We then both went through the records on a basic level as to the monies banked and the cost of major items e.g. wages and rent.

A discussion then took place:- 
I said "We are selling and plan to take some time off. Our niece was murdered in August this year and we are under extreme stress. We are committed to open a cafe in the next stage".

I then showed Mr Abboud the layout of the restaurant, the plant, fittings and chattels and during our stroll through the restaurant I said to him "Les, you can see this fitout is in excess of $400,000.00 and that everything is brand new." 
He said "Yes I can".

After this meeting both Mr Abboud and myself went on a tour of the shopping centre during which I pointed out to him the competition and the location of our suppliers.

We then came back to the restaurant and a conversation took place to the following effect:- 
Mr Abboud said "I think the centre is overtrading and agree with you that parking is a problem. What price are you asking?".

I said "We want $600,000.00.'.

He said "It is not worth $600,000.00 based on your turnover. The industry formula is somewhere around 30 times your weekly turnover depending on your fitout and future potential".

I said "Make me an offer".

He said "I can't do that until I get some firm figures".

I said "Ring Jack Rosen, my accountant on telephone 389-3622. He will give you what you want. They are located at 89 Bronte Road, Bondi Junction".

I subsequently telephoned my accountant and authorised Mr Rosen to release anything that was required by Mr Abboud. A further conversation took place to the following effect: Mr Abboud said "How do you get on with Lendlease? I am going to see them soon." 
I said "We get on very well and we do some catering for them." 
Mr Abboud said "Do you have to tell them your trading figures?" 
I said "We don't tell them everything, only our basic figures. What happens in the Centres that you trade in?" 
Mr Abboud said "I tell them nothing about my business." " 
Abboud denied that any records were produced by Neville and, generally, denied much of this version of the conversation. Although it is extraordinary that
Abboud should not have required the production of such records, I think Abboud was probably correct in saying that no records were produced at this time. In this he was supported by the plaintiff. I very much doubt the accuracy of
Neville's recollection. I think his cross-examination shows that he was quite confused, both in the order of events that occurred and in the substance of those events. He had no contemporaneous notes. I think the following evidence illustrates that point: "Q. If I could just briefly take you back to the conversation of 30 September,
I think you described in your evidence that conversation to be a short conversation on the telephone with Mr Abboud? 
A. Can I refer to - ? 
Q. Yes, please do.

HIS HONOUR: I think it's preferable that you don't. I gather you wish to refer to your statement? 
A .No, my Lord, I have made some notes of the sequence of the dates of - 
Q. Recently? 
A. Yes.

Q. No, I think it's better that you don't.

A. All telephone conversations with Mr Abboud were fairly short, long conversations were in the restaurant.

MARTIN: Q. I think at transcript 541 line 49 you described this conversation on 30 September as being very short, would that be correct? 
A. Yes, all conversations on the phone were short.

Q. So it would certainly be incorrect to suggest that the conversation lasted and a half minutes on 30 September, isn't it? 
A. I don't know, it was four years ago.

Q. If the conversation went for 22 and a half minutes that wouldn't be a short conversation, would it? 
A. No, it would be substantial.

Q. The telephone number at the Heritage Terrace Restaurant as at 30 September `92 was the prefix 047 then 218 142? 
A. Yes.

Q. I show you a facsimile message from Telecom Australia to Mr Abboud, you will see there has been highlighted in yellow pen the conversation that took place on 30 September in respect of Mr Abboud's telephone and the number 047 142, which you have acknowledged is your telephone number at the Heritage? 
A. Yes.

Q. Do you see that entry there? 
A. Yes.

Q. It recorded 22 minutes 37 seconds? 
A. Yes.

Q. As that telephone conversation? 
A. Yes.

Q. Do you wish to still adhere to your evidence that the conversation you had with Mr Abboud on the telephone of 30 September 1992 was a very short conversation? 
A. Obviously from that it wasn't." (T547.43 - 548.44) 
The above extract is one of many passages in the evidence of Neville in cross- examination that indicates the frailty of his recollection and the confusion in his mind of the events and their sequence that took place during the period of his negotiations with Abboud.

Abboud's evidence was that on 6 October 1992 he telephoned Neville and made an offer in the following terms: "I said: "We will go to $480,000 plus stock on the basis that the business is averaging between $16,000 and $17,000 per week. The advice I have is that a fair price is $30,000 for each $1,000 worth of takings." " 
Neville accepted that at some stage during negotiations a rule of thumb of that kind, applying a multiplier to gross takings to establish a purchase price, was discussed. This rule of thumb was said by Abboud to have been obtained by him from a property valuer, Grahame William Brook (Brook), in a telephone conversation on or prior to 30 September 1992. Brook does not support that evidence of Abboud. Abboud's file note of this telephone attendance on Neville of 6 October 1992 simply stated "prepared to accept $480,000". As stated later in these reasons, I do not accept that Abboud referred to any average takings of $16,000 to $17,000 per week in this conversation, nor his version of the terms in which Neville was said to have agreed upon the price of $480,000. According to Abboud, Neville said "the business is doing $15,000 per week and the average takings for the business are much higher but alright we will accept $480,000". In substance, Neville denied that version of the terms in which Abboud put the plaintiff's offer, while accepting that there was agreement on a trial period with a tuition period to follow settlement.

I admitted evidence of a conversation that Abboud had with L E Tournier , the business accounts manager at the Lakemba branch of the
National Australia Bank, during the negotiation period, in which Abboud sought finance for the purchase. This evidence was admitted, not as evidence of the representation alleged by the plaintiff, but as evidence of reliance upon the alleged representation. On that basis no objection was taken to the tender of documents 51 and 52 in the agreed bundle (Exhibit BC), being file notes of
Tournier and associated notes relating to that loan application. The notes record that the information provided by Abboud included the statement that the "Business has a current turnover of $17,000 per week". Abboud accepted in cross-examination that he had so informed Tournier (T295.18). On any reasonable view of Abboud's evidence, he had not been informed by Neville nor had he seen any record of the Heritage Terrace business which would justify such a statement. However, I accept that this is what he informed Tournier.
The application was for $350,000 and was sanctioned on 20 October 1992.

Abboud's evidence was that after the trial period shortfall in takings, the following conversation took place with Neville: "I said : "The trial was short." 
He said: "Melbourne Cup pulled down the takings. The restaurant is doing $15,000 per week and the average is higher." 
I said: "Look, I believe what you are telling me but if I pull out you will have to advertise, get an agent and pay commission. Yolla will buy the place but she will only offer $450,000. Ask your wife." 
Shortly after the end of the above conversation Mr Neville telephoned me and said words to the following effect: "I have spoken to Alison. We have no choice, we will accept $450,000 plus stock but we will not stay on after settlement. We want to settle by the th." " 
As in the case of the telephone conversation of 6 October 1992, I do not accept that Neville stated that the Heritage Terrace average takings were in excess of $15,000 per week. Nor do I accept that Neville declined to "stay on after settlement". This evidence is a reference to the agreement reached on 6
October 1992 that the defendants would provide a two weeks tuition period after settlement. It was common ground that no tuition period took place other than the trial period itself. Neville asserted that Abboud stated that he did not require a tuition period, whereas Abboud's evidence was as quoted above. I think the evidence of Neville in this respect is to be preferred to that of
Abboud, having regard to the evidence of Peter John Adams (Adams), the solicitor acting for the defendants on the sale of the Heritage Terrace business. He was present on settlement and witnessed a conversation between
Abboud and Neville to the following effect: "John Neville said: "What time do you want us to come in for the next week?" 
Leslie Abboud said: "We are satisfied with the business. We do not need you to come in." " (Exhibit 23, par 6) 
I have no reason to doubt the accuracy of Adams' recollection. While acting as the solicitor for the defendants, he had no motive to fabricate this evidence.
Abboud denied the truth of that evidence.

In respect of the conflicting evidence of Abboud and Neville in relation to the negotiation period, I am satisfied that there was no representation by
Neville that was understood by Abboud as an assertion that there was an ongoing or true average takings of the Heritage Terrace business of $16,000 to $17,000 per week or that the average takings were higher than $15,000 per week.

I am satisfied that Neville did represent to Abboud that the takings at the time of the negotiations between them were either "about" $15,000 per week or "$14,500 - $15,000" per week.

Abboud's evidence, that Neville represented to him on more than one occasion that the Heritage Terrace business was averaging $16,000 to $17,000 per week, was in the context of having been informed of an increased level of trading experienced in the Heritage Terrace business from the commencement of business on 2 March 1992 when compared with takings derived from the Heritage Inn business immediately prior to that. The statement attributed to Neville by
Abboud was that, at the time of negotiations, the takings of the Heritage
Terrace business were about $15,000 per week, but, taking into account the initial trading figures of the Heritage Terrace, the average was $16,000 to $17,000 per week. In my opinion, on any reasonable understanding of any such assertion, and in the mind of Abboud, it did not represent an ongoing or true average weekly takings of the business. Moreover, I think there is a mathematical difficulty in Abboud's position. According to Abboud's evidence, his analysis of the partnership income tax return for the year ended 30 June confirmed in his mind, that average weekly takings of the Heritage
Terrace business, from the commencement of its trading in March to the end of that financial year, were approximately $17,700. At one stage in his evidence
Abboud attributed to Neville a representation that, for the "last few months" prior to the period of the negotiations and at the time of the negotiations, the takings had been approximately $15,000 per week. One would not expect those figures to produce a mathematical average of weekly takings for the period March 1992 to September 1992 inclusive of approximately $16,000 to $17,000.

This difficulty is reflected in the following passage from his evidence: "Q. The other thing I don't understand is in that same letter and in your affidavit or statement you have repeated you say it was represented to you that the turnover was 15,000 a week at the present time, that is at the time of the representation, that it was averaging 16 to 17,000, I can't see how that works out? 
A. If you will go back to my statement, I had asked him "How much has it been taking in the last few months?" He said "15,000, but the average as we opened this new position to March to the time the representations were made was 16 to ,000." 
Q. I still don't understand that because if he is taking 15,000 when he is making the representation to you it is hard to see how he could be averaging or 17,000 over a period of time? 
A. Because from 2 March when it opened a new position it had booming business for the first two or three months, because it is a brand new centre massively promoted, it took phenomenal takings for the first five or six weeks of the business and then it settled down to what it should be taking. So these abnormal takings at the start and me doing the calculations with the tax returns where I established the first four months was 17,000 I believed that the takings first four months was in the order of 17,200 and then it has settled down to the 15,000.

Q. I understand that, but what you say is the 15,000 was regarded as normal and the 16 to 17 was not normal? 
A. Was the average for the whole - 
Q. I thought you said to me a moment ago that you didn't regard 16 or 17 as normal? 
A. I didn't regard it as normal, but it's still an accurate representation of the takings of the business being 16 or 17,000 from 2 March till the date of the representation." (T61.46 - 62.25) 
On that evidence alone, I have considerable difficulty in avoiding the conclusion that any calculation that took into account abnormal trading figures described as "phenomenal" or "booming" which were the short term result of a "massive" promotion could not produce ongoing average weekly takings of the Heritage Terrace business.

Abboud expanded on this subject matter in cross-examination in which he gave the following further evidence of this "boom": "Q. Did Mr Neville explain to you why the present takings, on your account, were less than the average? 
A. Sorry, I didn't speak to Mr Neville after settlement.

Q. No, but did he explain to you before settlement why, on the account you give of the conversation, the takings were then in about October 1992 less than the average? 
A. Why, when he said the average was 16 or 17 and why it's $15,000? 
Q. Yes? 
A. Because this is the quiet period just before Christmas, because Christmas he expected the takings to increase considerably and this was the quite (sic) period.

Q. Well, that would be the quiet period which includes Christmas but why would, in about late September, early October 1992, why would at that time the takings have been less than the average for the period from March to that date? 
A. Because when he opened, he has explained when they moved into this new location in March business just picked up so considerably that they had a boom for a considerable period of time and then winter came, business dropped and it drops till about September, October and it starts to pick up from November,
December.

Q. In what conversation with you was it that he gave you that explanation? 
A. That would have been probably on the first Saturday I went to see him. We didn't talk figures, that would have been the 26th, but he was explaining to me how the restaurant had just moved into this new location on 2 March and how it was busy in the early part and then we got into more details in the conversation of 30 September and a further conversation on the Saturday when we visited the restaurant of that week.

Q. But, Mr Abboud, would you go to Exhibit D, your statement of 13 March 1995? 
A. Yes, which one? 
Q. Your statement in chief, Exhibit D? 
A. Yes.

Q. Your main statement? 
A. Yes.

Q. Do you see that in paragraph 5 you refer to, on page 2, your first conversation with Mr Neville? 
A. Yes.

Q. And all he says about the move on your account was the restaurant was relocated to its present position in March of this year? 
A. I didn't recall the whole conversation word for word.

Q. I'm not asking that. I'm asking you is that what you say in your affidavit or statement in regards to the relocation of the restaurant? 
A. In that relocation he says indicated how the turnover of the business, how the business had improved so much, considerably. I didn't note it in my statement.

Q. Well, would you please go to paragraph 6 on the same page. You say that you say that you (sic) telephoned Mr Neville on September 30? 
A. Yes.

Q. And over the page, page 3, you give an account of that conversation? 
A. Yes.

Q. And on page 3 what you have Mr Neville as saying is that we moved to the new restaurant in March 1992 and when we moved the trading had picked up? 
A. Yes, that's what I'm saying.

Q. That is to say by comparison to the old restaurant? 
A. Yes.

Q. But Mr Neville, on the words you have used in your statement, wasn't saying that there had been a large surge of business in March 1992 which had then tapered off? 
A. But it was obvious when we compared the tax returns that there was a large surge. The average increase from $11,550 a week to $13,608 and, as I had done that exercise earlier I was able to come to the conclusion that from 2 March to 30 January 1992 the average weekly takings was $17,743. So the inference on the tax returns, which I drew from the tax returns and this statement, I came to the conclusion that the business had picked up so considerably that it was doing an average of $17,743 from March 2 to 30 June .

Q. Did Mr Neville in either of the conversations on 26 September or 30
September explain to you that the reason why the present takings were less than the average for the period March to October was that there had been a surge of business when the restaurant moved in March which had tapered off, or anything to that effect? 
A. We didn't use figures. He did, yes.

Q. He did? 
A. Mm.

Q. Is this then a part of the conversation which you have not recorded in your statement which is Exhibit D? 
A. Yes. I didn't - I thought using the words "trading had picked up" would convey that trading had increased substantially. I didn't think to write every single word verbatim that was ever said. I mean, there were many other things noted and I didn't note them in the statement.

Q. Is that perhaps because Mr Neville said no such thing to you? 
A. He did." (T66.56 - 68.56) 
I think that demonstrates that what was said by Neville about takings of $16,000 or $17,000 per week was based upon takings which were understood between Neville and Abboud to include a significant volume of takings which were abnormal and short term. To treat such a mathematical average as representing the ongoing average takings of the Heritage Terrace business, I think is quite unfounded. It may explain the reference in Abboud's file note of the conversation of 30 September 1992 which refers to an "average (of) $16,000 to $17,000 p w", but, in the light of his evidence, I do not think that such an average was a true average in the sense of ongoing average takings of the Heritage Terrace business: nor that it was understood as such by Abboud.

Abboud was further cross-examined on this subject matter and on his conversations with Tournier in the evidence which follows: "Q. When did those conversations take place? 
A. One conversation took place on 1 October '92 and on that - in respect of that conversation I went over to the bank and gave them the tax returns that I had obtained from Rosensachs (sic) and explained to Ivan Turner that I will be buying this business, that I needed a loan for this business and gave him details of how much I needed and also gave him details that I had with stamp duty and other costs that I would be paying, around the $500,000 mark for this business.

Q. Did you tell Mr Turner that the business had a current turnover of $17,000 per week? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. Was that, as you understood it, correct or not correct when you told Mr
Turner that? 
A. As I recall-- 
Q. Mr Abboud? 
A. Yes, it was correct.

Q. And on what material did you form that conclusion? 
A. Firstly, on the telephone conversation I had with Mr Neville on 30
September where he said the business is doing about 15,000, but the average a ,000, 17,000 a week. That meant to me that on average the business does 16-17,000 a week. Now, I also had the tax returns and I did the calculation between the '91 and '92 tax returns, that elaborate calculation where I came up to the conclusion that because of those additional four months, March, April, May June, when the business relocated to the new premises, that the business was doing, for those four months, 17,700. Hence it corroborates what Mr Neville was telling me about the average for the business being 16 to 17,000 per week.

Q. On your account of the 30 September conversation with Mr Neville what he said to you was that the business is now taking 15,000 per week on average? 
A. I am sorry, that's not what he said. He said the business is now taking ,000 per week but the average is 16-17,000 per week.

Q. I am sorry, I misread to you what the statement says. On your account of what Mr Neville said he told you, the business is now taking 15,000 a week? 
A. Yes, either used the word "now" or "about".

Q. And, indeed, in the statement dealing with that same conversation in paragraph 6, what you suggest is Mr Neville said, "The restaurant is taking about 15,000 per week and since we opened the present location we average it between 16 to 17,000"? 
A. Correct.

Q. But on any view of your account of what Mr Neville told you, what he told you was the business is now taking 15,000 a week or about that figure? 
A. That's correct. At that time.

Q. You told the bank, do you say, the business had a current turnover of ,000 a week? 
A. Current average turnover of 17,000 a week. I mean, the bank wants to know what is the average takings for the restaurant for the overall period and it is 17,000 a week, sir.

Q. Was that a conclusion which you derived from the tax returns? 
A. From the tax returns and what Mr Neville had told me on 30 September 1992.

Q. Having examined the tax returns carefully and done some calculations, did you form the view that it appeared that the business had started off with something of a surge and that the business had tapered down to a point where the then takings in late September, early October '92 were about 15,000? 
A. No, I didn't come to that conclusion from the tax return. I came to that conclusion from my discussion with Mr Neville. He had a boom when it first opened and now that it settled down and at the period we spoke in September it was at a low point, is the weakest period and that as we were going to get to
Christmas it is going to pick up again and so the average was going to be 16 to 17,000 a week.

Q. I may have put this to you before, that is not what you say in your statement of 13 March about those conversations? 
A. See, you asked me a different question. You didn't ask me about the conversation of 30 June. You asked me how I came to tell the bank the average - that the average takings were 17,000 a week. Now, if you asked me the question what Mr Neville had told me, I told you he said he was doing about ,000 a week but the average when he opened in March to now was 16 to 17,000 a week. Different question.

Q. Did Mr Neville say to you the business had a boom when it had opened? 
A. He didn't use the word "boom". He said, "We were very, very busy when we first opened and then it settled down after four or five weeks to a level." 
Q. He told you that, did he, on September 30 or before that time? 
A. I think he told me that on the Saturday. We didn't talk figures on the
Saturday that I went to see him, which is, I think, 26 September - "You can see this is a new centre, it had a boom"- sorry to use the word "boom" - "it had a very busy period at the start and it settled down." And this accords with my understanding of what happens at a shopping centre. When you have advertising sales and things like that. Like the Franklins Big Fresh, it had massive unusual takings for the first four weeks then it settled down.

Q. So your concern, really, when you spoke to Mr Neville was more the then current takings than its boom time takings? 
A. I was concerned with both because, you see, when he is saying the average is 16 to 17, I understood that to be from 2 March till the time the conversation took place.

Q. In the light of what you were told, you say you were told about the boom, your concern was with the then current takings in late September, early
October '92? 
A. No, I was concerned with both.

Q. And I suggest, Mr Abboud, that the conclusions which you drew and which you conveyed to the bank on 1 October '92 were those which you derived from the income-tax returns of the business? 
A. No, sir, they were both from what Mr Neville had told me and from the tax returns which Mr Neville says, "Look at the tax returns and just remember the period after 2 March '92 we moved into this new location and look how much the business has improved from one year to the next." " (T295.7 - 297.25) 
I think that evidence confirms sufficiently that whatever was said by Neville, in the context of the "boom", "surge", "massive unusual takings", "very busy period" in respect of an average takings of $16,000 to $17,000 per week, could not reasonably be treated as a fraudulent representation, nor should it be treated as proscribed conduct under the consumer legislation relied upon by the plaintiff.

In so far as the last passage quoted, at one point, relied upon an assertion by Neville that, with the advent of Christmas trade, takings were "going to pick up again and so the average was going to be $16,000 to $17,000 a week" (T296.32), that assertion in the plaintiff's case is not without some difficulty.

There was no case made by the plaintiff based on representations as to future matter, which I think, statements related to possible Christmas trading would involve. That was not the case made out by the plaintiff as pleaded, nor was it the case sought to be made out in Abboud's evidence in chief. I have referred to the fact that in Abboud's reply statement he denied that Neville had sought to support a representation of takings in the vicinity of $16,000 to $17,000 per week by reference to increased trading "over the Christmas weeks"..

In the communications between Abboud and others following the purchase, there was no allegation of a representation by Neville that Christmas trading would bring the average weekly takings to $16,000 or $17,000. Indeed, in his first complaint after the purchase concerning the level of takings, Abboud made no reference to any representation by Neville that the average takings were $16,000 to $17,000. Abboud spoke to Adams by telephone on 17 November 1992.
According to Abboud's statement of evidence dated 29 January 1996 (Abboud's further statement), that conversation was in the following terms: "Leslie Abboud: "The takings are very bad. Saturday took $2,000. Sunday - $800.00. Monday - $1,000.00. This is not what we took at the trial but looks like $10,000 to $11,000 per week. This is no where near the $14,500 to $15,000 per week." 
Peter Adams: "I will speak to people I know but I cannot explain it." " (Exhibit S) 
Abboud produced a file note of that conversation which is set out below: "Spoke to Peter Adams told him figures - takings are very bad, Sat took $2,000, Sunday $800 and Monday $1,000 - not what we took at trial - looking like $10,000 - $11,000 week - nowhere near $14,500 - $15,000 - He will speak to people he knows but can't explain it - sympathetic" 
Adams agrees that he had a conversation with Abboud on that day. He also kept a file note which was in the following terms: "He said he will supply affidavit of wife.

Then general discussion on business I said "Can we talk without prejudice" he said "Yes" 
He said "Business isn't going too good.

Turnover down each day - he believes Neville organised clients to come in to inflate figures.

He also removed till tapes to give a clean slate.

He hasn't changed staff." 
I said "Business reputed to be good business. I didn't believe Neville as dishonest.

Give it another week." 
He said "I am worried sick as I can't survive on $13,000 per week." 
I said "As you know I didn't go near the place as a matter of principle." 
He said "Yes I know you as being straight up and down from the start." 
I said "I'll enq. Kevin Chavell to see why he hasn't been" 
Rang Chavell - l/t message" 
This file note of Adams attributed a statement to Abboud inferring that the plaintiff was taking "$13,000 per week" as distinct from "looking like $10,000 - $11,500". The next point of significance is that the representation attributed by Abboud to Neville was in relation to takings of "$14,500 - $15,000". There is no reference to any representation by Neville that the
Heritage Terrace business was averaging $16,000 - $17,000 per week. I would have expected the conversation between Abboud and Adams to contain some reference to that alleged representation.

The amicable relationship between the two solicitors did not last that long.
Adams made a complaint to the Law Society of New South Wales, apparently, alleging conflict of interest in Abboud acting as solicitor in the matter.
Abboud responded by a letter to the Law Society of 10 September 1993 which contained the following passage: "It's anticipated to adduce evidence at the hearing Mr Adams participated in negotiations for the purchase of business, and in particular the amount of takings the business had taken, that he believed the business was a fantastic business. Further, it is likely that Mr Adams will be called as a witness and it would seem that another member of his firm should handle the matter as there will be a conflict of interest." (T61.13-.20) (My emphasis) 
Although Abboud sought in cross-examination to justify the truth of those assertions, I think it was stretching the point, to say the least, to allege that "Adams participated in negotiations for the purchase of business, and in particular the amount of takings the business had taken". Abboud sought to justify that statement by the fact that, on the instructions of Neville, Adams had put a proposal that a "buffer of plus or minus ten per cent" be allowed in the trial period minimum takings figure (T60.35). I would not have regarded
Abboud's statement to the Law Society to refer to such evidence and, I think, it is fairly clear that he was making a serious allegation against Adams which he did not pursue in these proceedings. Admittedly, he was retaliating to an attack on his professional integrity. However, I think his response is an indication that one needs to be careful in examining allegations made by
Abboud against others when his personal interests are involved.

On 27 November 1992, Abboud had a further telephone conversation with Adams and, again, each solicitor kept a file note of the attendance. Abboud's file note reads: "Spoke to P. Adams. client comming (sic) in on Tuesday 1/12/92 & he will get back to me after that." (Exhibit AG) 
The file note of Adams reads as follows: " Neville /11/92 TA Les Abboud 
General discussion 
He has gone through invoices happy 
He is quite ^ in giving business back 
Accused them of dudding books 
Told Centre Mgr taking $15,000" (Exhibit 26, Annexure B) 
On 3 December 1992, Abboud wrote to Adams in the following terms:.
 " WITHOUT PREJUDICE 
RE: ABBOUD FROM NEVILLE 
SALE THE HERITAGE TERRACE RESTAURANT - SHOP 8, PENRITH PLAZA PENRITH 
We wish to advise that we act for Yolla Abboud in the purchase of the above business from your client.

The sale was motivated by representation being made by John Neville that the turnover of the business was $15,000.00 per week. In fact a trial was conducted for two weeks and the turnover was not as represented resulting in the price being renegotiated. The excuse was that Tuesday being the Melbourne
Cup there would be a natural downturn.

The turnover in the first week was $12,000,00 and the turnover in the second week is about $12,300.00. It was represented to my client that the turnover was $15,000.00 per week at present and that the average was $16,000.00 to $17,000.00.

Cleary (sic) the turnover will be between $12,000.00 and $13,000.00 and is nowhere near what was represented.

Our client has instructed us that you (sic) client has two options. Firstly they can take the business back and refund monies paid and our client will refund any profit. Secondly our client seeks the sum of $70,000.00, being the difference between the price paid and the actual value of the business. The value has been determined by an independent valuer which we will be relying on.

We have been instructed that unless your client chooses one of the options then our client will institute proceedings under the Fair Dealings Act.
seeking rescision (sic) of the contract and damages.

Please respond before 4.00 pm on Friday the 4th December, 1992 otherwise legal action will be pursued without further notice." (Exhibit S, Annexure B) 
I note in relation to that letter that it was the first written post-purchase reference by Abboud to an alleged representation by Neville "that the average was $16,000 to $17,000 per week" for the Heritage Terrace business: Abboud estimated turnover for that business under the plaintiff's ownership at "between $12,000 and $13,000": it offered a return of the business with any profit derived by the plaintiff or alternatively sought damages of $70,000 "being the difference between the price paid and the actual value of the business" - a sum which was justified by the statement that "the value has been determined by an independent valuer which we will be relying on". No such independent valuation had been obtained by Abboud as appears from the following: "HIS HONOUR: Q. Mr Abboud, in your letter to Mr Adams in December I think you said that you had a valuer value the business at $70,000 less than what you paid for it, words to that effect, is that right? 
A. I had said I would accept 70,000 by way of damages difference.

Q. I rather thought you -? 
A. No, there was no valuer in respect to that situation, only my own estimate of damages. It was a without prejudice letter, I believe if I got 70,000 I might be able to spend it on the business and improve it. The valuer was in respect of the - 
Q. What you said was that "I accept the sum of 70,000 being the difference between the price paid and the actual value of the business to the value as being determined by an independent valuer which we will be relying on." Not correct? 
A. No - well, I might have said that, but I don't think I intended it that way." (T61.25 - .45) 
Again, I think this reflects a need to exercise caution in considering
Abboud's evidence in this matter.

The letter of 3 December 1993 was left unanswered, as was a further letter by
Abboud to the defendants' solicitors dated 10 December 1992 in the following terms: "RE: ABBOUD FROM NEVILLE 
SALE THE HERITAGE TERRACE RESTAURANT SHOP 8 PENRITH PLAZA PENRITH 
We refer to the above matter and to our letter dated 3rd December, 1992 and note that we have not received reply to same. Please confirm whether you have instructions to accepting service of Supreme Court proceedings on behalf of your client's under the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).

If we do not hear from you then we are to take it you are no longer acting for
Mr & Mrs Neville and then we will contact them directly." (Exhibit 26, Annexure C) 
I do not think it is appropriate to infer from that failure an admission as to the truth of the allegations made by Abboud in his letter of 3 December 1992.
Adams gave evidence that he conferred with A L Neville on 1 December 1992 in respect of the matter raised in Abboud's telephone conversation with him of 17
November 1992 and that, after receipt of Abboud's further letter of 10
December, he had a telephone conversation with Abboud on 15 December 1992. His file note of that conversation was in the following terms: " Neville /12/92 TA L. Abboud - Without Prejudice 
He has had Accountant look at figures.

Centre Management has given his figures 
Figures for Suppliers the same 
Mrs Neville has left invoices with Abboud 
Business Taking $13,000 
Represented at $15,000 
Mucking around with till 
October $51,314 
March $75916 ~~ ~~dening (sic) 
April $59341 
May $54356 
June $52512 
July $54207 
Aug- $47119 
Sep $48702 
Oct $51314 
Not a good Christmas trad" (Exhibit 26, Annexure D) 
Abboud's file note of this conversation is very brief, but consistent with the note of Adams.

I note the representation of takings referred to was of takings of $15,000 and that no mention was made of any representation of $16,000 to $17,000. It is also noted that current takings of the business were stated to be $13,000.

It appears that at the time of that conversation Neville was absent on holidays and that, upon his return, Adams conferred with the defendants on 7
January 1993 when he received instructions to reply to Abboud's letters in the following terms: " Re: Neville and Abboud 
We acknowledge receipt of your letters dated 3rd and 6th December 1992 and our conversation prior to the Christmas vacation.

Following discussion with our clients we reject your demand and your allegation contained in your letter of the 3rd December 1992" (Exhibit 26, Annexure E) 
Through oversight, a letter in that form was not sent.

The defendants lead evidence of communications between Abboud and Moore during negotiations and, after purchase, with Paul Francis Meehan (Meehan), Moore's solicitor, in which reference was made to the alleged representations of
Neville. Abboud alleged that Moore had misled him in relation to the reported takings of the Heritage Terrace. According to the evidence in Abboud's reply statement, during the course of negotiations Abboud spoke to Moore by telephone when the following conversation took place: "I said: "John Neville said the business is doing around $15,000.00 per week, is that what he has been telling you?"; 
He said: "Yes, it is a good business and you should buy it." " 
The only common ground of this evidence with the evidence of Moore is that
Moore agreed that he had a conversation with Abboud. There the agreement ends.
They do not agree as to where the meeting took place nor what was said.
According to Moore, the conversation occurred at the Plaza at a meeting with
Abboud and consisted of the following: "Leslie Abboud said, "I have been to see John Neville. I need some questions answered".

I said, "Fine".

Leslie Abboud said, "What is the turnover of the Heritage?" 
I said, "You will have to get permission off the Nevilles before I can give out these figures".

Leslie Abboud said, "Can you give me a ballpark".

I said, "Around $13,000.00 per month but you will have to get permission from the Nevilles to look at the figures as they vary from month to month". " (Exhibit 16, par 7) 
Meehan gave evidence of a telephone conversation he had with Abboud about this matter on 8 March 1993. Once again the evidence of Abboud and Meehan finds little common ground. There is no agreement on the date of the telephone conversation. Each had a file note. Abboud's note bears date 9 March 1993, while Meehan's file note bears date 8 March 1993. They are agreed that the conversations arose out of a facsimile from Meehan to Abboud dated 8/3/93 which was in the following terms: "RE: SHOP 8 PENRITH PLAZA, PENRITH 
We advise that we are the solicitors' for Lend Lease who have forwarded to us a copy of your letter dated 19th February, 1993.

In that letter you have made accusations of misrepresentation by Mr. Tim
Moore, an employee of the Lend Lease Corporation.

We are instructed that such accusation of misrepresentation of turnover figures are unsupported and defamatory to our client.

As you are aware, Lend Lease was not a servant or agent in relation to the sale of the abovementioned business and all figures in relation to the purchase of the business were provided to you by the vendor of the business.

Our client requests a written apology and a withdrawal of your allegation to its' employee Mr. Tim Moore, otherwise further legal proceedings may be commenced." (Exhibit U, Annexure A) 
In relation to the subject matter of that letter, it is reasonably clear that, notwithstanding some denials by Abboud during the course of cross-examination, he was threatening legal proceedings against Lend Lease and Moore as a means of forcing a commercial compromise on the amount of rent to be paid under the
Heritage Terrace lease. To a certain extent that exercise was successful. The plaintiff settled her claim with Lend Lease.

The telephone conversation between Meehan and Abboud, whenever it occurred, is recorded in file notes of each of the parties to the conversation. In the case of Abboud, it is in the following terms: "Paul Meehan spoke to him and said preserving position / 
Writing now on a humane basis at present - He confirmed that what I told Tim Moore is "this shop doing $15,000 pw he said it's doing around that figure" " (Exhibit U, Annexure B) 
Meehan has the following version noted: "Mr Abboud 
Spoke about alleged comments made by Tim Moore regards coffee lounge at
Penrith.

He alleges Moore made certain representations to him regarding takings of lounge, namely $12 - $14,000 p w. Put to him that Moore made no such reps and only answered an enquire (sic) from him.

Put to him Moore told you to get consent of Vendor and he would let you have access to figures he had and that you did in fact get access to those figures.

He agreed this was the case and that further, he did time in the business on trial basis. He agreed he didn't rely on anything Mr Moore had sd (sic) but relied on own enquiries, but felt he could get a reduction in rent by pressing this avenue." (Exhibit 15, Annexure A) 
The most extraordinary part of that exchange is the note of Meehan that Abboud identified the representation complained of as being representation of takings, "namely $12 - $14,000 p w".

In cross-examination of Abboud on his evidence of these communications with
Moore and Meehan, Abboud denied any reference to $13,000 in his conversation with Moore and asserted that he told Moore that Neville had stated that they were "taking about $15,000 a week" (T21.35). He further stated that on several occasions Moore had confirmed the reported takings at $15,000 a week and that it was not until 7 December 1992 that the true reported takings were made available to him (T20.37). It is difficult to reach any confident finding as to what was said as between Abboud on the one hand and Moore and Meehan on the other. In the case of the telephone attendance notes of Meehan and Abboud, I think they are both in their own way self-serving. Meehan was both solicitor and friend of Moore and, no doubt, was doing his best to put Moore's case and
I cannot imagine Meehan confirming that Moore made a false statement as to the level of takings reported to Lend Lease by the defendants, as the note of
Abboud would have it.

The evidence of Abboud to which I have referred leaves me with some confidence in the finding that Neville, during the course of negotiations from time to time, had represented to Abboud that the current takings of the Heritage
Terrace were $15,000 per week, or about $15,000, or $14,500 to $15,000 and that, in the context of so informing Abboud, led Abboud to an expectation that those figures could be improved upon. In my opinion, that falls short of a case of fraud or of proscribed conduct, if the evidence of takings about the time of those representations establishes current takings of $14,500 to $15,000 per week, or if the results of the trial period and the compromise represented by the variation deed should be regarded as overtaking those earlier representations.

I am far from satisfied that Neville represented to Abboud that the average takings of the Heritage Terrace business was $16,000 to $17,000 or much higher than $15,0000 on the several occasions that Abboud attributed their representations to Abboud. For the most part, they are unsupported by any contemporaneous record, they are patently self serving and, when Neville did refer to takings of $16,000 to $17,000, for the reasons that I have given, it did not amount to a representation of the average takings and was not understood by Abboud to do so.

In my approach to Neville's evidence on this subject matter he carries a particularly heavy burden. I have referred earlier in these reasons to the confused state of his evidence in cross-examination and of the frailty of his recollection of the sequence of events and of their subject matter leading up to the variation deed. Apart from that, I think, one has to approach his evidence as that of a person who has shown himself to be untrustworthy in business matters. I have given the broad nature of the conduct of Neville which justifies that approach and it is necessary to examine it in a little more detail when reaching a decision on the findings that should be made in relation to the reliability of the defendants' records of takings in respect of the Heritage Terrace business and, I think, to a lesser extent, of the records of the Heritage Inn business.

I have quoted some of the evidence in chief of Neville on this subject but, for convenience, will repeat particular aspects of it. In his statement in chief, his evidence was that on 3 October 1992 he stated to Abboud that "We are averaging between $13,000.00 to $13,500.00 per week here but it is too early to know what the final settled down figures will be. As we head towards
Christmas we should do $15,000.00, $16,000.00, $17000.00 a week and over
Christmas weeks should do around $25,000.00 plus if it is anything like our old business. In the week that we opened here in March this year, which is traditionally the worst time of the year, we turned over in excess of $28,000.00.".

He agreed that in that conversation an "industry formula" was discussed by which a purchase price could be indicated by multiplying turnover by a factor of thirty.

In relation to the agreed trial period, Neville explained in his evidence in chief that he had tried, unsuccessfully, to introduce a ten per cent margin up or down on the proposed $15,000 per week trial period figure.

I have considerable difficulty in accepting Neville's evidence that he spoke of the Heritage Terrace "averaging between $13,000 to $13,500 per week". It is true that the income tax returns for the year ended 30 June 1992 reflected such a figure - in fact $13,600 - but on Neville's evidence that return was understated by over $40,000 say another $800 per week. In other words, he must have known that, even on trading figures up to 30 June 1992, he was looking at a weekly turnover of close to $14,500.

Neville in cross-examination adhered to this evidence and sought to explain why he should have underestimated to Abboud the true weekly takings of the
Heritage Terrace, as appears from the following: "Q. Could I ask you, why did you, on your version, say to Mr Abboud in this conversation on 3 October 1992 that the business was averaging between 13 and and a half thousand dollars? 
A. Because they were the figures that I could substantiate certainly from our tax return that was submitted at the time.

Q. But you believed that the figures were higher than that at the time, didn't you? 
A. Yes, I did, i (sic) knew they were higher.

Q. Why did you say to Mr Abboud that the figures were lower, that is the turn over was lower than what you actually believed to be the figures at the time? 
A. Because I was substantiating the business, as you do in all businesses, on the tax return.

Q. But you are conscious of the fact that Mr Abboud was going to calculate the purchase price by reference to the turn over of the business, weren't you? 
A. Exactly.

Q. It was important for you to seek to obtain the highest possible purchase price for the business? 
A. Yes, it was.

Q. You knew it was important for you to tell Mr Abboud the highest possible turn over that the business was achieving? 
A. No, Mr Abboud had my tax returns and I knew what he would see in the tax returns.

Q. Why didn't you tell Mr Abboud that you believed that the business was doing , 14 and a half plus? 
A. Because our diaries were our own business and we knew where we were with our tax return.

Q. I suggest to you that in this conversation of 3 October you told Mr Abboud that the business was taking $15,000 per week? 
A. No, I told him on the average that it was doing 13 and a half, but as we headed towards Christmas the figures were picking up.

Q. But you knew the 13 and a half was not correct because you believed that it was doing more than that? 
A. I knew it was doing more than that.

Q. You say you failed to tell Mr Abboud your belief that it was doing 14, 14 and a half thousand? 
A. He had access to the tax returns, that's the basis on which we sold the business." (T546.39 - 547.32: see also T551.1) 
He denied that he had stated that the Heritage Terrace was presently taking $15,000 per week (T544.18).

In Neville's defence in the District Court proceedings he admitted: "That around the period 30 September 1992 to 4 November 1992 (he) made oral and express representations to ... Abboud by the telephone and at Penrith
Plaza that the gross turnover of the business for the said period was about $15,000.00. (That he) also made representations that the average of the business since it commenced on 2 March 1992 was between $13,000.00 and $13,500.00 and that towards Christmas the gross turnover should build up in excess of $15,000.00 per week".

Neville was cross-examined on this defence and the relevant passage is set out below: "Q. If I could show you firstly a document and could you identify your signature on it, just look at your signature please? 
A. Yes, that's my signature.

Q. Is that your signature? 
A. Yes.

Q. It's an affidavit verifying the further amended notice of grounds of defence, is it not? 
A. Yes.

Q. When you made that affidavit you were satisfied that the contents of the affidavit were accurate, didn't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. Indeed it's not your practice to swear false affidavits, is it? 
A. Not knowingly. Well, how do I answer that? I mean that's a trick question.

Q. I'm not trying to ask trick questions, but before you swore the affidavit you were satisfied yourself that the contents of the affidavit were correct? 
A. Yes? 
Q. I show you the further amended statement of claim which was issued on 6
September 1993 in the District Court of New South Wales and the further amended notice of grounds of defence which I have just shown you which you swore on 1 February 1994. (Approached) I take you to the further amended statement of claim and you see there is a paragraph 3(a)) and then below that there is paragraph 3a, it's slightly confusing. The questions I am directing you to is paragraph 3(a)? 
A. Yes.

Q. You have read that to yourself, have you? 
A. Yes.

Q. There you see it's alleged by the plaintiff that the defendants represented during the period from 30 September 1992 to 4 November 1992 that the gross takings of the business during the above mentioned period of time is at about $15,000 per week, do you see that? 
A. Yes, I do.

Q I now take you to paragraph 3 of the further amended notice of grounds of defence which was sworn by you on 1 February 1994. Read that to yourself. Do you agree with me in paragraph 3 of your defence you have said in response to paragraph 3(a) of the further amended statement of claim that the defendants admit that around the period 30 September 1992 to 4 November 1992 the first defendant, meaning yourself, made oral and express representations to Mr
Leslie Abboud by the telephone and at the Penrith Plaza that the gross turn over of the business for the said period was about $15,000; do you see that?
And that was a true statement when you swore your affidavit verifying that defence, wasn't it? 
A. I just have to read it I'm sorry. Could I ask a question at this stage? 
HIS HONOUR: Q. Yes? 
A. Was 30 September to 4 November the trial period? 
HIS HONOUR: No, the trial period I think began on about 21 October through to about 2 or 3 November.

A. And the question is? 
MARTIN: Q. I want to suggest to you when you swore your affidavit verifying that statement in paragraph 3 of your further amended notice of grounds of defence that statement I have just read out to you was true and correct? 
A. This is true and correct.

Q. But you did during the period from 30 September 1992 to 4 November 1992 represent to Mr Abboud on the telephone and at the Penrith Plaza that the gross turn over of the business for that period was about $15,000 per week? 
A. No.

Q. Are you saying now that paragraph 3 of your defence is false? 
A. No, I am saying that my conversation with Leslie Abboud never said that the business was turning over $15,000 a week on average.

Q. I have directed you to paragraph 3 of your further amended notice of grounds of defence: What you have said there, I submit, paragraph 3 is perfectly clear, it states that the defendants admit during the period 30
September 1992 to 4 November 1992 that you, Mr Neville, made oral and express representations to Mr Leslie Abboud by the telephone and at the Penrith Plaza that the gross turn over of the business for the said period was about $15,000 per week. That's what paragraph 3 says, isn't it? 
A. It does.

Q. I suggest to you when you swore your affidavit verifying your defence you swore that that statement was true and correct; isn't that correct? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. The position is that when you swore your affidavit under oath what you said under oath was, to the best of your knowledge and belief, true and correct, wasn't it? 
A. Yes, it was." (T517.22 - 519.14) 
I have no doubt from my observation of Neville that he was more confused than ever when answering these questions, but, as the evidence stands, it strongly corroborates the plaintiff's case so far as it is alleged that Neville represented to Abboud that current takings were $15,000 per week.

Finally, I think it is very difficult to understand how Neville could have agreed to a trial period which was required to yield gross takings of $30,000 unless he had a basis for saying that such gross takings represented the current takings of the Heritage Terrace business.

For the foregoing reasons I am of the opinion that any reference by Neville during negotiations to takings being $16,000 to $17,000 per week was not made in the form of a representation that the ongoing or true average takings were in that order: that Neville did represent that the takings were $15,000, or about $15,000 or $14,500 to $15,000.

I think the disposal of that part of the evidence in this case exposes the way to approach the trial period.

In substance, this aspect of the plaintiff's case falls to be decided by the view that should be taken of evidence of irregular aspects of trading during the trial period and of the view to be taken of the reliability of the documents purporting to record the financial operations of the Heritage
Terrace.

I think the most extraordinary evidence concerning the trial period is that of
Audrey Rigby (Rigby). She was employed as a waitress in the Heritage Terrace during the trial period. In her statement of evidence in chief dated 20 April , she gave evidence as follows: "7. In October, and November, 1992 I worked on Mondays and Thursdays. During the two weeks Mrs. Abboud came to the Restaurant on trial Mr. Neville was already inside the Restaurant when I came to open up. It was not usual for Mr.
Neville to come to the Restaurant before about 11 am, that is some 2 hours before normal.
On the four days when I opened the Restaurant during the trial period referred to in the preceding paragraph Mr. Neville was already in the
Restaurant. On those occasions I saw Mr. Neville operating the cash register continuously for some minutes while there were no customers at the till and before Mrs. Abboud arrived, which was at about 9 am." (pars 7 and 8) 
Rigby gave her oral evidence without hesitation in a direct and, in my opinion, frank way. I saw no sign of any prevarication. I think she was a witness endeavouring to give truthful testimony. Where I think her evidence calls for careful examination is in its reliability, as a number of inconsistencies were revealed during cross-examination.

In order to understand the operation of the cash register, I elicited from A L
Neville the following evidence: "Q. With the till tapes: Its my impression that there are two tapes, there is one which I understand takes its name from the fact if you press the Z button it will printout a total figure of takings? 
A. Yes, yes.

Q. On a tape. In addition to that I gather there is a tape which records each transaction as it is entered up? 
A. Yes.

Q. How often would you have to replace either tape? 
A. The Z tape is only a short tape, so that would probably last quite a while.

Q. A month, a week? 
A. Yes, maybe a month.

Q. What about the other tape? 
A. A couple of times a week.

Q. How many? 
A. Couple of times a week.

Q. How long does it take to do it, what have you got to do to replace it? 
A. You just - you have to feed the paper through the machine and make sure it's adhered properly to the spool and you just would probably make sure that everything was cleared on the tape so you could start again. The tape, it all depends on the machine, sometimes doesn't always - sometimes it doesn't always happen in the first motion." (T465.32 - 466.5) 
It was put to Rigby that what she had observed was Neville setting up the cash register and changing the tapes for the day's trading. On this aspect she gave the following evidence: "Q. So at the time that you saw these events with the cash register there were other members of staff about, weren't there? 
A. Yes, in the kitchen.

Q. And the kitchen is very close to the cash register, isn't it? 
A. Yes.

Q. Would it be any more than the distance between me and you away from the kitchen? 
A. No.

Q. And there would have been people working, I think at least two people working, in the kitchen by the time you got there? 
A. Yes.

Q. And there were other waitress staff as well around? 
A. No, there is usually only one waitress that opens the shop. It is not until later that another one would arrive, 10 o'clock or so.

HIS HONOUR: Q. I thought you opened the restaurant? 
A. Yes, I did. There would be only me, one waitress, there.

Q. But would the kitchen staff be already there? 
A. Yes.

WALES: Q. And the cash register would be readily visible and readily audible from the kitchen? 
A. Yes.

Q. Was it ever your job to use the cash register? 
A. Yes.

Q. Was it ever your job to change the tapes on the cash register? 
A. Occasionally but most of the time if I use the cash register - only maybe once in the whole time had I ever changed a roll in the cash register.

Q. Was it either Mr or Mrs Neville who changed the tape in the cash register? 
A. Yes, or another member - another waitress who knew how to change the roll.

Q. And that is another operation which involves threading the paper tape through the register? 
A. Yes.

Q. And in the course of that operation the register makes noises? 
A. Yes.

Q. What I want to put to you is that what you saw on these mornings was Mr
Neville changing the tape in the cash register? 
A. No.

Q. Are you sure? 
A. I am sure.

Q. You saw him, do you say, pressing keys on the cash register for a period of time? 
A. Yes.

Q. Making as it were phantom entries? 
A. Well, doing something, but I don't know what entries because I wasn't standing right behind him watching him, but the cash register was operating.

Q. And he was doing this in your presence? 
A. While I was serving customers, because I had to go around the back of the till to get drinks and whatnot, yes.

Q. So that were there always customers in the restaurant when this was happening? 
A. Sometimes there were because it was early, and sometimes there weren't." (T173.52 - 175.17) 
Rigby was very firm in her rejection of this suggestion that Neville was simply changing the tape in the cash register (see also T178.53).

Counsel for the defendants returned to the subject again and Rigby explained why it was she was able to distinguish between the operation of changing the cash register tape and what she had observed of Neville with the cash register.
 "Q. Why are you able to say that what you observed Mr Neville doing was not changing the tape? 
A. Because you can see someone changing the tape, but when you are not changing the tape you are using the figures on the register. You are pressing buttons on the register. You wouldn't do that if you were changing the tape.

Q. You actually saw that, you say? 
A. Yes." (T179.46 - .54) 
Rigby occasionally used the cash register and had changed its tape (T174.32).
It was also her duty to "put the float into the till" when she was the first waitress to arrive.

The further evidence she gave of her observations was as follows: "Q. To take up another matter his Honour raised, do you say that you really thought at the time, in November 1992, that Mr Neville was making some kind of phantom or uncalled for entry on the cash register? 
A. Well, I didn't know what they were. I observed him using the cash register, but, as I said, I didn't discuss with him what it was. I didn't know what it was, but it was obviously figures punched into the machine because I know how the cash register works, of course. I had to use it. I just thought it was unusual because he had never done that before.

Q. To ring up a sale how many buttons do you press ordinarily for, say, a $3.50 sale? 
A. You only ring up three dollars fifty.

Q. You press three dollars fifty and then an enter, or entry button? 
A. Yes.

Q. So you hit four buttons to make a 3.50 entry? 
A. Yes.

Q. Can you say how many times you saw him press buttons? 
A. I can't say exactly how many times or how many buttons he has pressed but he was there for you know a good, maybe five minutes, or so.

Q. Five minutes pressing buttons? 
A. That is what I observed.

Q. Are you quite sure about that? 
A. Yes.

Q. Could you think of any good reason why he would be doing that? 
A. No." (T180.33 - 181.11) 
Rigby was asked why she remained silent at the time in the face of this conduct of Neville. The reason she gave added a sinister note to her observations and was as follows: "Q. Why not? 
A. The reason I said nothing, which I have thought about - When that was happening with Mr Neville with the cash register he did say to me one day: "You might see some strange things happening now, but don't say anything about it." 
Q. I see. So you now say that Mr Neville told you to keep quiet about any odd thing that you saw? 
A. That is all he said to me.

Q. You have not put this in your affidavit? 
A. No.

Q. Why not? 
A. Because I didn't recall that before until now thinking about it. I now remember during those days with Mr Neville using the cash register that he did say to me - I just thought that was a strange thing to say but I didn't know what he meant by it, so I just minded my own business." (T182.33 - .51) 
As might be expected, since this evidence did not appear in the Rigby statement, she was subjected to further close cross-examination for that failure. Her explanation I did not regard as particularly convincing, particularly in light of her earlier evidence that she had not regarded
Neville's conduct at the time as dishonest, which, in itself, appears somewhat extraordinary. When she was first taken to that aspect of the matter she gave the following evidence: "Q. Did you discuss with Mrs Abboud shortly before, that is a few weeks before, you made your affidavit what you observed about Mr Neville and the cash register in the morning? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that was something you had not discussed with her before then? 
A. No.

Q. So that it was only in about late March or early April 1994 that you had any occasion to think back to the trial period and what you saw happening with the cash register? 
A. Yes.

Q. If you had thought in November 1992 when the trial period was taking place that something untoward or dishonest was taking place with the cash register you would have said something to someone, wouldn't you? 
A. Yes, I probably would, but I don't question what happens in the cash register of Mr Neville or Mr Abboud or Mrs Abboud. That is their business. It is not up for me to question.

Q. But if you thought in November 1992 that something dishonest was going on you would not have stood quiet about it? 
A. No.

Q. If you had thought in November 1992 that Mr Neville was trying to deceive
Mrs Abboud, you would have told Mrs Abboud? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you didn't? 
A. No." (T173.1 - .36) 
In a similar vein she gave the following further evidence: "Q. What do you think was being done if you didn't think it was dishonest? 
A. I didn't know at the time. It didn't occur to me. It was later when Mrs
Abboud had told me about what was going on that I thought back and then thought that was unusual." (T179.56 - 180.2) 
However, that evidence is difficult to reconcile with the following: "Q. Could you think of any good reason why he would be doing that? 
A. No.

Q. You knew that Mrs Abboud was there to trial the restaurant? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you think that what you saw happening was the creation of false entries in the cash register? 
A. I can't be sure.

Q. Did you think that at the time? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did you think that was honest or dishonest? 
A. Dishonest.

Q. Didn't you say a little while ago to his Honour that if you had seen something dishonest taking place you would have said something to someone? 
A. Yes, but I didn't want to discuss it with Mr and Mrs Neville. As I said, it was their business.

Q. But you knew that Mrs Abboud was there to check out the restaurant? 
A. But I had nothing to do with Mrs Abboud. My boss was the Mr Neville. I just said hello. That is all.

Q. But if you thought Mr or Mrs Neville were trying to cheat Mrs Abboud, would you have stood by and let that happen? 
A. No.

Q. You say that you thought then that what you saw happening was dishonest, is that right? 
A. I thought that, yes.

Q. The only possible reason for dishonesty could have been to cheat Mrs
Abboud, couldn't it? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you draw the conclusion in November 1992 that Mr Neville was trying to cheat Mrs Abboud or could have been trying to cheat her? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you mention that to anyone? 
A. No.

Q. If you knew -- 
A. I didn't know for sure that is what he was doing. I didn't know what he was doing was dishonest. I thought it was unusual that he was using the cash register, but I didn't think it was my place to question what was being done.
I thought it was unusual, that it was something that he did not usually do.

Q. That it was dishonest? 
A. I thought it could have been dishonest, but I wasn't sure.

Q. On the basis of what you say that you saw, wasn't it perfectly plain Mr
Neville was trying to create a false cash register reading to deceive Mrs
Abboud? 
A. I didn't know for sure.

Q. Did you think that was a possibility? 
A. Yes.

Q. Why didn't you say something to Mrs Abboud? 
A. I just didn't.

Q. So is this right, that you thought Mrs Abboud may have been being deceived? 
A. Yes.

Q. Or that there was a fair chance she was being deceived but you said nothing? 
A. Yes." (T181.9 - 182.30) 
It was following that last quoted evidence that Rigby offered the explanation for her silence that Neville instructed her to say nothing about the matter.

Her cross-examination ended with the following passage: "Q. You say you simply forgot to tell Alex that Mr Neville said, "Keep quiet about some funny things you see."? 
A. I didn't think that was - well I didn't remember at the time that Mr
Neville had said that, because I didn't think anything with the cash register - as I said, I thought it was dishonest, but I didn't know for sure. So I didn't mention it.

Q. But when Mr Neville said, "Keep quiet -- 
A. No, he didn't say keep quiet. He just said, "You will see some strange things." "You may see some strange things happening, but don't say anything." 
Q. Didn't that reinforce your thought that something dishonest was going on? 
A. Yes.

Q. Are you telling his Honour that you had real concerns that Mrs Abboud was being cheated but said nothing to her? 
A. Well, I didn't think it was - I didn't discuss things like that with Mrs
Abboud.

Q. I didn't ask you that. Do you tell his Honour that you had real concerns that Mrs Abboud was being cheated and simply said nothing? 
A. Yes.

Q. When you said sometime earlier that if you had seen something dishonest or untoward going on you would have told someone, was that answer true or not true? 
A. That's true.

Q. You say that can stand with your earlier answers? 
A. Well, as I said, when I was working for Mr Neville he told me that. I mean,
I didn't know Mr and Mrs Abboud were buying the business. I was told that - I just didn't think anything of it. It was none of my business. It was not my business. I just did as I was told and that was the end of that.

Q. You saw this strange business going on with the cash register on each of the four days when you were at work in the trial period? 
A. Yes." (T184.5 -.48) 
Counsel for the defendants clearly had a point in drawing Rigby's attention to the inconsistency in her evidence concerning any perceived dishonesty in the conduct of Neville which she observed.

That was not the only area of inconsistency exposed in her cross-examination, in the Rigby statement (par 7) she had stated that Neville "was already inside the restaurant when (she) came to open up". That clearly was wrong, as appears from her cross-examination (T176.26). Rigby arrived usually about 8:00 am and during this trial period Neville arrived about 9:00 am. In cross-examination,
Rigby was reminded of this evidence in her statement, in response to which she gave the following evidence: "A. I don't recall - a lot of the times Mr Neville came in at the usual time, but they were earlier than before the trial period.

Q. Do you now not recall whether what you say in your affidavit is right? 
A. I do recall what happened, what I said in the affidavit.

Q. Mrs Rigby, do you say now that you are not sure that what you say in your affidavit about the time when these events took place is right or wrong? 
A. What I said is right.

Q. In the affidavit? 
A. Yes.

Q. So what you said orally is not correct? 
A. No, that is correct too, to the best of my knowledge.

Q. So that what you say is that Mr Neville on these days of the trial period got there before you, is that right? 
A. Sometimes he did. Not every day. When I did open it, sometimes he was already in and other times he would come in at 9 o'clock.

Q. During the trial period? 
A. Yes.

Q. So some days of the trial period when you were there he came in after you, is that right? 
A. Yes, that's correct.

Q. Would you look at paragraph 8 of your affidavit? What you say is: "On the four days when I opened the restaurant during the trial period Mr Neville was already in the restaurant." 
A. Well, he may have been.

Q. If he got there at 9 o'clock he would have got there after you, wouldn't he? 
A. Yes.

Q. Is what you say in the first sentence of paragraph 8 correct or not correct, or are you not sure? 
A. Correct.

Q. Is what you said orally about Mr Neville arriving at the restaurant at 9 o'clock during the trial period correct or not correct? 
A. Not correct.

Q. Then why did you say it? 
A. Because I know during the trial period Mr Neville came in earlier than usual. Before the trial period he used to always come in usually after 10 or o'clock, but during the trial period I noticed that he was coming in earlier. But then I didn't think anything of it, because he was expecting people coming in to buy the business, and he had to be there.

Q. Would it be fair to say, Mrs Rigby, that you really do not have a clear recollection of these events of November 1992? 
A. I do. Yes, I do. " (T177.13 - 178.18) 
I have to say that I am unable to agree with Rigby in her description of the clarity of her recollection.

Neville denied the truth of the implications of Rigby's observation. In his evidence in chief he stated as follows: "Q. You understand that it is implicit in what is said against you that on the mornings of the trial period you created phantom entries in the cash register to give a false picture of the takings of the business? 
A. Yes.

Q. What do you say about that suggestion? 
A. Not true.

Q. The cash register in the business at that time of the trial period I think had two rolls of tape? 
A. Yes.

Q. There was a tape, the long tape which kept a record of every transaction that went through the cash register? 
A. Yes.

Q. There was a tape which I will call the Z tape. Is that the position? 
A. Yes.

Q. At the conclusion of each day's trading in the restaurant, even outside the trial period, was it the practice to press the Z button on the register to get what was called the Z tape? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did the Z tape show? 
A. It totalled all subgroups of entries during the day and gave you a cash register monetary total for the period between that period and when the last Z one was done.

Q. I think that the machine was capable on the Z tape of breaking down that total into different categories, is that right? 
A. Yes.

Q. So that if you chose, you could have entered into the cash register purchases of beverages, food, or whatever you liked - 
A. Yes.

Q. - to get a subtotal in those categories. But I think it was not your practice to use the cash register in that fashion, is that right? 
A. No.

Q. So what you got from the Z tape was simply the daily total of the individual entries? 
A. Yes.

Q. If a customer sought and was given a receipt for his particular purchase, did that also come out of the Z tape? 
A. Same roll.

Q. Did the machine just spit out a small strip with that particular transaction recorded upon it? 
A. You had to tell the machine to do it. I think there was either a button or a slide and then you had to remember to put it back, otherwise you would have got nothing next time.

Q. During the trial did you have a key to the restaurant? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you have access, if you chose to exercise it, to the restaurant before the staff arrived? 
A. Yes.

Q. In the early part of the morning - let us say up until 10 o'clock - on your observation what was the nature, in terms of type and value, of the usual purchase by customers at that time? 
A. Mainly coffee, raisin toast, and occasionally someone might have a full breakfast, but mainly coffee and raisin toast.

Q. What was the typical range of value of purchases by customers at that time of the morning up until 10? 
A. Probably, individually, under $5.

Q. I want you to assume that hypothetically you wanted to create a false entry in the cash register to inflate the day's takings by say $800. Was there any practical reason, let us say, to do with the operation of the cash register why you could not simply punch in an $800 transaction and have it recorded on the long tape? 
A. No. It would work.

Q. And would that figure then emerge as part of the daily total when you pressed the Z button at the end of the day? 
A. Yes.

Q. If you had entered, say, $800 on one day and if one examined the long tape and discovered the entry, would that be consistent or inconsistent with the usual run of morning transactions? 
A. Very inconsistent. It would show up as one sale.

Q. Assume that one wanted to get the same result by punching in 160 $5 transactions, once again would each of those transactions appear on the long tape you have examined? 
A. Yes.

Q. And would they then emerge as part of the total on the Z tape at the end of the day? 
A. Yes.

Q. Once again, if an examination of the detailed tape showed 160 $5 transactions at the start of trading would that be consistent or inconsistent with the usual run of the restaurant's operation? 
A. Very inconsistent.

Q. Was there a docket system in operation at the restaurant? 
A. Yes.

Q. Was it in operation when Mr and Mrs Abboud conducted the trial period? 
A. Yes, it was.

Q. What was that system? 
A. Each waitress would have the same non-carbon docket book. They would write the fare on that and give it to the customer who would present it to the till with money. It would be run up on the cash register and put on the spike next to the till.

Q. Was that the practice that was employed during the trial period? 
A. Yes.

Q. For how long during the trial period were the dockets kept? 
A. They were thrown away at the end of the day.

Q. Was that the usual practice even outside the trial period? 
A. Yes.

Q. Were all the dockets kept on the spike for the whole of each day of the trial period to the end of the day? 
A. Yes.

Q. If Mrs Abboud or Mr Abboud had examined the hypothetical detailed tape and had discovered one $800 entry, or 160 $5 entries, would it have been possible to check those entries against the dockets? 
OBJECTION. QUESTION ALLOWED.

A. No, there would not have been any dockets.

Q. What would the dockets have shown about those entries on the detailed tape? 
A. If you examined the long tape against the dockets on the spike, nine times out of ten they would correspond, assuming everybody got a docket, which everybody didn't, but they should virtually run one for one, the long tapes with the dockets." (T482.13 - 484.56) 
In cross-examination the following evidence was elicited: "Q. Prior to this trial period commencing it was your normal practice to arrive at the restaurant some time between 10 and 11 am, was it not? 
A. Yes, arrived 10 o'clock.

Q. At the commencement of the trial period you changed your practice, didn't you, and you started arriving at the restaurant at 8 o'clock? 
A. No, about half past 8 to 9.

Q. Because you regarded it as important that you should be there at the commencement of trade, didn't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. The tape in the till, we have heard accounts of two papers tapes, one recorded the Z reading and the other reading the inside tape. In respect of the Z reading tape how often would that normally have to be changed? 
A. It would depend on how many receipts you gave during the day because it was the same tape. I really don't recall whether, you know, two days or three days would see it out.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Did you say it was the same tape? 
A. That gave receipts. But we didn't do that many receipts.

MARTIN: Q. It was your normal practice not to give receipts, wasn't it? 
A. Unless asked for.

Q. And that happened infrequently? 
A. Yes.

Q. The inside tape that we have heard about, how often would that need to be changed? 
A. It depended on the number of transactions during the day. I don't know, every other day maybe.

Q. I'm sorry, is that every second day? 
A. I didn't really keep a record of how many times, whether I or my wife had changed the tape in the past.

Q. Prior to this trial period who would normally change the tapes in the till? 
A. Either my wife or myself, or if it ran out during the day then if it was a regular girl who knew how to do it she would change the tape.

Q. What's involved precisely in changing either of these tapes in the till? 
A. You lift the appropriate panelling of that particular cash register, take the tape out, as I recall it you use the existing spool and put it through a new tape. You then feed the tape into the slot and you push fast forward or forward button, it would then feed the tape automatically through the mechanism.

Q. How long would this task normally take? 
A. 30 seconds, a minute.

Q. You say you lift the top of the cash register, do you? 
A. Yes, it was a panel, just a small panel.

Q. You agree with me it would be clear to anyone close to the cash register in the restaurant that you were changing a tape if the top of the cash register had been lifted off? 
A. It was only a small panel. But if they were standing there it was obvious what we were doing.

Q. There is no need to press any buttons on the till to change the tapes, is there? 
A. Yes, you push the forward button to roll the tape through the roller mechanism.

Q. But that forward button is pressed once, isn't it? 
A. You hold it down while it goes through the mechanism and it makes the same noise as when you operate the cash register.

Q. The restaurant wasn't normally busy early in the mornings, was it? 
A. Nope.

Q. Indeed there were few customers around, isn't that correct? 
A. There was usually a few in at 9 o'clock.

Q. On each occasion you arrived at the restaurant during the trial period the
Abbouds certainly weren't present, were they? 
A. I think on one day Yolla and I arrived about the same time, and on one day she arrived after me, later, I mean after the restaurant opened.

Q. I want to suggest to you the occasions that you arrived early during this trial period you went to the cash register when there was very little other people around and you pressed the buttons on the cash register recording phantom transactions? 
A. No.

Q. You kept on pressing the buttons for some five minutes at a time? 
A. No.

Q. You did this for the purpose of ensuring that the Z reading in the till brought the takings of the day up to a level where you were satisfied that the takings for the fortnight were going to very close or exceed the $30,000? 
A. No.

Q. You did this on each occasion you arrived early during the trial period? 
A. No." (T554.32 - 556.27) 
There is nothing particularly significant about Neville's arrival at the
Heritage Terrace during the trial period at an earlier time than usual for him. It was obviously desirable for him to be there, either at the same time, if not, shortly prior to the arrival of the plaintiff. However, I do not see how his evidence can stand beside the evidence of Rigby in relation to the operation of the cash register at the commencement of operations as observed by Rigby during the trial period. Similarly, Neville denies making the statement attributed to him by Rigby. Obviously one of them is wrong. The extraordinary part of this conflict of evidence is that Rigby was a longstanding employee of the Nevilles and continued in the service of the plaintiff. By the time of hearing, Rigby had ceased to be employed by the plaintiff and appeared to be an independent witness. She was not cross- examined as to bias, nor was any evidence led of bias that could explain away her evidence against Neville. Nevertheless, Neville was given the opportunity to address this question, as appears from the following transcript of evidence: "HIS HONOUR: Q. Mrs Rigby had a long association with the restaurant, it seems to me? 
A. She had come and gone, and come back again.

Q. She appears to have been associated with the business when you and your wife conducted it? 
A. Yes.

Q. Throughout the whole of that period? 
A. Yes.

Q. That is 1986 through to the sale of the business? 
A. Yes.

Q. Were there any incidents that gave rise to any ill feeling, so far as you are aware? Can you answer that? 
A. Well, I didn't mind her. I thought she was okay.

Q. I didn't ask you that? 
A. I know Alison -- 
Q. I didn't ask you that? 
A. Oh.

Q. So far as you are aware, were there any incidents that gave rise to any ill feeling? 
A. I think Alison had had at least one run in with her.

Q. When was that? 
A. The time just prior to, I believe, when she first left.

Q. When you say "she first left", my understanding was she was there from 1983 until after you sold the business? 
A. I think she left for a short time. I couldn't be sure. I don't know. Alison handled the staff, but I seem to recall there was a period when she either got married or something happened. She was away for a while.

Q. That was some significant time prior to 1992? 
A. Yes.

Q. The reason I ask you that is that she seems very clear in her evidence about the conversation she had with you and of her observation of your use of the till. I observe that she is no longer in the employment of the plaintiff, so, on the face of it, she appears to have no particular reason, other than through mistake, to say the things that she said. I want to give you the opportunity of indicating anything that may have changed that view of her as a witness? 
A. I don't know how friendly she was with the plaintiffs. Hers was strictly a working relationship with us, and I didn't know - if she feels we had a problem, then, I am sorry, I certainly didn't know about it." (T585.5 -.57) 
I have had considerable difficulty in coming to the conclusion that Neville did act improperly in the operation of the cash register. There are some aspects of the allegation that raise improbabilities in my mind. The first is that, if Neville was endeavouring to falsify the records so as to achieve an apparent gross takings of $30,000 so as to bind the plaintiff to the original contract, having embarked upon this course, it would have been a comparatively simple matter for him to do so. Schedule 1 to these reasons is a table of weekly takings as recorded in A L Neville's diary (the diary) for the trial period and for the several weeks surrounding that period. One only has to look at the Sunday of the first week, Thursday and Saturday of the second week to identify occasions when there was scope for bolstering the record of takings without arousing suspicion through the inflated takings being noticeably out of line with recorded takings on those days of the week outside the trial period. Moreover, the takings for the trial period fell below $30,000 by an amount which should have been readily remedied by a dishonest manipulator of the cash register, who, one would assume, was keeping a running total of takings as the trial period progressed. It seems extraordinary to me that a person could go to such dishonest lengths and yet fail to attain the dishonest objective. Further, I find it extraordinary that such fraudulent behaviour would be carried out in full view of staff. The allegation is that Neville manipulated the cash register in the presence of Rigby and in line of sight of kitchen staff who were on duty at the time. Again, anybody manipulating the cash register in this way ran a very significant risk of exposure by a vigilant plaintiff or Abboud. As appears from the quoted transcript, Neville followed a system which included spiking the customer bills. Those bills could be readily cross-checked with the tape records. Such a scrutiny would also reveal any unusually high number of transactions recorded in the morning trade which, the evidence disclosed, usually consisted of a number of quite modest transactions. Any large transaction recorded in that period would be detected.
Further, the defendants' daughter, Grant, was to remain at the Heritage terrace after the sale as an employee of the plaintiff.

Exhibit BM is an analysis of the amounts of bankings, cash purchases for the restaurant business of the defendants and the diary records. It is an attempt to match bankings, cash purchases and the diary records. It does this by endeavouring to identify the periods of takings represented by a particular banking and with this information it identifies the cash purchases and the diary record of takings for that period. It then compares for each period the total banking and cash purchases with the total of the record of takings. That exhibit shows quite significant shortfalls of the bankings and cash purchases almost invariably from day to day. Occasionally, there is an instance where the bankings and cash purchases exceed the diary record of takings for the relevant days, but that is rare. The period when one would expect the diary record of takings to be in excess of bank takings and purchases is during the trial period when the Z tapes and diary are said to be inflated by phantom transactions. The reverse is true. The bankings and cash purchases in fact exceed the diary record of takings by several thousand dollars.

There was a further attack on the reliability of the Z tapes records for the trial period which related to the events of Tuesday 3 November - the last day of the trial which coincided with the holding of the Melbourne Cup. In her statement of evidence dated 5 May 1994, the plaintiff stated that: "8. The last day of the Trial Period fell on Melbourne Cup day. On that day I attended at the Restaurant from about 9 am until closing time. When I arrived at the Restaurant I saw there two sets of women having coffee. They left shortly after my arrival. The only other customers during the course of the morning were two men from Grace Brothers (sic) who had coffee and raisin toast together with three Grace Brothers (sic) girls who had morning tea, consisting of coffee and toast.
On the last day of the Trial Period there were eight or ten customers for lunch between noon and 1.30 pm. By 1.30 pm the Restaurant was empty of customers and the kitchen staff left about that time. There were no other customers that day.
At closing time on the last day of the Trial Period Alison Neville rang off the total on the cash register and counted in front of me the money from the cash register. The money added up to just over $1000. Alison Neville passed to me the till tape with the totals and a conversation took place during which words to the following effect were spoken: 
AN said: "Sign the Tape." 
I said: "This cannot be right I wont (sic) sign the tape" 
Alison Neville counted the money again and said words to the following effect: 
AN said: "You are only signing for the money which I just counted again."
Drawing on my present knowledge of the business of the Restaurant I say that the takings of the Restaurant on the last day of the Trial Period would not have been more than about $250-300." (Exhibit D, pars 8 - 11) 
The most remarkable piece of evidence given on this subject matter is that of
Abboud. His evidence was that the plaintiff had conveyed her suspicions to him concerning the level of takings on Melbourne Cup day. His evidence in cross- examination was as follows: "Q. Well, when she said to you that she didn't think that the till tape was right, did you ask her why she thought that? 
A. She said it was very quiet and there wasn't - she didn't give me the number of customers or the details of customers. She just said there was not enough customers to generate those takings.

Q. You formed the view, did you, that even allowing for the fact that
Melbourne Cup day may have been a day of low takings, that the actual till tape recording may have been significantly out? 
A. Not significantly. I thought they might be out a couple of hundred dollars.

Q. Given the process which was in place to verify the till tape, how could the till tape have been out by a couple of hundred dollars? 
A. The only method of verifying the money in the till is a Z reading from the cash register. A Z reading, as I explained earlier, is only a short tape, that big, and it only has the total. It does not have each transaction. That is on another roll. Now, if I'd been very, very suspicious or disbelieving of the
Nevilles, or had believed that the takings were around $200 to $300 - because my wife at that time was not aware what it could be down by - I would have insisted that the Nevilles show me the inside till tape, which I would have went through each transaction to verify there has not been a ringing in of $200 or $300, or an unusual amount, and I would have checked that with the waitress's dockets which the Nevilles would have still had. I would have insisted -- 
HIS HONOUR: Q. Mr Abboud, you are not being asked that. You are being asked how it could be out by a couple of hundred dollars.

A. It could be that Mr Neville added money into the till from his own pocket rather than from the customers.

WALES: Q. Yes, and wouldn't that suggest to you that Mr Neville was doing something improper in so doing? 
A. I confronted him with that, if you recall my earlier answer, and he had explained to me that they were the takings. I'd no evidence or proof that Mr
Neville had done anything wrong and I accepted -- 
HIS HONOUR: Q. Mr Abboud, again, that is not quite the thrust of the question. The cross-examiner is not seeking an explanation from you as to the apparent drop in the takings on the Melbourne Cup day. He is really questioning you about how the takings could be overstated by a couple of hundred dollars without some form of dishonesty on the part of the Nevilles. That is what I think you are being asked about.

A. Yes.

Q. And I think you intended to suggest in your answer that one explanation for the possible overstatement of takings on the Melbourne Cup day would be the putting in of money by the Nevilles? 
A. Mm. I was -- 
WALES: Q. You say that you confronted Mr Neville, to use I think the word that you used. Did you say to Mr Neville, for example, "Did you put additional money in the till?" 
A. No.

Q. You were satisfied with his explanation that the takings were low because the day was Melbourne Cup day? 
A. Yes.

Q. But, Mr Abboud, the fact that the takings were low because of Melbourne Cup day would only explain why the actual takings were low. It would not explain why the till tape appeared to differ from what the actual takings could have been? 
A. Correct, but I believed - I didn't believe I'd the right to accuse someone of cheating or putting money in the till without evidence, so I put in my mind, "All right, if they are not $1,108 - say they are $900 on that day - it is not a significant amount. I know Melbourne Cup is a slow day so why make such a big issue of it?" (T 28.1 - 29.25) 
Why indeed! To put it at its lowest, Abboud suspected that Neville, to use a colloquialism, had salted the till, but took the view that there was no need to make a  "big issue" of it. Given the fact that the tape for that day had been signed off as a correct record of takings and the acknowledgment in the variation deed of the accuracy of those records, I find it quite extraordinary that
Abboud should have harboured suspicion of dishonesty on the part of Neville, yet placed implicit trust in Neville's word, proceeding to complete the purchase without sighting current records. I also find it extraordinary, that the plaintiff, despite her disavowal of the ability to estimate takings from her knowledge of the restaurant's menu charges, did not have a reasonably good idea of the likely range of takings for a particular days trading. The idea of a handful of customers having coffee and raisin toast in the morning and eight or ten customers patronising the restaurant at lunch time, to paraphrase her evidence, producing takings in excess of a $1,000 is just ludicrous and would not require any knowledge of the menu charges to realise that such a record was false - and not by just "a couple of hundred dollars".

A L Neville disputes the version of the plaintiff in relation to both the number of customers attending the heritage Terrace on Melbourne Cup day and as to the content of any conversation between them. I simply cannot accept the plaintiff's version, given the seriousness of the implications of it, if it was true, and the absence of any action being taken by her or Abboud to verify the record of takings of that day. I reject the plaintiff's version and the explanation of Abboud for taking no action in respect of it. Neither do I accept the version of the plaintiff in stating that she was kept away from the cash register during the period of the trial. I accept the evidence of A L
Neville that she took "particular care" to allow both Abboud and the plaintiff to operate the register, that she provided the money to one or other of the plaintiff or Abboud "on all possible occasions" to permit their operation of the till.

However, with some reluctance, I have come to the conclusion that the evidence of Rigby of her observations of Neville and of the statement attributed to him should be accepted and that the inference should be drawn that in some way the cash register was manipulated by Neville during the trial period. It follows that the record of takings for the trial period must be treated as unreliable and false. The acknowledgment by the plaintiff of the correctness of the Z tape records may be put aside.

It does not follow that the diary record of takings for the trial period should be entirely disregarded. By reference to schedule 1, it can be seen that there are some aberrations. The entry of $2,110 for Monday, 26 October is approximately $450 above most recorded takings for a Monday in the period prior to and following the trial period.

The takings of $2,910 for Saturday, 24 October is anything from $100 to $900 above recorded Saturday takings about that time.

The takings of $2,255 for Wednesday, 21 October appears to be out of line to some extent as do the takings for Sunday, 1 November of $1,890 - as much as $900 above some close-by Sunday takings.

Yet, what is to be made of the takings for Thursday, 29 October of $3,050 when compared with takings for a Thursday in the preceding and following weeks, which are $200 to $500 above that figure? Similarly in the case of takings of $968 for Sunday, 25 October: they represent apparently unavailed of opportunities to "salt" the takings. While the monetary effect of that conduct may not be capable of precise quantification, I think that a comparison of the diary record for the trial period with the diary record of takings outside that period indicates that the manipulation of the register by Neville sounded in hundreds of dollars not thousands. However, this depends upon my findings as to the reliability of the diary records of takings outside the trial period. I have addressed that issue later in these reasons.

In my opinion, there is no substance in the plaintiff's allegation that the attendance of customers at the Heritage Terrace during the trial period was fraudulently increased by the defendants. There was no credible evidence that the defendants made any effort to encourage customers to patronise the restaurant during that period. At the most, customers may have known that the
Abbouds were possible purchasers of the Heritage Terrace business; hence, the
Abbouds' presence during the trial period. Had they wished to bolster takings in this way there was nothing to stop the defendants turning Melbourne Cup day into an attraction at the Heritage by catering for a "Melbourne Cup" luncheon, for example.

In reaching the adverse finding against Neville I make two further observations:
I do not think that A L Neville was involved in any way in the conduct of
Neville nor did she have any knowledge of it. There has been an attack on her credibility which I deal with in more detail when considering the reliability of the defendants' records of the Heritage Terrace.
I have been influenced in making this adverse finding by the dishonest behaviour of Neville in relation to the financial affairs of the Heritage
Terrace. I have referred generally to those aspects and deal with them with more particularity in connection with my findings in relation to the Heritage
Terrace records.

There was a sustained attack on the defendants through the falsity of their financial records. Much of that criticism was justified and well founded. Some of it, I think, bordered on the preposterous. All of it, the defendants brought upon their own heads by their destruction of records, indiscriminate cash withdrawals from the till takings, by the submission of false returns to
Lend Lease and of false income tax returns and, in the case of Neville, by altering some of the diary records.

Where, I think, the plaintiff was misguided in the attack on the defendants' records, related to the 1991 - 1992 taxation year, in respect of which there was an amended income tax return lodged by the defendants disclosing some $42,000 of understated income. The plaintiff was ambivalent in the attack on the defendants in respect of that amended return: in one instance using it as a platform for accusing the defendants of engaging in tax evasion and, in the next, characterising it as a false overstatement of income made only to substantiate the defendants' case in these proceedings. I observed during the hearing, and repeat, that the plaintiff could not have it both ways. Implicit in the accusation, that the $42,000, the subject of the amended return, did not represent income, was the allegation that the diary records of takings for that financial year were themselves fraudulently concocted. This follows because the $42,000 brought the declared income roughly into line with the diary record of takings of the Heritage Inn from 1 July 1991 to 29 February and of the Heritage Terrace from 2 March 1992 to 30 June 1992. I think it is highly imaginative to regard the Heritage Inn diary records as falsified for the purpose of this litigation. There is a little more scope for attacking the diary records of the Heritage Terrace business for the period 2 March 1992 to 30 June 1992. However, despite the evidence of alteration of the diary record for that period, I am reasonably satisfied that those diary records are reasonably reliable records of the Heritage Terrace business in that period, except as addressed below.

There is no doubt, in my mind that, in addition to the moneys banked by the defendants, they simply "took what (they) needed from the till" (T506.19).
According to Neville the practice in relation to records of these cash withdrawals was as follows: "Q. And is it correct to say that you did not keep or make a written record of you taking any of these monies? 
A. The diary was the written record.

Q. Apart from the diary, you yourself did not make any written record? 
A. No.

Q. And I take it as well that your wife did not make any written record of any monies she had taken from the till during this financial year? 
A. I don't believe so." (T506.29 - .40) ..............
 "Q. Now, I take it there were occasions after you had taken sums of money from the till where your wife continued her practice of taking the Z reading, the takings of the till, together with any cash purchase or cash sales dockets back home for the purpose of adding them up and balancing them? 
A. If we took money during the day we would record that in the till. But that record was then disposed of once we had done the Z reading.

Q. I thought you said to me previously that when you took drawings from the till you made no written record? 
A. I think I said before that, that when we took money out of the till we kept a record for that day, along with any cash sales dockets.

Q. And I take it that in respect of the monies that you had taken from the till for the financial year ending 30 June 1992 you made no record of them in your detailed ledger, did you? 
A. No.

Q. Again, the reason for that, is that did you not want to inform your accountant about the fact that you had taken those monies? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you had done it, no doubt, for the purpose, I suggest, of enabling you to commit a fraud upon the Commissioner of Taxation? 
A. Yes." (T507.13 - .42) 
Under the Heritage Terrace lease the defendants were required to provide Lend
Lease with a monthly statement of the gross takings of the Heritage Terrace business (the centre management reports). Exhibit BC included a summary of these reports (document 1) (the centre management reports summary). The defendants failed to comply with their obligations under the Heritage Terrace lease in that the centre management reports declared only so much of the gross takings as were banked by the defendants. Those bankings did not include the amounts of withdrawals of cash for the purchase of the business requirements of the Heritage Terrace, nor cash withdrawals from daily takings by one or other of the defendants.

I think there is little doubt that the centre management reports of takings represent a considerable understatement of gross takings. The following is a table of the reported takings as set out in the centre management reports summary: 
July  
Aug 
Sept 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
Jan 
Feb 
March 
April 
May 
June  ---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---    ,691  ,714  ,335  ,162  ,100  ,210  ,863  ,614  ,720  ,122  ,885  ,310    ,824  ,471  ,913  ,640  ,858  ,320  ,440  ,326  ,392  ,391  ,112  ,422    ,546  ,731  ,960  ,399  ,235  ,222  ,185  ,817  ,945  ,090  ,219  ,663    ,064  ,047  ,111  ,540  ,608  ,476  ,963  ,794  ,916  ,341  ,355  ,512    ,207  ,199  ,702  ,314  
I think this table reflects a consistency in the history of trading of the
Heritage Inn business and a consistency of that trading with that of the
Heritage Terrace: accepting that the Heritage Terrace was a larger restaurant than the Heritage Inn, had the benefit of being licensed under the [Liquor
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) and traded seven days per week from the end of April 1992. The table also reflects the seasonal character of the trading in the Christmas weeks shown by the figures in bold print and the aberration in the 1992 March and April trading figures for the Heritage Terrace. This consistency and pattern of trading results I think is to be found, also, in the diary records which in an adjusted form are set out in schedules two and three to these reasons.
Further, if it is accepted, as I do, that the diary records for the Heritage
Inn are a reasonably reliable record of the gross takings of that business, a comparison of those records with the diary records for the Heritage Terrace business tends to substantiate the reliability of the latter records: given the differences in the two restaurants.

By way of illustration on the weeks preceding 2 March 1992, takings for the
Heritage Inn as recorded in the diary were as follows: 
Week Ending Takings 
Saturday 18 January $13,590.00 
Saturday 25 January $14,305.00 
Saturday 1 February $13,340.00 
Saturday 8 February $13,880.00 
Saturday 15 February $12,965.00 
Saturday 22 February $13,485.00 (last week of trading) $15,075.00 
For the Heritage Terrace the trading figures (initially, also for a six day week) were as follows: 
Week Ending Takings 
Saturday 7 March $27,710.00 
Saturday 14 March $18,715.00 
Saturday 21 March $16,840.00 
Saturday 28 March $15,775.00 
Saturday 4 April $16,230.00 
Saturday 11 April $15,535.00 
Saturday 18 April $13,180.00 (this was a short week) 
Sunday 26 April $16,685.00 (commencement of 7 day per week trading but closed on Anzac day) 
The diary records were the subject of expert analysis by Christopher Ian
Anderson (Anderson). Much of his analysis was by observation assisted by a stereomicroscope; by ink differentiation tests using a Video Spectral
Comparator and aided by his expert knowledge of the capacity of ballpoint ink to be transferred from one page to another when those pages are brought into contact at various times after the ink is first applied. It was his opinion that ink was so transferred only during a very short time after being applied to a page. By the use of oblique low angle laboratory lighting he was able to observe the effect of writing in relation to embossing created on that page by writing on the back of that page. By resort to this technique and from his expert knowledge of the behaviour of ink transference, he was able to express opinions as to the order or sequence in which entries were made in the diary.
Through the other aids, he was able to express opinions as to the use of different inks in the making of a single entry and, in many cases when entries had been altered, he was able to identify the original entry.

The analysis of Anderson falls into three broad categories:
Overwritten and altered entries
Video prints showing entries intersecting embossed lines (created by entries on the back of the entry under observation), and
Entries associated with ink transference to the page facing the entry in the diary.

The diary records examined comprised entries for the financial years July 1991 to June 1992 and July 1992 to June 1993. With the latter diary, A L Neville ceased making entries on 13 November 1992 with the sale of the Heritage
Terrace business to the plaintiff and recommenced recording takings for the week commencing 30 March 1993 when Zackery's opened. Those records continued until 8 April 1993. A Neville has, in my opinion, never provided a satisfactory answer for her discontinuance of the keeping of such a record of takings of Zackery's. Her evidence was as follows: "Q. For this period of time, that is from 30 March 1993 to 30 June 1993 you have destroyed the till tapes, have you not? 
A. From when? 
Q. 30 March 1993 to 30 June? 
A. I didn't keep the till tapes.

Q. Do you have any diaries for this period? 
A. No, I don't keep the diaries.

Q. What has happened to the diaries for this period? 
A. I didn't keep them. I only have my - I don't write them in the diaries of what has happened in this case. I don't keep a personal diary." (T340.46 - 341.3) .......
 "Q. You made no written record of the daily takings? 
A. No, I didn't until I started the day book now.

Q. You have indicated that took place on 1 July 1993? 
A. No. The last six months, so 1995.

Q. Sorry 1 July 1995 you commenced keeping this columns notebook? 
A. Yes.

Q. Then from when you first operated Zackery's to 30 June 1994 is it correct to say that there is no written record kept by you relating to the daily takings of the business? 
A. No.

Q. Did you each day add up the daily takings during that period? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you say after adding up the daily takings you kept no written record of what those daily takings were? 
A. No.

Q. Is it correct to say that you didn't have any written record whatsoever of what were the daily takings of this business from 30 March 193 (sic) to 30
June 1994? 
HIS HONOUR: I think 1995.

MARTIN: Q. Sorry, 1995? 
A. I was the only one who operated the business and I had all the documentation on it. All the bankings. I didn't have any other bank accounts.
It was solely my business. No, I didn't keep the day book. After what had happened, in light of this case, I didn't write things down.

HIS HONOUR: Q. I don't follow that answer? 
A. Well, there had been so much hassle over my diaries and so much stress and strain about the diaries, I just didn't keep them any more. It was so stressful, all these accusations that had been made about the diaries all the time, and the fact that things were not true in them, I just didn't keep them any more.

Q. You didn't keep them from the start, did you? 
A. Of Zackery's? 
Q. Yes.

A. No, I didn't do it any more.

Q. That would not have anything to do with any criticisms of diary entries, would it? 
A. Well, that was all happening about that time. I was being criticised and accused, and accusations were levelled about the diaries from the Heritage, so
I just didn't keep them.

Q. That was in March 1993, is that right? 
A. The diaries were in issue when they were produced back in, I don't know when. They were all in issue for a long time the diaries." (341.36 - 342.39) 
It is my understanding of the evidence of the defendants that the diaries were never submitted to the plaintiff or Abboud during negotiations: were never referred to by either of them during those negotiations: that it was not until discovery was required and interrogatories delivered in respect of the diaries in September 1994 that the defendants realised they had a serious problem, at least to the extent of their exposure to prosecution for the evasion of tax.
Even at that stage, the evidence of A L Neville is that she was unaware of alterations made to the diary by Neville. I accept her evidence that it was only a short time prior to the hearing that she became aware of those alterations having been made by him. This lead her to answering those interrogatories falsely to the knowledge of Neville. Although the credibility of A L Neville has been attacked on the basis of those false answers, I am satisfied that there was no complicity on her part in the making of those alterations by Neville. Her attitude in the witness box was one of bitter resignation with the shortcomings of Neville.

It is convenient to distinguish the opinion evidence of Anderson in relation to the entries concerning the Heritage Inn business from the entries concerning the Heritage Terrace business.

In the case of the entries of takings for the Heritage Inn business,. Anderson reported on some twenty entries, three of which are liquid paper alterations, the remaining being overwriting, in some instances using different pens. I regard all of the alterations as obvious to the naked eye with no indication of an attempt to conceal the fact of an alteration. I think in all cases the altered takings record is in line with takings for that day of the week in weeks preceding or following the altered entry. In some instances the alteration is of a minor amount, on other occasions the alteration is to the weekly total with no corresponding alteration in the individual takings recorded for that week.

I find nothing of relevance to these proceedings in the fact that some entries in the diary have been obliterated by liquid paper. The entry relating to the intersection with an embossed line on the subject page is that of the entry for 2 February 1992. From the evidence presented by Anderson it is clear that the entry on that date was made after the entry on the back of that page for
Wednesday 5 February. However, the entry for 5 February has been crossed out with a red coloured ink as has the entry for 4 February and appears to be of an ink colour similar to the entry for 3 February and the subject entry for 2
February. It is possible that the alteration to the entry on 5 February was made at the same time as the entry for 2 February, which would explain the flattening of the embossed line on the page for 3 February 1992. In any event,
I think it is inevitable that irregularities of this kind would occur in a basic record such as those made by A L Neville in the diary and I see nothing of particular relevance to the issues in these proceedings in the timing of the subject entry for 2 February 1992. It certainly does not lead me draw an inference that the entry is false or unreliable.

I have not the slightest doubt that the alterations the subject of the
Anderson report in relation to the record of takings for the Heritage Inn business had no sinister character and provided no basis for the plaintiff's allegation that the amended return of the defendants for the year ended 30
June 1992 which disclosed additional income of approximately $42,000 and which brought disclosed income into line with the diary record of takings, was part of an act of fraud by the defendants upon the plaintiff.

The amended return was lodged by Rosen on behalf of the defendants on 16
September 1994 declaring an additional income of $42,219. The understatement of that income had been brought to Rosen's attention by A L Neville's letter to Abeshouse of 16 September 1994 which was in the following terms: "It has been drawn to my attention by my solicitor that the 1992 Income Tax return was understated by $40,000 - 
I was unaware of this matter until notified by Mr Peter Adam 
Would you please attend to the taxation amendment as soon as possible" (Document 132 - emphasis added) 
It is not particularly difficult to work out the circumstances in which that matter was drawn to A L Neville's attention by Adams. On 14 September 1994, the plaintiff filed a notice to the defendant to answer interrogatories directed to the diary records, the diary having been produced on discovery.

The practice adopted by A Neville in recording takings in the diary was described by her in the following terms: "Q. (BY LEAVE) Can I ask you, firstly, some questions about what has become known as the green diaries. You heard some evidence given by Mr Anderson about the question whether there were entries in the diary written not in strict date order. You recall those questions? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you understand that Mr Anderson was talking particularly about the figures, the numbers, which appear for most of the days of the week in the green diaries? 
A. Yes.

Q. First of all, can you tell his Honour what do those figures represent? 
A. They represent the turnover figures for the day of the restaurant.

Q. And was it your practice to do a weekly total for those figures as well and write them in the diary? 
A. Yes, weekly total.

Q. Would you tell his Honour what your general practice was in regard to when it was that you made those entries? 
A. Well, I would total them in the restaurant at the end of the day when I did the takings, if I had the time. If not, I would take the figures home and the money home and I would do it when I had more time, if I wasn't doing anything socially or whatever. If I wasn't there for a period of time a member of the family or the staff would put the relevant tape and cash sale dockets and anything, bank cards or anything, into a sandwich bag, brown paper bag, and write the day and the date on the front. They would leave it in the safe or my husband would bring them home and when I got around to it I would look at them all and transfer the totals into my diary.

Q. Did it ever happen that you wrote daily entries not in strict date order? 
A. If I picked up, whatever bag I picked up first I would not necessarily - I would not put the bags in order. I would take the bundle, do the first bag first and write down - when I calculated all that and sorted it out I would just write the figure in the book there and then and then at the end of the week when everything was filled in I totalled it. I may have totalled it at the end of the week. Sometimes I didn't total it for weeks if I didn't have the time and it wasn't-- 
Q. Were there ever occasions when you let go for more than a few days at a time the process of writing up the diary? 
A. Yes, yes. There were times when it would be.

Q. What were those times? 
A. Well, one thing that I noticed when the handwriting expert was giving the evidence about the transference of ink, it happened to be the week that my 9 year old niece was murdered and I would not have written anything in my diary regarding the takings of the business that week or probably the week after. I was not there. I left the business that afternoon when my sister rang me and I probably wouldn't have gone back there for at least a week or ten days.

Q. I think you made a note of that event in your diary for 19 August? 
A. Yes, and I think the next week would show the date of the funeral.

Q. Apart from those situations where events caused that there be breaks for more than a couple of days in writing up the diary, was it your practice or not your practice to write up the diary fairly close to if not actually on the date of entry? 
A. Yes, if I could do it I would do it then." (T298.11 - 299.25) 
Given my acceptance of the reliability of the diary record of takings for the
Heritage Inn business, that enables use of exhibit BM to identify the amount of cash withdrawals from the Heritage Inn business takings that were not recorded as cash purchases nor as bank takings. This amounted to approximately $34,000 up to the close of business of the Heritage Inn 0n 29 February 1992 for the financial year commenced on 1 July 1991 
A L Neville was cross-examined at length upon this matter of unrecorded cash withdrawals and the substance of her evidence was that, almost invariably, cash withdrawals were recorded in docket form at the time of the withdrawal and that, in general, cash was not taken that was not signed for. If there were discrepancies, it would only amount to hundreds of dollars and not the shortfall in bankings of the magnitude put to her in cross-examination (see
T313.25, 319.18, 320.35, 359.25 and 399 et seq). While I accept the evidence of A L Neville that she was not involved in the accountancy work, that being
Neville's responsibility, and that she had virtually no contact with Rosen or
Abeshouse, I do not accept that she was unaware of the magnitude of cash withdrawals for which no chits were retained. I have little doubt that from day to day as cash withdrawals were made, the practice was to sign chits so that at the end of the day the takings could be reconciled with the tapes. I have some confidence in the conclusion that, in general, A L Neville was aware that those chits were not provided to the accountant and that some form of tax evasion was practiced within the partnership business. I cannot think of any plausible innocent explanation for the destruction of the cash register tapes when the only record of takings, that is gross takings, were made in A L
Neville's diary which remained in her possession. No attempt was made by her to make that diary available to the accountant.

I have been left in no doubt that the destruction of the record of takings in the form of the cash register tapes was not an innocent act on the part of the defendants. I do not accept the evidence of A L Neville that the tapes were "discarded (as a matter of practice) in the waste paper basket" if the day's takings "balanced" (T306.24). The evidence of Van Arkel was that the tapes were retained, marked and stored in boxes in the Heritage Terrace store room.
I think it is apparent that those records were destroyed in furtherance of the tax evasion activities of the defendants.

In respect of the Heritage Terrace period of business for which takings are recorded in the diary, Anderson observed that the entries for 7 June and 10
June were probably recorded out of chronological sequence and, similarly, in the case of entries on 10 August, 12 August, 17 August and 19 August 1992.
Given the practice followed by A L Neville in the keeping of this diary, I find nothing exceptional or of significance to the issues in this case from those observations. The subject entries are not exceptional when compared with other entries preceding and following those the subject of Anderson's observations.

In addition, Anderson made observations about some nineteen or twenty alterations in the records of takings of the Heritage Terrace. As in the case of his observations in relation to alterations in relation to takings for the
Heritage Inn, he included alterations which are of no relevance to the issues in these proceedings. For example, his report on the entry for 23 March 1992 disclosed an alteration from $2,154 to $2155. Another entry for 28 June 1992 showed an alteration from $13,765 to $13,855, a difference of $90. The alteration for 27 May 1992 referred to above, is in fact, an alteration from $1,550 to $1,530. That is not the only alteration by which the original entry in the diary has been altered to a lesser figure. In another instance, an entry of $2,590 on Saturday 27 June 1992, Anderson observed that the "25" was written with a different pen than the figure "90". In respect of this latter figure Anderson expressed the view that it was "very likely" to have been the original entry. I do not understand the plaintiff to have asked me to draw the inference that the takings for 27 June 1992 were $90 and had been fraudulently altered to $2,590. In any event, while it is clear that different pens have been used for the entry there is nothing exceptional in the amount of takings for that day which is a Saturday, when compared with takings for Saturday, 6
June or Saturday, 13 June 1992.

However, there are several entries the subject of Anderson's report in respect of which it is clear that they had been altered in a manner intended to avoid the detection by a casual reader that the original figure has been altered. In respect of those alterations the defendants were interrogated by the plaintiff. However, Neville did not respond to the notice to answer interrogatories. He left that to A L Neville, who, in answer to those interrogatories, falsely stated that the entries were the original entries.
Neville admitted that some of the alterations were made by him without the knowledge of A L Neville and that he permitted her to answer the interrogatories falsely. His admission that he had altered these entries only came with his statement dated 11 January 1996. Neville's conduct in this regard leaves him with severely tarnished credibility in this litigation.

A L Neville was subjected to extensive cross-examination concerning these alterations and false answers to interrogatories. While her answers in cross- examination reflect some confusion, I have been left in no doubt that A L
Neville was not a party to the alterations made by Neville and I accept her evidence that she only became aware of the fact that the entries were altered by Neville shortly prior to the hearing of these proceedings. I do not think that she deliberately gave false answers to interrogatories in relation to these alterations.

The alterations to which Neville has admitted total some $4,500, spanning a period from 12 July 1992 to 20 September 1992. In four of those instances, the alteration was to a Sunday takings and consisted of adding $1,000 to each day's takings. The fifth alteration related to the takings of Thursday, 3
September 1992 which Neville increased by $500 in the diary record.
Alterations to the diary record of takings for two other days aroused doubts, in my mind, as to their reliability. I refer to the record of takings for 22
May 1992 and 21 July 1992. In the first instance there had been an alteration increasing the takings by $900 from that originally recorded and in the latter case by $300. The alteration of 22 May 1992 is quite obvious as is the corresponding alteration to the record of takings for the week ended 24 May
What raises doubts as to its reliability is that the altered record of takings of $2,950 is completely out of line with takings on the Friday preceding and following 22 May 1992.

In her answers to interrogatories, A L Neville stated that the original entry was written by her, but she was unable to state what that original entry was, nor who had altered it. I think it is a little surprising that she stated that she was unable to identify the original entry as I consider that the alteration is obvious and that the figure of $2,050 had been altered to $2,950 and that the total for that week had been altered from $13,070 to $13,970.
However, I do not regard that answer as one affecting her credibility. In the case of the alteration for the takings of 21 July 1992, again, the alteration is an obvious one. What arouses suspicion about the altered takings is that the record of the total of the takings for the week ended 26 July 1992 had been increased by $300 in a way that bears the hallmark of Neville's deceitful method of alteration. Without technical aids the alteration is not readily detectable. It is not surprising that in her answers to interrogatories A L
Neville stated that the original entry of the total of takings for the week ended 26 July 1992 had not been altered. I do not regard that answer as an attempt to deceive.

I have come to the conclusion that, in considering the diary record of takings for the Heritage Terrace, I should exclude the amounts by which Neville has admitted altering the diary records, namely, $4,500 and the alterations totalling $1,200 (the rejected alterations) on the basis that I am not satisfied that the amounts of those alterations represent reliable records of the takings of the Heritage Terrace.

The evidence of Neville concerning these alterations was unsatisfactory, in my opinion. I have no doubt that the relationship between the defendants in the second half of 1992 was an embittered one, one which had deteriorated to a stage where there was little civil communication between them. The evidence of
Neville was that he was confronted by A L Neville with having taken money from the business without her knowledge. He thought this conversation took place shortly after the sale of the Heritage Terrace. On that occasion Neville stated that he lied to his wife and denied any misconduct. In the second quarter of 1993 he said that he was involved in family court proceedings with
A L Neville and which involved a property settlement and preparation of income tax returns. He stated that he was, again, confronted by his wife with having taken money from the business and, on this occasion, he admitted to the misconduct, informing his wife that he had taken something between $4,000 and $5,000. He later altered the diary records to accord with the fact that he had taken that amount from the business. He made the alterations to the Sunday takings as that was the day of trading when A L Neville was absent and on which it was his recollection that he had usually deceived his wife about the level of takings. Neville claimed that he secretly altered the diary records in a way which would be difficult to detect to avoid further confrontation with A L Neville on the subject.

During the course of the hearing I sought to gain a better understanding of
Neville's evidence on this matter as appears from the following passage: "HIS HONOUR: Q. I am not clear as to why you made the changes? 
A. I was doing the tax return. I corrected the figures back to where they should have been. We had discussions about the takings where did I get the money to go on holiday. It was the middle of a separation and Family Law proceedings. What I would do now is probably what I would not have done then.

Q. I am trying to find out why you did it then? 
A. I was just doing the tax return. I put the figures back to where they should have been and gave it all to my tax accountant.

Q. You agreed with Mr Martin a little time ago that you deliberately altered the figures in a way that would not attract attention, do you agree? 
A. I did.

Q. I understood you to agree that the purpose of that was so that it would not attract the attention of your wife? 
A. That's right.

Q. But had you not already told your wife that you had extracted this money? 
A. She wasn't quite sure how much I had taken.

Q. But why, when a few thousand of dollars had been mentioned? 
A. Yes.

Q. So I can understand, why did there need to be any secrecy or any need to deceive anybody in those circumstances? 
A. If it was there, sir, I would just cross them out and change them. The circumstances between my wife and I then were one of high tension and argument, and, really, I wasn't prepared to go through another argument with her." (T514.56 - 515.36) 
It may be the truth of the matter but I remain mystified by Neville's explanation for the deceitful manner in which he affected the alterations. It has been submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that the alterations were an attempt by Neville to falsify the record of takings of the Heritage Terrace for the purpose of these proceedings. I think that is unlikely having regard to the amount involved in those alterations and his evidence, which I accept, that it was only when he was informed by his solicitor of the need to discover the diary in these proceedings that he realised that there was any obligation to reveal the diary contents to the plaintiff. As Neville has stated, the diary record was not revealed to Abboud, nor was any reference to its record of takings made during the course of negotiations between Neville and Abboud.
A L Neville has given evidence, which I accept, that it was only shortly prior to the hearing of these proceedings that she became aware of Neville's conduct in altering the diary record. She had not questioned Neville on his reason for secretly making the alterations since recently discovering the fact that he had made them. I think it is clear that the alterations were made a considerable time after the original entries were made. I think this much is clear from the existence of a print out of diary takings which cover the period affected by the alterations but which recorded the original entries.
There is a conflict of evidence between that of A L Neville and the evidence of Neville as to the disclosure of his dishonesty to A L Neville. I have not found that conflict as having any probative value, other than as to reliability of the evidence on this matter.

Even accepting Neville's explanation for the alterations, it is clear that, at best, they are an estimate by him, he having kept no record of moneys taken in this way from the business takings. I think the most likely explanation for the alterations lies in some aspect of the family court proceedings between the defendants which prompted Neville to effect the alterations in a deceitful way. As I have stated, I am not satisfied that the rejected alterations are a reliable record of the takings of the Heritage Terrace. In those circumstances
I think the correct approach to the diary record is to exclude the rejected alterations from calculations of the takings of the Heritage Terrace.

The plaintiff has attacked the reliability of the diary record of takings in ways other than by the expert analysis of those records by Anderson.

There has been evidence adduced in the respective cases of the parties as to an industry norm for a restaurant business such as the Heritage Terrace that measures its profitability of efficiency in terms of the ratio of the purchase of food requirements to gross takings. That ratio was said to be in a range of per cent to 31 per cent. It was consistent with business plans which the defendants had submitted to financial institutions to secure loan facilities.
It is the plaintiff's position that if one has access to records of the cost of purchases for a business such as the Heritage Terrace, one is able to estimate the likely gross takings of the business by application of this industry norm.

To this end, the plaintiff adduced the evidence of Alex Petrakis (Petrakis), a chartered accountant, who examined the records of the defendant both in respect of the Heritage Inn business and that of the Heritage Terrace. In respect of the Heritage Inn records, these were used primarily as an historical basis for his analysis which centred upon the trading of the
Heritage Terrace from its inception on 2 March 1992 to 30 June 1992 - a period which he referred to as the "First Period" - and the period 1 July 1992 to 13
November 1992 - which he referred to as the "Second Period" - the last mentioned date being the date on which the defendants ceased to trade at the
Heritage Terrace.

He also compared these analyses with a similar one performed in relation to the period of trading at the Heritage Terrace by the plaintiff from 14
November 1992 to 31 March 1993 - the "Third Period" in his analysis.

Petrakis was well qualified to give the expert evidence contained in his report of 10 May 1994 (the Petrakis report). His experience in the food service industry was described as follows: "A. I grew up in the food service industry. My father was a restaurateur for some 30 years and since, predominantly since my Dad is with Walker Wayland, and presently I do a lot of work for food service operators, predominantly in restaurants and coffee lounges. I have done some lecturing for the Catering
Association and I have also run seminars for people looking to get into the hospitality and food service industry.

Q. When did you commence doing accounting work specifically for clients in the food service industry? 
A. In 1987 when I joined Walker Wayland." (T186.5 -.16) 
At the time of giving evidence he acted as the accountant for the proprietors of probably ten to fifteen businesses described as that of a "restaurant/coffee lounge". His own experience was that, in terms of efficiency, the lowest ratio of purchases to gross takings had been 29 per cent (T203.20). He regarded the industry indicator of 29-31 per cent as applicable to a restaurant coffee lounge which traded with or without a licence under the [Liquor
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) (T202.53). When considering the historical trading figures for the Heritage
Inn, he did not regard the change in locality, size, period of trading and the nature of the business represented by the Heritage Terrace as significant.

With the records of purchases and of gross takings available to him through the income tax returns of the partnership, he calculated that the ratio of purchases to gross sales for the year ended 30 June 1990 was 32.4 per cent; for 1991, 29.9 per cent; for 1992, 31.3 per cent and for the period 1 July to 13 November 1992 (the second period) 25.9 per cent. Upon these figures he expressed the opinion that the likely gross takings of the Heritage Terrace business were $11,500 per week.

In order to calculate this last mentioned percentage at 25.9 per cent, he adjusted the cost of purchases, which the records disclosed as being $72,046, first, by adding to that cost the sum of $2,600 representing the value of opening stock for the second period - a figure taken from the closing stock figure for the year ended 30 June 1992. To that total of $74,646 he made a further adjustment of $2,064 for the value of goods which he identified as having been "taken (for) private use", leaving a balance of $72,582. To that adjusted cost of purchase he made a further deduction of $5,601, being the closing stock figure as agreed between the parties at the time of sale. This gave a cost of purchase of $66,981 (par 3.2.4 Petrakis report).

In respect of this second period, the diary entries, excluding the rejected alterations, totalled $261,273. Petrakis allowed gross takings at $258,348 which was a figure he extracted from the income tax return for the year ended June 1993, adjusted by the deduction of deposits totalling $9,552.75, said to be refunds of income tax. This adjustment brought the sales figure down to $258,348 and gave a ratio of purchases to gross sales of 25.9 per cent. There was a dispute between the accountants for the respective parties as to the correctness of the adjustment in relation to the cheques represented by the refund of tax. I think the letter of Rosen of 29 July 1994 to the defendants' solicitor (Exhibit 19) shows that Petrakis was in error in making that adjustment, notwithstanding Petrakis' view to the contrary. Petrakis did a further calculation based upon the diary takings unadjusted. That brought the ratio down to 25 per cent. In either case Petrakis was of the opinion that: "Given the nature of the operation I would think that (25%) is low. I believe that in order to - I believe that the percentage should be around about 30%, so I think that would suggest that maybe the sales figures are inflated" (T195.39) 
In the Petrakis report in respect of the first period, that is, from the commencement of the Heritage Terrace business to the end of the 1991 - 1992 financial year, he expressed the opinion that based on the diary records of takings totalling $264,015 that: "This amount of gross takings is capable of being achieved having regard to the value of purchases made during this period" (Par 5.1.1) 
In his evidence he identified the cost of purchases for that period as being $81,619.66 (T202.10). That represents a percentage of 30.9. Given that the first period represents approximately four months trading and that the second period is of the same order - 2 or 3 weeks longer - one would not expect to find any significant trading difference in analysing those two trading periods except for the unusual level of trading that marked the commencement of the
Heritage Terrace business, to which I have earlier referred and taking into account seasonal conditions upon takings. In this respect I think it is important that the Heritage Terrace business was essentially a continuation of the defendants' family restaurant business which was well established in the plaza.

Consequently, I entertained some scepticism of the validity of Petrakis' analysis of the second period which accepted the reasonableness of the trading figures for the first period when contrasted with purchases, but expressed significant reservations about that relationship in respect of the second period. This was reflected in the following passage from the transcript of the evidence of Petrakis: "HIS HONOUR: If I could just interrupt, I have got a problem at the moment, with your conclusions as far as I can see you do not carry out the critical analysis of what is referred to as the first period, or do you? 
A. No, what I looked at in that period was the nature of the operations only and that was - 
Q. You have taken a percentage from the income tax return information? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Which you have expressed in par 3.2.2? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Mr Weeks presumably has taken the same information to compile the figure that's referred to in par 3.4 for the period ended 30 June 1992, is that right? 
A. Yes.

Q. Then, if I put it this way, if you are right in your expression of opinion in par 5.3.2? 
A. Yes.

Q. There has been a very significant drop in the turnover of the business following 30 June 1992? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Is that reflected in the cost of purchases? 
A. The figure that I have arrived at to the 11,500 figure is based on my just cost of sales, which is the original tax return figure, and after those adjustments foreclosing stock for goods from own use - 
Q. What I'm really trying to find out in a simplistic way is whether the total cost of purchases for the year ending 30 June 1992, when compared with the total cost of purchases for the ensuing period, which you refer to as the second period, shows a very significant drop in the cost of purchases? 
A. That's correct." (200.26 - 201.7) 
While Petrakis operated under much the same difficulties as confronted the
Court as a result of the absence of complete records of the trading of the
Heritage Terrace, the conclusion I have reached is that, while mathematically his calculations are probably unassailable, the assumptions which he has made, probably, do not reflect the reality. One of the significant elements in his calculation lies in the adjustments which he has made to the cost of purchases in respect of this second period. The evidence of A L Neville, which I accept, was that the closing stock figure for the year ended 30 June 1992 was an estimate and not the subject of any physical stock take. This was so for that year and the preceding years. By contrast the closing stock for the second period was the subject of a physical stock take agreed upon by the parties.
The size of that closing stock value led A L Neville to the conclusion that the opening stock for the year beginning 1 July 1992 was significantly understated. Her view was reinforced by the fact that there was a run down of stock in the lead up to the sale. I think this evidence is persuasive of the fact that Petrakis has underestimated significantly the actual cost of purchases in respect of the second period.

Furthermore, Petrakis did not give any recognition to the fact that, upon the establishment of the Heritage Terrace Inn, "a significant amount of dry stock transferred to the new restaurant", as evidenced by Robyn Doris Van
Arkel (Van Arkel), a former employee of the defendants who was employed as a cook by the plaintiff at the Heritage Terrace. Her duties included the ordering of stock and the purchase of produce for the restaurant, both while employed by the defendants and by the plaintiff. She was called by the plaintiff.

I am not persuaded by his evidence that the record of takings are a fraudulent record - leaving aside the rejected alterations and the record of the trial period. On behalf of the defendants there was presented a schedule showing rolling totals of both purchases and takings for the Heritage Terrace, the first of such totals being for the period ended 26 July 1992. In respect of each of those progressive monthly totals there was calculated the ratio of the cost of purchases to takings. Those monthly takings were derived from the diary records, but excluded the alterations admitted to by Neville. That schedule covered the whole of the second period in the Petrakis report.

The percentage of purchases to takings, so calculated, varied between 23.88 for the month ended 8 November 1992 to 30.86, being for the month ended 11
October 1992. For the most part, the ratios vary between approximately 27 per cent and 29 per cent. When one takes into account the evidence of A L Neville that stock reserves were being depleted towards the end of this period, I think these percentages are comparatively unexceptional. Leaving aside the trial period and the rejected alterations, I see no reason to treat the reliability of the diary records for the second period any differently from those of the first period in the Petrakis report.

The defendants called a consultant in the food industry, Harry Robert
Alexander (Alexander), whose formal qualifications and practical experience fully qualified him to offer expert opinion concerning the operation of a restaurant business such as the Heritage Terrace business.. He was a consultant to Lend Lease and specifically advised the defendants upon the design and layout of the Heritage Terrace. He was familiar with the operation of both the Heritage Inn and the Heritage Terrace restaurants under the management of the defendants. His evidence, which I accept, characterises A L
Neville's competence in the conduct of such restaurants as superior. He had ample opportunity to observe the operation of the Heritage Terrace as he conducted a different type of food retail business a short distance away from the Heritage Terrace. While accepting an industry norm of between 29 and 31 per cent as representing the "general rule" as to the ratio of purchases to gross takings, he considered that the appropriate range for the Heritage
Terrace restaurant to be between 27 to 31 per cent or possibly 27 to 32 per cent. I consider that this evidence lends weight to the reliability of the record of takings of the Heritage Terrace in respect of Petrakis' second period.

The plaintiff has further challenged the reliability of the diary record of takings for the Heritage Terrace by reference to the takings of that business immediately after and following the conduct of that business by the plaintiff: this is the third period in the Petrakis report. In respect of the third period Petrakis calculated the average weekly gross takings from the daily cash register tapes as being $11,275: takings which he regarded as "capable of being achieved having regard to the value of purchases made during this period".

The takings of the Heritage Terrace for the period from the week ended 20
November 1992 to that ended 31 March 1993 was set out in schedule form in the plaintiff's affidavit sworn 5 May 1994. That evidence disclosed that in the first four weeks of trading the gross takings were respectively, $11,440.10, $11,814.80, $12,899.09 and $12,865, averaging $12,254 per week. For the month of December, taking that period as being represented by the weeks ended 4
December to week ended 25 December, the gross takings were $53,580. After the
Christmas trading, the 14 weeks to the week ended 31 March 1993 averaged $10,387 per week.

I note that in respect of the Christmas trading: the total takings of $53,580 may be compared with the amount reported to
Centre Management for December 1991 namely $73,476, those takings were produced in a restaurant smaller than the Heritage
Terrace and during trading hours less than those of the Heritage Terrace , the amount reported to centre management was a significant understatement of takings, and according to the diary record for the month of December 1991 the takings amounted to $81,450.

I consider that this dramatic disparity between the takings experienced by the plaintiff for the month of December 1992 with the takings for December 1991 should not be explained by reason of any falsification of record of takings of the Heritage Terrace business. Whatever the true explanation, in my opinion, the cause of this disparity should not be laid at the door of the defendants.
Similarly, the trading figures for 1993 are, in my opinion, no reflection of falsity in the defendants' record of takings for the Heritage Terrace.

The defendants have challenged the reliability of the plaintiff's record of takings. The basis for this challenge lies in some inconsistency in the evidence of Abboud of takings experienced by the plaintiff in the period immediately after the purchase of the Heritage Terrace business. In a telephone conversation between Abboud and Adams of 17 November 1992, Abboud's evidence was that he told Adams that the takings looked "like $10,000 to $11,000 per week (which was) nowhere near the $14,500 to $15,000 per week".
According to Adams, Abboud had stated that he was "worried sick as (he couldn't) survive on $13,000 per week".

Further, in Abboud's letter to Adams of 3 December 1992, he made the following statements about turnover: "The turnover in the first week was $12,000,00 and the turnover in the second week is about $12,300.00. It was represented to my client that the turnover was $15,000.00 per week at present and that the average was $16,000.00 to $17,000.00.

Cleary (sic) the turnover will be between $12,000.00 and $13,000.00 and is nowhere near what was represented." 
Then in his telephone conversation with Adams on 15 December Abboud referred to takings of $13,000. It has been submitted on behalf of the defendants that
I should infer that, like many operators of a "cash business", Abboud had made unrecorded drawings from takings. Abboud gave an explanation for the apparent disparity between those statements and the actual takings of the business.
According to Abboud, he made allowances in those statements of takings for the value of unascertained account customer business. I am not prepared to draw the inference sought by the defendants and I accept that the takings as evidenced by the plaintiff were the true takings of the Heritage Terrace business under the ownership of the plaintiff.

There has been a general attack on the credibility of Abboud, but, beyond the criticisms of his evidence which I have offered from time to time, and the caution which I have found necessary to adopt when approaching certain aspects of his evidence, I would not accede to the validity of this general attack upon his credit.

Submissions were made in respect of apparently inconsistent statements made by
Abboud in relation to earlier proceedings in which he was involved: the untruthfulness of his statement to Lend Lease, in his fight to achieve moderation in the rental reserved by the Heritage Terrace lease, that he had nothing to lose as the lease was under the plaintiff's name and she had no assets. Abboud admitted that this statement "wasn't exactly true". The plaintiff did have an interest in property. However, while I regard that statement as reflecting a lack of integrity, it is of a kind that is not uncommon in negotiation and, so far as these proceedings are concerned, I think it only serves to strengthen the views I have expressed about the correct approach to his evidence. There were other matters relied upon by the defendants, but none more heavily than Abboud's involvement in the preparation of an affidavit for the plaintiff in her application for a licence under the [Liquor
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/). The passage in the affidavit seized upon by the defendant was as follows: "Managed and supervised On License Restaurant known as "Midway Restaurant" at Punchbowl Road, Punchbowl from 23rd of May 1988 to 30th June, 1990. Owner was Dr. S. Chwah practising at 741 Punchbowl Road, Punchbowl. Phone 707 2052.
I was a hands on manager responsible for the running of the restaurant and the sale of liquor to patrons as well as supervising bar staff and waitresses" (Exhibit 25) 
Both Abboud and the plaintiff sought to justify this statement. In the case of the plaintiff, on the basis that she relied upon and trusted her husband in the preparation of the affidavit and, moreover, that there was justification for it in her experience in the subject restaurant. The view I have expressed and repeat is that the plaintiff was comparatively inexperienced in the type of business conducted at the Heritage Terrace. The description of her experience in the passage above quoted bears only a passing resemblance to the reality of the plaintiff's involvement in a very small restaurant, on a casual basis, in which she assisted at odd times as the only waitress in the establishment. However, while attempts in cross-examination to justify this exaggeration in her affidavit might well have been not undertaken, I do not regard the hyperbole as of particular significance in assessing the credibility of either Abboud or the plaintiff, except to repeat earlier observations that in commercial matters Abboud is not scrupulous. In short, while I have no quarrel with the detail of the criticism of the evidence of
Abboud and the plaintiff on this subject as chronicled by the defendants' counsel, the up shot is not as damaging to their credibility as the defendants would have the Court find.

One area that does raise serious doubts as to the reliability of the evidence in chief of Abboud and the plaintiff arises out of the coincidence in the content of their respective affidavits. The coincidence is such that it could only have been the result of each knowing or being prompted by reference to the contents of the statements of the other. The coincidence was obvious, but neither was prepared to accept any form of collusion in the preparation of these statements.

There is another piece of evidence which has a very strong ring of truth about it, notwithstanding the plaintiff's denial of its truth. In the statement of A
L Neville of 11 August 1994, when speaking of the last day of trading of the
Heritage Terrace under the defendants' ownership, she stated: "I remember a further conversation on the last day of trading (13 November ). I remember this conversation quite well as I was emotional at that time in having sold the business which I had for the last seven years. I was concerned at that time as to whether or not the new owners would care for the business in a way my husband and I had.

I said to Mrs Abboud "I hope the business brings you as much pleasure as it has done for me over the years".

Mrs Abboud said "We buy and sell businesses all the time but it means nothing to me. I hope this business goes alright as we have sued other people in our previous business purchases".

I was quite upset with this answer from Mrs Abboud." (Exhibit 1) 
While I have had occasion to criticise the willingness of A L Neville in relation to the manner in which cash was handled or permitted to be handled by her in both the Heritage Inn and Heritage Terrace business, her willingness to, at least, permit income tax returns to be lodged which she had every reason to suspect contained understatements of income and in respect of one other matter concerning her approach to a witness for the plaintiff, which is referred to below, I have reached a very firm conclusion that she was a dedicated, highly efficient restaurant proprietor, and that she would not be a party to any deliberate falsification of diary records as part of an exercise of defrauding prospective purchasers of her business. If there was any falsification of diary records for that purpose it could only have been done systematically by Neville and in a way which did not involve A L Neville. In my opinion, the evidence does not warrant a finding of systematic falsification of the diary records.

The credit of each of the plaintiff and A L Neville was brought into question as a result of their conduct in communicating with an intended witness in these proceedings: in the case of A L Neville, it was a communication with Van
Arkel and, in the case of the plaintiff, with Lorraine Frances Handley .

Van Arkel had been an employee of the defendants at the Heritage Inn and
Heritage Terrace and then became an employee of the plaintiff at the Heritage
Terrace. The evidence disclosed that Van Arkel was interviewed by the defendants' solicitor in March of 1994 and, following that conference, a draft statement was forwarded to her by Adams for her approval and signature. The statement was never signed by Van Arkel. In her evidence she explained that there were a number of statements in the draft with which she did not agree.
It is clear from her evidence that at about that time she was accosted by A L
Neville in what can be described as an unseemly incident. A L Neville endeavoured to coerce Van Arkel into providing a statement for the purpose of these proceedings. There was a further confrontation between them in public outside the Heritage Terrace. The incident ended with an employee of the
Heritage Terrace taking Van Arkel into the restaurant. That was the end of the matter, except for a phone call by A L Neville to the Heritage Terrace proprietor to apologise for the scene created by her with Van Arkel. These incidents brought no credit to A L Neville who left me in little doubt that her conduct was regretted.

In the case of Handley, she too had been an employee of the defendants and of the plaintiff. She provided a statement to the defendants' solicitor which was duly served upon the plaintiff's solicitor. Her evidence was that, following service of that statement, she received a telephone call from the plaintiff on September 1994. In her evidence in chief she stated that the conversation was as follows: "3. On 30 September 1994 I received a telephone call at my home from the plaintiff. A conversation took place with Yolla Abboud and myself to the following effect:- 
Abboud said to me "I have received a copy of your statement. I have five days to answer it. If you don't withdraw your statement I will disclose your husband's cash earnings to the Tax Office. You should not have got involved. I thought you were my friend. You have until Friday to withdraw it". " (Exhibit 12, par 3) 
The significance of that statement was that Handley's husband was a casual employee of the plaintiff who received his wages in cash.

Under cross-examination her evidence in chief was altered in the following way: "Q. It's correct to say, isn't it, that there was no time during this conversation where Mrs Abboud ever referred to the tax office or the taxation office? 
A. No, but she brought that across, that's what she was speaking about.

Q. Just so I'm clear, there was no stage during this telephone conversation with Mrs Abboud, where she ever mentioned the tax office or the taxation office, isn't that correct? 
A. Yes, I can tell you what she said.

Q. If you could look at paragraph 3 of your affidavit of 21 October 1994, exhibit 12, do you have that before you? 
A. Yes.

Q. You see in paragraph 3 you make a reference to Mrs Abboud having used the phrase, "Tax office" -- 
A. That's right.

Q. -- in your affidavit. That's wrong, isn't it? 
A. She didn't use those words, but she implied.

Q. Mrs Abboud never used the words, "Tax office" in this telephone conversation with you, did she? 
A. No.

Q. It's quite wrong to suggest she used those words, isn't it? 
A. No, because that's what was implied.

Q. Ms Handley, you know the distinction, do you say you can recall what was said in this conversation? 
A. Yes.

Q. You swore you read through this affidavit before you signed it, didn't you? 
A. That's right.

Q. You satisfied yourself that the contents of the affidavit were true and correct, didn't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. Do you now acknowledge that what you said in your affidavit relating to what Mrs Abboud said to you in this telephone conversation was not correct? 
A. It was implied and that's what I thought it meant, so I said, yes, that's the statement, that was right.

Q. Ms Handley, do you now acknowledge what you said in your affidavit of 21
October 1994 relating to what Mrs Abboud had said to you by reference to using the words "Tax office" that your affidavit is wrong? 
A. Yes, but when I was in the other court even the judge said he would have implied the same thing, that that's what was meant by it. There was no other reason to say what she meant, who else would she tell that my husband was receiving cash in hand. There was no-one else to tell.

Q. I didn't ask you that, I take it your recollection about this conversation is not good, is it? 
A. Yes, it is good.

Q. Then why did you make a mistake about attributing to Mrs Abboud a number of words which you now acknowledge she didn't say to you? 
A. But it was implied.

Q. In this conversation Mrs Abboud said to you, "Hullo Lorraine, how are you?"
Didn't she? 
A. "How are you?", I haven't got the full exact words here with me.

Q. No, I want to suggest to you, cast your mind back to this telephone conversation? 
A. Right.

Q. I wanted to suggest to you that Mrs Abboud said to you, "Hullo Lorraine, how are you?" 
A. Yes, maybe, yes.

Q. You replied, "Good, how are you"? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. Mrs Abboud said she was very upset about what you had said about her in your statement? 
A. That's right.

Q. She said to you that she thought you were a friend of hers? 
A. That's right.

Q. She said, "Why would you say such a lie?" 
A. Beg your pardon? 
Q. Didn't she say to you "Why would you say such a lie?" 
A. What lie, I didn't say a lie. She didn't say -- 
Q. Did Mrs Abboud say to you that you had told lies in your statement? 
A. She said that she wanted me to withdraw my statement.

Q. No, please, just concentrate on what I'm suggesting to you: Did Mrs Abboud in this telephone conversation say to you, or allege that you had told lies in your statement? 
A. She said she was surprised, she thought I was her friend, it was non of my business and that I should withdraw my statement. She had read my statement and I should withdraw it.

Q. Is that the best recollection you have of the conversation you had with Mrs
Abboud? 
A. I can't remember word to word exactly, but I can remember what it was about and she said if I didn't withdraw my statement that she would have to tell in her - when she said her statement she would have to say that my husband had been receiving cash in hand for the last two to three years.

Q. Mrs Abboud said she had nothing to hide, didn't she? 
A. She had nothing - no, she didn't say that.

Q. Is that to the best of your recollection, what she had said to you about withdrawing your statement? 
A. She said I had five days to withdraw it before she answered, you know, the affidavit." (T658.4 - 660.12) 
The plaintiff accepted that she had contacted Handley following the service of
Handley's statement, but denied the substance of Handley's evidence. She said that the only reference to Handley's husband in that conversation was in the following terms: "Yolla Abboud: "I know I've got their statement here. I don't care about their statement. I care about your statement. You're supposed to be my friend. We gave you a farewell party and you gave me flowers and asked me for my friendship and to keep Stewart on. He stayed on, and we gave you a cake. Is that what you do for friendship." 
Lorraine Handley: "I was obliged to do it. I didn't want to." 
Yolla Abboud: "No you don't. Just say the truth. Why did you have to lie?" 
Lorraine Handley: "What about Stewart?" 
Yolla Abboud: "I don't know. If I have to answer those statements I have to disclose all information truthfully. I have nothing to hide." 
Lorraine Handley: "I don't want to do it. I don't know what to do. I will have to talk to somebody about it." 
Lorraine Handley then hung up." (Exhibit AK) 
In cross-examination she adhered to the substance of that evidence.

I was left in little doubt that the gist of the plaintiff's communication to
Handley was that the consequence of Handley adhering to her statement was the exposure of her husband's possible tax evasion.

Neither the plaintiff nor A L Neville come out of those incidents with any credit, save for the expression of regret made by A L Neville shortly after her exchange with Van Arkel. In the case of the plaintiff, I think her evidence on this matter is not to be accepted and it indicates a need to be careful in evaluating her evidence when her interests are involved.

I am satisfied that, in evaluating the reliability of the diary as a record of the takings of the Heritage Terrace business, there is little assistance to be gained from the plaintiff's evidence of takings from that business following her purchase of it.

Earlier in these reasons I referred to the strong family nature of the business under the control of the defendants, to the competence of A L Neville in the running of such a business and to the personal following which she enjoyed with a significant majority of her customers, estimated by her to represent some 70 per cent of the customers of the business. In contrast, it is clear, despite claims of the plaintiff to the contrary, that the plaintiff's experience in this industry was limited and I have no doubt that in the operation of such a business she would have needed to undergo a very steep learning curve. The same applies to Abboud to the extent that he had any personal involvement in the day to day running of the restaurant.

I have referred to the evidence of Alexander, an expert in the food industry who was called on behalf of the defendants in these proceedings. His formal qualifications and practical experience marked him as an expert whose opinions could be valued. He had a close knowledge of the Heritage Inn and of the
Heritage Terrace business operations. In broad terms, he regarded the management of the restaurant business by A L Neville as "impeccable" and the restaurant years ahead of other similar enterprises in the plaza.

The case has been put on behalf of the plaintiff that the takings of the
Heritage Terrace business under the ownership of the plaintiff may be taken as a guide to the falsity of the defendants' representations and of the diary record of takings by reason of the facts that the menu before and after the sale remained unchanged, as did the staff and quality of the food sold. In broad terms, I think the evidence justifies the conclusion that there were no major changes in the menu or in the staff and, except for some subtle differences, in the quality of the food offered.

Evidence was called by both the plaintiff and the defendants from customers, food consultants and employees in the business. One thing I think is clear from that evidence, namely, that the style of management and level of efficiency was markedly different under the management of the plaintiff when compared with that of the defendants.

Van Arkel gave evidence for the plaintiff on these matters. Her evidence was that she was employed as a cook by the defendants and then by the plaintiff.
It was part of her duties to order stock. She stated that following the change in ownership there was no change in her duties, nor in the methods of making purchases. In her opinion, the size and quality of meals did not change. The menu remained unchanged. Apart from the effect of seasonal conditions she was no less busy when working for the plaintiff than when she was employed by the defendants. She enjoyed working for the plaintiff and found the work environment enjoyable.

Van Arkel presented as unsophisticated and endeavouring to be frank in her responses. However, she displayed considerable confusion, I thought, in cross- examination relating to her conference with Adams. On one view of her evidence, she accepted that she may have told Adams that there was "no real organisation in the restaurant" after the plaintiff took over the management of the restaurant and that she may have told him that the plaintiff had no experience in running such a restaurant.. She may also have told Adams that the responsibility of running the restaurant was delegated to the staff by the plaintiff - a method different from the way in which the defendants conducted the business. She may have said that the involvement of the plaintiff and
Abboud was less than that of the defendants in the operation of the business..
She may have stated to Adams that "I have never worked with people of this kind in my life. They appear to know nothing about the running of a restaurant". Her evidence on that matter, perhaps, illustrates the difficulty with her evidence, generally. It was as follows: "Q. Did you say this to Mr Adams "I have never worked with people of this kind in my life. They appear to know nothing about the running of a restaurant"? 
A. I don't recall, no, sorry.

Q. Could you have said that? 
A. I have no idea what I said then. I could not even tell you what is written in the paper, honestly.

Q. Are you able to deny that you may have said such a thing? 
A. I don't recall saying it.

Q. I am not asking you that Miss Van Arkel. I am saying do you deny you could have used those works to Mr Adams&gt; 
A. Yes.

Q. You did not? 
A. No, I don't recall saying them so I am not going to admit recalling saying something if I don't recall saying it.
 .......................

Q. What I am saying to you is this: are you telling his Honour from the witness box that you simply do not recall one way or the other or are you saying you could not have possible used those words to Mr Adams, namely, "I have never worked with people of this kind in my life. They appear to know nothing about the running of a restaurant"? 
A. I don't recall, honestly. I don't think I would have said that.

Q. You're quite positive? 
A. I can't be positive. I actually don't recall saying it, honestly.

HIS HONOUR: Q. I think it is quite important to be clear about it to this extent. Leaving aside whether you said that or not, what is your opinion about it? Does that fairly or not fairly describe your opinion of the way in which they conducted the restaurant? 
A. No, I think they actually ran the restaurant to the best of their capabilities.

Q. What was your opinion about that capability? 
A. Yes, it was quite reasonable, yes. They did what they knew how to do so --" (T146.55 - 147.16 and T147.39 - 148.4) 
She did not know whether she told Adams that the plaintiff "did not cost out goods to establish a reasonable profit". The following question and answer I think conveys the particular problem I had with Van Arkel's evidence: "Q. Is your memory of the period when the Nevilles and the Abboud were there now a bit uncertain? 
A. No. There is so much going on with my life I could not remember, even tell you what I did last week in all honesty so -." (T149.4 - .8) 
Anne Marie Shelper (Shelper) was a sandwich hand who had been employed over a period of some eighteen years in varying capacities in the Heritage Inn and
Heritage Terrace restaurants. She was called by the plaintiff. Her evidence was similar to that of Van Arkel, in that she regarded her daily duties as being unchanged under the ownership of the plaintiff when compared with her employment by the defendants. After the plaintiff's purchase, the staff remained unchanged for several months and she found working with the plaintiff to be pleasant and similar to that of her employment with the defendants. In the Heritage Terrace was a finalist in a competition for an award to be conferred on small business in Penrith. Her mother, as a customer of the
Heritage Terrace, also gave evidence of a similar nature. I thought that
Shelper was frank in her answers and endeavoured to be helpful in responding to questions. She thought that the Heritage Terrace business had begun to quieten down prior to the sale. Her evidence in cross-examination was as follows on this subject: "Q. Whereabouts on the premises were you working? 
A. I was in the kitchen and I can see out into the restaurant.

Q. Did you make any observation about any changes, any difference in the number or the people coming to the restaurant after the Abbouds took over? 
A. It quietened down.

Q. Do you know when? 
A. It started - you go through periods and it quietened down when the Nevilles were there, and it sort of went while the Abbouds were there, and it picks up again. So you go through these transactions of it being quiet.

Q. In relation to the time when the Abbouds took over, can you place when it quietened down? Was it sometimes afterwards? 
A. It was beginning to quieten down when Alison and John were there.

Q. Did you notice anything else about any improvement or falling off of the business after the Abbouds took over? 
A. No.

Q. So far as the demands on your work were concerned, were the demands any different? Did you work just as hard or make as many sandwiches, or less, after the Abbouds took over? 
A. When it was called for, when the people - yes.

Q. I am not sure that I understand that.

A. Well ,it is very hard. Because, I mean, like now, it is a quiet period, so obviously I am not making as many sandwiches as when it is really busy." (T163.46 - 164.24) 
Kristine Cash was another employee of the defendants who worked as a waitress in the Heritage Inn but not the Heritage Terrace. She also worked with the plaintiff commencing February 1993. I did not regard her evidence of much assistance.

David Hassib gave evidence as a customer of the Heritage Terrace from January again I found his evidence of little assistance.

Rigby had also been employed by the defendants for a very long time, it was her recollection that, following the opening of the Heritage Terrace, it was busy for "the first two or three weeks", but, then, the "trade appeared to be less than the amount of trade in the (Heritage Inn)". She was also of the opinion that the amount of trade in June, July and August 1992 fell further.
It was her recollection that menus and the standard of meals served in the restaurant following the purchase by the plaintiff remained unchanged. I have not found her evidence to be a particularly helpful comparison of the level of trade experienced in the Heritage Inn with that of the Heritage Terrace. In cross-examination Rigby stated that she usually arrived at work at eight o'clock to open the restaurant - this in November 1992. This seemed at variance with her evidence that her hours of work had been reduced in the face of a falling volume of trade. That prompted the following evidence by way of explanation: "HIS HONOUR: Q. Mrs Rigby, would you look at paragraph 5 of your affidavit? You say that your hours were reduced? 
A. Yes.

Q. What were your hours before they were reduced? 
A. Usually I would work about 10 till 3, but during those times I would work from 10 to about 2.

Q. When did you start working at 8 o'clock? 
A. It wasn't until - it would be a few months after that. More towards
November, October-November.
 .................

WALES: Q. Do I understand from your answers to his Honour that your hours of work were reduced and then were increased again? 
A. Yes, because in that business usually in the months of June July August it is not quite as busy, but later when I started opening the shop my hours increased because there was a change in staff or there was not enough staff or someone could not open the store and we were changing our shifts around.

Q. You had been employed at the Heritage Terrace Restaurant for quite a few years before November 1992? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you observed that trading fluctuations with the seasons? 
A. Yes.

Q. And quietened in winter months? 
A. Yes.

Q. And picked up in summer months? 
A. Yes.

Q. So the increase and decrease in your hours of work was nothing out of the ordinary? 
A. No, it usually fluctuated. If it was busier you stayed and you left if you were not needed." (T179.26 - .36 and T180.4 - .31) 
Rigby's evidence suggests that the evidence of falling trade in mid-winter was a seasonal matter and that trade had picked up towards October November.

Pauline Perrera gave evidence as a customer of both the defendants and of the plaintiff. Her observations were that the change of ownership had no effect on the servings which her family ordered, which usually consisted of pate and toast or anti pasta. She spoke well of the cordial treatment of her family by the plaintiff and Abboud and of the ambience of the restaurant which appealed to her.

For the defendants there was called Grahame Leslie Bromfield a customer who had been a long time resident of the Penrith area. He had been a teacher for twenty-seven years and a school principal in the district. He patronised the
Heritage Terrace four to six times per week as following his wife's death he "wanted to meet people". He continued as a customer of the restaurant after the purchase by the plaintiff. Set out below are his observations of the conduct of the restaurant under the defendants and under the management of the plaintiff: "8. During the period 1988 to November 1992 I observed certain things about the way Alison and John Neville ran their restaurants including:- 
The Nevilles were extremely friendly and went out of their way to satisfy their clientele. They always had time for you. Alison would make time to sit down with her clientele which was appreciated and made you feel wanted.

Alison would have personal contact with customers and would involve her clientele with each other. This provided a good feeling in the restaurant. She displayed a real empathy towards people. She knew her patrons, their needs and their problems.

Alison displayed excellent inter-personal and communication skills.

In both of her restaurants Alison was extremely popular. Many times people would have to queue to gain a seat in the restaurant and I noticed that a lot of people would miss out on getting seats.

The Nevilles gave special care to their regular clients and they always endeavoured to find a seat even when people were lined up outside their restaurant.

The Nevilles set a very high standard in their restaurant for service, for their staff, for the quality of their food and the cleanliness of the restaurant. I found that: a) I would be served quickly, there was very little waiting time for my meal; b) The staff were nicely groomed and dressed in a uniform; c) The food was always fresh, there was always plenty of it and it was tasty; ) The restaurant was always clean. I saw restaurant staff cleaning the restaurant during the day and after the restaurant had closed. I have been present when John and Alison did the cleaning.

The "Specials Board" was popular. When I attended the restaurant especially on Thursday, I observed people asking for the special for the day.
As you became a regular you became friendly with other regulars. We all looked forward to the specials that appeared on the "Specials Board". I was aware that a lot of the food was prepared at their home. Alison's mother, Winifred, would prepare all types of dishes such as chicken and mushroom pies.

From my observations, one of the Nevilles and in most cases both John and
Alison Neville would be there at closing time.

They would close the restaurant premises around 5.30 to 6.00pm. The restaurant would then be cleaned each evening. I would on occasions be at the restaurant at closing time. I would stay on to have a social drink and conversation with the Nevilles.

Alison was very particular about the restaurant's cleanliness and would remain there well after 6.00pm. Whilst attending the restaurant I noticed that John
Neville would regularly clean the kitchen filters on Wednesdays.
After the Nevilles sold in November 1992 I continued to go to The Heritage
Terrace Restaurant on a regular basis as I had made friends with some of the regulars. I missed the presence of the Nevilles. I stopped going to the
Restaurant in April, 1993 and I observed the following changes:- 
A lot of the regular clientele ceased coming to the restaurant in the period November 1992 to April 1993. I noticed a lot of people that Alison had introduced to me did not continue to patronise The Heritage Terrace Restaurant whilst owned by the Yolla Abboud.

The quality of the food changed. I regularly would order steak with mushroom sauce. The meat was less tender, contained more fat and was less tasty.

There was a different atmosphere in the restaurant. Leslie Abboud and his wife Yolla Abboud always were friendly to me however, they did not have the same charisma, interpersonal and communication skills as were displayed by
John and Alison Neville.

Yolla Abboud did not have the same deportment as Alison. Alison was more conservative in her dress, speech and manner.

It appeared to me that neither Leslie or Yolla Abboud were able to bridge the gap between their clients and themselves.

From my observations the Abbouds did not have the same skills in relating to their clientele. The lacked personal contact with the clientele.

I noticed that the general cleanliness of the restaurant declined. Dust could be seen on the fittings. This would not have been tolerated by Alison
Neville.

Trade seemed to fall off. People did not stand in a queue and on most occasions tables were empty.

Presentation of the restaurant changed. I noticed that the presentation was more down market by the introduction of such things such as an ice-cream machine at the front of the restaurant, paintings were left on the ledge and things appeared to be half done. Frozen ice-cream brochures were placed on the tables and the selection of music changed." (Exhibit 7) 
On that evidence he was cross-examined as follows: "Q. You would like to see her succeed in this litigation, wouldn't you? 
A. I don't think that's my judgment to make, I'm here to tell the truth as I understand it, and my perceptions of the restaurant when I was there.
 ...............

Q. Do you agree with me that the observations you make are really matters of subjective opinion? 
A. I think they are accurate observations that I made and the time that I have been in the restaurant they would be subjective to my opinions, I agree with that. But I believe they are factual observations that I have made." (T697.44 - .49 and T697.55 - 698.2) 
Bromfield presented as a quiet, reserved person who gave his answers in a convincing, responsive manner. I regarded him as a reliable witness both in respect of his observations of the restaurant operation and of his analysis of differences in those operations.

Sharyn Lee Gale (Gale) was a former waitress employed at the Heritage Terrace restaurant. She had worked for several years at the Heritage Inn and recommenced employment with the defendants when the Heritage Terrace opened.
She remained in that employment after the purchase of the Heritage Terrace by the plaintiff. In her opinion, the conduct of the restaurant by the defendants was extremely efficient and she gave evidence at length of the highly competent way in which the defendants operated the restaurant. She compared the plaintiff's conduct of the restaurant unfavourably with the standards achieved by the defendants. She referred to the introduction of a menu board "with flashing lights and wires hanging off it" which, to her observation, attracted the ridicule of regular customers. Gale emphasised the family nature of the defendants' business. She identified a number of changes that were made to the operation of the business by the plaintiff in the way of changes in the cake supplier and the wastage of food. She stated that this wastage was exacerbated by the purchase of large quantities of produce from the market instead of from local suppliers in smaller quantities. Gale described the establishment of a gelato ice cream machine at the front of the shop which she opined gave the restaurant the appearance of a milk bar. It was her evidence that, on the first weekend that she worked for the plaintiff, Abboud and his cousin were present at the restaurant and changed the background music from classical, which had been used by A L Neville, to rock and roll played very loudly and which drew complaints from the customers. She referred to the fact that the plaintiff brought in young relations to assist in the restaurant who were inexperienced and showed poor skills in dealing with customers. She described instances of serious complaints by customers of the absence of required service and of groups whose meals would be served at different times and not promptly. In all Gale worked for the plaintiff for six weeks. She described the circumstances in which she left as follows: "They were pleasant enough people (referring to the plaintiff and Abboud) and
I did not have any personal difficulties with them but because of all the changes in the business I did not feel that I could continue to work there and
I resigned" (Exhibit 9) 
In that period she described the business as having "started to drop off", a change which he noticed "within the first fortnight". It was her opinion that the restaurant became an unpleasant place within which to work, with staff and patrons unhappy with the conditions in which the restaurant operated under the plaintiff.

Gale was cross-examined on her impartiality as follows: "Q. But you would like her very much to succeed in this litigation, wouldn't you? 
A. I would like to see - I would like to see that - how do you put it? I would like to see that the Nevilles would be at least - the Nevilles, as far as I am concerned, when I was working with these people there were changes that were made to that business that affected that business and I don't see why other people should be paying for that, definitely.

Q. I take it from that you would like to see the Nevilles succeed in the litigation? 
A. Certainly.

Q. One of the reasons for that is that you are a friend of Mrs Neville? 
A. Mrs Neville has been very supportive to all her staff members through the period there. I have worked for many different people and I found her to be a very, very supportive employer. So, therefore, obviously I have - we built a friendship through there, like a number of staff that worked in that restaurant, because she was so good to us.

Q. What support has Mrs Neville given you? 
A. As far as (a) support with flexibility in hours, wanting to - once I wanted to get out of the kitchen and wanted to waitress, giving me a go, that sort of thing, being understanding.

Q. You feel a debt of gratitude towards to Mrs Neville for doing that for you? 
A. Not so much that I would go against anything I believe in or that I would say anything.

Q. I want to suggest to you that the changes that took place in the business after the Abbouds took over were merely matters of your subjective opinion? 
A. Well, I don't think so. I feel there was some physical evidence in there well.
 ..............

Q. None of the changes had any real effect on the business? 
A. I could certainly see the changes. If you have customers complaining to you then, obviously, there are changes in the business. Something is going on if you have people complaining. If people are walking out there must be something terribly wrong, it must be due to the changes.

MARTIN: Q. That is an assumption you are making? 
A. It is what I saw.

Q. But you are merely assuming, aren't you, that these complaints the customers, you say, were making related to the changes that had taken place? 
A. Well, it was only after I actually saw changes taking place, I heard customers complaining and walking out and I feel I could only give evidence of what I saw and what I experienced and that's exactly it." (T640.57 - 641.40 and T641.49 - 642.8) 
I found this self appraisal of her approach to evidence frank and this frankness was reflected in her general cross-examination. She presented as a person with definite views and with some skill in observations. I regarded her evidence as reliable.

Grant had been employed by her parents in the Heritage Inn and the Heritage
Terrace and continued in employment with the plaintiff. Inevitably, her evidence could not be regarded as objective. Nevertheless, I think it received substantial corroboration from other witnesses whose evidence was less susceptible to challenge on the ground of bias. She spoke of wastage under the plaintiff caused by the introduction of bulk buying and of changes in suppliers. She too mentioned the introduction of the gelato ice cream machine and its detrimental effect on the aesthetics of the restaurant. According to her evidence, the classical music previously used as background music was changed to a "music of a louder continental flavour". She criticised the attitude of the plaintiff to customers, the drop in standards of cleanliness, the reduced trading hours and the inexperience of the plaintiff. She referred to the "sloppiness" in the manner in which customers were served and she demonstrated what she meant by this in the witness box.

She may have captured the difference in style of presentation of the owner and staff in the following passage: "During my time in my mother's restaurant and in the restaurant owned by Yolla
Abboud I noticed various changes.
Presentation and Staffing 
When my mother owned the restaurant there was a tight control over staff and dress regulations. My mother always required the staff to wear a uniform that consisted of a skirt below the knee or culottes, black stockings and covered black shoes. The blouse was supplied by my mother. My parents always dressed in stylish clothing.

When the Abbouds took over the Restaurant it was obvious to me Yolla
Abboud knew little about the running of a restaurant. She would continually ask me if I knew how to make drinks and other items sold in the restaurant." (Exhibit 10, par 5) 
Although I considered she gave her evidence in a frank manner, I have preferred to regard the evidence as likely to be biased and have looked for corroboration of the matters to which she referred. I think there is ample corroboration of most of those matters.

Handley had worked at the Heritage Inn and, then, the Heritage Terrace restaurant for approximately six years and remained an employee of the plaintiff until March of 1993. She gave similar evidence to that of other witnesses for the defendants as to the very high level of competence with which A L Neville conducted the Heritage Inn and Heritage Terrace restaurants.
She, too, compared that very unfavourably with the conduct of the Heritage
Terrace under the ownership of the plaintiff. She made the following observations: "a) She did not appear to know the procedure in running a restaurant; b) She was inconsistent with her decisions; c) She lacked control over her staff and did not interfere in the service of food to customers. She did not check the portions, the garnishments or seem interested in the slowness of service; d) She appeared inexperienced in the operation of the restaurant equipment; e) She lacked the personal approach towards the customers. I feel this was one of the most important qualities of the Nevilles and it was severely lacking with Mrs Abboud." (Exhibit 11) 
She evidenced the level of complaints by customers of slow service and instances which reflected a lack of confidence in the conduct of the restaurant by the plaintiff and Abboud. She gave evidence of a conversation with Abboud which she said took place in January 1993 to the following effect: "Les Abboud said to me "The business is going downhill. Do you think it is because the Plaza is so quiet?" 
At this time there were three staff present, myself, Robyn (the cook) and Ann (the sandwich hand).

I said "No, I don't think it is for that reason. It is because the restaurant is not being run properly when you are not here".

Les Abboud said "What can we do?" 
I said "People are waiting too long for their food and things (sic) not being run the way they should be" " (Exhibit 11) 
According to the observation of Handley "there was a gradual downturn in customers and especially the regulars that had frequented the restaurant when it was owned by the Nevilles". The circumstances of her resignation she described as follows: "I resigned from the restaurant in early March 1993. During my time working for Yolla Abboud I enjoyed working whilst Les Abboud was in the restaurant, however I could not continue to work for Yolla Abboud.

In my opinion, Yolla Abboud was not able to run the restaurant efficiently and certainly did not run the restaurant in the same professional manner as the
Nevilles." (Exhibit 11, par 7 (ix)) 
Of her evidence in chief that there was an early downturn in trade in the restaurant under the ownership of the plaintiff she was cross-examined as follows: "Q. I want to suggest to you soon after Mrs Abboud had acquired the restaurant that the restaurant appeared to get busier because Christmas was approaching? 
A. I would imagine so.

Q. It's certainly fair to say after Mrs Abboud acquired the restaurant you didn't observe any downturn in trade because the restaurant was approaching this busier Christmas period? 
A. We had a downturn in trade, it became busier only at lunch times, the trade kind of quiet in the mornings, in the afternoons when we had the specials on it was busy at the lunch time period. But yeah, no, I don't really understand what you mean.

Q. I think you have agreed with the proposition that the restaurant appeared to get busier as it was approaching Christmas 1992 after Mrs Abboud had acquired the business? 
A. Well, the shopping centre became busier, yes.

Q. What I'm suggesting to you is that the restaurant itself became busier as
Christmas approached? 
A. I suppose it must have, yes.

Q. It's not correct to say that there was a downturn in trade soon after Mrs
Abboud had acquired the business? 
A. Not straight away, no.

Q. Certainly not prior to Christmas '92 because of the busier Christmas trading period? 
A. Because you have a lot of, yeah, people that come into the centre because it's Christmas time, yes.
 ...............

Q. I thought you had said to me earlier that there was no downturn in trade after Mrs Abboud had acquired the business because of the Christmas trading period that was approaching? 
A. Well, generally that's what I said, yes.

Q. I want to suggest to you that the changes you have itemised in your statement that you say took place to the business after Mrs Abboud had acquired the business didn't result, from your observations, in any downturn in trade? 
A. The downturn in trade was over a general period, it wasn't just before
Christmas." (T656.5 - .35 and T656.58 - 657.11) 
That evidence, I think, reflects some confusion in the recollection of
Handley.

Morris Wayne Steel (Steel), a retired manager, was a witness for the defendants who had been a customer of the Heritage Inn and the Heritage
Terrace, attending those restaurants approximately two to three times a week.
He continued to frequent the Heritage Terrace after its purchase by the plaintiff. He ceased frequenting the restaurant in February 1993. He was highly complimentary of the defendants' competence, whereas his evidence of the plaintiff's operation of the restaurant was less than complimentary. He illustrated the way in which the service declined by his ability to "almost complete the cross-word puzzle in the Telegraph before being served". It was his observation that the friendly atmosphere of the Heritage Terrace under the management of A L Neville had disappeared, that the type of food had changed to a more continental emphasis. It was his observation that there was a downturn in trade from the absence of queues of waiting customers which he had noticed present during the operation of the restaurant by the defendants. He was particularly unhappy about being served "pressed chicken" in lieu of "real chicken". In cross-examination he readily agreed that his observations were subjective. However, I found him to be responsive in cross-examination and regarded his evidence as reliable.

The plaintiff denied each of the criticisms levelled at her conduct of the restaurant. Her evidence probably serves to underline the very subjective nature of the subject matter. Nevertheless, I am quite satisfied that there was a distinctly different style and method of operation of the Heritage
Terrace under the operation by the plaintiff when compared with the defendants' management. I think this was largely the combined effect of a significant lack of experience and competence in the running of such a restaurant on the part of the plaintiff; the markedly different style of the plaintiff and of A L Neville in nearly every social respect and the very personal nature of the business that A L Neville had created through the family style restaurant which she had developed over many years. I found the evidence of Bromfield, Gale and Steel particularly helpful.

Despite the obvious predisposition of Grant to give evidence favourable to the defendants' case, I found her evidence as to the changes and, in particular, the different presentation of service under the ownership of the plaintiff, a useful insight into part of the problem that, I think, has adversely affected the plaintiff's opportunity to successfully conduct the Heritage Terrace business. I think it is sufficient to say that I have been left with a satisfaction that the takings of the Heritage Terrace under the ownership of the plaintiff should not be taken as a guide to the level of takings of that business prior to 13 November 1992.

I have not been persuaded to treat the takings of the Heritage Terrace business under the ownership of the plaintiff as a measure of the true level of takings of that business when operated by the defendants by the evidence of
Michael Phillipou Militiades (Militiades), a management consultant called to give evidence on behalf of the plaintiff. Since April 1994 he has owned and operated a restaurant at Brooklyn known as "The Broadwalk - Marina Cafe &
Deli". He has worked in the food industry for approximately forty one years as the operator of various establishments such as coffee lounges, fish shops, a wedding reception centre, as manager for the White Wings chain of shops under the name of "The Whistling Prawn". He became the national operations manager of its fast food division. For about twenty years prior to 1985 he conducted a management consultancy business. The basis of his expertise appears to lie in his practical experience in the field of retail sale of food.

Militiades supported the opinion evidence of Petrakis that, for a business such as the Heritage Terrace business, a "smart operator" would aim for a ratio of 29 to 31 per cent for the proportion of food costs to gross takings.
At the same time, I think he recognised flexibility in the ratios that different operators were capable of achieving. He was of the opinion that, where the historical records of a business showed a consistent range of 29 per cent to 31 per cent as its proportion of food costs to takings, it would not be likely to be able to reduce the range to one of 25 per cent to 26 per cent as a result of "good management".

In what appeared to be an attempt to criticise the standard of management of the defendants, particularly that of A L Neville, he carried out an analysis of the records of Zackery's for the first four and a half months of its operation to show that the ratio of food costs to gross sales was 34.84 per cent. I have no doubt that the period under consideration was far too short to have any useful bearing on the question of the defendants' competence in the management of such a business. I note in cross-examination on this material he tended to draw away from the expression of opinion of his evidence in chief that his analysis indicated "that the business was not particularly well managed" (T236.22). He had only slight association with the operation of
Zackery's. To use his expression, he "had a look at Zackery's".

In the case of the Heritage Terrace he visited it "as a private patron for lunch on 2 occasions in March and April 1993 and ...... (and) for about three hours during the midday on each 3 and on 12 January 1994 in the course of engagement as a consultant by Mr Abboud". In his evidence in chief he set out his observations of the Heritage Terrace operation on those occasions.
Generally speaking, he had no criticism of the service offered by the plaintiff, nor of the state of cleanliness of the premises. He had some criticism of the adequacy of the equipment and the size of various elements.
On the occasions that he was present, the Heritage Terrace "was not more than three quarters full".

I have little difficulty in accepting, in general, the accuracy of those observations. However, he does not address, nor could he, the differences which I have regarded as quite significant in the conduct of the Heritage
Terrace by the plaintiff when compared with its management by the defendants.
It is in this context that I think it is necessary to view the weight of his opinion expressed in his evidence in chief in the following terms: "When a new operator mismanages the running of a restaurant or coffee shop from when the new operator first takes over the management of the business the takings of the business do not immediately drop. From my experience in the food industry, it takes approximately 4 to 6 months before takings of such a business fall as a consequence of mismanagement. In other words, mismanagement of such a business does not, in my view, have an immediate effect upon the takings of the business. It takes time for this to happen." (Exhibit O, par 19) 
As a general proposition there may be some value in this opinion,. However, for it to have any practical value in these proceedings, it would be necessary, in my opinion, for Militiades to relate it to the Heritage Terrace business, and the particular circumstances of its management by the defendants and then by the plaintiff. He has not attempted to do this. By way of illustration, he makes no reference to the significance of the substantial personal following enjoyed by the defendants in the operation of the Heritage
Terrace, engendered by many years of association with the old Penrith Plaza and the Plaza as restaurant proprietors. Further, I would have thought it basic to such an opinion to have some understanding of the comparative level of competence or incompetence of the incoming and outgoing proprietors.

As stated earlier in these reasons, Petrakis by use of the stated industry norm of a range of 29 to 31 per cent for the proportionate cost of food purchases to gross turnover, purported to establish actual gross takings for the Heritage Terrace for the second period of 1 July 1992 to 13 November 1992 of $11,500 per week. For the reasons given I regard that analysis as flawed.
By similar means he estimated the average weekly gross takings of the Heritage
Terrace for the period 14 November 1992 to 31 March 1993 (the third period) at $11,275. In this way the plaintiff sought to draw an inference as to the true measure of takings of the Heritage Terrace business prior to sale.

However, for the reasons given, subject to the rejected alterations and to the record of takings of the trial period, I regard the diary record as a reliable record of takings of the Heritage Terrace. It remains then, I think, to consider what was the effect of the representation by the defendants as found by me and the effect of the conduct of Neville in relation to the trial period.

It is very difficult to give any form of monetary expression to the finding which involves the acceptance of Rigby's evidence that she observed Neville acting irregularly in the operation of the cash register during the trial period. As stated earlier in these reasons, if there had been any extensive falsification of takings during that trial period, one place where that could be expected to show up is in the comparison of bankings, cash purchases and diary records of takings as scheduled in Exhibit BM. If the diary entries were falsely overstated, one would expect to find that the total of the diary recorded takings would significantly exceed bankings for the relevant period.
In fact, the bankings on 28 October 1992 which relates to takings for 23, 24, , 26 and 27 October 1992 were together with cash purchases in excess of the total of diary record takings for those days. Similarly, the banking of 4
November 1992 which represents the banking for the remainder of the trial period was also well in excess of the diary record of takings for the period by some $3,500. Emphasising the point, one would have expected falsely inflated diary records of takings to exceed bankings for that period.
 
Notwithstanding my inability to accurately quantify the likely effect of
Neville's manipulation of the cash register during the trial period, I think the takings for trading recorded outside of the trial period gives some indication of that likely distortion. In the first week of the trial period the takings were recorded as $15,173. The nearest to that in the weeks preceding the trial period is the amount of $14,855 for the week commencing 30
September. The comparison is more marked if one compares the first week trial period's takings with the week immediately preceding it and the difference is over $900. To be weighed against that is the total takings for the second week of the trial period of $13,864.

The comparison suggests that any manipulation of the register may be measured in hundreds of dollars not thousands.

The central finding against the defendants is that it was represented to the plaintiff that the takings of the Heritage Terrace current at the time of the negotiations was about $15,000 per week, or $14,500 to $15,000 per week. In respect of that representation I think it is clear that Neville was careful to restrict the representation to one relating to current takings. At the same time, I have no doubt that he conveyed to the plaintiff that those current takings were firm, by referring to greatly increased turnover at the inception of the Heritage terrace business and by referring to anticipated increased takings with the effect of Christmas trading.

To facilitate an examination of the question whether the representations as found against the defendants were actionable, I have annexed a schedule of takings from the inception of the Heritage Terrace business to the termination of ownership by the defendants (schedule 2): the takings have been adjusted to exclude the effect of the rejected alterations.

If one takes the figures extracted in schedule 1, it is arguable that at the commencement of negotiations the representations as to current takings are fully supported by the diary record which shows totals of $14,710 and $14,855 for the weeks commencing 23 September and 30 September 1992 respectively. The weekly takings shown on schedule 2 for the weeks commencing 21 September 1992 and 28 September 1992 are $14,490 and $14,735 respectively.

However, if one goes forward to the two weeks immediately preceding the commencement of the trial period namely, the weeks commencing 7 October and 14
October 1992 respectively, the position from the defendants' stand point is less defensible, with takings of $13,690 and $14,231 respectively shown on schedule 1. The nearest figures on schedule 2 are for the weeks commencing 5
October and 12 October 1992 which show takings of $13,900 and $14,310 respectively.

Given the nature of the representations as being directed to current takings,
I do not think it reasonable to contrast the takings so represented with the adjusted takings, for example, averaged out from the commencement of business on 2 March 1992 up to and including 20 October 1992. That average is approximately $14,280 and contains the inflationary effect of the atypical trading results of the opening weeks of business.

Nor do I think it reasonable to contrast the takings as represented with the takings at the immediate point of time of the representations; for example, to take in isolation the takings for the weeks ended 23 September and 30
September 1992. I think the correct approach is to treat the representations as ongoing into the trial period, and for the purpose of ascertaining current takings, to look at the period of negotiations, expanded to take in some time prior to the commencement of negotiations.

I have thought it reasonable to treat takings current at the time of the representations as commencing in the month of September. Viewed in that context the current takings averaged approximately $13,760 per week: that is, taking the relevant period as commencing on 2 September and going through to the end of the week commencing 14 October. On that basis the takings current at the time of the negotiations up to the commencement of the trial period fell short by approximately $1,000 per week from the represented level of takings of $14,500 to $15,000.

Had a narrower view been taken of the nature of the representations, so as to relate the takings to a period commencing with the week of the first negotiation, in other words, taking into account the takings of the week commencing 23 September through to the takings for the week commencing 14
October, the average would have been approximately $14,370 per week.

If one has regard to the takings of the Heritage Terrace business in the week and a half following the trial period prior to sale, that level of takings tends to support the approach I have adopted of taking into account the takings for the period commencing 2 September 1992. I say this as the takings for the first week after the trial, that is, the week commencing 28 October, were $13,895.

I accept that, had the plaintiff been aware that the current takings of the
Heritage Terrace business fell well below $15,000 per week, she would not have purchased the business - certainly not at the agreed price of $450,000.

Subject then to proof of damages, the plaintiff is entitled to judgment in these proceedings. The question of damages I think is a particularly difficult one, having regard to the nature of the findings that I have made. The problem is not one arising out of the lack of expert witnesses. Each party called several expert witnesses to evaluate the Heritage Terrace business. Each of them, in one respect or another, have been of assistance, but each, I think, have approached the subject matter in a way that precludes acceptance of the conclusions proffered by each of them.

The plaintiff's accountant, Frank Zonaras (Zonaras), gave evidence of an estimated loss of expected profit by the plaintiff on alternative bases that the weekly turnover of the Heritage Terrace business was $15,000, $16,000 and $17,0000. The period in respect of which this estimate was made was a 74 week period from 13 November 1992 to 19 April 1994. He calculated a net profit in respect of the business, reaching a turnover of $15,000 per week, of $359,006 for that 74 week period, adjusted to exclude depreciation and interest and bank charges related to borrowing. To reach that estimate, Zonaras calculated gross profit by multiplying $15,000 by 74 weeks and to that total of $1,110,000 he deducted purchases of $349,650 based upon a ratio of purchases to sales of 31.5 per cent. That gave him a gross profit of $760,350. The expenses he deducted from gross profit were actual, adjusted, for example in the case of wages, on the estimate of the plaintiff of additional labour requirements to generate the assumed turnover. On an annual basis, that net profit came back to $252,274 (T288.45). Zonaras was asked to do a similar calculation based upon a weekly turnover of $12,000 and, "without reducing the wages component, he estimated the net profit to be $145,414 per annum (T289.6). That figure he accepted would be an under estimate of net profit.

One of the problems inherent in this calculation of Zonaras was exposed in cross-examination which demonstrated that for the year ended 30 June 1993 the actual turnover of the Heritage Terrace under the management of the plaintiff was approximately $12,000 per week which yielded an adjusted net profit of $28,272. On an annual basis that represented approximately $44,500 - a far cry from the estimated net profit of $145,000, itself an underestimate according to Zonaras.

Although there was no cross-examination on the following aspect of Zonaras' calculations, it seems to me that there is a further problem in his methodology, in that he appears to be relating a 52 week span of expenses to a week period of operations. If I am correct in this criticism, the correction of that error would be affected by the reduction of sales to $780,000 and purchases at 31.5 per cent to a figure of $245,700, leaving a gross profit of $534,300. Taking his expenses of $401,344 that still leaves an adjusted net profit for the year of approximately $133,000.

On either basis it is difficult to reconcile Zonaras' evidence of adjusted net profit with the evidence of Peter Julian Frankl (Frankl), the principal of
Peter Frankl & Associates, a firm specialising in business valuations. His principal task was to prepare a valuation of the Heritage Terrace business on an assumption that the average weekly turnover was $12,000 giving an annual sales figure of $624,000. This was expressed in his report in the following terms: "2 At the time of purchase, with the available information, I have determined that $12,000 is the most likely outcome on a weekly average basis. This equates to $624,000 sales on an annual basis" (Exhibit K) 
As appears from his evidence in chief (T257.50), in fact, this "determined" figure "was advised to (him) by Leslie Abboud as the level of turnover". In order to determine a "net cash inflow" for the Heritage Terrace business at point of sale, he constructed a cost of purchases and schedule of expenses based on historical percentages of costs and expenses for the period 1 July to 30 June 1992 in respect of the Heritage Inn business (plus three months trading by the Heritage Terrace), adjusted to accord with his opinion of acceptable levels of margins by a business such as the Heritage Terrace business. For example, in relation to the cost of purchases he noted that, historically, the Heritage Inn business had achieved "a near 70 per cent gross margin". He adopted a margin, for the purpose of his calculation, of 67.5 per cent on the basis that it was "reasonable to expect the margin to be between per cent and 70 per cent". In this way he calculated a net cash inflow of $68,520. This may be compared with Zonaras' estimate of $145,414 or, if I am correct in thinking Zonaras' calculation is methodically flawed, $133,000 in calculating loss of profit at an assumed weekly turnover of $12,000.

For the purpose of his valuation Frankl adopted alternative methods, namely a discounted cash flow valuation and a capitalisation of future maintainable profits. For the latter valuation he simply applied an indice extracted from an industry publication, Barrington's Business For Sale Indices - Coffee Shops - December Quarter 1992, in the absence of "evidence of selling prices for coffee lounges and the differing market practices for deriving future maintainable profits". I did not regard that as of any particular assistance and, as I read the evidence of Frankl, I suspect, nor did he.

For the discounted cash flow method of valuation, he estimated a "final value of (the Heritage Terrace) business at the time of purchase .... of $150,000".
To reach this valuation he expressed the opinion that the annual net cash inflow from trading could be expected to be between $55,000 and $85,000 per year, which had to be adjusted by some $38,000 per year to allow for the part time involvement of Abboud and the full time management of the business by the plaintiff, resulting in a "cash profit" of between $17,000 and $47,000 per year. On his method of discounting that cash flow, he arrived at a value of $100,000 to which he added $50,000 "based on the future potential of the business". He worked on an annual inflation rate of 3.5 per cent. Frankl presented a table in support of this valuation which revealed that he had applied a "risk free" rate of 6.8 per cent to the lower end of his range of cash inflow, namely $17,000, and a "high risk" rate of 36.3 per cent to the upper end of his range, $47,000. He then took a mid point rate of 22 per cent to a mid point of his range of cash profit which yielded a valuation rounded off at $100,000.

I have some significant difficulties with Frankl's opinion of value, not the least of which is the grossly underestimated figure of turnover adopted by him. Before returning to this and other aspects of his valuation, I think it is convenient to note that the valuation of $150,000 was adjusted in a later report (Exhibit AQ). The adjustment reflected the instructions of the plaintiff that the level of turnover "was more accurately estimated (at) $11,500 per week and that the gross margin was 30 per cent". Applying his mid range discount percentage of 22 per cent, Frankl revalued the business at $140,000, which included the component of $50,000 for potential. In this report he also contrasted this valuation with one adopting the capitalisation of future maintainable profits and, as in the earlier valuation, I found this comparison to be of little or no assistance. In this report, Frankl sought to test the reasonableness of his valuation of $140,000 by calculating what return of investment would be represented by a price of $140,000. This yielded a rate 37.8 per cent which he considered could be "justified on the basis of a greater potential to increase turnover and profitability compared to other coffee lounges being sold at that time".

Frankl was also called to give evidence of "the reasonableness of the amount that was paid for the business" by the plaintiff. The assumption was made that the actual average weekly sales of the Heritage Terrace business at time of sale was $16,500. For this purpose he constructed a table of sales and expenses upon similar bases to those adopted in his valuation of the business.
This yielded a net cash in flow of $171,480 from which, as in the case of the earlier valuations, he deducted $38,000, representing the wages of the plaintiff and Abboud, resulting in an adjusted net cash inflow of $133,480.
Using this amount and the price paid by the plaintiff of $450,000 he determined a yield of 23 per cent which he considered "generally ....
appropriate".

At my request, Frankl produced a table which is set out below and, as its heading disclosed, represented Frankl's valuation of the business calculated in respect of levels of weekly turnover. For this purpose he adopted the return on investment rate of 37.8 per cent, the rate which he considered could be justified when considering his valuation of $140,000.
 "3. Business Value at different levels of Turnover 
Business Value calculated at 37.8% ROI 
Turnover (weekly) 
Turnover 
Annual 
Gross 
Profit 70% 
Expenses 
Net Profit less $13,000 (3) 
Value rounded to ,000  ---|---|---|---  ,500  ,000  ,600  ,680  ,920  ,000  ,000  ,000  ,200  ,680  ,520  ,000  ,000  ,000  ,800  ,920  ,880  ,000  ,000  ,000  ,200  ,640  ,560  ,000  ,000  ,000  ,600  ,240  ,360  ,000  ,000  ,000  ,000  ,840  ,160  ,000  ,000  ,000  ,400  ,440  ,960  ,000  ,500  ,000  ,600  ,240  ,360  ,000  ,000  ,000  ,800  ,040  ,760  ,000  .8% is used as derived from the valuation at $11,500 per week in the addendum.

Gross profit calculated at 32.5% & ROI 37% $13,000 represents part time wages to Leslie Abboud" (Exhibit AO) 
It is not clear to me why Frankl did not adjust the cash flow by $38,000 to allow for the wages of the plaintiff as well as the Abboud's wages. In respect of that table it appears that Frankl has included in the valuation a component of $50,000 for potential, although this is not expressly stated.

Although I have formed a high opinion of Frankl's competence in this field, for the reasons that follow, I have considerable difficulty in accepting the applicability of his conclusions as to the value of the Heritage Terrace business. I think the basic problem is his starting point in relation to turnover and the premises upon which his cash flow tables were constructed, when those cash flow figures are contrasted with historical figures.
Furthermore, I think there are some internal inconsistencies in his various conclusions.

For the purpose of determining the reasonableness of the price paid for the
Heritage Terrace business, on the assumption that its average weekly takings were $16,500, Frankl constructed a cash flow in which the expenses, other than wages and occupancy costs, represented a percentage of 5.62 per cent of sales.
Yet, in the calculation of those expenses for the purpose of determining the business value at different levels of turnover in the table above, he has adopted a percentage of 6.99 per cent. Moreover, his total expenses for such a turnover for the purpose of that table was $456,240, which is to be contrasted with his total expenditure of $429,120 adopted in his cash flow for determining the reasonableness of the $450,000 price at that same level of turnover. I also note that Frankl's valuation at the different levels of turnover shown in the table, while consistent with his earlier opinion evidence as to value at turnovers of $11,500 and $12,000 weekly, does not, in my opinion, accord with his opinion as to reasonableness of the price of $450,000 on an assumed turnover of $16,500 weekly. It can be seen from the above table that his valuation for that level of turnover, which includes a $50,000 component for potential, was $348,000. I find it very difficult to reconcile that opinion of valuation with his opinion as to the reasonableness of the price of $450,000 on an assumed turnover of $16,500 weekly.

However, I think the most significant flaw in the utility of his conclusions lies in the acceptance of the turnover, initially of $12,000 per week, and then $11,500 per week, given to him by the plaintiff. Frankl appears to have adopted that level of turnover without any critical examination of records. As appears from these reasons I reject, in substance, the attack by the plaintiff on the diary records of the Heritage Terrace takings in respect of the period up to the trial period - leaving aside the effect of the rejected alterations.
Further, Frankl used historical figures for the purpose of constructing his cash flow which, I think, are distorted by his adoption of accounts which accord with the initial tax return of the defendants for the year ended 30
June 1992 and which was later amended by them. Frankl has ignored that amended return which results in an underestimate of approximately $42,0000. The amended return for that year disclosed an income of approximately $750,000. I think it is legitimate to contrast that figure with the assumed sales figure adopted by Frankl of $598,000. A measurement of that distortion may be indicated by noting that the figures used by Frankl for the year ended 30 June disclosed an average sales per week figure of approximately $13,600, whereas the true weekly figure was closer to $14,500. I think it is possible to construct a cash flow on the basis of those diary records which is vastly different from the analysis constructed by Frankl.

Schedule 3 is a table which reproduces the centre management reports summary, to which I have added the adjusted takings recorded in the diary for the months of March to October 1992 inclusive. Those latter amounts appear in brackets. The first thing that may be observed, in relation to those diary record of takings, is the significant understatement of takings from month to month as reported to Lend Lease by the defendants. The further matter is the seasonal variation in takings, particularly reflected in takings for the months of November and December. Those two months represent, in the years preceding the opening of the Heritage Terrace, approximately 20 per cent of the gross takings for the year. I have excluded 1991-1992 because of the distortion in takings caused by the abnormally high takings for the opening weeks of business in the Heritage Terrace.

One way of putting that seasonal effect into perspective, is to take the months of July to October 1992 (excluding the rejected alterations) and make an arbitrary adjustment in respect of the trial period of October 1992, by reducing the diary record of takings by some $4,000 for that month. I do not think the manipulation of the cash register by Neville in that period amounted to anything like $4,000. Viewed in that way, the takings for the four months,
July to October, amounts to $232,000 approximately. The seasonal effect on takings for the months of November and December, which I have estimated represents 20 per cent of annual gross takings, can be quantified in an indicative way by an analysis of the takings for the first quarter of each year as shown in the schedule 3 summary. Over the years preceding the opening of the Heritage Terrace the takings for the first quarter represent approximately 31 per cent of the years takings. If a seasonal adjustment of that kind was applied to the adjusted first quarter of the 1992 - 1993 financial year figure of $233,000 it would yield an annual figure of approximately $750,000.

This calculation is not so much a substitution for the expert analysis presented by Frankl, but, in my opinion, it is an indication of the nature of the distortion which I think is inherent in Frankl's analyses. Ironically, that annual figure would reflect gross weekly takings of approximately $14,500. While I do not think it is appropriate to make a finding of adjusted net profit on that annual figure, I regard that exercise as a useful one to expose anomalies in the valuations presented by Frankl and his derivation of an unrealistically low adjusted net "cash" profit.

I had occasion to raise some of these anomalies with Frankl during the course of his evidence. I have referred earlier in these reasons to the calculation of the cash flow by Frankl for the purpose of his valuation, which is purported to be based on historical figures of the Heritage Terrace at an assumed annual sales level of $624,000. That net cash inflow was $68,520 about which I addressed the following questions to him: "HIS HONOUR: Q. There seems to be something strange in that, doesn't there, with your other expenses running at about 40,000 more, 45,000 below prevailing expenses as at '91/92, it is presumably less than '92/93, if you adopted that figure you are left with virtually no cash inflow? 
A. That's correct. I had to make an assumption about these expenses being in proportion to the level of turn over to some extent because, as you say, if the expenses ran at the level of previous years with that lower level of turn over the business would not be really viable.
 ....................

Q. What I'm trying to find out is how realistic your cash flow calculation is when compared with the 1991/92 tax return. Just remind me, the figure in exhibit AO in that year for gross profit of $486,156, that comes from the tax return? 
A. Yes. The main area of difference is in the, "Other expenses" where in the tax return it was $55,607.

Q. Yes, what concerns me though - I don't know whether you have an explanation to offer for it - is that the gross profit in '91/92 for the tax return is $586,000, whereas you have calculated a gross profit of 421, how does that stand the test of realism in the light of the '91/92 return? 
A. '91/92 return is based on average sales per week of $13,609 and mine is calculated on $12,000 so the two gross profits are based on very similar percentages of mine at 67.5 per cent of sales and the tax return at 68.7 per cent of sales, so I believe they are comparable.

Q. In terms of percentage they may be, but in terms of ultimate dollar signs they are not? 
A. As far as level of turn over is concerned I used the level of turn over that I was advised by my client to use.

Q. Then that leaves us with the justification for taking a percentage of 1.60 per cent for other expenses? 
A. Yes.

Q. That really should be much higher it seems to me if you go to the figures as disclosed in the income tax return? 
A. If I can comment on that, approximately half of the "Other cash" expenses were motor vehicle expenses.

Q. When you say, "motor vehicle expenses" you don't include lease payments in that, do you? 
A. I don't have really have much more detail on motor vehicle expenses in that '92 year. I know that it was $25,223. I don't know the details of that.

Q. That wouldn't be more service? 
A. I doubt it, no. So I was advised by my client that he would be able to operate this business on much lower motor vehicle expenses.

MARTIN: Q. Obviously if the, "Other expenses" were higher than the 1.6 percent of the gross sales that would result in a lower net cash flow? 
A. Yes.

HIS HONOUR: Q. You can inject there, "Considerably lower".

That figure that you have derived on p2 of your first report, exhibit K, of net cash flow percentage of 10.98 given the various calculated percentages in exhibit AO out of the preceding years and including the year 1991/92, does that give you cause to pause? 
A. Well, the "Other expenses" of $10,000 could be investigated in more detail.

Q. But that would only reduce that percentage? 
A. It would reduce it even further.

Q. What I'm really curious about is whether that worries you when you look at the percentages of net cash flow as extracted from the income tax return? 
A. The business was clearly under functioning, was not very profitable with $4,000 turn over.

Q. It really throws you back to having a hard look at that assumed level of sales, doesn't it? 
A. Yes.

Q. If you treat the figures in the tax return as correct - and I am not saying whether one as a view one way or the other about that - if you treat them as correct it seems to me a couple of things flow from that: One is a very big question mark over the level of sales that you have been given and consequently the percentage represented by cash inflow to that level of sales, do you agree with that? 
A. Yes." (T260.31 - .41 and T261.23 - 262.43) 
In fact, the tax return which he considered to be correct, declared income which was understated by approximately $42,000.

Again, in the calculation of his cash flow Frankl expressed the view that the "Annual Net Cash Inflow from trading (was) expected to be between $55,000 and $85,000 per annum". In evidence in chief he explained that statement of opinion in the following way: "Q. If I could move on to p4 of your first report, exhibit K under the subheading, "Future expectations", you state that the annual net cash inflow from trading is expected to be between $55,000 and $85,000 per annum, where do you get those two figures from? 
A. This was through sensitivity testing by observing the effect of the variance of wages, margins and expenses that were likely to occur in the future based on the historical information I had.

Q. So that in your opinion was the range of likely annual net cash inflow? 
A. Yes.

HIS HONOUR: Q. How does that line up with your schedule, exhibit AO, which throws up figures of varying between 81 and 96,000? 
A. Well, I would really say that you can't really compare the two because my whole analysis is based on much lower level of turn over and assuming a lower level of costs.

Q. I was going to suggest we come back to the sales figure again, you agree? 
A. They come back to the sales figure? 
Q. Yes? 
A. Yes." (T263.3 - .29) 
Exhibit AO, referred to in the last quoted extract from the transcript, is a reference to the adjusted net cash flow revealed by the income tax returns of the Heritage Inn and Heritage Terrace business as extracted by Frankl and which showed for the years 1988 - 1989 through to 1991 - 1992 an adjusted profit, respectively of $96,156, $90,246, $81,341 and $95,948. When it is recalled that, from his range of $55,000 to $85,000, Frankl deducted $38,000, representing wages for the plaintiff and Abboud, which reduced the range to $17,000 to $47,000, the difficulties I have had with Frankl's methodology are magnified.

There was a further area of the cross-examination of Frankl that left me with some concern as to the validity of his construction of a cash flow. The justification of the deduction of $38,000 from the cash flow represented by the wages of the plaintiff and her husband depended upon the proposition that
Frankl's structure of the cash flow component of wages based upon historical figures excluded the wages of the defendants. In exhibit AO in Frankl's analysis of those historical figures he stated that "wages are before salary to A Neville". He was cross-examined on that assumption as follows: "Q. In note 2 you say: "Wages are before salary to A Neville." How do you know that to be the case? 
A. It is the impression I obtained from looking at the tax returns.

Q. Did you look at Mr Neville's tax returns? 
A. I have the tax returns here.

Q. Do you have, for example, Mr Neville's 1991-92 tax return? 
A. Is it headed "Alison and John Neville"? Is that a page from it? This is the tax return that I looked at.

Q. Would that be the partnership return? 
A. I'd say so, yes.

Q. Is it or is it not? 
A. I am not sure. It has the trading account of the restaurant in it.

Q. Mr Frankle (sic), if you wanted to know whether Mr Neville's wages were or were not part of the salary or wage figure in the partnership return you would go to Mr Neville's personal return, wouldn't you? 
A. Well, I believe that would have some information that is relevant to that question, yes.

Q. Isn't that where you would go? 
A. I didn't have that information at the time.

Q. Isn't that where you would go? 
A. Yes.

Q. And it would tell you whether his income for that year was his share of the partnership profits or his income as a PAYE taxpayer or both? 
A. Yes.

Q. And from that you would know, or you could conclude whether the figure for wages in the partnership return on the business did or did not include salary paid to Mr Neville? 
A. Yes.

Q. And the same would apply to Mrs Neville, that is to say, you would look to her personal tax return to draw the same conclusions? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you look at the personal tax returns of either Mr or Mrs Neville? 
A. No.

Q. Then why is it that you say categorically in footnote 2 of AO that wages are before salary to A Neville? 
A. Perhaps I should not have said it so categorically.

Q. Did you say it at all? 
A. Well, it is not really material, because what I am trying to do here is -- 
Q. Let me stop you here. You say it is not material? 
A. No.

Q. Doesn't the exercise which you suggest is the most accurate exercise for working out the value of the business, that is to say the discounted cash flow method involved, working out the expenses of the business, adding on the value of the partners' free labour, deriving a profit, and then, by applying a notional yield to that profit, working out a capital sum? 
A. Yes.

Q. Then isn't it imperative to know whether the wage figure in the tax returns does or does not include payments to the partners themselves? 
A. It does in so far as determining what percentage should be used in the cash flow for wages in the future which I came to the ultimate conclusion should be per cent.

Q. Mr Frankle (sic), if you are going to add on in this calculation a figure which represents the uncharged for labour of the partners, you need to know whether the labour is or is not uncharged for, don't you? 
A. Well, having that information would give a more, perhaps a more accurate estimate of what the wages percentage should be." (T272.11 - 273.39) 
It seemed to me that, not only would "that information" have given Frankl "a more, perhaps a more accurate estimate of what the wages percentage should be", it would also bring into question his deduction, from his sensitivity tested cash flow range of $55,000 to $85,000, of the sum of $38,000, representing the estimated wages of the plaintiff and Abboud.

The defendants called Alan Gordon Weekes, a principal in the accountancy business conducted by Greenwood Challoner Services Pty Ltd, to comment on the various reports of the plaintiff's experts. However, I regard his report as superficial, making no comment on the affidavits forming part of the evidence in chief of Zonaras and Frankl. Of the opinion evidence of Militiades, he questioned its value on the basis of the limited observation of the Heritage
Terrace business by Militiades. His comments on Petrakis' evidence were limited to the latter's' criticism of the inclusion in takings of the tax refund cheques of $9,552.75, referred to earlier in these reasons. Given the contents of Rosen's letter to the defendants' solicitors of 29 July 1994, it was not necessary to call Weekes to make that comment.

The defendants also called John David Robertson (Robertson), a registered valuer and fellow of the Australian Institute of Valuers since 1982, who expressed the opinion that the fair market value of the Heritage Terrace as at November 1992 was $300,000. That valuation was based upon a two years net profit of the business which he estimated to be $152,191. That profit was derived from an analysis of the trading history of the Heritage Inn business and that of the Heritage Terrace to the point of sale of the latter to the plaintiff. As in the case of Frankl's analysis, the profit and loss account was adjusted to exclude depreciation, interest costs and other costs unlikely to be incurred in the future. For the year ended 30 June 1993, he multiplied the weekly figures in the adjusted profit and loss account to 13 November 1992 by fifty two to give an annual figure. As with Frankl, his valuation preceded the adjustment to the income tax return for the year ended 30 June 1992 occasioned by the September 1994 disclosure by the defendants of additional income of approximately $42,000, of which he took no account. Although noting that the Heritage Terrace trading history excluded "the summer trading period", he made no adjustment for this in his extension of the adjusted profit and loss account to an annual basis. As noted in these reasons, there was a significant increase in turnover in the summer trading of the Heritage
Inn and, notwithstanding the experience of the plaintiff in trading during that summer period, I am of the view that it is unrealistic to exclude a factor to reflect this increased level of trading in the adjusted profit and loss account of the Heritage Terrace business. Frankl does not directly address this question by excluding the period from 1 July 1992 to 13 November from his analysis of trading history, as appears from exhibit AO. I have considerable difficulty in accepting the opinion evidence of Robertson given his understatement of income for the year ended 30 June 1992; his failure to adjust takings for seasonal increments; and the evidence of Frankl of value at various levels of net "cash" profit as set out in the extract from exhibit AO above: in particular, Frankl's opinion that at an adjusted level of net profit of $138,760 the "rounded" value of such a business would be $367,000.

I think the correct approach to valuation is to accept the reasonableness of
Frankl's return on investment rate of 37.8 per cent and to treat the adjusted net profit as lying somewhere in the range of $138,000 to $152,000: the first figure being the adjustment of Frankl's net cash flow figure for 1991 - 1992 of $95,948 by the understatement of income by $42,217 and the second figure being the net cash flow figure as calculated by Robertson. If one makes some further adjustment to take account of the value of wages of the owner I think the range comes down to somewhere between $120,000 and $135,000. I have not allowed the full $38,000 usually adopted by Frankl. Using a return on investment rate of 37.8 per cent indicates a value of approximately $340,000.

This approach ignores the failure of Robinson to take account of seasonal conditions and understated income.

I think such an analysis underscores an aspect of my view of the evidence which was not considered by the parties. My view is that, at the time of the negotiations, the then current takings were averaging approximately $13,700 per week. I have found in favour of the plaintiff on the basis of the takings current at the time of the negotiations. It does not follow that the plaintiff is entitled to damages assessed on the premise that the average weekly takings of the Heritage Terrace business was $13,700 on an annual basis. For the reasons that I have given, I think the average takings on an annual basis would be well in excess of $14,000 per week, particularly when seasonal conditions are taken into account.

For those reasons I am satisfied that the Heritage Terrace business under the ownership of the defendants was profitable and that the price paid for it by the plaintiff was not dramatically higher than its true value.

I do not propose to proceed to a final finding as to value until the parties are provided with an opportunity of presenting further submissions. Counsel for the defendants, during the course of submissions, requested an opportunity to present short minutes, once the findings of the Court were ascertained concerning this aspect of the plaintiff's case on damages. However, some of my criticism of Frankl's valuation and the bases of my concern as to the applicability of Robertson's were not the subject of submissions by the parties. I think the parties should be given the opportunity to address these matters. In this category I include my criticism of the Zonaras calculation of loss of profits based on what appears to be an inappropriate level of expenses.

In addition to the entitlement of the plaintiff to damages arising out of the diminished value of the business, the plaintiff seeks consequential damages in respect of: interest incurred by her under a loan facility established by her for the purpose of acquiring and operating the Heritage Terrace business; bank charges related to such borrowings; stamp duty paid by her on the agreement for the purchase of the business; foregone interest on her capital invested in the Heritage Terrace business; foregone wages and superannuation contributions for the period of her operation of the Heritage terrace business; and loss of commercial opportunity.

In relation to those heads of consequential damages, I have indicated earlier in these reasons that I have not accepted the plaintiff's evidence in relation to her loss of opportunity claim. Moreover, in respect of all heads of consequential damages, it is my view that the plaintiff must fail, given my findings as to the level of profitability of this business in the hands of a competent operator.

On the basis of these findings, it is my view that nothing flows from any distinction of the assessment of damages for fraud or under the [Trade
Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) or the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). The cause of action under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) is based upon the application of [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s6.html) of that Act which extends the operation of the Act to persons, not being corporations, where the proscribed conduct involves the use of telephonic services.

Although I accept that, in the telephone conversation of 30 September 1992,
Neville represented that the then current takings of the Heritage Terrace business were about $15,000, if that was the only occasion on which such a statement had been made I have some doubt about the actionability of such a representation. I think the real mischief in Neville's conduct lay in the repetition of that or of a similar representation that the takings were between $14,500 and $15,000 and in his manipulation of the trial period takings. However, in my view, nothing turns upon the basis upon which damages are assessed on the various causes of action maintained by the plaintiff in these proceedings.

It follows from these findings that the defendants' cross-claim must fail. Had
I reached a different conclusion in the plaintiff's proceedings, I would not have regarded the cross-claim as being made out. The only damages that the cross-claimants rely upon are the costs incurred in defending the proceedings brought by the plaintiff. In my opinion, those costs do not represent damages founding an action in deceit. A defendant to an action which is groundless is adequately protected by the Court's power as to costs and by the Court's control over any action constituting an abuse of process.

At the request of the parties I have not considered the question of costs. The matter will be listed for directions to enable the parties to present further submissions on the question of damages and costs as noted earlier in these reasons.

Schedule of Adjusted Weekly Takings from A L Neville's Diary 
Week commencing 2/3/92  
Week commencing 9/3/92 
Week commencing 16/3/92 
Week commencing 23/3/92 
Week commencing 30/3/92 
Week commencing 6/4/92 
Week commencing 13/4/92 
Week commencing 20/4/92 
Week commencing 27/4/92 
Week commencing 4/5/92  ---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 
Monday  ,250  ,295  ,830  ,155  ,810  ,715  ,150  ,770  ,500  ,300  
Tuesday  ,200  ,400  ,800  ,840  ,500  ,550  ,760  ,550  ,550  ,300  
Wednesday  ,200  ,560  ,400  ,040  ,850  ,145  ,400  ,335  ,520  ,860  
Thursday  ,660  ,000  ,430  ,050  ,250  ,160  ,610  ,765  ,610  ,520  
Friday  ,100  ,890  ,400  ,590  ,650  ,100 
Closed  ,665  ,610  ,950  
Saturday  ,300  ,570  ,980  ,100  ,860  ,750  ,260 
Closed  ,920  ,970  
Sunday  ,310  ,065 
Closed  ,600  ,000  ,200  
Weekly total  ,710  ,715  ,840  ,775  ,230  ,535  ,180  ,685  ,710  ,100  
Week commencing 11/5/92  
Week commencing 18/5/92 
Week commencing 25/5/92 
Week commencing 1/6/92 
Week commencing 8/6/92 
Week commencing 15/6/92 
Week commencing 22/6/92 
Week commencing 29/6/92 
Week commencing 6/7/92 
Week commencing 13/7/92  ---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 
Monday  ,570  ,200  ,230  ,300  ,500  ,360  ,650  ,430  ,730  ,500  
Tuesday  ,320  ,200  ,330  ,560  ,390  ,200  ,300  ,450  ,490  ,600  
Wednesday  ,700  ,510  ,530  ,870  ,400  ,750  ,720  ,500  ,700  ,700  
Thursday  ,100  ,670  ,120  ,000  ,930  ,900  ,150  ,650  ,070  ,600  
Friday  ,540  * ~~2,950 ~~2050  ,930  ,300  ,800  ,940  ,970  ,870  ,050  ,260  
Saturday  ,300  ,520  ,800  ,560  ,550  ,180  ,590  ,120  ,280  ,640  
Sunday       ,080  ,200   ,475  ,060  * ~~1,730~~    
Weekly total  ,330  * ~~13,970~~ 13,070  ,830  ,670  ,770  ,230  ,855  ,080  * ~~14,050~~ ,050  ,260  
Week commencing 20/7/92  
Week commencing 27/7/92 
Week commencing 3/8/92 
Week commencing 10/8/92 
Week commencing 17/8/92 
Week commencing 24/8/92 
Week commencing 31/8/92 
Week commencing 7/9/92 
Week commencing 14/9/92 
Week commencing 21/9/92  ---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 
Monday  ,350  ,235  ,500  ,220  ,365  ,100  ,250  ,390  ,280  ,530  
Tuesday  ~~1,500~~ 1,200  ,330  ,440  ,240  ,420  ,420  ,300  ,480  ,410  ,580  
Wednesday  ,560  ,690  ,600  ,350  ,340  ,660  ,560  ,430  ,730  ,720  
Thursday  ,530  ,450  ,000  ,140  ,325  ,150  *~~ 3,880~~ 3,380  ,360  ,250  ,810  
Friday  ,960  ,850  ,700  ,950  ,830  ,635  ,690  ,970  ,750  ,120  
Saturday  ,520  ,430  ,150  ,520  ,225  ,670  ,590  ,300  ,200  ,700  
Sunday    *~~ 1,950~~  ,200  *~~ 1,890~~  
Closed  ,100  ,100  ,020  *~~ 1,830~~  ,030  
Weekly total  *~~ 13,420~~ 13,120  *~~ 13,935~~ ,935  ,590  * ~~1,330~~ ,330  ,615  ,735  *~~ 13,370~~ ,870  ,950  *~~ 13,450~~ ,450  ,490  
Week commencing 28/9/92  
Week commencing 5/10/92 
Week commencing 12/10/92 
Week commencing 19/10/92 
Week commencing 26/10/92 
Week commencing 2/11/92 
Week commencing 9/11/92  ---|---|---|---|---|--- 
Monday  ,680  ,875 *  ,660  ,634  ,110  ,616  ,435  
Tuesday  ,650  ,575  ,580  ,527  ,470  ,108  ,300  
Wednesday  ,290  ,070  ,770  ,255  ,910  ,350  ,510  
Thursday  ,340  ,090  ,570  ,580  ,050  ,420  ,370  
Friday  ,050  ,050  ,880  ,880  ,860  ,380  ,060  
Saturday  ,460  ,040  ,490  ,920  ,430  ,500  
Sunday  ,265  ,200  ,360   ,890  ,210  
Weekly total  ,735  ,900 
Public Holiday  ,310  ,754  ,720  ,584  ,675  * Adjusted to include rejected alterations 
Murder of defendants' niece.

Schedule 1 
Schedule of Adjusted Weekly Takings from A L Neville's 1992 Diary 
Week Commencing  /9/92  /9/92  /10/92  /10/92  /10/92  /10/92  /11/92  /11/92  ---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Trial Period - 4 
Trial Period - 3 
Trial Period - 2 
Trial Period - 1  
Trial Period 
Week commencing 21/10/92  
Trial Period 
Week 2 
Week commencing /10/92  
Trial Period + 1  
Trial Period + 2  
Wednesday  ,720  ,290  ,070  ,770  ,255  ,910  ,350  ,510  
Thursday  ,810  ,340  ,090  ,570  ,580  ,050  ,420  ,370  
Friday  ,120  ,050  ,050  ,880  ,880  ,860  ,380  ,060  
Saturday  ,700  ,460  ,040  ,490  ,910  ,430  ,800  
Sunday  ,030  ,265  ,200  ,360   ,890  ,210  
Monday  ,680  ,875  ,660  ,634  ,110  ,616  ,435  
Tuesday  ,650  ,575  ,580  ,527  ,470  ,108  ,300  
Weekly Total  ,710  ,855  ,690  ,231  ,173  ,864  ,895  ,940  
Schedule 3 
July  
Aug 
Sept 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
Jan 
Feb 
March 
April 
May 
June  ---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---    ,691  ,714  ,335  ,162  ,100  ,210  ,863  ,614  ,720  ,122  ,885  ,310    ,824  ,471  ,913  ,640  ,858  ,320  ,440  ,326  ,392  ,391  ,112  ,422    ,546  ,731  ,960  ,399  ,235  ,222  ,185  ,817  ,945  ,090  ,219  ,663    ,064  ,047  ,111  ,540  ,608  ,476  ,963  ,794  [82,350] ,916  [66,500] ,341  [57,860] ,355  [56,405] ,512    [60,185] ,207  [53,900] ,199  [57,130] ,702  [64,909] ,314 
Sale Heritage /11/93 $25,149.62  
Friday, 16 August 1996 
ADDENDUM 
HIS HONOUR: On 7 August 1996 I delivered my principal reasons for judgment in these proceedings, but did not proceed to final judgment to enable the parties to be heard in relation to matters raised in those principal reasons which I considered the parties had not addressed, or had not been given the opportunity to do so. In addition, I had been requested by counsel for the defendants at the close of the hearing to permit the parties to bring in short minutes and to be heard on the question of costs.

The parties have been given these opportunities and written submissions have been presented in addition to oral argument heard on 14 and 15 August 1996.
Accordingly, I express my further reasons for judgment by way of an addendum to the principal reasons to which this addendum is annexed. I have taken advantage of this addendum to make revisions to the principal reasons to remove grammatical and typographical shortcomings and to correct irregularities in form which were found in the published reasons. After the conclusion of submissions, with the plaintiffs consent, the defendants tendered the affidavit of David McNamara, sworn 18 March 1996, which evidenced pedestrian traffic movement in the Plaza during the years 1992, 1993 and 1994 on a monthly basis. That affidavit is marked exhibit 31. This statistical material bears out the seasonal nature of attendance at the Plaza and that in the Christmas period of 1992 that seasonal factor was not as strong as in the following year. I think this is consistent with the findings in the principal reasons.

A further matter which was not addressed in the principal reasons relates to an allegation by the plaintiff that the 1993 income tax return of the defendants' partnership made false claims for deductions. This was part of the plaintiff's claim that the additional income declared by the defendants in their amended returns for the year ended 30 June 1992 was fictional income declared by the defendants to bolster their defence in these proceedings. The excessive deductions claimed for the year ended 30 June 1993 were said by the plaintiff to be false claims intended to offset the declaration of fictional income in the previous financial year. As stated in the principal reasons, I have rejected that view of the defendants' conduct. While the deductions claimed in respect of the year ended 30 June 1993 cannot be substantiated in full, I regard those claims that were unjustified as another example of the defendants' willingness to act unscrupulously when it came to observing their obligations to pay income tax.

In relation to the matters in respect of which the parties were invited to be further heard in the proceedings, it is accepted by both parties that the expert evidence of Zonaras is seriously flawed by the matter adverted to in my principal reasons.

As to the valuation evidence, while both parties accept that it is open to me to address that issue, in principle, in the manner outlined in the principal reasons and raise no claim of prejudice by reason of that approach, each has presented submissions as to how that approach should be modified.

In the case of the plaintiff, counsel has submitted that, while it is necessary to adjust Frankl's calculation of adjusted net cash flow to bring to account the additional income of approximately $42,000 for the year ended 30
June 1992, the adjustment is only temporary, as a balancing deduction of $42,000 should be made representing increased wages drawn by the defendants in respect of their expenditure of labour in the operation of the partnership business. I disagree with that approach. It may be that some portion of it could be legitimately apportioned to wages of the defendants. However, I regard that as quite unrealistic, having regard to the nature of the appropriation of those monies by the defendant, which was quite indiscriminate and simply consisted of taking what they needed from the business takings. I think it is somewhat artificial to treat that conduct as an informal drawing of wages. To the extent that some portion of it could be attributed to satisfaction of some entitlement of the defendants to be paid wages over and above the wages declared as having been received by the defendants, I think one would also have to take into account Frankl's failure to bring to account the effect of Christmas trading on the takings of the Heritage Terrace business. He adopted an arbitrary gross takings figure of $624,000 reduced to $598,000 per annum solely on the instructions of the plaintiff. While it may be said that, in some limited respects, Frankl has brought some seasonal factors into account in the construction of his theoretical adjusted net cash flow statement, I regard that as of comparatively minor significance.

Counsel for the plaintiff has submitted that it is unsafe to have regard to the adjusted profit as calculated by Robertson in the manner contemplated in the principal reasons. It was submitted that the manner in which Robertson constructed his net profit figure is subject to serious question. Counsel illustrated this by reference to the allowance made by Robertson in respect of wages for the purpose of his calculation which, on an annual basis, was approximately $40,000 less than the level of wages for previous years as experienced mainly in the Heritage Inn. In this, I think counsel made a valid point, but it is one which needs to be looked at in the context of the failure by Robertson to make any allowance for the adjustment to takings required by the seasonal factors affecting the Heritage Terrace business. I think in an analysis like this, particularly where each of the experts involved have proceeded on bases which are found wanting, that the best the Court can do in those circumstances is to ascertain a value which, of necessity, should not be regarded as precise in quantification.

The approach by counsel for the defendants was to welcome the rejection of
Robertson's valuation, but to adopt an adjusted net profit of $167,230 taken from the "actual trading statement for 1991 - 1992": adjusted to exclude non- recurring items, those personal to the defendants in the operation of the business and further adjusted to remove the amount of the wages paid to the defendants. It was submitted that a return on investment rate lower than the rate of 37.8 per cent, accepted by Frankl and applied by me in the principal reasons, should be adopted in determining the value of a business with such a net profit.

In support of these submissions emphasis was placed upon findings in the principal reasons, in particular the finding that the likely gross takings of the Heritage Terrace business would have been well in excess of $14,000 per week. No explanation is offered why Robertson's adjusted net profit figure should be abandoned for the calculation of a profit figure from the 1991 - trading year. Moreover, if such an approach fails to address the fact that the 1991 - 1992 trading statement was distorted by the abnormal takings of the Heritage Terrace business in its first weeks of operation.

I have not been persuaded to depart from the approach taken in the principal reasons, which I regard as one that reflects most closely the view that I have formed of the effect of the false and misleading representations by the defendants.

Accordingly, I adopt the valuation of $340,000 as referred to in the principal reasons for the calculation of damages to which the plaintiff is entitled. It is accepted that if damages are so assessed then the plaintiff's entitlement to interest amounts to $46,453 as at 15 August 1996 which I have rounded out to $46,455. Accordingly, there is to be judgment in favour of the plaintiff in the sum of $156,455.

There then remains the question of costs. It has been submitted on behalf of the defendants that some apportionment of costs should be effected to reflect aspects of the issues upon which it is contended the defendants met with some success. I do not agree. While it is true that I have had occasion to reject certain aspects of the plaintiff's claim and the evidence of the plaintiff and of Abboud in particular matters, I think the plaintiff has been successful to an extent that does not warrant any apportionment of costs, or the awarding of costs on some proportionate basis.

There then remains to be considered the reserved costs of the vacating of the hearing date of these proceedings which had been fixed for 28 August 1995. The order vacating that date was made on 25 August 1995, the Friday preceding the date fixed for hearing. The circumstances giving rise to that order are set out in my reasons for judgment of 25 August 1995. Initially, I was of the view that, notwithstanding the distressing circumstances that forced the application upon the plaintiff to seek a vacation of the hearing date, the defendants should not be asked to bear the burden of the costs occasioned by the vacating of that date. This approach was influenced by the fact that, for some several days prior to the hearing of the application, the defendants' solicitor had been endeavouring to ascertain from the plaintiff whether she proposed to proceed with the hearing on the date fixed, notwithstanding the incapacity suffered by Abboud which had led to his hospitalisation. It was not until the day preceding the hearing of the application that the plaintiff departed from the stance that she intended to proceed with the hearing notwithstanding the injury to Abboud. However, two matters were brought to my attention which prompted the order that costs be reserved. Those two matters were: 
That the defendants proposed to utilise the adjournment, if it was granted, by the tendering of further statements of evidence which had not been obtained to comply with the previous directions of the court, 
The plaintiff's counsel informed me that the intention to proceed with the hearing on 28 August 1995 was on the basis of medical advice that Abboud would be capable of giving evidence on her behalf, notwithstanding his serious injury: that medical opinion changed on 24 August 1995 when the plaintiff was advised that the health of Abboud was such as to preclude him from giving evidence in the proceedings if they were to commence on 28 August 1995.

It is clear that the defendants did avail themselves of the benefit of the adjournment to obtain further evidence in these proceedings and the plaintiff has evidenced the matters outlined in paragraph (2) above in her affidavit sworn 25 August 1995. In the circumstances, the view I have formed is that the costs occasioned by the vacation of the hearing date of 28 August 1995 should be borne by the respective parties. Accordingly I give the following judgment and orders: 
Judgment for the plaintiff against the defendants in the sum of $156,455 
The cross-claim be dismissed, 
The defendants pay the plaintiff's costs of the amended summons other than the costs occasioned by the vacating of the hearing date fixed for 28 August ,

The cross-claimants pay the cross-defendant's costs of the cross-claim.

On the application of the defendants, I grant a stay for 28 days, conditionally upon the undertaking of counsel on behalf of the defendants that each of them will take no step to dispose of by sale or otherwise the whole or any part of any interest either may have in Zackery's restaurant or in the lease of the premises on which that business is conducted without 14 days notice in writing thereof served personally on the plaintiffs' solicitor of the intention to take such a step.

It is noted that in imposing that condition it is done without objection by the defendants and without acknowledging the validity of the basis upon which the plaintiff has moved this Court for an injunction restraining the defendants from dealing with their respective assets in a way which may deprive the plaintiff of the fruits of this judgment. That application is adjourned to 12 September 1996.
 * * * 
