

New South Wales Insurance Ministerial Corporation versus Edkins Matter No Ca /98 [1998] NSWSC 591 (13 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 December 1998 
NEW SOUTH WALES INSURANCE MINISTERIAL CORPORATION versus EDKINS 
CA 40130/98; DC 5175/97 October 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Priestley JA, Sheppard AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES - 
HIS HONOUR JUDGE GOLDRING 
FILE NO/S: CA 40130/98; DC 5175/97 
DELIVERED: 13 OCTOBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 7 JULY 1998 
PARTIES: NEW SOUTH WALES INSURANCE MINISTERIAL CORPORATION versus EDKINS 
JUDGMENT OF: SPIGELMAN CJ, PRIESTLEY JA, SHEPPARD AJA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: J D HISLOP QC / P BLACKET 
Respondent: A LAKEMAN 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: GRAHAM GOLDBERG PARTNERS, SYDNEY 
Respondent: G H HEALEY & CO, BLACKTOWN 
CATCHWORDS: 
POWER OF THE DISTRICT COURT TO MAKE COST ORDERS 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 12 
NEW SOUTH WALES INSURANCE MINISTERIAL CORPORATION v EDKINS 
POWER OF THE DISTRICT COURT TO MAKE COST ORDERS - Respondent involved in two separate motor vehicle accidents - neither defendant contested liability - trials heard concurrently, in effect to determine apportionment of Respondent's damages between two defendants, IMC and another - the other defendant successfully claimed indemnity costs against the Respondent - Respondent successfully applied for an order that IMC pay his costs including the indemnity costs payable to the other defendant.

On appeal the appellant submitted that: the trial judge did not have the power to make the orders that he did; the trial judge's exercise of discretion miscarried; once the verdicts and costs orders in the two cases were announced, the trial judge was functus officio and could not add to or vary his cost orders.

Held: pursuant to <case>(b) of the District Court Act, the trial judge had the power to order that costs payable by a party in, or in relation to,
District Court proceedings could be paid, wholly or partly, by someone other than the party, Knight versus FP Special Assets Limited; there was no clear error of principle or manifest injustice in the trial judge's exercise of discretion concerning costs warranting the grant of leave to appeal; the trial judge was not functus officio when announcing the verdicts and orders, for his duties were not completed until after the costs argument had been heard.

Knight versus FP Special Assets Limited [(1992) 174 CLR 178] [District Court Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) sections
A, 148B 
District Court Rules Pt 39A r25, 
ORDERS 
Summons for leave to appeal dismissed with costs.

NEW SOUTH WALES INSURANCE MINISTERIAL CORPORATION versus EDKINS 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: I agree with Priestley JA. 
PRIESTLEY JA: This was an application for leave to appeal in which the court heard full argument so that if the court decided to grant leave it could deal with the appeal without the need for a second hearing. 
The application for leave was made by New South Wales Insurance Ministerial
Corporation (IMC) which was the defendant in a District Court action brought by Mr B. Edkins as plaintiff claiming damages for injuries suffered in a motor vehicle accident in 1985.

Mr Edkins suffered further injuries in a later motor vehicle accident in 1991.
In respect of those injuries he brought a District Court action against Mr W.
Ryan.

The two actions were heard by his Honour Judge Goldring during six hearing days in January and February this year. Neither defendant contested liability.
The evidence in each action was treated as evidence in the other.

The trial judge had the parallel tasks of deciding the amount of damages that should be adjudged against each defendant. Despite the length of time between the two accidents, when the actions came to trial there was one total set of consequences to the plaintiff of the two accidents and from this set each defendant had to try to show what should be attributed to it or him, and complementarily, the other. Obviously, it was in the interest of each defendant to try to minimise the damage attributable to it or him and to maximise the damage attributable to the other.

The trial judge handed down his reserved judgments on 19 February 1998. He found a verdict of $110,820 against IMC and $116,913 against Mr Ryan. In each action he ordered the defendant to pay the costs.

Counsel for Mr Ryan then applied for a further costs order. The trial judge was told that some months earlier Mr Ryan had made an offer of compromise to the plaintiff for an amount of $177,653.95, which was not accepted.

In accordance with r 25 of the District Court Rules Pt 39A, the trial judge ordered that the plaintiff should have his costs on a party and party basis up to the date of the offer and Mr Ryan his costs on a party and party basis thereafter.

The plaintiff then applied for an order that IMC pay the plaintiff's costs including costs payable to Mr Ryan.

After argument, the trial judge ordered that "in the first action [ie against IMC] the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs including costs payable to the defendant in the second action [ie against Mr Ryan]".

The trial judge gave reasons, which seem to me to be quite appropriate, for making the orders that he did.

The first ground of IMC's application for leave was that the trial judge had no power to make the orders that he did. The second ground was that the trial judge's exercise of discretion miscarried. The third ground was that once the verdicts and costs orders in the two cases were announced, the trial judge was functus officio and he could not add to or vary his costs orders.

The first ground was based on the proposition that the District Court had no power to order IMC, which was not a party to the plaintiff's action against Mr
Ryan, to pay costs referable to the action against him.

The correctness or otherwise of this submission depends upon the construction of sections 148A and 148B of the [District Court Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/). The trial judge relied on <case> as empowering him to make the order that he did.
It was as follows: "148B(1) Subject to this Act and the rules and subject to any other Act -
 costs in or in relation to any proceedings shall be in the discretion of the Court; the Court has full power to determine by whom, to whom and to what extent costs are to be paid or in relation to any proceedings; and the Court may order costs to be assessed on the basis set out in Division of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p11) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) or on an indemnity basis.
 (repealed)" 
If the relevant provision consisted only of pars (a), (b) and (c) of <case>, I do not think there would be any basis for an argument that the trial judge did not have power to make the order which he did. This is because of what was said by the High Court in Knight versus FP Special Assets Limited [(1992) 174 CLR .] 
In that case the judges were Mason CJ and Deane Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ.
Mason CJ and Deane J delivered a joint opinion. After a historical survey they said: "Obviously, the prima facie general principle is that an order for costs is only made against a party to the litigation. As our discussion of the earlier authorities indicates, there are, however, a variety of circumstances in which considerations of justice may, in accordance with general principles relating to awards of costs, support an order for costs against a non-party. Thus, for example, there are several long-established categories of case in which equity recognized that it may be appropriate for such an order to be made.

For our part, we consider it appropriate to recognize a general category of case in which an order for costs should be made against a non-party and which would encompass the case of a receiver of a company who is not a party to the litigation. That category of case consists of circumstances where the party to the litigation is an insolvent person or man of straw, where the non-party has played an active part in the conduct of the litigation and where the non-party or some person on whose behalf he or she is acting or by whom he or she has been appointed, has an interest in the subject of the litigation. Where the circumstances of a case fall within that category, an order for costs should be made against the non-party if the interests of justice require that it be made." (at 192-193) 
Against that background Mason CJ and Deane J saw no reason why a statute or rule conferring a wide discretionary power upon the court to award costs should be read down by implying a limitation on it to the effect that costs could only be ordered to paid by parties to the proceedings (see at 191).

Dawson J took the same approach. He pointed out that the words in the rule relied on in that case did not confine the discretion to award costs to the parties to the proceedings (at 203). A little earlier he had said: "True it is that in general costs are not awarded against non-parties, but that is because it is generally inappropriate to do so." (at 203) 
Then again, a little later, he said: "The circumstances in which it would be appropriate to award costs to a non- party would necessarily be confined, but that is a question of discretion, not jurisdiction." (at 203) 
Gaudron J agreed with Mason CJ and Deane J, adding that a grant of power should be construed in accordance with ordinary principles but that when the power was one conferred on a court which must be exercised judicially and in accordance with legal principle, the need for the power to be exercised judicially tended in favour of the most liberal construction (at 205).

McHugh J dissented.

The words of the rule which the High Court was considering in Knight are not in fully the same terms as pars (a) and (b) of <case> although there are substantial similarities. However, I think the reasoning of the majority in
Knight clearly supports reading pars (a) and (b) in the same way as the rule in question in Knight was read.

IMC's argument was based on the qualifying effect it was contended <case> had on <case>. It was correctly pointed out that the opening words of <case> made the operation of <case> subject to the other provisions of the [District
Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) as well as to the rules and any other Act. Section 148A was as follows: "148A In this Division (except <case>), a reference to costs is a reference to the costs payable by a party in or in relation to proceedings including disbursements." 
It was submitted that the definition of costs showed a statutory intention that no-one other than a party to proceedings could be ordered to pay costs of those proceedings. I am not sure that that is so, but even if it were, it would not mean that <case> in any way limited the power of the trial judge to do, pursuant to <case>, what he did in the present case. This can be illustrated by writing into par (b) of <case> the definition of costs from s 148A. The paragraph then reads: "The Court has full power to determine by whom, to whom and to what extent (the costs payable by a party in or in relation to proceedings) are to be paid ..." 
The power thus given seems to me clearly to include the power to order that the costs payable by a party in or in relation to District Court proceedings be paid, wholly or partly, by someone other than the party.

It is the appearance of both "payable" and "are to be paid" in the version of the paragraph extended as above by the insertion of the definition which leads me to the opinion expressed in the preceding paragraph. Although this is a very literal reading of the provisions, it seems to me to be a proper one in the circumstances. It recognises the existence of a power in the District
Court, which is in line both with the general views expressed by the majority in the High Court in Knight about such powers and also with the way in which provisions such as <case> should be read.

My opinion is that what the trial judge did was in accordance with the power given by par (b) as amplified by the definition of "costs" from <case>.

A further submission for IMC was that the adoption of the construction which seems to me to be the appropriate one would have the result that the District
Court's powers in regard to costs would be greater than those of the Supreme
Court. This led to submissions about the power of the Supreme Court to make costs orders which I do not think it is necessary to go into here. I have not formed any opinion about IMC's submission about the position in the Supreme
Court. Whether it be right or not, it is based on differences in words between the provisions conferring power on the two courts. Since the words of <case> seem to me to be clear words granting a general power and since the High Court in Knight supports the general proposition that such words should not be read down, it does not seem to me to be appropriate to seek to read them down by reference to somewhat different provisions dealing with the same powers of a different court.

I am therefore of opinion that his Honour Judge Goldring had statutory authority for making the orders which he did.

There does not seem to me to be anything in the argument that the trial judge's discretion miscarried to warrant this court departing from its customary approach that it should not grant leave to appeal from costs orders unless there is some clear error of principle or manifest injustice.

Also in my opinion there is no merit in the argument concerning the judge being functus officio at the point where he announced his verdicts and costs orders in the two actions. Although he did not know it at that moment, he had not then completed his duties in the cases, there was a costs argument still to be heard. He heard it immediately and acted quite properly and with proper authority in doing so.

Having reached the opinion that I have about the power of the District Court to make the costs orders which it did in the two actions, I do not think the case is suitable for the granting of leave to appeal.

In my opinion the summons for leave to appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SHEPPARD AJA: In this matter I have had the advantage of reading the judgment to be delivered by Priestley JA. I am in agreement with his Honour's reasons and conclusions, and with the orders which he proposes. * * * 
