

Regina versus John Tony Thomas Henjak [1996] NSWSC 567 (25 November 1996) 
REGINA versus John Tony James HENJAK /96 
Monday 25 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, JAMES J, IRELAND J 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PRACTICE - FRESH EVIDENCE 
The appellant was convicted of supplying a prohibited drug, methylamphetamine.
He appealed on the basis of fresh evidence, the evidence in question being that of two co-accused. One co-accused had pleaded guilty, and his evidence would have been available at the trial. The other co-accused had pleaded not guilty - HELD - The evidence of the first co-accused was not fresh evidence.
The evidence of the second co-accused was fresh evidence, but the evidence of neither accused had sufficient credibility to warrant a new trial.

O R D E R 
Appeal dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Following a trial before his Honour Judge Ducker and a jury in the District Court at Wollongong in June 1996 the appellant was convicted of the offence of supplying a prohibited drug, methylamphetamine, in an amount not less than the large commercial quantity. The appellant, who had been in custody since the date of the alleged offence, 27 February 1995, was sentenced to imprisonment for a minimum term of two years and nine months from 27
February 1995 and an additional term of eleven months.

The appellant appeals against his conviction.

There are two grounds of appeal. The first ground is that the conviction was unsafe or unsatisfactory. For reasons that will appear, there is no substance in that ground of appeal, and it was relatively briefly mentioned in argument.
The second ground of appeal, which was the substantial ground relied upon in argument, is that the conviction should be quashed, and a new trial ordered, on the basis of fresh evidence.

During the afternoon of Monday 27 February 1995, following a drug supply which took place under police surveillance, and which involved undercover police operatives, three persons were arrested at a service station complex on the
Hume Highway at Sutton Forest.

At Sutton Forest, as at other locations on the Hume Highway, there are, on either side of the road, and connected by an overpass, service station and other facilities at which motorists can obtain petrol, food and drink, and other goods and services. These facilities were, on occasion, referred to in the evidence as roadhouses.

At the Sutton Forest facility, on the western side of the Hume Highway, there is a McDonalds restaurant. In the ordinary course, one would expect that the facility on the eastern side of the highway would be used by a motorist travelling south, and the facility on the western side of the highway would be used by a motorist travelling north. However, as was mentioned, there is an overpass connecting the two facilities, and motorists can drive across the overpass to move from one facility to the other. It should also be mentioned that, at this location, the Hume Highway is a multi-lane highway with a substantial nature strip dividing the traffic flowing south from the traffic flowing north.

The three persons mentioned above were arrested at or near the McDonalds restaurant on the western side of the Hume Highway at Sutton Forest. They were
Dennis Kremisis, his de facto spouse Eileen Janette Kypridis, and the appellant.

It was common ground at the trial that, on the afternoon in question, Kremisis and Kypridis were travelling together in a gold coloured Gemini vehicle, and the appellant was travelling in a maroon coloured Commodore vehicle with the registration number YPY-609.

An undercover police operative, using the name of Salim Hassan, had previously arranged to acquire from Kremisis a quantity of methylamphetamine. It was not the Crown case that Kremisis was the original supplier of the drugs. His role was that of a courier. The arrest of the three persons took place immediately following a delivery of drugs made by Kremisis to Hassan at the Sutton Forest facility, near the McDonalds restaurant, on the western side of the Hume
Highway. Kremisis handed a quantity of drugs over to Hassan in return for the purchase price, and, as soon as that happened, the police swooped. They arrested Kremisis and Kypridis, and at the same time they arrested the appellant.

The Crown case was that the appellant had delivered the drugs to Kremisis shortly before Kremisis passed them over to Hassan. Once again, it was not the
Crown case that the appellant was the original supplier of the drugs. His role was allegedly also that of a courier.

All of the three persons who were arrested were presented for trial together.
However, following a voir dire hearing before the trial proper commenced, in which there was an unsuccessful challenge to the admissibility of an electronically recorded interview between the police and Kremisis, Kremisis pleaded guilty. He received a substantial prison sentence, which he is still serving.

Kypridis maintained a plea of not guilty. She stood mute at her trial. Her counsel successfully argued that there was no evidence that she was aware of the quantity of the drugs supplied, and she was convicted of a lesser offence.
Ducker DCJ dealt with her in a sympathetic fashion on sentencing. Unlike
Kremisis and the appellant, she had no prior criminal record. The judge sentenced her on the basis that she had been lured by her association with
Kremisis into the drug culture, and that she was heavily under his influence.
She was dealt with by way of a deferred sentence recognizance.

In order to set the context for an understanding of the appellant's case at the trial, and the evidence relied upon as fresh evidence, it is convenient to repeat the summary of the Crown case given by Ducker DCJ in his remarks on sentence.

Over the period leading up to 27 February 1995 the undercover operative Hassan made contact with Kremisis and arranged to purchase methylamphetamine from him, with delivery to be made on 27 February 1995. Many of the conversations between Hassan and Kremisis were secretly recorded.

It was arranged between Hassan and Kremisis that on 27 February 1995 they would meet at the garage/restaurant complex on the western side of the Hume
Highway at Sutton Forest.

Pursuant to that arrangement two undercover operatives went to the agreed location on the afternoon of 27 February 1995 where they met Kremisis, who was in the company of Kypridis. Kremisis had a conversation with Hassan and satisfied himself that the purchase money was available.

Following that meeting, Kremisis and Kypridis left in the Gemini vehicle, and crossed over the overpass to the complex on the eastern side of the Highway.
It had been arranged that they were there to meet the person who was to bring the drugs to Kremisis so that Kremisis might, in turn, supply the drugs to the undercover operative.

After a time, during which Kremisis and Kypridis were under police surveillance, the appellant, according to the police evidence, arrived at the complex at the eastern side of the Hume Highway driving a maroon Commodore vehicle registration number YPY-609. He was approached by Kremisis. They spoke together for about ten minutes. Then the maroon Commodore, driven by the appellant, and the Gemini vehicle in which Kremisis and Kypridis were travelling, left the complex and travelled south down the eastern side of the
Hume Highway. They came to a rest stop about one kilometre away from the service station. The police said that they observed the appellant park his
Commodore at the rest stop and then enter the rear seat of the Gemini. The
Gemini travelled down a forestry side road for a short distance. The appellant alighted, went into the bushes, and came back carrying a Target plastic shopping bag. That bag contained the drugs in question. It was placed in the
Gemini. The Gemini then returned to the rest area. The appellant alighted from the Gemini and entered the Commodore. The two vehicles then drove in a northerly direction back to the Sutton Forest complex, into the complex on the western side of the Hume Highway. Once there, the Commodore parked directly in front of the McDonalds restaurant, and the Gemini parked near a vehicle in which two of the undercover operatives were travelling.

Soon afterwards Kremisis approached Hassan. He showed Hassan the drugs. The drugs were placed in the police operative's vehicle. At that stage a number of police emerged and arrested all the parties involved, including Kremisis,
Kypridis and the appellant. (The police also went through the charade of arresting the undercover operatives.) 
The appellant was interviewed by police. The interview was electronically recorded. The appellant did not deny that he was the driver of the maroon
Commodore vehicle registration number YPY-609. He maintained, however, and continues to maintain, that he had nothing to do with any drug transaction.

The police operation on the afternoon in question was a joint operation involving police from the Australian Capital Territory and New South Wales. A number of police witnesses gave evidence of what they saw in the course of their surveillance. Those witnesses included a police officer who was in a helicopter. These witnesses all gave evidence of their observations of the appellant, and the maroon Commodore vehicle, from the time the vehicle arrived at the complex on the eastern side of the Hume Highway until the time the appellant was arrested at the complex on the western side of the Hume Highway.
One police officer, Detective Swift, whose evidence was corroborated by other police officers, said that she saw the registration plate on the Commodore vehicle when it arrived first at the eastern complex, that she observed that the registration number was YPY-609, and that she broadcast that registration number to other police at the time.

As senior counsel for the appellant acknowledged, the case for the appellant is, and always has been, that he was the victim, first, of a serious mistake by the police officers involved in this operation and, second, of perjured evidence given by them, presumably in an attempt to cover up their mistake.

It may be observed that, if the police arrested the wrong person as the courier who brought the drugs to Kremisis, the corollary is that they let the real courier get away. That, in the circumstances, would have been a very serious blunder. There is no doubt, and it is not in question in this appeal, that whoever the person was who brought the drugs to Kremisis, that person was travelling in a Commodore vehicle variously described as maroon or red. There is no question, and it is not now disputed either by Kremisis or the appellant, that the driver of the Commodore vehicle, whoever he was, made contact with Kremisis on the eastern side of the Sutton Forest complex, as the police alleged, and that thereafter, at least up until the time Kremisis returned to the complex on the western side of the Hume Highway, the movements of the vehicles and their occupants were substantially as described by the police. The appellant challenges the police evidence about their observations of the registration number of the Commodore vehicle, and argues that such evidence is false. The appellant's case is that, somehow, the police involved in the operation bungled it to the extent of letting the real courier in the
Commodore vehicle get away, (at what point he might have got away is not clear), arrested the appellant, probably genuinely believing that the appellant was the courier, and then, once they found out their mistake, sought to cover it up by manufacturing evidence against the appellant and, in particular, manufacturing evidence about the observations made of the registration number of the Commodore vehicle.

In his electronically recorded interview soon after his arrest, the appellant was called upon to explain his presence at the McDonalds complex where he was arrested. At this point he encountered some difficulty. The appellant is a resident of Sydney, and he told the police that he was on a journey from
Sydney to Canberra. That, of course, would have had him travelling in a southerly direction along the Hume Highway. He was asked what he was doing at the complex on the western side of the highway, which would ordinarily be used by people travelling in a northerly direction. The appellant's answer was as follows. He said that he stopped at the complex on the eastern side of the highway at Sutton Forest to fill up with petrol. As he was leaving the complex with a view to proceeding south to Canberra, he decided he would like a drink of Coke. There was, of course, plenty of soft drink, including Coke, available at the facilities on the eastern side of the Hume Highway. However, according to the appellant, he had a preference for the less gassy type of Coke sold at
McDonalds, and he decided he would drive to McDonalds restaurant on the western side of the highway. He did not, however, take the obvious course of travelling across the overpass. Rather, having travelled south for a little distance, he made a 'U' turn, across the Hume Highway, and travelled back up the western side of the highway to McDonalds. He went into McDonalds, bought himself a Coke, and was arrested just as he was leaving the premises.

It might be mentioned at this point that all of the police officers who were called as witnesses, and were involved in the surveillance operation, denied that they saw any motor vehicle make a manoeuvre of the kind described by the appellant. Such a manoeuvre would be likely to attract police attention. This, however, is said to be another aspect of the police fabrication of evidence.

The appellant gave evidence, and was obviously disbelieved by the jury. He adhered to the account which he had given, in his record of interview, as to how he came to be present at the McDonalds restaurant.

Kremisis, who had pleaded guilty at the commencement of the trial, was not called as a witness either by the Crown or by the appellant. Kypridis said nothing.

The appellant's evidence was subject to strong challenge by the Crown. His principal problem was the implausibility of the explanation he gave to the police, after his arrest, for his presence at the complex on the western side of the Hume Highway when, according to him, he was on a journey south.

There were some discrepancies and inconsistencies in the evidence of the police officers involved in the surveillance operation, but in my estimation these were not substantial. The principal criticism made of the Crown case was that the police were unable to produce contemporaneous notes of the surveillance operation.

If the jury accepted the evidence of Detective Swift, and the other police officers who gave evidence about their observations of the movements of the maroon Commodore from the time it arrived at the eastern complex until the time it returned to the western complex, and, in particular, if the jury accepted the evidence of police observations of the registration number of that vehicle, then that was the end of the matter. There was no question that the appellant was the driver of a maroon Commodore with the registration number YPY-609. If the police officers were telling the truth when they said that they saw that registration number on the Commodore which first made contact with Kremisis at the eastern complex, then obviously the appellant was guilty. That is why the first ground of appeal must fail. The jury, acting reasonably, were well entitled to accept that evidence, notwithstanding the inability of the police to support it by contemporaneous notes and records.
The Crown case against the appellant at trial was strong, and the defence case was implausible. On the evidence presented at the trial, it is not at all surprising that the appellant was convicted.

The possibility that this was a case involving the fabrication, by a substantial number of police officers, of evidence as to what they observed in the course of their surveillance was central to the defence case before the jury, as it was to this appeal. In particular, the absence of contemporaneous records of the police observation of the registration number of the Commodore whose driver first made contact with Kremisis, and of surveillance logs, was heavily relied upon. This court has not seen the police witnesses, but the assessment of their credibility by the jury was of central importance at the trial. We have to make our own assessment of the evidence, allowing for the fact that we have not seen the witnesses, and bearing in mind the purpose for which we are making the assessment. As I have said, giving full weight to the considerations advanced on behalf of the appellant, the Crown case was strong, and the defence case was implausible.

The evidence upon which the appellant now relies as fresh evidence comes from
Kremisis and Kypridis. They have both sworn affidavits in which they say that the appellant was not the man whom they met on 27 February 1995, and who supplied them with the drugs in the plastic Target bag. They say that the appellant was a total stranger to them before he was arrested on 27 February
They do not profess to know, or they profess not to know, the man in the Commodore who supplied the drugs on 27 February 1995. Kremisis acknowledges that he knows the identity of the person from whom the drugs originated, but he says that the person is violent and dangerous, and he is unwilling to name him.

The principles to be applied in a consideration of evidence said to be fresh or new are not in dispute, and are established in cases such as Gallagher v
The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259. (See] also R versus Drummond & Domican [(1990) 46 ACrimR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281990%29%2046%20ACrimR%20408 "View LawCiteRecord" ) and R versus Hemsley CCA unreported 8 December 1995). As Barwick CJ observed in
Ratten versus The Queen ((1974) <case>; [131 CLR 510] at ) even if new material relied upon by an appellant does not satisfy the test of fresh evidence an appellate court will quash a conviction if it forms the view that there has been a miscarriage of justice.

The evidence of Kremisis is not fresh.

In May 1995, when the appellant was unsuccessfully seeking bail, Kremisis, in support of the appellant's bail application, swore a statutory declaration in which he denied that the appellant was the person who had supplied him with drugs on 27 February 1995. The same solicitors were acting for the appellant then as are acting for him now, and they were aware that Kremisis was then willing to give this evidence.

Kremisis would have been compellable as a witness at the trial of the appellant. By the time the Crown opened its case against the appellant,
Kremisis had pleaded guilty. Neither the Crown nor the appellant chose to call him to give evidence. He may have declined to answer some questions, as he did in his evidence before this court. However, he was neither actually nor constructively unavailable.

Further, the evidence which has been given in this court by Kremisis was unconvincing. He is a man with a criminal record, including a conviction for the offence that occurred on 27 February 1995. He now professes to be anxious to assist to remedy an injustice, but he stood by when the appellant was on trial without coming forward to support the appellant. At that time he had already pleaded guilty to the charge against him. He was an unimpressive witness.

Kypridis appears to be an intelligent and articulate woman. However, it is her honesty, not her intelligence, which is in question. She now says that she had never met the appellant before he was arrested on the occasion in question, and she also says that, prior to her electronically recorded interview, she told the police that they had arrested the wrong man. Her evidence, however, suffers from a major problem. Prior to her trial, she was involved in an application for a sentence indication. In the course of preparing for that application she indicated to the prosecuting authorities a willingness to give evidence for the Crown in the proceedings against the appellant, and she signed an undertaking to give such evidence. She now makes the disingenuous claim that, whilst she was willing to give evidence in the proceedings against the appellant, she had in mind that the evidence that she would have given would have been evidence which exculpated the appellant. It is obvious, and I do not understand her to dispute, that she gave the undertaking in question in the belief that it would be to her advantage in the sense that she would receive a lesser sentence (or sentence indication) by reason of her willingness to co-operate with the authorities. There is little doubt that she meant the authorities to understand that the evidence she could give in the proceedings against the appellant would be evidence that would assist the
Crown case.

The evidence of Kypridis is, technically, fresh evidence. She was not a compellable witness at the trial of the appellant. She was a co-defendant, and
I would accept that it was unrealistic to expect that the lawyers representing the appellant would have sought to call her as a witness. Furthermore, the evidence does not show that she had told the lawyers, prior to the trial, that she could give evidence in support of the appellant. Indeed, if the lawyers were aware of what she had done in relation to the sentence indication they would have every reason to believe that her evidence would be adverse to the appellant. However, whilst it may be accepted that the evidence of Kypridis is fresh evidence, it is lacking in cogency. She also was asked why she was content to stand by at the trial and allow an innocent person to be convicted, and her explanation was not convincing. Her explanation of her conduct in relation to the sentence indication hearing appeared to be simply dishonest.

Further, the evidence of Kremisis and Kypridis must be considered in the context of all the evidence in the case, including the strength of the Crown case against the appellant, and the weakness of the defence case (Gallagher v
The Queen, above, at 402-403).

I do not consider that there is a significant possibility that the jury, acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant had the fresh evidence been before it at the trial; nor do I consider that the case is one in which, taking into account all the evidence now relied upon by the appellant, it has been shown that there was a miscarriage of justice.

The appeal should be dismissed.
 
JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice.
 
IRELAND J: I have read in draft form the judgment of the Chief Justice with which I agree.
 * * * 
