

Glenda Jones versus Anne Johnston [1997] NSWSC 163 (28 April 1997) 
Glenda JONES versus Anne JOHNSTON /94 
Monday 28 April 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: The plaintiff claims damages for personal injury sustained by her during the afternoon of 24 September 1992 when the car she was driving was hit from the rear by the defendant's car. Liability is admitted and the matter is for assessment of damages only, which is governed by the provisions of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).

The plaintiff was born on 26 June 1959. She was thirty-three years of age when injured, thirty-seven at date of hearing. She is married, the mother of four children, at the date of accident aged eleven, ten, six and five, and was in the process of establishing herself as a piano teacher, most of which work she did in her own home. She had plans to increase the number of her students to give her a full forty or forty-five hour working week when her youngest child began grade 1 at school, an event which occurred at the beginning of 1993.

It will be necessary to say more about her pre-injury life and work in due course.

The impact of the collision was sufficient to force the plaintiff's vehicle, which was stationary as she waited to make a right hand turn, forward about twenty or thirty feet. Her head struck the steering wheel, and then the back of the head rest, and she immediately experienced severe sharp pain in the middle of the back of the neck. After the formalities of reporting the collision to the police, the plaintiff was able to drive home, a very short distance. She felt groggy which she then attributed to shock, and went to bed early. She was able to sleep until about 5 am when she woke with what she described as incredible pain in the neck and arms. That day she consulted her general practitioner, Dr de Sailly, who prescribed pain killers, physiotherapy, and sent her for x-ray. The x-ray showed some narrowing of the disc space at C5-6 with associated degenerative changes. After a month, when the symptoms, were, if anything, worse, Dr de Sailly arranged for a CAT scan and MRI examination. He reported the CAT scan as showing some evidence of an old injury at C4 - 5, and the disc protrusion at C5 -6. His opinion was that the protrusion was a new and serious injury caused by the collision. He referred the plaintiff to Dr Newcombe, a neurosurgeon, who operated on the
C5-6 disc on 17 December 1992 with some, but not complete, relief. On 17 March he performed surgery of the same kind on the disc at C4-5. Following this second surgery Dr Newcombe reported improvement, with some residual mild neck pain radiating towards the left shoulder, the elimination of arm pains and some restriction of neck movement. He recommended the use of a back support for teaching piano and the purchase of a separate water bed or separate tank from that used by her husband in order to minimise sleep disruption. He considered she would be able to undertake part time piano teaching for twenty- five hours per week, but that full-time teaching (i.e. forty hours per week) would be likely to prove too much for her. He thought at that time (27 June ) her general condition was stable and unlikely to change significantly.

Dr Newcombe reported again, for medico legal purposes, on 26 February 1996.
His examination then disclosed persistent restriction of neck movement with lateral flexion restricted to twenty degrees on either side and extension to about fifty degrees, forward flexion to about ten degrees without causing undue pain. He noted that she was coping with difficulty with her piano teaching work which she was doing for about twenty-one hours per week and that activities such as ironing, washing and changing beds all provoked pain. He reported that the plaintiff said that her pain was less than it had been before the surgery but that residual pain was constant and aggravated by the domestic tasks he had already mentioned, and by driving a car without power steering. He again noted that her general situation was stable and required no on-going care other than her regular visits to her general practitioner which occurred approximately every six weeks. He considered there was a level of permanent impairment of neck function which he quantified at thirty percent.
In cross-examination, Dr Newcombe agreed that he was largely dependent upon the accuracy, reliability and integrity of the plaintiff in assessing the degree of disability.

The plaintiff gave detailed oral evidence about her present condition. She said that she still has difficulty lifting, even something like a five litre orange juice carton, or a large container of washing powder, that she is unable to iron or do any more than a very small amount of sewing and that while she still enjoys teaching the piano, she finds it more difficult than she previously did. She has been unable to return to aerobics, a form of exercise in which she previously engaged. She said alighting from the car causes pain, and she is unable to ride horses, one of her pre-injury activities. Family activities, such as bush walking and swimming are beyond her capacity. She takes medication regularly, notably anti-inflammatories. She said she has constant pain in the neck which is easily aggravated and when aggravated extends into her arms. There is a constant dull pain in the heel of her hands that does not cause any real disability.

In cross-examination she was asked to stand in the witness box and to demonstrate the range of movement in her neck. She gave a demonstration that indicated movement extremely limited to either side, and almost equally limited forwards and backwards. When asked to do so she moved extremely slowly and deliberately. She said that her movement was not always as limited as it was on that day, after she had been giving evidence for some time, and she said that on that day she was "pretty sore" and would normally be able to make a quick flicking movement, although she later qualified this by saying that her movement was "not quick by any means." She said she can and does force her neck into more vigorous movement when necessary, for example when attention to her children is demanded, or when reversing her motor vehicle. When this occurs, she said, she suffers the consequences. She said that the level of pain which she suffers has been fairly constant since the second operation in , and, after an initial settling period, her degree of movement had reached its present level.

It is the plaintiff's present level of disability which is critical to the determination of the issues. In the assessment of that level of disability her credibility is an extremely significantly factor. It was put very much in issue.

The defendant produced four segments of video film depicting the plaintiff engaged in various activities, on 7 March 1996, on 9 August 1996 and 10 August , and January 1997. This film is important in illustrating a degree of flexibility in her neck which the plaintiff had denied possessing. The first section of film (Exhibit 1) showed the plaintiff at close range in an animated conversation in and around the garage of her home. After the film had been shown to her she agreed that it showed her moving her head around freely, twisting her head to the right and then to the left and doing both at a much greater speed than demonstrated by her in the witness box. She attempted two explanations of what was depicted in the film. Firstly, she suggested that the film had been exposed early in the morning when her condition is customarily less severe. Secondly, she suggested that, no matter what appeared on the film, she was suffering pain that was not apparent on the film. I do not accept this. The film shows the plaintiff in a relaxed conversation, it represents her at very close quarters, and neither her face nor her carriage suggest the least degree of restriction, incapacity, or discomfort.

The second segment of film (Exhibit 2)is very short, and was exposed on 9
August 1996, apparently at a medical centre which the plaintiff attended for an appointment, presumably with one of the defendant's medico-legal specialists. It is short, it is indistinct, and is of little assistance. Such is not the case with the third segment of film (part of Exhibit 2), exposed on August 1996 which shows the plaintiff sitting in her motor vehicle, looking to the right and twisting her head along the right shoulder line. Again, on my assessment of what is depicted in the film, she was able to move freely, and there is no evidence of any restriction or discomfort. When cross-examined about this segment of film, the plaintiff accepted that she was able to move more quickly than she had demonstrated in the witness box, but maintained that, in order to look sideways, she would have twisted at the waist and not at the neck. She denied looking over her shoulder to the rear of the car. I do not accept this denial. Indeed, in my view, the film shows the plaintiff twisting towards the back of the car for the purpose of stowing some object behind the front passenger seat. She maintained that she was on that day, as always, in pain, and that the pain she was experiencing on the day that film was exposed was representative of her usual pain level.

The fourth segment of film (Exhibit 3), exposed over a three day period from to 24 January 1997, depicts the plaintiff leaving her house, carrying clothing to a motor vehicle, hanging the clothing, apparently, on a hook near the ceiling of the rear of the motor vehicle, reversing the car and driving off. She agreed that when reversing the car she was looking rapidly from side to side, but said this was because there were children in the vicinity and it would have been dangerous not to have done so. When asked if she were moving freely on that occasion, she replied that she would not have been moving without pain.

A subsequent section of the same film contained a lengthy exposure of the plaintiff in the garden of her home. She rolled out two hoses and moved actively around the garden. She agreed that a neighbour had passed and been greeted by her, for the purpose of which she turned her head rapidly to the left. On a number of occasions she volunteered that notwithstanding what appeared in the film, none of her activity was pain free.

I have already expressed the view that much of the film demonstrates a level of flexibility of movement much greater than described by the plaintiff in her evidence, both in chief and in cross-examination. My view is co-ordinate with that of a number of medical practitioners. Dr Roderick McEwan examined the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant on 9 August 1996. He took a detailed history and reported on a comprehensive examination. The history included the two operations and her reported continuing pain. He recorded her complaints of inability to perform most physical activities without increased pain, particularly lifting, carrying grocery parcels or the laundry, an inability to perform most household duties, including many of those associated with meal preparation, inability to work in the garden, inability to drive her husband's manual car, and aggravation of neck pain when driving her own vehicle.

At the time of his examination Dr McEwan formed the view that the plaintiff exaggerated her level of disability. He noted inconsistencies in examination and considered her ability to do light housework to be much more extensive than reported by her.

On 4 November 1996 Dr McEwan reported again, having watched the video film. Dr
McEwan considered that on film the plaintiff displayed much greater neck movement than he had observed during his examination, and he detailed instances of sections of the film which showed full rotation of the neck to the left and to the right, and a general freedom of movement unexpected in a person having the symptoms described by her to him during examination.

Dr Ronald Thomson examined the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant on 21
August 1995 and 28 May 1996, and reported on each of those days. The description of her condition recorded by Dr Thomson was generally in accord with that recorded by Dr McEwan. Dr Thomson too, noted "some seeming inconsistencies", and a variation between the plaintiff's presentation whilst she was informally observed and that during formal physical examination. He therefore expressed the view that she was less disabled than she claimed, and that the surgery may be been more effective than she was prepared to admit. In his second report, Dr Thomson expressed the view that the plaintiff's complaints of pain "would be basically insupportable on rational anatomical/pathological grounds." He again noted serious inconsistencies.

In three subsequent reports Dr Thomson reported on the conclusions he drew following examination of the video film. In each report, he gave a detailed description of what he had observed in the film. His observations coincide generally with my own. Each report concluded with his view that the range of activities so observed and the manner in which they were executed are incompatible with the plaintiff's presentation to him on examination.

There is little comfort for the plaintiff in the views expressed by her own experts when they too were asked to view, and comment upon, some of the film.
Dr de Sailly, the plaintiff's general practitioner, agreed that the plaintiff appeared to have quite a lot of freedom of movement, no apparent restrictions on flexibility and to be in no apparent pain. He agreed that the film did not reveal the stiffness and painful neck movements that he had described in a report of 13 February 1995, but these observations are of limited assistance because they concern a comparison with a description of the plaintiff's condition prior to the second surgery.

Dr Newcombe was shown exhibits 1 and 3, and he, too, agreed that there was no apparent pain, and a considerable degree of facility in neck movement.
Importantly, he agreed that the plaintiff pivoted from the neck and did not appear to find it necessary to move her body from the waist, as she had claimed. When asked whether what he had observed in the film was consistent with what he had observed in his examinations he paused briefly before answering, and when he did so it was carefully and deliberately. He said: "It is a greater range of movement than I would have expected." (t 109) 
Ms Donna Maree Trevenar is a consultant occupational therapist who had, at the request of her own solicitors, assessed the plaintiff's need for assistance and reported on 18 May 1995, 16 February 1996, and 4 July 1996. For the purpose of the assessment she had attended the plaintiff's home and had had access to a number of other reports. Ms Trevenar also took a history and description of the plaintiff's complaints. The recommendations contained in her reports were based upon her observations and the information she had been given by the plaintiff. In addition to what she had been told by the plaintiff, Ms Trevenar observed the manner in which the plaintiff moved around. She assessed the plaintiff's needs both in the house and in the garden. She described her carriage as follows: "Her upper body was stiff in carriage. She certainly didn't turn to the side freely. She walked freely, but, yes, her carriage was stiff." (t 91) 
She said that rather than turn freely to the side the plaintiff tended to pivot her whole upper torso. She turned her head to the side only minimally, just a few degrees or a couple of inches. These observations made by Ms
Trevenar were consistent throughout the three separate assessments that she made. On the basis of these observations Ms Trevenar thought that the plaintiff would have limitations in bending, pivoting from the waist and twisting her head, and that these movements would cause pain. Ms Trevenar was shown exhibit 1. She agreed that there were occasions depicted on the film when the plaintiff was moving her neck in a manner she had not previously seen, and that the plaintiff's movement as observed in the film was inconsistent with what she had seen during her visits. She was shown exhibit 3 and agreed that the plaintiff displayed a facility of movement far in excess of that which she had been able to observe in her three consultations.

Ms Trevenar did say that she was unsurprised by the capacity displayed in the film because it was not sustained, and thought that the plaintiff would have more difficulty during sustained movement. I am unable to agree with Ms
Trevenar's observation that the movement displayed in exhibit 3 was not sustained. The film shows the plaintiff engaged in a variety of tasks over quite a protracted period of time.

The effect of all this evidence is that I conclude that the plaintiff exaggerated her condition. The finding is quite serious concerning as it does not merely an attempt to exaggerate her claim while in the witness box, but a sustained and on-going determination to deceive the doctors, including her own treating neurosurgeon. It is a finding which has serious consequences for her credibility. Moreover, this exaggeration is not the only matter in which the plaintiff's credibility must be called into question. An issue, which except for the credibility aspects, is of only moderate importance, arose at an early stage of the evidence. The plaintiff was asked about previous accidents and injuries and she said that she had fallen off a horse at the age of sixteen, in 1975 when she was still at school. She said that she hit her shoulder, she felt a bit sick in the stomach, was taken to the hospital where her skull was x-rayed and she was discharged the following day. In cross-examination she denied that she had suffered any neck pain as a consequence of this fall. She denied that she had told Dr de Sailly that she had done so. The medical reports tell a different story. In Dr de Sailly's first report, dated 20
January 1993, he noted that the plaintiff had told him "that she had previously hurt her neck (age sixteen) when she had fallen off a horse but this injury was different".

Dr Newcombe, in his first report dated 22 January 1993, also wrote: "At the age of sixteen she had fallen from a horse and had an episode of neck pain which settled." 
Dr Corry, on 23 February 1994, reported: "Ms Jones confirmed that she had injured her neck previous to this motor vehicle accident. The first injury was at the age of sixteen when she had fallen off a horse landing on her neck and head." 
Dr McEwan reported to the defendant's solicitors on 9 August 1996 under the heading "Past History": "Fell from a horse aged sixteen and was treated at the casualty department of the Queanbeyan District Hospital. She was not unconscious. Her skull was x-rayed and she was told the result was normal. She recovered normally from this." 
Dr Thomson reported to the defendant's solicitors on 21 August 1995: "She claimed a neck injury thereout [following the motor vehicle collision the subject of the present proceedings] and when asked for any relevant prior history, said she sustained a neck injury at the age of sixteen when she fell from a horse, and for which she was admitted to Queanbeyan Hospital over night.
 ...

She was then aged thirty-three years [at the date of accident] and such a degree of pre-existing C 5/6 disc degenerative disease as then existed would have to be caused by significant enough trauma and the most likely cause thereof would appear to be the fall from the horse at the age of sixteen years...." 
The true significance of any pre-existing neck injury is a matter for later consideration. At present, the concern is with the reliability of the plaintiff as a truthful and accurate historian. Dr McEwan's note of the fall from the horse is significant because it omits any reference to a neck injury, but it is alone among those reports for which the examiner investigated prior history in doing so. It is to be noted that Dr Thomson, in the report just mentioned, attributed 50 percent of her then present condition to the fall from the horse, and the balance to the motor vehicle collision with which these proceedings are concerned.

Given the dates of the various reports - Dr McEwan in August 1996, and Dr
Thomson in August 1995 - it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the plaintiff gave a different, and apparently more favourable, history of the fall from the horse to Dr McEwan than she had to the other medical practitioners who examined her prior to her realisation, brought perhaps with
Dr Thomson's report, that the existence of a neck injury prior to that caused by the motor vehicle accident might interfere with her rights to compensation.
It is another matter which does not assist the plaintiff's credit.

I am, therefore, as I have noted above, satisfied that the plaintiff is a witness whose evidence must be scrutinised with some care. This does not mean, of course, that I do not accept anything that she says, and it is clear that the injury she suffered was a serious one, necessitating two separate surgical procedures. It does mean that where there is a dispute as to the plaintiff's evidence, or a conflict of testimony, I must take special care in the assessment of the claims. Her credibility affects also the weight that can be placed upon the opinions of medical practitioners, with whom, also, she does not appear to have been completely frank.

I turn to the assessment of damages,.

Damages for Non economic Loss 
Senior counsel for the plaintiff contrasted the plaintiff's post injury life and condition with that pre-injury. The plaintiff had, prior to her injury, plainly lived a physically active and demanding life. She and her family lived in a large house with a very large, and, it seems, rather elaborate garden, with a variety of fruit trees, vegetables, grape vines and ornamental plants, particularly roses. The plaintiff herself was responsible for the maintenance of the entire house and garden, including lawn mowing, with only occasional assistance from her husband. She used the fruit produced by the fruit trees to make preserves and jams. She had taken a TAFE needlework course because she enjoyed making children's clothes, and she was undertaking additional music examinations better to qualify herself for her teaching. This required about two and a half hours each day of practice. She attended aerobics weekly. She was teaching piano roughly eight or nine hours per week.
So much may be accepted.

Further, I accept her description of the immediate effects upon her following the collision. I have already referred to her description of her condition in the day or two following, and thereafter, up to the first operation performed by Dr Newcombe on 17 December 1992. She continued to have pain and was prescribed physiotherapy, but found the treatment severely exacerbated the pain. There was gradual deterioration, causing her to take digesics with increasing frequency. She said that she had too much pain to lift a cup of coffee, was unable to drive herself at all, and, although she attempted to discharge her obligations to her students, she found towards the end of term that she was unable to continue, and gradually cancelled the lessons.
Following the first operation on 17 December 1992 she was, she said "frightfully sick", and still in a great deal of pain and was itchy because of an allergy to the plaster. There was numbness on the right hip which had been the donor site for a bone graft. Exhibit A consisted of two photographs which amply support the evidence given by the plaintiff in this respect.

The plaintiff added that, also in the right hip region she suffered another complication of the surgery. This she described as "a great big numb patch" running from the scar at the site of the bone graft across her navel and around the right side of her genital area. She said that there was no sensation, "it feels like a thick blanket you could sort of feel underneath, but there is nothing on top". She first noticed this after the effects of the anaesthetic dissipated following the 1992 surgery, but there has been no improvement in the intervening years. The consequence has been the loss of sexual response by her and of interest in sexual activity with predictable effects upon her marriage. This aspect of the plaintiff's claim was contentious, and, consistently with my view of the plaintiff's credibility, must be examined with some care. Loss of sexual pleasure if it is demonstrated, in a woman of the plaintiff's age particularly one who, as is the plaintiff's case, has had a satisfactory and enjoyable sexual relationship, can constitute a significant component in the claim for damages for non economic loss. The plaintiff was closely cross-examined about this part of her claim, the suggestion being that she had not raised the matter with Dr Newcombe. She said that she had raised it with him at an early stage but for a combination of reasons, partly embarrassment, and partly Dr
Newcombe's advice that it was unlikely to be remediable, she did not pursue the question with him. In Dr Newcombe's report of 22 January 1993 he recorded a complaint of numbness in the right thigh, which he said resulted from involvement of the lateral cutaneous nerve during the taking of the bone grafts. In his evidence in chief he confirmed his opinion, expressed as long ago as March 1994, that the ilio inguinal nerve may also have been involved.
In cross-examination he thought this the most likely explanation.

The plaintiff's husband gave evidence consistent with her own.

I therefore accept the plaintiff's description of this aspect of her condition. It is a matter of some importance to which I have regard in determining the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) proportion.

The plaintiff's evidence as to the effects of the accident upon her was supported by her husband, Bryan Jones, and her mother, Mrs Jean Wright. Mr
Jones said that, immediately after the operation on 1992, the plaintiff was unable to do anything except rest and the family was dependent upon the assistance of friends and of Mrs Wright for cooking and other household duties. He said Mrs Wright moved in to live with the family for three or four weeks for this purpose. Thereafter, the plaintiff was unable to continue her maintenance of the house and garden and the deterioration which resulted became depressing for her. He described her condition between the two operations in the following way: "...very reserved in the things that she was able to take on, trying things but not succeeding in duties that she had traditionally done or was happy to do, and coming out reasonably sore at the end of the day because of trying new things and very quickly learning her limitations and being quite depressed about those at the time... disinclined to cook the evening meal, the large meal we have together, and she was reasonably sore and often would be lying on the lounge resting as I came home in the afternoon." 
He observed that there was a marked deterioration during the course of the day, the plaintiff being relatively "sprightly" in the early part of the day.
Even now, he said that the plaintiff takes on very light duties, and only those which she believes she can manage. She had been unable to assist in setting out the garden in the new house the family has moved to and has been quite depressed as a consequence.

Mrs Wright, the plaintiff's mother said that following the accident, she did washing and ironing and some cooking, sometimes taking the children overnight.
The plaintiff's need for assistance was such that she reduced her own hours of work from two or three days a week to one to enable her to do what was necessary. Eventually, she gave up work altogether. She continued rendering this assistance until May 1995, spending two full days a week, sometimes for twelve hours each day, doing housework for the plaintiff. She said that between the two operations the plaintiff was always in pain and very often irritable and that following the second operation she was a little better.

Notwithstanding her disabilities, in 1993 the plaintiff commenced another TAFE course, this time in accounting. This was, she said, because her physical limitations precluded the activities in which she had formerly engaged, and she thought she might as well use her brain. This, too, for physical reasons, proved beyond her capacity.

I have come to the conclusion that the plaintiff's condition was, until the second operation, in March 1995, quite severe, and as described by her. I am not persuaded that it remains as severe. The video film belies such a conclusion. What is difficult, in the circumstances, is to reach any firm conclusion about what disabilities she does now suffer. I accept that she has discomfort from time to time, and some stiffness, but I am unable to accept that the discomfort or disability is of anything like the order she would have had me believe.

The plaintiff and her husband sold their large house at the end of 1995, she said because the house and garden were too much for her to manage. The present house was designed as single rather than double storey in order to accommodate her difficulties and the garden designed for low maintenance and easy access, for the same reason. I am not persuaded that the plaintiff's condition was the sole motivation for the sale of the house and the move, but I accept that it may have been a contributing factor. This evidence was put as signifying objectively the extent of her disability.

Having viewed the video film, Dr Newcombe revised his assessment of the plaintiff's level of permanent impairment, from 30 percent to 15 percent, but not, rather oddly it seems to me, his view of her capacity for work or other restrictions. I accept his new estimate of 15 percent permanent impairment, and that assessment must affect also my assessment of the plaintiff's capacity for work and other activities.

There is a further complication in the assessment of damages for non economic loss. I have already made reference, in another context, to the plaintiff's fall from a horse at the age of sixteen, and to the results of radiology shortly after the accident. Of this, Dr Newcombe, in a report dated 26
February, 1996, wrote: "Although I would agree that there would have been pre-existing degenerative changes in the neck, it is apparent that the 1992 injury produced pathology and symptoms sufficient to cause the subsequent disability and if that injury had not happened then the subsequent operations and present level of disability would not have occurred." 
However, he added: "If the injury had not occurred then the degenerative change in her neck may have led to symptoms later in life. I think, that on the balance of probabilities, similar pain and occupational disturbance would have occurred by the age of sixty years." 
Dr Thomson, who examined the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant, observed that the x-rays taken shortly after the accident showed long standing pre- existing degenerative disc disease of which he considered the most likely cause was the fall from the horse, and that, accordingly, 50 percent of her then condition (August 1995) could be attributable to that event. I do not accept this. In oral evidence, Dr Newcombe said that commonly, people suffer from cervical spondylosis in "niggling episodes", but that it settles after a few weeks with no more symptoms for a year or two. That, I consider was, and would have remained, the plaintiff's position. There had been a further brief episode in about 1982 when the plaintiff was a passenger in a car which braked suddenly, causing her neck to jerk. She experienced some symptoms which quickly resolved. I accept that, immediately prior to the accident, the plaintiff, although she had some radiologically detectable disc disease, was symptom free. I accept that the collision precipitated and accelerated a process that was under way although the plaintiff was at that time ignorant of it. I therefore prefer the approach taken by Dr Newcombe, that, at some point in the future, even without the collision of 1992, the plaintiff's neck would have degenerated to a point similar to its present condition, to that of Dr
Thomson.

Senior counsel for the plaintiff argued that the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) proportion is not less than 55 percent; counsel for the defendant urged upon me a maximum of 15 percent. Taking into account the immediate aftermath of the accident, the two serious operations, the interference with sexual relations, the plaintiff's age, and the projected likely effect of her neck condition, I consider that the plaintiff's case represents one third of a most extreme case. Accordingly, as damages for non economic loss I award the sum of $82,333.00.

Economic Loss.

Past 
The plaintiff claims damages for economic loss to date quantified separately in relation to five separate periods. Those periods are as follows: September 1992 - 17 December 1992 
These are the dates of the accident, and of the first surgery.
 February 1993 - 28 August 1993 
The first date is the date the plaintiff's youngest child began first grade, when the plaintiff, according to her earlier testimony, hoped to increase her teaching hours to a full forty or forty-five hour week. The second date is the date when she commenced temporary work as a laboratory technician, at a local high school, a position she was able to maintain only for a very short time. The loss that is claimed is for forty hours teaching per week at $15 net per hour.
 October 1993 - 17 March 1995 March 1995 - 1 May 1995 May 1995 - 10 March 1997 (The latter date is the date of commencement of the Goulburn sittings of the court) 
The evidence does not sustain the claims made in this way. As to the first period, the plaintiff's evidence was that, because the students had generally pre-paid their lessons, she battled on, although gradually reducing the lessons, until about three weeks before the end of term when she cancelled them completely. There is no evidence that the plaintiff provided any refunds of the pre-paid lessons. I make no allowance for this period.

As to the second period it was the plaintiff's evidence that she was sufficiently well-known to have students available to her to teach a full school week, with the addition of some evening lessons. However, she said that she resumed teaching in February 1993, she modified her teaching technique by the purchase of equipment to assist her, and although the student numbers were variable, they were gradually increasing. She was asked about the position in relation to music students by the end of 1993 and said that the numbers had been gradually increasing, and she found it easier to sit and teach than to do the gardening or the sewing. It is difficult to reconcile this evidence with evidence given shortly after, that, in about the middle of 1993, the plaintiff obtained work as a laboratory technician at a local high school because "I was not doing very well where I was", but that she soon realised this work was beyond her physical capacity. Nevertheless, the evidence does not allow any finding in relation to lost income during this period. I make no allowance.

During 1994, in the fourth term, the plaintiff began teaching at a local primary school for two afternoons each week for an hour and a half. This brought the level of her teaching to about twenty hours per week, with which she said she did not cope very well. Although it is extremely difficult to quantify, I think there is some loss shown during this period. The only inference I can draw from the evidence is that the loss commenced in the fourth term of 1994. The plaintiff has demonstrated a gross loss of $480 per week from October 1994 to December 1994, and from February 1995 to March 1995, a total of four months. This gives a gross loss of $8,640. Allowing for the incidence of taxation I award the sum of $5,700.

Clearly enough, the plaintiff was unable to work for some period following the surgery, and this is reflected in the five weeks claimed in the fourth period.
I allow, as claimed, $3,268.

In relation to the last period claimed the plaintiff said that she returned to teaching in April 1995 for between twenty-three and twenty-five hours per week, again coping with difficulty. In this instance there is some evidence of the availability of additional work. She said that, uninjured, she would have been able to fill up her week and she liked to be busy. The loss is claimed at $245.10 net per week, over a period of one hundred and three weeks (to 28
April 1997), $25,245. No challenge was made to the calculation, although it was argued that the evidence did not support a finding that the plaintiff would, on the probabilities, have worked the longer hours. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has shown inability to work to the extent she claims. I have particular regard to the evidence of Dr Newcombe, to the effect that the plaintiff would be unable to teach for longer than the hours she presently does, but I bear in mind that Dr Newcombe's assessment was based upon what I have concluded to be a false picture presented by the plaintiff. It is not unreasonable that a person who has undergone surgery of the nature the plaintiff has undergone would continue to have some symptoms which would, temporarily at least, interfere with her ability to work but I consider the appropriate allowance to be approximately two thirds of the amount claimed. I allow $17,000.

Accordingly, for economic loss to date I allow the sum of $25,968.

Future 
The parties have agreed that any future losses should be quantified at the rate of $16.34 net per hour. It is claimed that the plaintiff should be allowed fifteen hours per week at this rate for the future. I am not satisfied that she is not capable of working more extensively than she presently is.
Certainly, I am not satisfied that she will remain permanently unfit for work in the future. In this instance I accept the submission of the defendant that the proper approach to the quantification of future economic loss is to allow a sum by way of a cushion. I allow $25,000.

Domestic Services 
The plaintiff further claims damages under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the Act. The parties are agreed that the section in its unamended form applies and, accordingly, no allowance may be made for services provided during the period of six months following the accident, and may only be awarded for services provided for in excess of six hours per week. It will be recalled that within the first six months the plaintiff's mother moved in to the house to assist the plaintiff but this provision of services must be excluded. Mrs
Wright said that she continued to work in the plaintiff's home from the time she gave up her own paid employment in December 1992 until May 1995, for two full days a week, sometimes for twelve hours a day. She added, however, that there were other times when she couldn't always make it, although that was not frequent. This assistance was given gratuitously.

Senior counsel for the plaintiff argued that I should allow eighteen hours per week from 25 March 1993 to May 1995. I do not think the evidence permits me to go so far. Clearly enough the hours of assistance provided by Mrs Wright, though generous, were variable. I consider that the twelve hour days were likely to have been infrequent rather than regular. I propose to work on the basis that Mrs Wright provided such services, on average, for sixteen hours per week, which means I must award damages for ten hours per week from 25
March. The agreed rate is $15 per hour. At $150 per week for two years and two months, I allow $16,950.

In addition, it was agreed that the plaintiff had paid $9,919 for domestic services, and I allow this amount.

Future Domestic Services 
The plaintiff claims an award of $98.50 for the rest of her life, for the provision of paid domestic assistance. This claim arises from her evidence that she now pays a husband and wife team of cleaners $45 per week, a woman who does the washing $36 per week, and somebody else between $15 and $20 per week for ironing. I am far from satisfied that this is all attributable to the plaintiff's physical condition. I think a modest amount should be allowed for future domestic services. I allow $15,000.

Medical Expenses 
Medical expenses totalling $28,238.00 have been incurred, of which $22,264 has been paid by the defendant and $5,974 by the plaintiff. This amount is allowed although the defendant must have credit for the sum paid.

A sum of $2.05 per week for future pharmaceutical expenses was agreed, and quantifies, over the plaintiff's life expectancy of another forty-three years, at $1,567. I allow $1,600.

A claim was made for the costs of future consultations with the plaintiff's general practitioner at an agreed cost of $28.00 per visit, but there was little, if any, evidence of the need for such consultations, and particularly of any continuing need. I allow a lump sum of $1,000. I was also told that a figure of $35.00 per annum was agreed as replacement costs for a TENS machine the plaintiff uses. I allow $1,600. I have not overlooked the reports of Ms
Travenar, the occupational therapist who recommended provision of a variety of aids or equipment, but I am not satisfied that the need for any of these items is established.

The damages I award are therefore as follows: $
Non-economic loss 82,333
Loss of earning capacity to date 25,968
Future loss of earning capacity 25,000
Past gratuitous domestic services 16,950
Past paid domestic services 9,919
Future domestic services 15,000
Medical expenses to date 28,238
Future pharmaceutical expenses. 1,600
Future general practitioner consultations 1,000
TENS replacement costs 1,600 $207,608 
From this must be deducted $22,264 already paid by the defendant. There will be a verdict for the plaintiff for $207,608, and judgment for $185,344. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
