

Nicholas versus Savva [1996] NSWSC 162 (28 May 1996) 
NICHOLAS V SAVVA /94 
Thursday 9 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The fourth defendant, N & K Engineering Supplies Pty Ltd ("the Company") was incorporated on 23 April 1981. It has an issued share capital of $4 comprising 4 shares with a par value of $1 each. At all material times each of the first and second plaintiffs, Mr and Mrs Nicholas, and the first and second defendants, Mr and Mrs Savva, held one share. Mr Nicholas and Mrs Savva are brother and sister. All of these people were directors. The Company's statutory records also show that the third defendant, Samuel Savva, the son of the first and second defendants, had been a director since 30 November 1984.

The plaintiffs say that by 1994, the parties had reached the stage where they could no longer get on together and as a result, the engineering business, which they conducted, was sold to a company, Bioway Pty Ltd, which is controlled by a Mr Watt. Mr Watt currently trades either in the name of this company or an associated company under the Business Name Q-Fit from the premises from which N & K Engineering Supplies Pty Ltd used to trade, namely 40-42 Fitzroy Street, Marrickville. This property is still owned by the fourth defendant.

The plaintiffs' statement of claim sought a series of orders including a declaration that the third defendant had not been validly appointed as a director of the fourth defendant and that the real property be sold and that the first and second defendants be removed as directors of the fourth defendant.

The hearing began before me on Monday 26 February 1996. The evidence finished on 29 February 1996 and counsel addressed. It is pleasing to state that most of the disputes between the parties were then resolved and the Court by consent noted that each director of the Company other than the first plaintiff and first defendant would resign as a director on 1 March 1996 and a regime was put in place for the sale by the parties and the retainer by them of a solicitor independent of all of them to act for them on the sale so it is unnecessary to deal with most of the issues which originally were live between the parties. Thus on 29 February it was agreed that I would give my reasons for the sole remaining issue which appears to be in dispute between the parties, I would publish my reasons for decision on that issue and then stand the matter over to see what consequential orders should be made or whether it was necessary to list the matter for further hearing.

The issue that requires resolution is substantially an issue of fact. The plaintiffs allege that the first, second and third defendants were misappropriating moneys from the Company. For simplicity I can concentrate on the first defendant, because if the allegations are made out against him, other matters may be able to be dealt with in an enquiry and the case of the other defendants should fall into place. The evidence suggests that the second defendant did not have direct knowledge as to what her husband was doing one way or the other and that the first plaintiff and first defendant tended to consider their children's interests as identical to their own, so that any problem with the third defendant really falls into the same plight as a problem with the first defendant.

The case was conducted in a rather bizarre way. The first defendant admitted that he had been misappropriating money from the Company. However, his defence was that those misappropriations occurred by arrangement, and for every dollar he misappropriated, he ensured that the first plaintiff was permitted to misappropriate an equal amount. The first plaintiff agrees that certain moneys were misappropriated by agreement between the parties, but he says that the other misappropriations which went on were not with his consent and the first defendant obtained a considerable sum of money. The first plaintiff says that this sum was at least $124,196.38.

Mr White, the solicitor for the plaintiffs, says that the first plaintiff's misappropriations were in discrete ways. He was party on a few occasions to inflating an invoice and pocketing part of the inflated value of the invoice.
He also admits to an occasional pocketing of a share of the proceeds of cash sales which did not go through the Company's books, and to knowing about a scheme under which the parties' sons were paid according to the Company books, more than they actually received, so that the sons paid tax on their alleged income, but the fathers received the actual cash. He also knew that one employee, a relative, was paid in cash without any transaction going through the books. However, the first plaintiff maintains that he did not know that cheques were being made in favour of cash and the proceeds misappropriated and he also considers that the first defendant and his sons Samuel and Phillip were privy to far more appropriations of the proceeds of cash sales than the first plaintiff knew. The first plaintiff acknowledges that there were some discrepancies with respect to the way in which expenses were recorded, for instance, entertainment expenses went down as travelling expenses, but he denies that cheques were drawn for cash for travelling expenses for cash which was just split between the parties. In other words, the first plaintiff says that whilst he was a party to and received half the proceeds of some misappropriations, this was always at the suggestion of the first defendant and the first defendant did not account to him for 50% of the moneys appropriated.

Thus the issue presents itself. In one sense it is a strange issue for a Court of Equity to have to decide, did the first plaintiff misappropriate from the defendant Company as much as the first defendant did? However, neither party raised the matter of clean hands and neither party was at all fazed by the possibility that the only person who might benefit financially out of the whole case was the Commissioner of Taxation.

The Court is much less reluctant than it was a century ago to decide questions between persons who, in the olden days, would be thought to be workers of iniquity. Thus last year I decided a dispute as to which of the proprietors of rival massage parlours had the right to a telephone number; see Rahme v
Telstra Corp Ltd - 8 June 1995, unreported, but noted [[1995] ACL ] NSW 2.
More recently the Chief Judge in Equity decided in Bowden versus Bowcher -15
December 1995, as yet unreported, but noted [[1996] ACL 185] NSW 1, that a woman who diverted business from her former employers' telephone fantasy line business in which women "talked dirty" to men over the telephone for a fee, had to pay her former employers $40,000 equitable compensation. Accordingly, I should not delay further in giving my decision on the question which has been raised by the parties.

Although public opinion on this matter has probably changed considerably over the last 10 years, it used to be thought that it was fair game to fiddle the books so as to pay as little tax as possible and it may often have been thought that business people who engaged in such practice were smart rather than criminal. However, there can be no doubt that the siphoning off of moneys from an enterprise to avoid paying tax on those moneys is a legal and moral wrong. As it is clear that both the first plaintiff and the first defendant participated in this conduct, at least to a degree, neither the first plaintiff nor the first defendant can put themselves before the Court otherwise than as a rogue. Accordingly, one does not start with any presumption that a man is thought to be honest before it is proved that he is dishonest. Both the major actors' credibility suffers because of their involvement in evading taxation on the profits of their business.

In considering whether the first defendant is correct that the first plaintiff received equal moneys from the misappropriation to that which he himself made, or whether the first plaintiff's version should be accepted that the first defendant received much more, it is necessary to look closely at the evidence and to the inferences that can be drawn from the evidence. Probably the best way of performing this exercise is to look at the detailed submissions as to why their respective clients should be believed made by Mr White, the solicitor for the plaintiffs, and Mr Armfield of counsel for the defendants.

Mr White puts 14 primary matters why the plaintiffs' case should be accepted.
I will go through this list, dealing at the same time with any point Mr
Armfield made which is conveniently dealt with at that stage, and then examine the remaining points made by Mr Armfield.
First, Mr White puts that the demeanour of the first plaintiff was impressive. I am not with him on this submission at all. I thought the first plaintiff was most uncomfortable during cross examination. He had only owned up to a very limited knowledge of the misappropriations in his affidavits and gradually in cross examination he agreed more and more with the suggestions put to him by Mr Armfield that he really must have known far more about what was happening than he had claimed in his affidavits. The first plaintiff was not a very articulate man, but he had no trouble with the questions asked and as I have said, he gradually admitted to virtually everything Mr Armfield put to him. I did not think that he was as impressive a witness as some of the others, but that may well have been because of his general personality rather than because he wished to conceal something. However, there was nothing about his demeanour which would make me prefer him to other witnesses. Indeed, the first defendant was far more articulate and far more impressive as a person in convincing a hearer that he was a man of integrity. We know, of course, that he was not a man of integrity, so I suppose that casts the first defendant in the mould of what is popularly called "a con man". Be that as it may, there was nothing convincing about the first plaintiff's demeanour.
Mr White puts that Mr Ridges corroborates Mr Nicholas and contradicts Mr
Savva. He points to Mr Ridges' affidavit where he deposes that it was Mr Savva alone who instructed him to write the cheques in question. Mr Ridges was employed by the fourth defendant Company as a part-time bookkeeper two days a week between 1990 and 1994. He gave evidence in the passages in question of five cheques drawn between June 1990 and June 1992. The significance of this evidence is that the first plaintiff completely denied any involvement in pocketing the proceeds of cash cheques. The first plaintiff made it clear that he only participated if an invoice was actually created or inflated, not where a cheque was made out to cash and the proceeds distributed. Accordingly, if Mr
Ridges is accepted in this evidence that I am about to relate, it would throw further doubts on the first defendant's credibility because the lastmentioned insisted that all spoils were shared equally. The five cheques are: dated 7 June 1990; dated 29 June 1990; dated 4 July 1991; dated 4 July 1991; dated 9 January 1992.

I will deal with the evidence in respect of each of those cheques in turn.

Cheque 840623 was made out for $1097.50. The butt was marked "Merkel", but the cheque was actually made out for cash. Mr Ridges said he cashed this cheque and either gave Mr Savva the cash directly or put it in the glove box of his car.

Cheque 840663 was made out for cash for $886.33 though the butt says "Campbell & Ronan". Campbell & Ronan were the Customs Agents retained by the business. Mr Savva signed the cheque and the cheque was cashed by Mr Ridges who put the proceeds in Mr Savva's car's glove box or paid it to Mr Savva.

On 4 July 1991, two cheques were made out to Campbell & Ronan, one for $897.30 and the other for $2256.66. Mr Ridges cannot see why he would have written two cheques on the one day to the same supplier, and can only find an invoice to support the latter cheque. He believes that the first was a cash cheque.

Cheque 676236 for $2,418.72 was dated 9 January 1992. The butt is marked "Altona" but the cheque itself which is in evidence is actually made out for cash and on the back of the cheque it would seem the teller has written that the person cashing it was handed $2,400 worth of $100 notes and the balance in smaller notes or coin. The cheque was signed by both Mr Nicholas and Mr Savva.

Mr Savva was asked about the cheque of 7 June 1990 and said that he could not recollect whether he spoke to Mr Nicholas about that cheque or not, though it was his usual practice to collaborate with him as to the approximate amount of the cheque. Mr Ridges would then write up a cheque for a sum near the amount that the parties wanted, but adding some odd dollars and cents at the end to make it look legitimate (T 94). Suppliers' names such as the one used on this cheque "Merkel" were used at random. Mr Ridges would then go to the bank and cash the cheque. If Mr Ridges was driving Mr Savva's car he would leave the money in the glove box; otherwise he would give it to Mr Savva. Mr Savva said that he thought there were some occasions where Mr Ridges gave him cash in Mr
Nicholas' presence, but he couldn't recall specific dates.

The first plaintiff denied that he had ever drawn a cheque to cash without an invoice. He was cross examined on this and never deviated from it. He further says that from time to time he would sign cheques in blank leaving the book with Mr Ridges, so that when the cheque was actually drawn, it was only necessary to add Mr Savva's signature to it.

Mr Ridges was cross examined by Mr Armfield. His evidence was that he believed that Mr Nicholas knew about the inflated invoices and probably the cash cheques, because otherwise Mr Ridges would have told Mr Nicholas about it.

I must confess I did not find Mr Ridges to be a witness upon whose evidence I would have wished to decide this whole case. He seems to be remarkably naive in the way in which he went about his work.

Mr White says that Mr Ridges' evidence contradicts that of Mr Savva. I do not really consider it does because Mr Ridges obviously believes that whilst he was handing the money to Mr Savva, Mr Nicholas knew all about it and was getting his share. I cannot see anything about the physical details of the transactions in which Mr Ridges contradicts Mr Savva.
 , 4 and 5. Mr White puts that it is significant that Mr Savva always collected the cash and never Mr Nicholas, and that Mr Savva's assertion that he always collaborated with Mr Nicholas was implausible, this being particularly obvious in the case of cash cheques cashed while Mr Nicholas was away. The first of these three points is merely a matter of noting. It certainly does go towards favouring the plaintiffs' case. The second point is a mere matter of impression. However, the third point, namely that cheques were cashed while Mr Nicholas was away is telling.

It was accepted by Mr Savva (T 99), that Mr and Mrs Nicholas were overseas between 1 June and 9 July 1990. In that period two of the cheques which I have already discussed were cashed. Mr Savva was cross examined on other cheques as well, namely, 840623/629/638/646/655/663 and 664. Each of these extra cheques was made out to cash, each was signed only by Mr Savva. Cheque 629's butt is in Mr Savva's handwriting, but the cheque is in Mr Ridges' writing. Cheque 646 could be in Sam Savva's handwriting. The butt of cheque 646 showed it was a payment to Campbell & Ronan. Cheques 623 and 629 had butts marked "Westpac
Merkel". Cheques 655 and 663 were also made out to Campbell & Ronan on the butt and cheques 638 and 664 to Altona, another supplier. Most of the cheques are in Mr Ridges' handwriting and signed by Mr Savva; 655 was actually written out by Mr Savva. All these cheques were written out in a period when Mr and
Mrs Nicholas were away. Cheque 664 has a date 9 July on it, though the Company books show that it is in the book immediately before a cheque dated 3 July.
There is no doubt, however, from the bank stamp on the original cheque that it was cashed on 9 July.

It seems to me completely incredible that in the period when Mr and Mrs
Nicholas were away, seven different cheques were the subject of an arrangement whereby there was collaboration, the drawing of a cheque, the cashing of the cheque, the handing of the moneys to Mr Savva and then splitting the proceeds equally. It seems to me that when Mr Savva thought up his story about splitting the money equally he forgot that so many of these cheques had occurred at a time when Mr and Mrs Nicholas were overseas. Mr Savva said that he put the moiety due to Mr Nicholas aside and gave it to him when he returned, but it is very very difficult to accept that.

Mr Savva did, however, say that the reason for so many cheques in this period was that they could be taken as tax deductions for payments to suppliers for the tax year ended 30 June. In view of the moral standards prevailing within the fourth defendant Company, this is believable, but it does not explain why it was necessary to have seven different cheques in amounts of hundreds of dollars when most of them were in favour of Campbell & Ronan rather than a large amount. One suggestion might be that it looked more credible to have a series of smaller cheques, but again that seems peculiar. Certainly neither the first defendant nor Mr Ridges volunteered that as an explanation. Mr White put squarely to Mr Savva at T 112 that he had no arrangement whatsoever with
Mr Nicholas to take any cash out of the Company by falsifying cheque butts which Mr Savva denied. However, in my view it almost certainly happened. I would note that the total of the seven cheques involved in the June/July 1990 period is $6720.72.
The sixth matter relied on by Mr White was Mr Savva's incorrect assertion that he cashed cheques when there was money in the bank so that the payment of the cheques was merely a matter of distributing a dividend in an unorthodox way. However, when one looks at the situation, many of the cheques were drawn at a time when the Company was in substantial overdraft. Mr White cross examined Mr Savva as to the fact that on 29 June 1990, the overdraft limit was $45,000, the account was in fact overdrawn to the extent of $45,679, but even so, some of the seven cheques were drawn. Mr Savva answered that there was an arrangement with the bank for additional finances and this is quite credible as very often banks do provide customers with a top-up to their overdrafts at a slightly higher interest rate, but even so, Mr Savva could hardly say that the cheques were drawn for the purpose of distributing surplus funds. However, in para 22 of his affidavit, DA11, he had actually said that the cash cheques had come about in these circumstances: "The conversations [with the first plaintiff] were to the following effect: 
William Savva: 'There is money there. I think we will draw a cheque'.

Nick Nicholas: 'No worries, whatever you want to do.' 
On occasions, the First Plaintiff suggested to me that a cheque be drawn, and
I replied in the same manner. These conversations occurred when there were substantial credit funds in the bank account of the Fourth Defendant." 
This evidence just could not be true, at least in respect of the seven cheques, because not only was there no Mr Nicholas in Australia with whom that conversation could be held, but also there were not cash funds available in the bank account. The other explanation given as to why the cheques were drawn in this period, that is, to create the impression to the Commissioner of
Taxation that a greater amount had been paid to suppliers than was in fact paid, sounds far more genuine.
Mr White puts that the practice of Mr Nicholas to sign blank cheques accounts for the fact that Mr Nicholas' signature appears on some of the cheques that were written out to cash. Because of this, Mr White submits, I think correctly, that one should not brand Mr Nicholas as a collaborator merely because his signature was on some of the cheques.
Mr White puts that Mr Savva's failure to respond appropriately in the allegations made against him in the solicitors' letter of 13 July 1995 should tell against him. This matter was vigorously debated by counsel. Mr Armfield put that where one's only answer to an allegation is to incriminate oneself, the Court should not draw the inference by failure to answer that the allegations made against the recipient of a letter of demand are admitted.

Mr White and Mr Armfield referred me to authority. Mr Armfield referred to
Wentworth versus Lloyd <case>; [(1864) 10 HLC 589]; [11 ER 1154.] Romilly, MR, had observed in the Rolls Court that where a person claims privilege on the ground of professional communication, the Court may assume that the keeping back of evidence is to be taken most strongly against him but the rule is otherwise where a person declines to answer on the ground that he is not bound to incriminate himself. The House of Lords considered that view was wrong. However, it would seem to follow from the judgments that one should not draw inferences from a person failing to respond to a question in Court because it might incriminate him. Thus, Mr Armfield argues, one should not draw any adverse inference from the silence of a person when allegations are made against him by a solicitor's letter if the only answer that could have been made to the allegations would have been an incriminating one; see also Standard Chartered Bank of Australia Ltd v
Antico [(1993) 36 NSWLR 87], 94;
Dolan versus Australian & Overseas Telecommunications Corp <case>; <case>; [(1993) 43 FCR 594.] 
Mr White relied on part of the judgment of Gibbs, CJ in L Shaddock &
Associates Pty Ltd versus Parramatta City Council (No 1)  <case>; [(1981) 150 CLR 225], 230, and by the same learned Judge in Thomas versus Hollier [(1984) 156 CLR 152], 157. In the latter case, his Honour said, "The failure to answer a letter may amount to an admission if there are circumstances which render it more reasonably probable that a man who denied the assertions made against him in the letter would answer those assertions that he would not."
His Honour relied principally on Wiedemann versus 
Walpole [[1891] 2 QB 534] at 143. 
I dealt with most of the cases in this area of the law in my article "Silence as Evidence" [(1992) 66 ALJ 675.] As noted at p 677, in the criminal law the Victorian Full
Court said in R versus Salahattin <case>; [[1983] 1 VR 521], 528, that although it might be unfair to treat silence in failing to deny an allegation as founding an inference that the accused was admitting the truth of the allegation where he had been expressly warned that he was not obliged to make any answer and said absolutely nothing, a different conclusion could be drawn from a failure to deny an allegation where the person so warned has not remained silent but has elected to talk selectively.
The question still is whether it is appropriate to draw the inference from all the circumstances.

In my view, in the instant case, the facts and circumstances show that it would be proper to draw an adverse inference from the fact that the first defendant at no stage put up in answer to the allegations made in Messrs Lane & Lane's letter of 13 July 1994, that yes he had misappropriated money, but so had the first plaintiff who had taken an equal amount with him. It would have been incriminating to have put the "defence" in that stark form, but I have no doubt at all that any skilful solicitor could have so worded the letter as to convey the message without using the word "misappropriate". It is to my mind significant that the first defendant did not put up his version of "equal stealing" until relatively late in the piece. Indeed, the significance is exacerbated by the course the correspondence took. Lane & Lane wrote their letter containing the allegations on 13 July 1994. On 21 July 1994, after a telephone conversation between the solicitors, Mr Savva's solicitors said that they were awaiting receipt of information from their client and would then correspond. Lane & Lane then extended the time for reply to 27
July. There was no answer by that deadline, and on 28 July 1994, Lane &
Lane wrote a further letter indicating that they had been instructed to commence proceedings and giving a deadline of 2 August for Mr Savva's solicitor to indicate whether he would accept service.

On the last day of that period there was a conversation between solicitors.
There was no written reply from Mr Savva's solicitors. On 4 August 1994 Lane & Lane wrote a further letter to which the reply on 5 August was to seek further particulars and to note that the first defendant's solicitors had instructions to accept service. If there had been available the ready answer that the first defendant and the first plaintiff were in pari delictu and nothing was to be gained by suing, one would have expected that that message would have been conveyed at an earlier point in time rather than (i) not answer correspondence; (ii) say that further details were required from the client; or (iii) ask for particulars.

It would not seem that the present issue really surfaced until the defence of September 1994.

Accordingly, in my view, there is some force in this submission of Mr White's.
The ninth matter is Mr Savva's alleged failure to protect the fourth defendant's interest because he continued to work for Q-fit after the business was sold, and is currently an employee of Mr Watt or one of his companies. The allegation is that because his livelihood depends on Mr Watt's goodwill, Mr
Savva has not joined in with the first plaintiff in suing Mr Watt for non- payment of the balance of purchase moneys for the business or for rent which is owing on the lease of the real estate on which the business is conducted.
Most of that area of the case has now been settled by the parties agreeing that an independent solicitor will pursue their remedies and I do not consider that any failure by Mr Savva in this area throws light upon the question as to who is to be believed on the "sharing of the spoils" issue.
Mr White then puts that the frequency of cheques written during 1991 and the acquisition by Mr Savva and his wife of two home units respectively in
September and December 1991, and the absence overseas on holiday of Mr and Mrs
Nicholas in October 1991 tell against Mr Savva's account that the moneys were shared equally. The moneys were really needed to fund the home unit purchases and, to a degree, to look after Mr Savva's gambling debts.

Dealing with the gambling issue first, it was put by Mr White that because Mr
Savva was a member of two licensed clubs with gambling facilities in the one suburb it must follow that he was a heavy and habitual gambler who could not help himself gamble despite the means he had at his disposal. I do not consider that that inference should be drawn. There are, I would imagine many people in our community who are solid and responsible citizens without any great propensity to gamble too heavily who would be in a similar position either because they enjoy the amenities of two clubs in their area, or for other good reasons other than gambling addiction.

The allegation about the need for funds to buy home units should, however, be taken a little more seriously.

Annexure "CC" to Mr Savva's affidavit of 15 September 1994 sets out a list of cheques between November 1990 and June 1992 in which the cheque was really for cash but the butt noted some supplier or customs agent as the "notional payee". Of these 78, 24 (that is, slightly more than 30%) are for the period 1
August to 31 December 1991. As this particular scam went on for 20 months, one would expect the figure to be nearer 25% if the process was carried out evenly. However, as the trend was to take more near the end of the financial year, the period of August to December was an off-time for misappropriations, so that it does seem to me that the 30% figure does give some credence to the suggestion that it was necessary at a time when the Savvas needed money for the purpose of purchasing two home units, that there would be an increase in the number of cheques cashed. It would also be unlikely if this was the reason for the acceleration that the moneys would be split with Mr Nicholas who had no corresponding problem.

It is also significant that Mr and Mrs Nicholas were overseas between 4 and 14
October 1991. During this period, one particular cheque was prepared which requires close examination; No 913410. It is made out in Mr Savva's own handwriting for $1476.50. The butt is dated 3 October 1991, but the actual cheque is dated 4 October 1991 and it was cashed on 4 October 1991. The notional payee was Campbell & Ronan. The cheque was actually signed by Mr
Nicholas, presumably signed in blank. The bank stamp shows that it issued $1400 worth of $100 notes plus other amounts of notes and coins when the cheque was cashed. It is most unlikely that if Mr and Mrs Nicholas were overseas, they would have received half the proceeds. Even if they did not leave Australia until late in the afternoon on that day, it is still a rather unusual transaction, especially if, as Mr Savva has always said, there was not only a division of the spoils, but collaboration first as to the amount that was needed.
Mr White then puts as the eleventh matter, that the cheques to cash with a false invoice ceased in September 1992 and it can be seen straight away that
Mr Savva had problems with his overdraft. Whilst the evidence bears this out,
I do not consider that it is a particularly important matter in working out whether the spoils were distributed evenly or not.
The next matter on which Mr White relies is what he calls "Mr Savva's unsatisfactory evidence about sharing the spoils with cash to Mr Nicholas when he returned from holidays". I agree that the evidence given about the 4
October 1991 cheque at T 127 was a little hard to accept, but I have already dealt with this matter under other headings.
The next matter that Mr White raises is Mr Savva's unsatisfactory evidence about the altered cheque of 26 October 1993.

There is no doubt at all that on about 26 October 1993, a cheque was signed by both Mr Nicholas and Mr Savva. When that cheque was originally made out, it was for $3750.00 payable in favour of W Savva. When it was cashed by the bank it was for $7750.00 and was made out in favour of cash. At T 182, Mr Savva was cross examined about this cheque. The euphemism for receiving money from a cash cheque was "dividend". Mr Savva said that he did ask Mr Nicholas for a dividend cheque in October 1993. He said that both he and Mr Nicholas knew how much the outstanding dividend was, but "we didn't draw the full outstanding dividend". Mr Savva agrees that Mr Nicholas wrote out a cheque for $3750.00 and gave it to Sam Savva to take to Sam's father. Mr Savva agrees that he changed the cheque to $7750.00 and the payee from W Savva to cash. Mr White put to Mr Savva that in addition to his own initials he had also put initials "NN" on the cheque. Mr Savva repeatedly answered that he only put his own initials. Mr Savva then said that he rang up the bank manager and explained that there had been a mistake with the cheque and that the bank manager should ring Mr Nicholas up if he wanted to. He said it was common practice for cheques which did not completely correspond with the instructions to the bank to be honoured and then the defect fixed up later. Later on, (T 185), Mr Savva was asked - "As events have transpired you know that had you asked Mr Nicholas for a cheque for $7500, provided he got the same amount he would have given it to you, that's correct, isn't it?" 
A. "Well, I would have hoped so".

Q. "Why didn't you simply telephone Mr Nicholas again and say to him 'You got the amount wrong, I want the whole $7500. Will you send a cheque home with Sam tomorrow?' ...?" 
A. "Because he told me he wouldn't sign a cheque he wouldn't pay the dividend." 
Q. "You had in your hand a cheque made payable to you for $3750 didn't you?" 
A. "... yes I did ...".

Q. "You wanted double that?" 
A. "That was what the arrangement - that is what I asked for originally, yes, and he refused ... ".

Q. "You changed the cheque because you thought if you asked him for another one for $7500 he wouldn't give it to you, is that so?" 
A. "Another cheque for $7500 or a further $3000".

Q. "No $7500 that's what you wanted, isn't it?" 
A. "That's correct." 
The first plaintiff in his affidavit sworn 25 October 1994, said that Mr Savva said in October 1993, "I need some money" and Mr Nicholas said "No". A few days later he spoke to the second defendant (the first defendant's wife and the first plaintiff's sister) who was crying and upset the first plaintiff.
Accordingly, the day following that conversation the first plaintiff said to
Samuel Savva, "I will give your father some money". Samuel Savva telephoned his father and said, "He said $7500". Thinking that the $7500.00 was the whole amount required he wrote a cheque for $3750.00 being the first defendant's half. On the following day Samuel Savva said, "Dad says it should have been $7500 each". The first plaintiff said he would give Samuel Savva another cheque for the difference, but Samuel replied, "No, its okay dad fixed it up ... Dad rang the bank and fixed it up with the bank manager ...". The first plaintiff then said that he expressed concern to Samuel Savva about this.

Samuel Savva's evidence is that the first plaintiff gave him a cheque for $3750.00 which he took to his father. The next morning he told the first plaintiff that "Dad said it should have been $7500" and the first plaintiff said "I thought he meant $7500 split between us ... I'll fix it up". Samuel
Savva said that he replied, "Dad is going to fix it up with Colin" (Colin being the bank manager). He denies that Mr Nicholas said, "I will give you another cheque for the difference".

The significance of this incident is not so much in what happened, but how things were handled and how the evidence came out about the matter. The first plaintiff's version of what happened tells against him because it shows that, at least on this occasion, he was willing to pay a "dividend" otherwise than by means of inflating an invoice or appropriating cash from cash sales.
Furthermore, he was happy, or at least content, for the first defendant to have half of what was being distributed so long as he had the other half.

However, the incident tells against the first defendant because it shows the way he would go about things to get what he wanted. There is no suggestion that Mr Nicholas was contacted by Mr Savva to say that the cheque was for the wrong amount, rather Mr Savva on his own altered the cheque and fixed things up with the bank manager. If the situation really was one where Messrs
Nicholas and Savva collaborated with each other, one would not expect this.
Furthermore $7750 is not twice $3750 which one would expect if Mr Savva's account was correct. However, it must be said in mitigation that by 1993, relationships were not as pleasant, one towards the other, as they had been in earlier years.

Mr Nicholas was cross examined about the cheque at T 43-44. He denied that he had ever initialled the alteration to the cheque and said that he had no reason, apart from mistake, to make the cheque out for $3750.00 because that's what he thought the first defendant wanted. He admitted that he took an equal dividend for himself.

Mr Savva denies that he put other initials on the cheque beside his own. Two copies of the photostat cheque are in evidence. To my observation, there are, what appear to be initials other than "WS" on the cheque, and it would seem fairly clear that they were put on the cheque in an attempt to mislead people dealing with the cheque that Mr Nicholas had consented to the alteration. He never did so consent, though, because he drew an equal amount for himself a little later, he suffered no actual detriment (though the Company might have suffered a detriment). The only reasonable hypothesis is that when Mr Savva was "fixing it up", he endorsed an extra squiggle (or perhaps an "NN") on the cheque so that it would appear that the alteration had been agreed to by both signatories. I tend to think that his denial that he forged Mr Nicholas' initials and his denial that he wrote "NN" on the cheque is that he probably justified in his own mind that it was not an actual "NN" but a squiggle which would merely mislead people into thinking that two persons had initialled the alteration.

I believe this incident strongly discounts the credit I should otherwise give to the first defendant's evidence.
The fourteenth and last matter that Mr White raises is the unsatisfactory evidence of Phillip Savva on cash sales. I agree that it was not easy to fully accept Mr Phillip Savva's evidence, but I do not consider that it throws light on the vital question I have to decide.

I now turn to Mr Armfield's submissions. He first put that when one analysed the evidence, there were nine different ways in which money was abstracted from the Company and that the plaintiffs were involved in all nine ways, not only the two ways in which they said were discrete participations in distribution of moneys from the Company.

Mr Armfield submitted that - 
A. The cash sales were split; 
B. Rent cheques from the tenant were made payable to cash and the proceeds were divided at least over and above $200; 
C. Invoices were deliberately inflated; 
D. Cheques were drawn for advertising expenses that really related to entertainment; 
E. Employees were paid in cash; 
F. Travelling expenses were inflated; 
G. Amounts were debited in the books as wages of the sons of Mr Savva and the difference between what the sons received and the book value was split; 
H. The Company sold property, namely a boat at Nords Wharf and a Holden
Commodore motor car for cash and the proceeds were split; 
I. Motor vehicles were purchased by the Company for the Savva children and half the expenses were paid to the plaintiffs.

It is fair to say that Mr Armfield is correct in this proposition on the evidence. This list does not include, of course, the tenth way of abstracting money from the property, namely:- 
J. Cheques where the butt would indicate there was a payment to a supplier or customs agent but where there was actually a cash cheque and cash moneys were received for it from the bank.

Mr Armfield, however, suggests that as the plaintiffs were privy to the first nine methods, why would there be something special about them not becoming privy to the tenth? 
Indeed, he submits that it is extremely unlikely that the first plaintiff did not know about all ten methods.

Secondly, Mr Armfield put that the explanation given at T64 as to how the first plaintiff became aware of method J was improbable and fanciful. His evidence was, "I was driving on the road one day and it was starting to rain and it was pretty dark and I saw a big light in front of me, like a flash, and something came into me and said 'They're doing something with the cheques' and
I got a big shock and I went to see Dr Sloane on the way to work and I said to him 'You know there is a problem at work, whatever' and he suggested ... I go back to work, go through the records because if they are doing the cash sales, he said to me, I think you'll find they are probably doing cheques as well and then ... I went through the cheque books and I looked for invoices from the supplier. There wasn't an invoice and that is when I went up to the bank ...".

The first plaintiff seemed to put some store on this explanation because he attempted to read an affidavit from Dr Sloane which he said would have confirmed this. In actual fact Mrs Nicholas gave confirmatory evidence (T 78).
She said that she did not think it extraordinary that her husband had this premonition and was proved right. Mr Armfield put that this evidence is so ludicrous as to destroy the first plaintiff's credit.

I think this is putting the submission too high, but the explanation really does affect the first plaintiff's credit. It is more likely than not, from other parts of the evidence, that the first plaintiff became gradually aware for some time that moneys were being abstracted from the Company other than by the nine ways in which the first plaintiff was sharing. However, he did not want to do anything for quite a while because he wanted to go back to Cyprus and wished to sell up the business so that he would have funds to do this. It is far more likely that he chose his moment deliberately to attack the first and second defendants on the cash cheques rather than he had a Pauline light on the Damascus Road experience.

This leads on to Mr Armfield's third point, and that is the great delay there was in making the complaints. Mr Ridges' evidence at T 152 was that he had a direction from the first plaintiff in September 1992 never to write out a cheque again unless he had an invoice to which it related in front of him and no cheques were to be drawn which were not signed by both Mr Savva and Mr
Nicholas. It is fairly obvious that by September 1992, if he had not known before, Mr Nicholas knew about the cash cheques and put a stop to the practice. However, although this had occurred in 1992, Mr Ridges received no complaint from Mr Nicholas until July 1994 after the business had been sold.

The fourth point was a similar one, that is, that as he found out about the cash cheques on his own evidence in September 1992, he must have found out from the bank manager how much was involved, yet he did not seek to recover the $124,196.38 for two years afterwards.

The fifth point is that it is strange that the Company's accountant, Mr
Antoniou, was never brought in to the affair at all. The probable reason for this is that the first plaintiff realized only too well that he had as much to lose as the first defendant by bringing the accountant into it.

Sixthly, Mr Armfield put that the general credit of the plaintiffs is affected by the fact that their affidavits never mentioned that they were appropriating moneys themselves. Furthermore, in cross examination, the first plaintiff was not able to explain away how he was able to swear affidavits which gave the impression that he was completely innocent of any misappropriation when he had been involved on his own admission in two methods of misappropriation, and on the evidence, was probably involved in at least nine. For instance, Mr
Armfield put that para 10 of the first plaintiff's initial affidavit is a perfect example of a half truth. That was the paragraph where Mr Nicholas said that in September 1992 he became very concerned that some of the Company's funds had gone missing.

I consider this is a valid point.

Seventhly, Mr Armfield puts that it is significant that Mr Nicholas throughout his evidence gave the suggestion that it was always Mr Savva who forced him to take money out of the fourth defendant Company. Mr Armfield puts that this is not likely to be so. He cites in particular the evidence of Mr Watt, the controller of the purchasing company, who in his affidavit, swore that it was the first plaintiff rather than the first defendant who put to him that the business was better than it looked in the books because a lot of dealings were done for cash. Mr Armfield said Mr Watt had no reason to lie, though the answer to this may be that there was more connection between Mr Watt and Mr
Savva than between Mr Watt and Mr Nicholas, especially as Mr Savva is now a employee of Mr Watt's, but Mr Nicholas is back in Cyprus.

Again, this is a valid point and indeed I have difficulty in accepting that the whole of the idea to appropriate moneys equally from the Company was that of Mr Savva and that Mr Nicholas was forced to do it because of pressure put on him by Mr Savva.

Eighthly, Mr Armfield points to the evidence of Mr Morrison. That gentleman was the director of a company Beckett Pumps Pty Ltd, a mutual trading partner with the fourth defendant Company. Mr Morrison said it was the first plaintiff who, when disposing of a shredder and some shelving, insisted that the purchaser pay in cash and only cash.

The ninth point is similar to the seventh, that is, that Mr Nicholas was always reluctant to concede that he physically tampered with documents. Thus, in paras 5 and 10 of his second affidavit, the first plaintiff said it was specifically at Mr Savva's request, particularly when Mr Savva, a gambling man, needed money, that invoices were inflated.

Tenthly, Mr Armfield puts that Mr Ridges' evidence is only meaningful on the basis that he, Ridges, was sure in his own mind that Mr Nicholas knew about everything that was going on so that as a humble book-keeper he could merely follow the orders of the two proprietors of the Company.

The critiques of the principal witnesses provided by Mr White and Mr Armfield,
I think conclusively show that neither of the principal witnesses can be completely believed. Valid points were made on each side which affect the credibility of the two witnesses. They were difficult men to compare. As I think I have said already, Mr Savva was confident and articulate, but needed to qualify some of the evidence he had given earlier when he realized that it could not be correct, such as the situation where cash cheques had been drawn during a period when Mr Nicholas was overseas. On the other hand, Mr Nicholas was relatively inarticulate, he did seek to give the impression that he was completely a "babe in the woods" and if he erred, he erred by pressure put on him by his brother-in-law. When the full story came out, he was a knowing party to many ways in which the Company's funds were dissipated by direct payments to the directors.

When one looks at the picture as a whole, however, it seems to me far more likely than not that Mr Savva helped himself to more than one-half of the total moneys which were misappropriated. I just cannot believe his evidence that he collaborated with Mr Nicholas and shared half the cash with Mr
Nicholas that he or Mr Ridges obtained by cashing the cheques whose butts would give the impression that relevant cheques were made out to suppliers. I am of the view that at least the $124,196.38 was appropriated from the
Company's property over and above any moneys that may have been appropriated equally by Messrs Nicholas and William Savva.

The plaintiffs seek that there be an enquiry as to what further sums have been appropriated by the first defendant from the fourth defendant. I have some trouble with this. I will not deal with it finally because it is not the matter upon which the parties have asked for a decision, but in my view the following must be stated:-
No party is entitled to part of an account. If an enquiry was merely directed as to how much over and above the sum I have already mentioned was appropriated by the first defendant it would not really deal with the whole of the dispute between the parties.
What the Company is entitled to is a complete refund of all the moneys that were appropriated by both parties without proper permission. If the appropriate resolution is passed by the members, then, subject to any rights the creditors and the Commissioner of Taxation may have, that may atone for anything that had been done previously without authority. However, unless there is such retrospective authorisation, both parties need to account to the Company for what they have withdrawn from it without authority.
On the balance of probabilities I find that the first plaintiff also has more likely than not abstracted from the Company more than he has already confessed to removing. I reject his explanation that he has only misappropriated moneys from the Company in discrete ways and then only at the urging of Mr Savva. It seems to me that the evidence about the cash sales and the evidence of Mr Watt and Mr Morrison show that it is more likely than not, that at least in this area, both Mr Savva and Mr 
Nicholas received cash moneys and it is not necessarily so at all, especially after relations started to sour, that the moneys were split equally.
On the evidence before me at the moment, I am not able to say what was the quantum of the moneys which were appropriated over and above that which both parties admit. If the parties press it, there will either have to be an enquiry or alternatively, if there is a winding up, the liquidator will need to investigate the matter including a public examination of the directors  and thereafter commencing proceedings against them unless he considers that the whole of the recovered funds would in any event have to pass to the Commissioner of Taxation.

Accordingly, all I need do at this stage is to record my finding that the first defendant is liable to refund to the fourth defendant the sum of at least $124,196.38 and stand the matter over so that these reasons can be digested and the parties formulate their next step. So that there is a definite target date for the parties to bring in short minutes I will formally order that the matter be listed before me at 9.30 am on Tuesday 28 May 1996.
However, so long as contact is made with my Associate on or before 21 May, this date can be varied to suit the convenience of the parties and their legal representatives.
 * * * 
