

Pyramid Building Society (In Liq) versus Leslie George Merton [1996] NSWSC 617 (13 December 1996) 
PYRAMID BUILDING SOCIETY (IN LIQUIDATION) versus LESLIE GEORGE MERTON /96 
WEDNESDAY 11 DECEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced by way of a summons filed on 27 May 1996 whereby the plaintiff sought judgment against the defendant in the sum of $47,711,958.39 and interest at the rate of 22.9 per cent per annum from 17 May 1996 and an order that the defendant pay its costs. The claim is based on the alleged liability of the defendant as the guarantor of the liabilities of Abelego Pty Limited.

On 11 July 1996 the defendant filed a defence in which he asserted in paragraph 1 that the wrong plaintiff has been chosen and that the plaintiff should be Farrow Mortgage Services Pty Limited (In liquidation).

In paragraph 2 of the defence the defendant asserted that a deed of assignment dated 17 May 1996 entered into between Farrow and Pyramid Building Society (In
Liquidation) was invalid "by the manner of its execution and by its intent to negate the rights of the defendant to set off the benefit of" his cross-claim for damages.

Paragraph 3 raised a similar matter by way of defence and paragraph 4 asserted a claim that the amount claimed by the plaintiff was in dispute for various reasons therein specified. Paragraph 5 raised a matter which seems to depend upon the validity of the deed of assignment, and paragraph 6 set out a number of bases on which it is alleged the defendant is not liable, which in essence give rise to a cross-claim and this is made clearer in paragraph 7.

In paragraph 8 the defendant asserted, in the alternative, that he possesses a claim for mutual set off pursuant to [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s86.html) of the [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) and section 553 of the Corporations Law "in respect of mutual dealings between" the principal debtor and Farrow. Paragraph 9 alleged that the principal debt owed by the principal debtor is reduced or negated to the extent of the cross- claim and, in paragraph 10, the defendant seeks the leave of the Court in effect to bring an application for security for costs.

The matter has been before the Court on a number of occasions. On 19 July 1996 the Chief Judge gave certain directions for its further hearing and fixed the hearing to commence on 30 September 1996. On 20 September 1996 the matter came before his Honour when he was provided with an affidavit sworn by Mr Norman
Lucas, the solicitor for the plaintiff, on that date. Mr Lucas deposed to the fact that there had not been compliance by the defendant with directions given and, in paragraph 4, he referred to a telephone conversation he had with the defendant when the defendant said that he would not be "carrying on my defence of this matter any further" because he had been made bankrupt by the
Australian Taxation Office on 19 September 1996. Mr Lucas confirmed the defendant's bankruptcy by a search of the bankruptcy index which indicated, contrary to what he had been told, that the appropriate order had been made on August 1996, and that Insolvency and Trustee Service (Australia) had been appointed as the official receiver. The affidavit annexed a letter from the official receiver dated 16 September 1996 which answered certain queries raised.

In these circumstances the Chief Judge vacated the hearing date and stood the matter over for directions on 13 December 1996. The matter came back before his Honour on 29 November 1996 when he was provided with the defence of the defendant, which became exhibit A before his Honour, and he noted an affidavit of Mr Lucas sworn on 27 November 1996 in which he annexed various correspondence between his firm, Clayton Utz, and Insolvency and Trustee
Service (Australia).

In a letter of 22 November 1996 from that organisation to Mr Cowling, the partner of Clayton Utz who has control of the matter, it was stated, inter alia, "The official trustee will not be defending the proceedings." In these circumstances his Honour initially gave the plaintiff leave to enter judgment in the registry subject to compliance with the Rules of Court and notwithstanding that the proceedings were commenced by way of summons.
Subsequently, no doubt because of an appreciation that a defence had been filed, his Honour vacated the orders made and stood the matter over to 9.30am today. Notwithstanding that order, the matter was listed at 9.15am today to accommodate certain problems his Honour had in dealing with it at 9.30am.

I sat at 9.15am and I had the defendant called three times outside the Court at that time and there was no appearance by or on his behalf. However, it seemed to me that as the matter had been stood over until 9.30am, notwithstanding that it is listed in this morning's Sydney Morning Herald for hearing at 9.15am, it was appropriate to wait until 9.30am and I adjourned until that time. At 9.30am the defendant was again called three times outside the Court and there was no appearance by or on his behalf.

Mr Lucas has appeared today and between 9.15 and 9.30am he telephoned the office of Insolvency and Trustee Service (Australia) and spoke to Mr Michael
Andrew who, Mr Lucas has informed me from the bar table, confirmed that that organisation would not be defending the proceedings. The defendant is sued in his capacity as guarantor of Abelego Pty Limited and I am satisfied by the affidavit of Robert John Edge sworn 7 December 1996 that the amount owing is $54,355,930.36. The certificate Mr Edge has provided is authorised by clause of the mortgage and clause 9 of the guarantee.

I have been referred to the statement of Mr Rod Van der Chys of 14 May 1996, which has become exhibit B. The only matter, as I understand it, on which the plaintiff carries any onus, having regard to the defences raised, is whether
Pyramid Building Society Pty Limited (In Liquidation) is the correct plaintiff. Mr Lucas has tendered a deed of assignment of guarantee and indemnity dated 17 May 1996, which has become exhibit A. That indicates, prima facie, that there has been an assignment and the invalidity said to attach to that document in paragraph 2 of the defence has not been sought to be made out. The balance of the defence raises matters upon which, in my view, the defendant would carry the onus of proof and, no doubt for the reasons to which
I have referred, no attempt has been made to make good any of those assertions.

In these circumstances I order judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $54,355,930.36. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of these proceedings and I order that exhibit A be returned.
I further order that execution of this judgment be stayed until the expiration of 21 days after service upon the trustee in bankruptcy and the defendant of the judgment.

Originally the present plaintiff brought proceedings against the defendant in proceedings 50071/95. The defence to those proceedings was that the plaintiff was the incorrect party, because at the time of their commencement there had been no assignment from Farrow to Pyramid. That was undoubtedly so. In the result the cause of action upon which the plaintiff relies did not arise until May 1996. Accordingly, proceedings 50071/95 were fatally and fundamentally defective, as I have pointed out in previous judgments. In the circumstances I think the appropriate order is to order that the summons in the proceeding /95 be dismissed and, save for the costs orders already made in those proceedings, I dismiss the summons and I make no order as to costs in those proceedings. I take this course because much of the evidence filed in those proceedings could have been utilised in the present proceedings.
 * * * 
