

Regina versus Bonita Heather Dowe No. 60029/95 Sentence [1995] NSWSC 70 (10
October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GROVE(1), JAMES(2) AND HULME(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 1 September #DATE 1:9:1995 #ADD 10:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant       T.A. Game 
Solicitors for the Appellant    
T.S. Murphy 
Counsel for the Respondent      M.J. Ierace 
Solicitors for the Respondent     Commonwealth DPP
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
GROVE J This is an application for leave to appeal by Bonita Heather Dowe who appeared before Urquhart DCJ where she was sentenced in respect of a number of charges contrary to the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/). It is not necessary for present purposes to relate the detail of the charges and it suffices to observe that they arise out of her use of various false names in order to obtain payment of pension from the Social Security authorities. It was observed that as a result of her frauds the Commonwealth had been persuaded to overpay her an amount in the vicinity of more than $180,000.
The learned sentencing judge imposed upon the applicant an overall sentence of three years' imprisonment and directed that she be the subject of a recognizance release order after serving 12 months, a part of that term.
This appeal is dealt with by the Court in quite exceptional circumstances and it will be apparent from what I will have to say that the result is not of any precedential value for other cases of like offence.
The Crown consents to the Court receiving the affidavit of Jennifer Iera
Wheeler sworn 29 August to which is exhibited a report concerning the applicant from Dr Royle Crooks of 24 August 1995. That report which is consistent with the progress of a medical condition described to his Honour in the District Court shows that there has been grave deterioration.
The applicant was initially incarcerated and whilst in prison she had a severe vomiting attack. The seriousness of this was apparently not immediately appreciated by her custodians and after five days she collapsed and was transferred to Westmead Hospital where it was discovered she had renal failure. This added to a serious cardiac condition, the details of which were explored at the sentencing proceedings.
The fact is that, since the sentence was imposed, the applicant has had two hospitalizations due to cardio-respiratory failure. One in April of this year and a more serious one in May this year. Her life expectancy is measured in terms of considerably less than a year.
In the circumstances and no doubt as a manifestation of mercy and humanity, the Crown has not only consented to our receiving this material but has expressly submitted that the appeal ought be allowed and submitted that an appropriate sentence would not require this applicant to spend any further period in custody.
In the very special circumstances of this case in which the applicant's illness has, as I view the material, progressed beyond a stage of seriousness to that in which she is virtually in need of palliative preterminal care, I agree that that approach is appropriate.
Accordingly I would propose the following orders: that the application for leave to appeal against the sentence be granted, the appeal allowed and the sentence imposed in the District Court be quashed. In lieu thereof, the applicant be sentenced to imprisonment for a period of three years to date from 13 December 1994 and that there be a recognizance release order in regard to that sentence whereby she be released after serving two months and one day, part of that sentence, conditional upon her entering into a recognizance to be of good behaviour for the balance period of two years, nine months and 29 days. It is to be noted that the applicant has already been in custody for the specified period of two months and one day and no question of her returning to custody arises. In order to remove any doubt,
I would specify that the Order for Reparation made in the District Court is to stand.
JUDGE2
JAMES J I agree with the judgment and orders proposed by the presiding Judge.
JUDGE3
HULME J I agree. I would add only this. Nothing in this case should be taken as an indication that the prospect of someone dying in gaol should be regarded as a major reason why a sentence otherwise appropriate should not be imposed.
Those who commit offences late in their life cannot, in my view, claim with any great force that they should not suffer the consequences of their criminality.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/70.html  
