

Regina versus D W Stig [1996] NSWSC 493 (17 October 1996) 
REGINA versus Darrel Wayne STIG /96, 60448/96 October 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Mahoney ACJ, Simpson J, Barr J 
CATCHWORDS: Interlocutory order granting parties liberty to inspect documents produced on subpoena - whether legitimate forensic purpose shown - whether public interest in confidentiality of documents given proper weight - whether correct balancing test applied - held: no error demonstrated - leave to appeal refused.

RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY ACJ: The facts are detailed in the judgment of Barr J. His Honour's statement of them enables me to go directly to the matters in issue.

The two applications, by the respective Commissioners of Police in New South
Wales and Victoria, have been dealt with together. Mr Bartley, who appears for both applicants, sought leave to appear, in their place or in addition, for the Attorney General of New South Wales. The Court will ordinarily accede to a request by the Attorney General to appear in a proceeding before the Court, in appropriate cases as a party and in other cases in other capacities. In the present applications, it has been agreed that the Attorney General may appear to make submissions to the Court in the interests of the Commissioners and Mr
Bartley has, in the event, appeared for the Attorney General and the
Commissioners.

As Barr J has indicated, the present applications relate to subpoenas issued for the production of evidence by the Commissioners at the trial of Mr Stig in relation to certain drug offences. As is now common, the contest as to a matter which might, argued at the trial, have delayed its progress, was dealt with by his Honour Judge JB Phelan in advance of the trial. The Commissioners objected to the production of the subpoenaed material on two grounds: that the material would serve no legitimate forensic purpose of the accused at the trial; and that the public interest required or warranted that the information be not disclosed. Stated summarily, it was the task of the learned judge to decide whether there was involved a legitimate forensic purpose, whether there was a public interest to be served by the non-disclosure of the documents, and whether, taking into account these and other relevant factors, whether the material should be produced on subpoena. The learned judge ordered that the material be produced but limited production of the material to the barrister and solicitor representing Mr Stig. It is in respect of these interlocutory orders that the Commissioners sought leave to appeal pursuant to the Criminal
Appeals Act 1912.
LEGITIMATE FORENSIC PURPOSE: 
The learned judge held that the accused had a real forensic purpose in seeking production of and access to the material. The material, it was accepted, related inter alia to surveillance of two men in relation to apprehended drug offences. His Honour, in his judgment of 23 August 1996, said: "I confirm that the way in which evidence of the undercover operation emerged and the unexplained delay in executing the warrant caused me concern. There seemed to be a real possibility that there were influences operating at a higher level in the Police Force or perhaps elsewhere, permitting the principal offenders to escape and leaving the accused in a potentially compromised position in the presentation of his defence. My feeling on this issue was sufficiently strong to wonder whether I should refer the matter after trial to Wood J enquiry." 
In arriving at this conclusion, the learned judge had regard both to what had been put to him upon the applications and also to what had been placed before him during the (aborted) first trial of the accused. It was accepted before him that the judge should have regard to the latter matter and both counsel before this Court have agreed that this Court can and should have regard to that matter. I shall refer to aspects of this subsequently.

In order to understand the significance of his Honour's finding in this regard, it is necessary to refer to the nature of Mr Stig's defence. He was in possession of certain premises. His contention was that he was approached by certain men and agreed to their using his premises to mix chemicals. The mixing of chemicals took place on the premises: what was involved was the illegal manufacture of amphetamines. Mr Stig contended that he did not know that what the men proposed to do or were doing on the premises was illegal. It was that defence which, in substance, was to be pressed at the trial.

The Crown case, as it was presented at the first trial and was to be at the second trial, was generally to the effect that police officers had raided Mr
Stig's premises, had found secreted in a hot-house amphetamines valued at some $2 million, and had questioned Mr Stig about them. It was suggested, apparently, that Mr Stig had made a statement which could be understood to have implicated him in an offence.

Had the case left to the jury been merely that the police had come upon Mr
Stig's premises, had found there the large quantity of amphetamines, and had obtained a statement from him, the case against him might have been considered strong. The only explanation he gave was that he had met two men whom he did not otherwise know and had agreed to allow them to use his premises. If he could not produce the men or effectively identify them and account for what they had done upon his premises, the jury might well conclude that his explanation was unacceptable. They might well have concluded that, the amphetamines being found as they were, he was responsible for and knew of them.

The submission to the judge and, in a form, to this Court, was that the material subpoenaed would provide assistance to Mr Stig in establishing his defence in several ways. First, the evidence would establish, or assist in establishing, that there were two men with relevant criminal records involved in drug trading who had a direct association - or at least a sufficient association - with Mr Stig's premises. The suggestion was that the evidence subpoenaed would show that the Victorian police and subsequently the New South
Wales police had had two such men under surveillance for some time and that they had been traced to or to the vicinity of Mr Stig's premises. The suggestion was generally, I infer, that if Mr Stig could establish that there were two such persons involved in the drug trade that would add credibility to his account of how amphetamines came to be upon his premises.

It is not necessary for an accused person seeking evidence on subpoena to establish that the evidence will certainly prove the case which he proposes to set up. It is sufficient that there be a real and significant possibility that if the evidence is available, it may do so or may establish a sufficient part of that case. In the present case, the evidence would, in my opinion, have this effect: at least, there was the appropriate possibility that it would. It would provide a basis for Mr Stig's explanation of how his premises came to be used which, absent some identification of two men apt to seek possession of the premises and so use it, might have appeared to the jury less than credible.

Second, the submission suggested that the way in which the existence and activities of the two men emerged at the first trial established or added weight to Mr Stig's claim in this regard. It was, counsel suggested, "coy" of the police not to have revealed these facts in chief at the trial; the facts or the substance of them were, it was suggested, adduced only in cross- examination. This is a matter to which the learned judge made reference. He suggested, as Mr Rosser QC said, that "almost all of the information in the document slowly emerged at the trial". Whether this be a fully accurate account of the trial or whether it overstates what occurred was a matter in difference. But, the suggestion was, inferences were to be drawn against the relevant police officers from the way in which "slowly" the evidence emerged.
What was said at the trial, as appearing on the transcript, and what the judge otherwise may have observed at the trial were matters upon which his Honour relied in coming to the conclusions to which he referred.

The two men in question were not arrested. At the trial, no account was given of them or why they were not arrested. The suggestion was that the picture presented against Mr Stig at the trial was different from the one which would have emerged had the police explained in detail the operation on which they had been engaged. This, it was suggested, would have affected the attitude apt to be taken by the jury to Mr Stig and the defence and he sought to advance.

Third, it was submitted that what emerged at the trial and was observed by the judge went to the credit of the police involved. The suggestion was that, when the statement said to have been made by the accused was contested, as it was to be, the jury might conclude that the police were not to be accepted as credible witnesses in this regard.

If the judge's finding on this matter be correct, the material or the information contained in it would constitute a substantial forensic advantage to the accused at the trial. Faced with this, Mr Bartley submitted that his
Honour's finding of fact was wrong. I think he accepted - at least it is in my opinion clear - that if the judge's finding be accepted, the accused had the necessary forensic interest in the material. He therefore sought to avoid the finding.

Mr Bartley was faced with the fact that the transcript of what occurred at the trial, some 180 pages, is not before this Court. When this was adverted to, he sought to tender that transcript and to refer to particular portions of it. On an interlocutory application such as this the power of this Court to accept evidence is accepted. It is not necessary or appropriate in these applications to attempt to delimit the circumstances in which such evidence will be admitted. Subject to what I shall say, this Court is, in my opinion, ordinarily averse to entering into such an exercise in fact finding as would be required in the present case. However, it is not necessary to pursue this aspect of the matter further because Mr Rosser QC fairly conceded that he made submissions based upon the assumption that that transcript would be before this Court and he accepted that he could not object to the tender of it. The transcript has been placed before the Court. At least three things may be said. First, the finding of a judge as to what took place at the trial will ordinarily be accepted by a court reviewing the events in question. The present case is, in principle, not exactly a case of that kind: it involves conclusions drawn by the judge from what occurred before him. But, for myself,
I would differ from the conclusions of a trial judge in a case such as this only if it appeared to me that there was some error in the conclusions at which he had arrived. The submission here was not that there was a positive error but that the evidence did not warrant the inference drawn. In my opinion, that inference was one which was open to the judge.

Second, in considering the correctness of the conclusion drawn by the judge, it is in my opinion proper to have regard to the fact that the judge enjoyed the ordinary advantage of a trial judge in observing not merely what was said but how it was said and the context of it at the trial. In considering whether, for example, evidence has emerged "slowly" or reluctantly, the advantage of a trial judge may in my opinion be significant. A transcript of a trial such as this does not include all of the exchanges which take place between a trial judge and counsel and may not fully record the background against which what was said was said.

Third, I am not satisfied from a perusal of the relevant portions of the transcript that the suspicions which the judge had - the "real possibility" to which he referred - were not correct. It was not necessary for him to reach at that stage a final conclusion upon the matters to which he referred. But, in my opinion, the jury could, in considering the case against Mr Stig, have seen as "a real possibility" what the judge referred to and they might have taken that into account in determining whether, beyond a reasonable doubt, the case against Mr Stig had been proved.

Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the judge was wrong in concluding that there existed the "real possibility" to which he referred or at least that what had been done left the accused "in a potentially compromised position in the presentation of his defence". I am satisfied that in this way the necessary forensic advantage qua the subpoenaed material was shown to exist.
THE PUBLIC INTEREST: 
Privilege against production of material on subpoena may exist where there is a relevant public interest to be served by not disclosing it. It is not necessary to traverse the principles in this regard: in these applications they have not been in question. I shall therefore deal with the matter generally and without standing upon the precise terms of what is involved.

Public interest is, like any other matter, a matter which, if it is to be relied upon, must be shown to exist. How this will be shown will depend on the circumstances. Where what is involved is the protection of an informant, the
Court may ordinarily infer a public interest in non-disclosure of his name.
But this is not such a case. In this case the Commissioners sought to establish the existence of the relevant public interest immunity by affidavit.
The affidavit of Assistant Commissioner of Police Christine Nixon of 1 August illustrates the material referred to in argument.

In relation to the public interest immunity claimed, the deponent, in relation to particular portions of the material, stated the public interest as follows: "... public interest immunity in that they relate to another ongoing Police inquiry, and for the contents of those documents to be disclosed at this stage would have the effect of alerting persons who are the subject of that inquiry to the fact that they are of interest to Police and to the degree of progress of that inquiry, and therefore tend to hamper the efficiency of the Police investigation.
 ...
 ... for public interest immunity attaches to the documents insofar as the documents disclose police methodology, and such disclosure if allowed could have the effect of undermining the efficiency of ongoing and future police operations." 
Insofar as the complaint was that there would be disclosure of "police methodology" generally, the evidence does not indicate in what way or, in particular, the extent of the seriousness of this disclosure. In relation to the ongoing police inquiry referred to, nothing was said to enable the Court to assess the significance of the inquiry or what prejudice would be caused.
It was accepted that the persons in question later became aware of the inquiry and the fact of surveillance. These matters do not exhaust the matters sought to be relied on but, as emerged during argument, they affect the extent of the damage apt to be done to the public interest by the disclosure, with appropriate restricted provisions, of the material in question.
THE BALANCING OF THE CLAIMS: 
It was accepted in this case that, in determining whether the material subpoenaed should be produced, the Court should balance the forensic advantage and the public interest in the appropriate way. Again, the principles involved are not in issue.

Mr Bartley submitted that his Honour had failed to balance the public interest claim against the claim of the accused. There was no reference in detail in the judge's final reasons to the balancing process. But in my opinion it is clear that his Honour was conscious of the need to balance the interests involved. During the course of dialogue with counsel on 2 August 1996, the public interest was referred to. Having regard to the nature of the issue as presented to the judge and the context in which his reasons were formulated, the fact that he did not, in his final reasons, refer to the process of balancing does not warrant the inference that he did not properly take account of the public interest involved.

Mr Bartley's submission was, consequently, that the judge was wrong in the balance at which he arrived. I am not satisfied that he was. His decision was a discretionary decision based upon value judgments which in turn were affected by what he had seen and heard at the first trial. Mr Bartley conceded that he could not point to any overt error in what the judge had done. I do not think the Court should infer error to have existed.

In the end, the submission was, I think, that the judge's conclusion was so far wrong that error was to be inferred.

I am conscious of the importance of maintaining proper confidentiality in respect of those aspects of police investigations which warrant such an approach. The problems confronting bona fide investigation by an impartial police service are considerable and the Court will, I think, have proper regard to them.

I am conscious also of the difficulty in framing affidavit evidence directed to the identification of and the proof of public interest claims of the present kind. To be more explicit may be to be less confidential. A bland statement of the nature of the public interest in question will, in many cases, not be sufficient and the identification of the interest to be claimed may require care.

But those things said, upon the conclusions arrived at by the judge, what was here involved, was a possibility that a prosecution case would be presented in a way which was quite unfair to the accused. The unfairness was the greater because, as appears to have been accepted, the accused was a basically illiterate person of low intelligence who suffered from partial deafness and other personal difficulties.

In each case, the process of weighing individual interest against public interest must be made carefully and according to the evidence in the instant case. For myself, I would give particular weight to a personal claim for forensic advantage where there is a real possibility that, absent the material in question, an innocent person might be convicted. I am conscious that the possibility of forensic detriment may be small and the public interest great; in some cases the individual interest must be outweighed by the public interest. But where the possibility of personal detriment is as real as the judge saw it to be in this case, I do not think that it is to be outweighed by statements of the public interest of the kind here established.

For these reasons I am of opinion that the present applications should be refused.

Before parting with the matter, it is proper to add two things. First, I have referred to the judge's conclusions in relation to the possibility of police misconduct. It is proper to emphasise that what is here concerned is possibility and not probability or certainty. The position of the police officers concerned has not been the subject of detailed investigation and it is not to be inferred, from what the judge said or from the present proceeding, that the police officers were acting inappropriately in relation to this matter. That is a matter which, if necessary, may require investigation during the second trial or otherwise.

Second, the dismissal of the present applications does not preclude the
Commissioners making a different application based upon different considerations in relation to the subpoenaed material. The judge would not, I think, entertain merely a rehearing of the present applications. But the Court has been informed that circumstances have to an extent changed in relation to the investigations. If, upon properly identified public interest grounds, orders were required to protect the public interest in changed circumstances, it would be within the power of the judge to consider such applications.
Whether they should be granted is, of course, a matter for the judge to determine. If such applications are to be made, they should be made at a time which will enable finalisation of them before the trial.
 
SIMPSON J: I have read in draft the judgments of Mahoney ACJ and Barr J. Like their Honours I am of the view that no error has been demonstrated in the approach taken by Phelan DCJ. Accordingly, I agree with the order proposed.
 
BARR J: The Commissioners of Police for the State of New South Wales and Victoria produced documents under subpoena to the District Court at the trial of the respondent, Darrel Wayne Stig, but submitted that the trial judge should not permit the parties to have access to certain of them, raising questions of public interest immunity and asserting that the respondent had no legitimate forensic purpose in trying to get access to them. The trial judge, Judge J B Phelan, inspected the documents and granted access to them, but directed that their contents should be kept exclusively within the information of the legal representatives of the respondent and disclosed by them to the respondent only to the extent that it might become forensically necessary. The respective Commissioners of Police wish to appeal against his Honour's order under <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act. Since his Honour refused to certify that the order was a proper one for determination on appeal, they may only appeal by leave of this Court. They now apply for that leave. Counsel for the applicants was granted leave to make submissions also on behalf of the Attorney General for New South Wales.

The charge against the respondent is that he knowingly took part in the manufacture of a prohibited drug, namely methylamphetamine, in an amount not less than the large commercial quantity thereof, during May and June 1995 at
Thirlmere. The respondent owns premises at 160 Station Street, Thirlmere and at the time of the events giving rise to the charge against him had been carrying on business there for about ten years as a self-employed market gardener. He was a person in his early 50's, of low intelligence and having no criminal convictions. He proposes at his trial to adduce evidence of these matters and of the fact that he has survived financially over the last few years with the help of his parents and family on the farm. His income, it is said, has been from the sale of cattle and vegetables produced there. He is "basically illiterate" and, although he has bank accounts, has to have his relatives write out bank deposit slips, cheques and the like for his signature.

On 7 June 1995 an operation called "Keeslip" was commenced by a task force of the New South Wales Drug Enforcement Agency. Its purpose was to investigate the suspected manufacture and supply of amphetamines. The persons suspected to have been involved were Robert John Malcolm and John William Dorain. On 30 May information had been received that Dorain was travelling from Melbourne to the vicinity of Albury carrying drums of methanol and benzine. It was believed that the two men had met there and had decanted the contents of the drums into containers possessed by Malcolm. Members of the task force followed
Malcolm to the Bargo area. One week later police followed Malcolm and Dorain as they travelled together towards Thirlmere. They drove into the respondent's premises. Some time later their vehicle left those premises and went to another address in Thirlmere owned by a man called Galvin, who had convictions for stealing goods, including chemicals capable of being used to make amphetamine. Malcolm and Dorain both had substantial criminal records including drug offences.

The police observed activities at the respondent's premises during the hours of darkness on 7 June 1995 and noticed that there was a fire, similar to an incinerator flame, at the rear of the premises. There was a strong acidic smell such as might be suspected of being produced during the manufacture of amphetamines. On 8 June 1995 a member of the task force applied to a magistrate for a search warrant to enter and search the respondent's premises.
In his application he set forth the facts that I have summarised above. He also declared and affirmed that he had reasonable grounds for believing that there was on the premises, or would be within 72 hours thereafter, amphetamine, chemicals and apparatus used in the manufacture of amphetamine and relevant documents and other records. The search warrant was obtained at about 2.30pm on 8 June 1995. Notwithstanding what they had seen on the night of 7 June 1995, the police did not execute the warrant until Friday, 9 June
By that time Malcolm and Dorain, if they had been there, had left the premises. The respondent was present and was questioned by police officers. He showed them a number of sheds at the rear of the property and explained to them that he had agreed to let other persons use a shed for what he had been led to believe was mixing chemicals. Police seized a large amount of laboratory apparatus, chemicals and other equipment which may, for the purposes of these applications, be taken to have been used for the manufacture of amphetamines. Almost immediately after commencing a search of the property police officers found a canister of amphetamines buried in a hothouse. The value of the drug is said to be worth about $2 million.

The respondent has pleaded not guilty. His defence is that he did not know that amphetamines were being made in his shed, but had been tricked by people experienced in manufacturing amphetamines. His lack of education, physical disabilities (he suffered from a hearing loss of about 50%) and low intelligence made him an ideal target.

The Crown proposes to adduce evidence that the respondent stated during a recorded interview that he knew that the mixing of the chemicals was illegal.
That admission is disputed. At an earlier trial which for reasons not relevant to this application was aborted, evidence was given by a speech pathologist that it was highly unlikely that the respondent had made the alleged admission, so it seems possible that the jury may decide not to act on the evidence. In the result the Crown case against the respondent is principally or wholly a circumstantial one, the main features of which are that there were found on his premises a quantity of the drug and the means of manufacturing it. There is also the evidence of what the police heard and saw on the night of 7 June 1995. It is also said that about $4,000 in cash was found on the premises and that the respondent told the police a lie, which demonstrated consciousness of his guilt.

The respective Commissioners of Police asserted before his Honour that public interest immunity attached to certain of the documents described by the subpoena because, first, they related to an existing police inquiry, so that disclosure of their contents would alert persons the subject of the inquiry.
The efficiency of the police investigation would therefore tend to be hampered. Secondly, it was put that public interest immunity attached to some other of the documents because they disclosed police methods, and to do so might undermine the efficiency of police operations.

The public has an interest in protecting the confidentiality of existing police investigations. Attorney General for New South Wales versus Stuart [(1994) NSWLR 667] in the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL at 674F. There is also an interest in preserving the confidentiality of police methods, if their disclosure would render them ineffective or less effective. At the same time the public has an interest in guarding against the conviction of innocent persons and in seeing that they are not prevented from taking any lawful steps in the preparation or presentation of their defence. Where a claim of public interest immunity is made, the Court is required to consider two conflicting aspects of the public interest, namely, whether harm would be done by the production of the documents, and whether the administration of justice would be frustrated or impaired if the documents were withheld. The Court must decide which of those aspects predominates in the case before it. This balancing can only be undertaken when it appears both that damage would be done to the public interest by producing the documents sought or documents of that class, and that there are or are likely to be documents which contain material relevant to the issues raised in the proceedings. Attorney General v
Stuart at 675; Sankey versus Whitlam <case>; [(1978) 142 CLR 1] at 38-39; Alister versus The Queen (1984) 154 CLR 404 at 412.
This second aspect has been called the legitimate forensic purpose test. See
Maddison versus Goldrick [[1976] 1 NSWLR 651]; R v
Saleam [(1989) 16 NSWLR 14]; Attorney General versus Stuart at 675. It involves the need to prevent a fishing expedition in the hope of catching something worthwhile to the defence.

It is for the party seeking access to documents to demonstrate the existence of such a legitimate purpose for doing so and ordinarily it is enough for the person resisting inspection of documents merely to assert that there is no legitimate forensic purpose, so as clearly to raise the issue. So it was in this case.

However, where the party resisting inspection wishes to raise questions of public interest immunity it will ordinarily be expected to adduce evidence to demonstrate the public interest in keeping the relevant documents confidential. Sometimes very little evidence, or even a bare assertion, will suffice, as where it is common ground that the prosecution relies on evidence of a police informer, whose identity will probably be revealed if inspection is had. Difficulties may sometimes be encountered in demonstrating the existence of the public interest without disclosing the very material whose confidentiality it is sought to preserve, but there are methods which can be resorted to to overcome those difficulties. So affidavits or memoranda can be tendered on a confidential basis.

In the present case, however, the respective Commissioners made no more than a perfunctory attempt to raise the issue of public interest immunity. The affidavit filed on behalf of the New South Wales Commissioner stated in respect of certain of the documents that: "... the documents are the subject of a claim for public interest immunity in that they relate to another ongoing Police inquiry, and for the contents of those documents to be disclosed at this stage would have the effect of alerting persons who are the subject of that inquiry to the fact that they are of interest to Police and to the degree of progress of that inquiry, and therefore tend to hamper the efficiency of the Police investigation" and in respect of others that: "... a claim for public interest immunity attaches to the documents insofar as the documents disclose police methodology, and such disclosure if allowed could have the effect of undermining the efficiency of ongoing and future police operations." 
The affidavit relied on by the Victorian Commissioner was in similar terms.

No attempt was made to inform the Court, even in a guarded way, of the nature of the "other ongoing police inquiry" or of what police "methodology" might be disclosed by the inspection of documents or how that disclosure might undermine the efficiency of police operations.

His Honour received written submissions canvassing the question of legitimate forensic purpose, and heard oral submissions from counsel. His Honour was invited to read the documents produced on subpoena and adjourned the Court for the purpose of doing so. On resumption his Honour permitted further submissions to be made, during which he remarked that: "... the reality ... is that almost all of the information in the documents slowly emerged at the trial." 
As counsel were aware, his Honour had been the judge presiding over the aborted trial. Counsel for the applicants repeated the submission that the documents related to ongoing police inquiries and his Honour said: "Yes, well I was a bit concerned about that but ... powerful and all as the evidence was, no arrests had been made of the other two men for reasons that one of the police officers was unable to explain. And I got the very strong impression that there were people upstairs in the police force, or somewhere, who were thwarting the proper investigation of the matter. That was my very worried feeling at the time." 
A little later his Honour announced his intention to grant access to the documents, "particularly in the light of my knowledge of the case gleaned from the aborted trial." His Honour then granted a stay of proceedings and agreed to deliver more extensive reasons later on. On 23 August 1996 his Honour delivered reasons which included the following: "Access was granted in the light of the background facts in defence solicitor's submissions of 1 August 1996 and my knowledge of the case from having presided over a trial between 16th and 13th May this year which was aborted.

I confirm that the way in which evidence of the undercover operation emerged and the unexplained delay in executing the warrant caused me concern. There seemed to be a real possibility that there were influences operating at a higher level in the Police Force or perhaps elsewhere, permitting the principle offenders to escape and leaving the accused in a potentially compromised position in the presentation of his defence. My feeling on this issue was sufficiently strong to wonder whether I should refer the matter after trial to (the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service).

Whilst these concerns may be capable of innocent explanation, no opportunity was sought to negate them when they were raised by me with Miss McSpedden on 2
August this year. Much of the information in the documents did emerge at the trial, but in such a way that it was difficult to know how much more information may have been available.

With this background I rejected the submission that there was any `fishing' going on and after consideration of R versus Saleam [(1989) 16 NSWLR 14] I allowed access on strict terms that would protect any police enquiry from publicity or other prejudice." 
No exception was taken by counsel to his Honour's use of his knowledge of events at the previous trial, though no transcript of the trial was tendered.
It was not submitted to this Court that his Honour's use of his knowledge was impermissible.

Counsel for the applicants and the Attorney General submitted first that his
Honour confused the two aspects of the public interest which had to be balanced and secondly that he erred in the process of balancing them. It is convenient to consider these submissions together.

I do not think that his Honour confused the two aspects of the public interest which he was required to consider. His Honour was well aware from counsel's written and oral submissions that the respondent, the party seeking access to the documents, had to identify precisely the purpose for which access was being sought. His Honour's reference to R versus Saleam makes that clear. His
Honour's express rejection of the submission that "this was a mere fishing expedition" confirms this conclusion. His Honour's remarks were made in the context of his unease about the integrity of the police investigation and of his suspicion that the police might have let the principal offenders escape, leaving the respondent in a compromised position relating to his defence. I accept the submissions of Mr Rosser QC for the respondents in this Court that what his Honour was there referring to was this. The respondent's case was that he, a simple person, had been duped. If an accused person on whose property the large commercial quantity of amphetamines is found and shown to have been manufactured is restricted in his defence to putting forward a claim that others used his property for unlawful purposes without his knowledge or permission, that is a weak defence. If, on the other hand, evidence is available showing that two men experienced with drugs and crime generally travelled to New South Wales apparently for the purpose of manufacturing amphetamines, that police saw them present on the accused's property and saw and heard things consistent with the manufacture of amphetamines whilst those men were apparently in the vicinity, that they left the premises before the police executed the search warrant and up to the date of trial they had never been interviewed by police, there may be a defence of a very different kind. I think that that submission is made out. Mr Rosser's second submission was that the likelihood was that facts revealed by the inspection of documents might be used to attack the credit of the investigating police. A remarkable feature of the first trial, it was said, was that police were less than candid during cross-examination about admitting what they knew of the amphetamine manufacturing operation which took place on the respondent's property until they realised that cross-examining counsel had a copy of the application for the search warrant. I accept the submission. It seems likely to me that the inspection of documents might produce relevant material for cross-examination on the honesty of the police and the integrity of the investigation.

Counsel invited this Court to read a transcript of the evidence taken at the first trial, but it seems to me that there are several reasons why this Court ought not to use it in considering the application. First, this is an application for leave to appeal and it seems inappropriate for this Court to try to reconstruct from a transcript (which was not before his Honour) the facts on which his Honour's impressions of the trial were based. Secondly, his
Honour may well have relied as much on the demeanour of police witnesses as on anything they said. That would not appear from the transcript. But a more important reason, it seems to me, is that the evidence at the first trial would be relevant only to the question whether the respondent had a legitimate forensic purpose for seeking access to documents. For the reasons which I have already expressed, I am satisfied without the need to resort to a reading of the transcript that such a purpose existed and that his Honour was entitled so to find.

Counsel also invited this Court to inspect the documents themselves. It was put that his Honour did so and that this Court might gain a better understanding of his Honour's process of reasoning by seeing the documents his
Honour had before him. For my part I would prefer not to inspect them. His
Honour read them in the light of what he knew about the first trial, as his judgment makes clear, so he gained an understanding which this Court could never have.

His Honour did not state that he was balancing the two aspects of the public interest to which I have referred, but I think it implicit in his judgment that that is the process that he carried out. Once having decided that there existed a legitimate forensic purpose in seeking access to the documents, his
Honour had to decide whether the public interest in seeing that purpose fulfilled outweighed the public interest in seeing that the documents remained confidential. As I have already observed, there was scant evidence to put into the balance to justify a denial of access. Counsel's attention was drawn in this application to the paucity of evidence supporting the need for immunity from inspection on either of the bases asserted. Acknowledging that the evidence was less informative than it might have been, counsel submitted that it was sufficient and went on to rehearse substantial facts and circumstances, together with arguments based upon them, which were never before his Honour. I shall make further reference to those matters later in this judgment. The overall impression I have received from his Honour's judgment, however, is that his Honour must have compared the need for the respondent to pursue all proper steps in his defence with the need, formally but faintly expressed, to preserve the confidentiality of the documents. His Honour impliedly concluded that the former outweighed the latter. In my view his Honour was entitled to come to that conclusion. I would reject the applicant's second submission.

The final submission made by counsel for the applicants was that the form of the order made by his Honour was inappropriate because it put counsel in an impossible position and was unworkable because it could not be supervised and that the dangers involved in permitting access subject to uncontrollable conditions justified the refusal of an order for access. Reliance was placed on the judgment of Wilcox J in Hilton versus Wells <case>; <case>; [(1992-1993) 176 CLR 604.] It seems to me that neither of those cases proscribes the making in a proper case of an order like the one made by his Honour. In Hilton versus Wells Wilcox J drew attention to the dangers involved in such an order but decided on the facts of the case before him that it was inappropriate. In The Commonwealth versus Northern
Land Council the High Court of Australia was concerned relevantly only with an order permitting inspection by legal representatives before a claim for immunity had even been decided.

It seems to me that the order made by his Honour was well within his discretion.

Leave to appeal under <case>, Criminal Appeal Act should not readily be granted unless there has been shown to be an error of principle apt to cause irregularity of injustice. R versus Ho Court of Criminal Appeal, New South Wales, July 1994, unreported. This Court has previously made a clear distinction between an appeal and an application for leave to appeal under the section.
Before the Court will consider the merits of the matter the applicant must show that it is a matter warranting a grant of leave. R versus Matovski [(1989) NSWLR 720.] In my opinion it has not been demonstrated that a grant of leave is warranted and I would refuse leave to appeal.
 * * * 
