

Cross V M and L Hazelton Pty Ltd Matter No 2580/96 [1997] NSWSC 309 (15
August 1997) 
Cross V M & L Hazelton Pty Limited /96 August 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /96 - CROSS V M & L HAZELTON PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a case which, on one version of it, has been twice settled yet the court is still having to make determinations in the matter. 
The suit, involving a falling out between the parties in respect of the
Gladstone Hotel, was listed for hearing before the Chief Judge on 21 February
It seemed to have been settled and the Chief Judge ordered that the matter stand over to the Registrar for mention on 31 July 1997. However, by 31
July 1997 the parties were arguing as to whether the case had been settled or not, including, it would seem, the authority of the defendant's counsel to settle the case. On 31 July the Registrar gave the plaintiffs leave to amend the statement of claim to add new clauses 17 to 25 seeking an order that the matter had, in fact, been settled and for an order implementing the settlement. That matter was set down for the short notice listing on 31 July and, in the ordinary course of events, comes on for hearing today.

On 30 July 1997, that is the day before the matter was in the Registrar's list, the plaintiffs' solicitor sent to the defendant's solicitor a simple document saying "Offer of Compromise - The plaintiffs offer to accept the sum of $30,000". On 14 August 1997, that is yesterday, the defendant accepted that offer. Today the plaintiffs ask for costs and the defendant resists that.

The defendant says that "the agreement", that had been reached outside the
Chief Judge's court, was that $25,000 would be paid on one day and a further $5,000 some time afterwards, that each party would pay their own costs and that it took the settlement to be that the plaintiffs were still willing to accept that $30,000.

However, the rules provided or have been interpreted to provide that offers for compromise are ordinarily to be made on a basis other than an "inclusive of costs" basis, and that (Rule 52A(22)(1): "Upon the acceptance of an offer of compromise ... the defendant shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, pay the costs in respect of the claim by the plaintiff against the defendant up to and including the day the offer was accepted." The whole thrust of the rules is that litigants should be encouraged to settle on an offer of compromise and that the court is only to make an order to the contrary in the exceptional case.

If there has been some misunderstanding, then it may be that there is an equity in the defendant to set aside the apparent agreement or to rectify it but, in view of the ordinary provisions of the rules, which solicitors are deemed to know, that may be a hard path to tread. It is not one that I am treading this morning.

Accordingly, it is my view that I should order that the defendant should pay the plaintiffs' costs. However, there is this that is extraordinary about this case, namely the application that was listed this morning is merely whether the proceedings were compromised outside the Chief Judge's court. All other questions in the proceedings would have been dealt with at some later date had I not found in favour of the plaintiffs on that issue.

The offer of compromise was made on 30 July, which must have been in contemplation of the orders that were filed the next day before the Registrar for the present point to be dealt with separately in the short notice list.
When one adds to these facts the further factor that the original settlement was $30,000, with each party to pay its own costs, it would seem to me that the appropriate order for costs is only that the defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs from 22 February 1997 up to and including 14 August 1997 and that in respect of the other costs of the proceedings, everyone pay their own. That is the order I make.

The formal orders are judgment for the plaintiffs for $30,000. I order that the defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs on and from 22 February 1997 to and including 14 August 1997. Otherwise, each party shall pay its, his or her own costs.
 * * * 
