

Webster versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales Matter No /87 [1998] NSWSC 718 (28 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
PAUL RONALD WEBSTER versus GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /87 July 1998 
Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
By these proceedings the plaintiff Paul Ronald Webster seeks damages from the
Government Insurance Office as a result of grave injuries which he sustained in a motor vehicle accident on 15 March 1987. On that date the plaintiff was a passenger in a motor vehicle driven by the defendant's insured Bevan John
Teague along Pollack Avenue, Wyong in this State. Due to what was clearly a failure properly to control his vehicle, Mr Teague failed to negotiate a right hand bend in the roadway and his vehicle came into collision with a power pole. Although the defendant did not admit liability in these proceedings no argument was addressed to the Court on this issue by the defendant. Mr Teague was clearly negligent and the plaintiff is entitled to an award of damages against the defendant undiminished by any question of contributory negligence.

The plaintiff was born on 21 July 1966 and therefore 20 years old at the date of the accident. He was living with his parents and his elder sister at their home in North Street, Mount Colah. He had completed his School Certificate at
Wyong High School and, at the date of the accident, was in second year of a two year Art Certificate Course at Hornsby TAFE.

After the accident the plaintiff was taken to Wyong Hospital, then Gosford
Hospital, and on the same day was transferred to Royal North Shore Hospital, where he came under the care of Dr R G Rushworth, a consultant neurosurgeon.
On arrival at Royal North Shore Hospital the plaintiff was unconscious and had a massive open frontal wound with his brain coming out of it. His pupils were dilated and unreactive to light. A CT scan and x-ray showed that he had extensive fracturing of his frontal bone, niason, anterior cranial fossa and facial bones. On the day of admission Dr Rushworth explored and repaired the cranial portion of the plaintiff's injuries. He found that both frontal lobes were extensively damaged and both optic nerves were thought to have been divided. There was an extensive defect in the anterior cranial fossa which was repaired with fascia-lata.

In the post-operative period the plaintiff was neurologically improved. He would obey commands and could move all his limbs. His conscious level then deteriorated, but improved again by 18 March 1987. At that time he was unable to see. His pupils remained fixed and dilated.

On 18 March he was noted to have fluid running from his nose which was thought to be cerebro-spinal fluid and a spinal drain was inserted. This remained in place for seven days, and the leak ceased thereafter. Tracheostomy was performed on 19 March 1987 and repair of his facial fractures was undertaken by plastic surgeons on 23 March 1987. He remained effectively blind and an initial electrical examination of his vision suggested that this might be permanent. However, when the test was repeated some response was obtained from the right eye.

The repair of the facial fractures was carried out by Dr John Vandervord, a specialist in plastic and reconstructive surgery. This involved intermaxillary fixation, external fixation, exploration and reconstruction of the infraorbital margin on the right side.

On 27 April 1987 the plaintiff was discharged from Royal North Shore Hospital and admitted to Coorabel Hospital under the care of Dr Renton, a rehabilitation specialist. At this time the plaintiff was orientated and could appreciate light in the right eye. He was able to walk with assistance and to feed himself.

On 3 July 1987 the plaintiff was discharged from Coorabel Hospital to live with his parents. Upon his return home he came under the care of Dr Bok, a general practitioner at Hornsby. In September 1987 he was reviewed at the
Royal North Shore Hospital Medical Centre. On 1 October he again consulted Dr
Renton. In October 1987 he was interviewed by Miss Helen Newman a clinical psychologist. She was then employed as a locum neuro-psychologist at Coorabel
Hospital. One of many matters of concern with which the plaintiff presented was that of having phobic reactions to needles and visualising spiders and other objects. Indeed he had developed a distressing and acute fear of spiders for which he was referred to a hypnotherapist. Miss Newman reported that the plaintiff remained phobic in his attitude and unable to structure his day; lack of initiative behaviour and inability to organise one's life being reflective of frontal lobe deficit. She recorded that strains on the family in a situation such as the plaintiffs "are often unbearable".
The plaintiff was referred to Hornsby Hospital for continuing therapy and as it was felt that too many practitioners were becoming involved in his programme, and not one programme was being followed through, arrangements were made for Dr Helen Mackie at Hornsby Hospital to co-ordinate his rehabilitation programme.

On 8 November 1987 the plaintiff was re-admitted to Royal North Shore Hospital for a further operation by Dr Vandervord in an attempt to improve cosmetic appearance. A rib bone graft was taken and there was reconstruction of the globular region and infra-orbital region. The plaintiff's care included attendance during the first six months of 1988 at the Sydney Natural Therapy
Centre for hypnotherapy regarding phobias, fears and enuresis.

The plaintiff was referred to the Hornsby Ku-Ring-Gai Area Health Service under the care of Dr Ian Cameron, a staff specialist. Originally he was treated as on out-patient but the lack of success in that regard was such that the plaintiff was admitted to the rehabilitation ward at the Hornsby Hospital, where he remained a patient from 18 July 1988 to 3 November 1988. According to
Dr Cameron this admission helped the plaintiff to overcome some of his anxieties, particularly in social situations and, with behavioural techniques, his incontinence improved markedly. Efforts were made to help with training to cope with the visual impairment. After discharge the plaintiff pursued an out- patient rehabilitation programme.

In a report dated 3 February 1989, Dr Cameron stated that, using the guidelines to "evaluation of permanent impairment" of the American Medical
Association, the plaintiff's overall disability was assessed at approximately % whole person impairment. Between 8 October 1988 and 3 November 1988 the plaintiff trained with the Guide Dog Association of New South Wales. Between
March 1989 and October 1989 he attended 20 sessions at the University of New
South Wales School of Psychology Clinic for a desensitisation therapy programme.

On 2 June 1989 the plaintiff was assessed by Dr Peter Benecke, an ophthalmic surgeon, who reported that the left eye was blind and vision in the right eye was 6/18. The blind eye was divergent with ptosis present. The right eye had a significantly limited visual field. Both eyes had optic atrophy. Dr Benecke reported that there was no procedure available to provide the plaintiff with more vision.

On 26 February 1992 the plaintiff fell over a tree root due to his poor vision and fractured his left tibia. He was admitted to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital for treatment by Dr Hume an orthopaedic surgeon. On 16 June 1992 the plaintiff was examined by Dr Wayne Reid a clinical neuropsychologist. Dr Reid reported that, from a limited neuropsychological assessment, it was his opinion, that apart from the plaintiff's complaints of inertia, he showed remarkably few cognitive deficits following his severe head injury. It was his opinion, clinically, that the plaintiff's greatest problems were his visual impairment and his inertia. He thought that the plaintiff had potential to benefit from work skills training which should be highly structured, and prompts such as his parents, timetables, and alarm devices should be used to help him compensate for his difficulties with inertia.

However when examined four months later, by Dr Peter Rawling also a clinical neuropsychologist, that specialist found that the plaintiff presented with specific cognitive and behavioural impairments, that were persistent, disruptive and essentially organically driven. I do not consider that Dr
Reid's assessment of the plaintiff's cognitive defects stands well with the totality of the medical and psychiatric evidence.

On 16 August 1993 the plaintiff was examined by Dr Patricia Jungfer, a consultant psychiatrist. She reported that the plaintiff had developed, as a result of his closed head injury, a severe obsessive compulsive disorder, a particular manifestation of which was his fear of spiders. In addition, he had developed an obsessive compulsive disorder resulting in an elaborate washing and shaving ritual which took many hours a day if he is allowed to continue it. In recent years he had become so distressed by the ritual that he avoided both showering and shaving because of the time it takes. The underlying obsessional idea involved a concern about being dirty or not having been sufficiently clean. Unfortunately, his visual impairment compounded this obsession since he cannot adequately see that he has washed himself sufficiently. In addition he had developed an obsessional hand washing ritual.
Regrettably intervention by clinical psychologists had not relieved the obsession and the fatigue associated with this ritual made it difficult for him to carry out his daily activities. This behaviour was, in Dr Jungfer's view, causally connected to the head injury.

According to Dr Jungfer, the second organic syndrome which the plaintiff had developed was that of a severe amotivational syndrome. He lacked drive and initiative to commence activities and behaviours. As a consequence of this he required prompting and assistance to carry out the vast majority of activities necessary for everyday life. The use of stimulants to relieve his amotivational syndrome had achieved limited success.

Another consequence of the plaintiff's structural injuries to his brain had been an alteration in his personality. He described a decreased intensity in experiencing emotions; his conduct was unreactive and lacked spontaneity.

Dr Jungfer said that the plaintiff suffered secondary psychological reactions to his multiple physical injuries, i.e. his blindness and his facial disfigurement having resulted in an adjustment reaction with the present mood and avoidance behaviour. She considered his prognosis to be poor. The plaintiff was re-examined by Dr Jungfer on 19 March 1997.

I shall quote this report in full because it contains a detailed and helpful assessment of the plaintiff's disabilities and life style ten years after the accident.
 "I refer to your correspondence dated 4 March 1997. Mr Webster was seen on the 19th March 1997 in the Burwood Consulting Rooms. He was seen independently and an interview was conducted with his parents. Mr Paul Webster is a 30 year- old single man who lives in his parents (sic) home at Mt Colah. He is on the disability support benefit and is unemployed.

HISTORY OF ACCIDENT 
Mr Paul Webster has no recall of the motor vehicle accident where he sustained his injury. Information from the records show (sic) that Mr Webster was a front seat passenger in a vehicle. The police report indicates that Mr
Webster was wearing a seat belt, and the vehicle hit a pole in the early hours of the morning. Mr Webster was initially managed at Gosford Hospital and then transferred to the Royal North Shore Hospital. The injury occurred on the 15th
March 1987. Estimate of his Glasgow Coma Score is unknown. Injuries he sustained as a consequence of the accident were an extremely severe facial injury, with an injury to the frontal area of the head with an open frontal fracture with loss of brain tissue. He had extensive fracturing to his frontal bone, anterior cranial fossa and facial bones. Surgical intervention at the time showed extensive frontal lobe damage, disruption of both optic nerves. Mr
Webster was transferred from the Royal North Shore Hospital to Coorabel
Hospital in April 1987, he remained there until July 1987. Mr Webster's management at the Coorabel Hospital included active rehabilitation. There is no estimate in the records of his post-traumatic amnesia. Initial neuropyschological assessment demonstrated impairment of functioning of areas of frontal lobe with reduced concentration, reduced efficiency of memory and information processing. Mr Webster following his treatment at the Coorabel
Hospital is effectively blind with a 100% loss of vision in his left eye and % loss of vision in his right eye. He has problems with urinary incontinence and significant cognitive and behavioural problems.

HISTORY OF PRESENTING ILLNESS 
Mr Webster outlined a number of difficulties that he continues to have as a consequence of his closed brain injury. The list of his difficulties and complaints of Mr Webster should be read in conjunction with a previous report of 1993.

Mr Webster's complaints at the time that I saw him were psychological, cognitive, behavioural and physical.
 . Physical 
Mr Webster continues to have problems with regards to his vision. He has 100% loss of vision in his left eye and 85% loss of vision in his right eye. He can see an outline of shape, light and dark, but he has no effective vision, therefore he is barely able to read, (sic) partake in the usual recreational activities. Mr Webster indicated that there has been no change to his vision in recent years, there has been no deterioration. Mr Webster occasionally has headaches and he has developed a torticollis in his neck and this produces pain due to muscle spasms. Mr Webster has no sense of smell or taste, this has been a chronic problem since the time of the motor vehicle accident and there has been no improvement.
 . Cognitive 
Mr Webster has a number of ongoing cognitive difficulties. He has problems with regards to impulsivity in that if he has money, or is somewhere he will carry something out at that point in time without any forethought. In contrast to his impulsivity he has severe and marked motivational problems. Mr Webster has difficulties with regards to organising/initiating activity. He is extremely amotivated (sic) with regards to his self care and attending to his own personal needs. He has difficulties with initiation and activation of social activities and the management of his financial affairs. Mr Webster with regards to the motivation, he describes that the thinks about doing things, but is unable to actually initiate the activity and carry it out. He also reports problems with fatigue, that he tires readily late afternoon. Mr
Webster with regards to his memory, is able to get by, he benefits from the use of memory aids as he frequently forgets messages. He has difficulties organising and planning his activities and needs an organiser.

Mr Webster is able to read and write and his bodily function in this area has not been disturbed, although the visual impairment limits the extent to which he can carry this out. Mr Webster's long term memory appears to be intact.
 . Psychological 
Mr Webster's greatest area of disability and dysfunction, apart from his vision, lies in the area of his psychological and behavioural status. Mr
Webster remains significantly disabled with regards to his ability to carry out any activity. He does not shower, shave, or attend to his own self hygiene. He indicates that it is primarily "a hassle". He describes dysphoric mood and lack of interest or motivation to carry anything out. He also has problems with regards to his showering, again he says "what's the point". He also reports that these activities require a great deal of mental work and he easily becomes tired by them. He needs to do things step by step, and if he misses a step, or feels that he has not carried it out correctly, he needs to repeat that step and start again. He gets lost in the routine, he has to start all over again, therefore showering and shaving may take hours to complete.
The showering and shaving routine is particularly fixed and behavioural intervention has had little effect in changing it. If Mr Webster has a purpose for which he should shower and shave, he does so, however, he needs to allow a significant period of time to carry out the task completely.

Mr Webster continues to have a number of phobias and fears. He reports difficulties with regards to fear of spiders, he will not leave the house if someone else has not left the house before him, or use some kind of object, like a broom, to sweep in front of him so that he will not touch spiders.

He also will not go into the back yard, again for fear that he will be attacked by spiders. The basis of this fear appears to have been when he was originally in hospital and he hallucinated and saw spiders, or thought he saw spiders. Since that time he has had a fear of spiders and being hurt by them, being on his body and not being able to sense them correctly, and this prohibits him from leaving the house, as he is fearful that something will happen.

Mr Webster has difficulties regarding mood swings. He reports that he panics easily and frequently his mood fluctuates from being alright to flat and to being quite irritated and anxious. There is no history of violence. Mr Webster has problems with anxiety attacks, and he gets quite panicky in disturbed and stormy weather, or storms, primarily because he cannot see what is happening.
He describes difficulties with fatigue and tiring easily at the end of the day. He has no disturbance of appetite and his sleep is relatively normal, although if he is anxious about attending something then he has a disturbance of his sleep. He describes his mood as being depressed, but it is not sustained. It can alter with regards to social stimulation, however, predominantly he feels dysphoria and hopelessness.

HISTORY OF INTERVIEW WITH PARENTS 
Mr. and Mrs. Webster report (sic) their son has been at home since 1996. He previously lived in (sic) independent care setting, but this failed due to problems with regards to his self care, inability to clean his room and arguments within the home. Mr Webster also, on a number of occasions, obtained food poisoning as he was unable to smell or taste food that was bad within the house. The parents report that their son still does very little in the home, but he smokes a great deal of the time. He will not go out of the house and he continues to have fears regarding his spiders, and his compulsive behaviour regarding self care continues. Mr. and Mrs. Webster described that their son has severe problems with regards to his motivation and he asks to have most things done, and they help to have things carried out. They do report problems with impulsivity regarding spending behaviour. Mr Webster is unable to live independently, he cannot travel alone as he becomes lost, fearful and anxious.
He will not use visual aids to assist him. Mr Webster has a preoccupation regarding dirt and germs and he frequently speaks about it within the family home. Mr Webster is unable to manage his financial affairs, and his father currently manages his financial matters for him.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
Mr. Webster, as stated, was injured in a motor vehicle at the age of 20. At the time he was attending an Arts Course at Hornsby TAFE. Mr Webster comes from a family of two children, he is the youngest. He has an older sister who is currently studying nursing. Mr Webster's early education history was unremarkable. There were no problems regarding his behaviour when he attended school. He has previously not been expelled or had problems with regards to his behaviour within the school setting. Mr Webster has not undertaken any form of formal training, he has been unable to do so as a consequence of difficulties with regards to his motivation, transportation issues and learning difficulties.

Mr Webster currently smokes approximately one packet of cigarettes per day, occasionally more. He has few social outlets, he has one friend who is a schizophrenic and has significant problems with alcohol and gambling and leads
Mr Webster into difficult circumstances. Mr Webster, as stated, is currently living in his family home. He lived independently in supported housing for approximately two and a half years. This was a house setting where there were a number of other residents who had disabilities and they were learning to live independently within the community with an organisation called "Total
Living Foundation". Unfortunately, as stated above, this deteriorated and Mr
Webster was unable to live independently. Mr Webster currently requires significant amounts of support with regards to social interaction, he needs assistance from someone to provide him with socialisation and this is provided currently by an organisation called "Community Connections" who come once per week. Mr Webster needs assistance with his ability to shop, cook and attend to his home. There is both the combination of behavioural problems and visual impairment and loss of smell that lead to his high need of attendant care. Mr
Webster's only hobby is that of a computer and he spends time playing computer games. He had previously been interested in art, but no longer carries this out due to anxiety about his performance. Mr Webster does not consume alcohol.
At the time I saw him he was on no medication.

MEDICAL HISTORY 
Mr Webster currently has a right sided cervical spasm and is receiving botulinum toxin for this cervical spasm. He is clinically blind and has a total loss of sense and smell.

INFORMATION PROVIDED 
The reports provided included that of a discharge summary from the Royal
North Shore Hospital which indicates that Mr Webster sustained an extremely severe open brain injury with contusions of his frontal lobe and severing of his optic nerves. Discharge summary from Coorabel Hospital summarises difficulties that Mr Webster was having and indicates that neuropsychological assessment demonstrated damage to his frontal areas. Mr Webster also had seizures and initially required anticonvulsants. Mr Webster's management by the Rehabilitation Services at Hornsby-Kuringai has been primarily as an outpatient, but there have been problems with carrying this through, and Mr
Webster has had a number of admissions in inpatient settings at Royal Ryde to assist in his independence and to provide him with some independent living skills. Dr Rushworth's report indicates the extent of severity of Mr Webster's injuries, his conclusion is that your client sustained a very severe frontal injury and the consequences of this a bilateral frontal lobe damage and damage to both optic nerves and loss of smell. Dr Rushworth does not believe that your client is able to earn a living and that he has a high risk of post traumatic epilepsy.

MENTAL STATE 
Mr Wester was well groomed, cleanly shaven. There was little spontaneous movement. His speech was slow and precise. His affect anxious, but reactive.
There was no evidence of depression. There were no abnormal mannerisms, or behaviour.

MANAGEMENT 
Mr Webster's management has primarily been rehabilitative, he has also had psychological intervention. He has been extensively seen at the Prince of
Wales Hospital in the Phobic Anxiety Disorder Unit and has had hypnotherapy with a Mr Leon Cowen. In addition he has been treated by myself from /06/1993 to 26/04/94 including seven consultations for an amotivational problem. Mr Webster's management has been pharmacological, behavioural and psychological. Despite optimal management Mr Webster remained significantly disabled. All therapeutic interventions have achieved minimal improvement, Mr
Webster continues to have a significant amount of problems. In addition Mr
Webster has difficulties with regards to a new learning, and there appear to be difficulties with extinguishing the behaviour as a consequence of his brain damage, and therefore for any form of ongoing benefit he will require ongoing and intensive intervention, something for which he has not had the financial resources to allow for it to happen. 
Mr Webster's management regarding independent living has resulted in multiple admissions to the Royal Ryde Rehabilitation Unit and the Transitional Living
Unit in an attempt to achieve independent living. However, his level of care and need is of such a level that he is not able to function independently.

With regards to future management, Mr Webster would benefit from ongoing psychological intervention, assistance with regards to his phobias and possibly another repeat period of hypnotherapy to assist him. In addition at some time in the future there may be some form of pharmacological agent which would provide him with some benefit and an open mind should be kept with regards to further psychological therapy in years to come.

MANGEMENT NEEDS . Activities of Daily Living: 
Mr Webster requires the presence of an attendant carer. He requires extensive input of maximal 12 hours a day, this would enable someone to cook, clean for him, attend to his personal needs, supervise his showering and shaving so that he may complete these tasks more effectively; also to provide him with the necessary supervision to assist in his motivational difficulties. It would also provide him with some form of social and recreational output.
 . Social: 
As stated above, Mr Webster would benefit from the presence of an attendant carer to assist in his socialisation, take him to places and to enable him to experience a number of social activities. Without the presence of attendant carers, due to the severe lack of friends as a consequence of his disabilities, Mr Webster would have no social intervention. It is unlikely that Mr Webster would marry and have a family, almost certainly he would not be able to provide for the family, or provide the necessary support within a relationship to have a satisfactory relationship.
 . Financia:l 
Mr Webster is unable to manage his affairs, he requires the provision of a financial manager for the purposes of such and these requirements are indefinite.
 . Tutor: 
Mr Webster would appear to have some understanding of the processes of the court, however, his psychological state, his problem with impulsivity, his problems with respect to new learning and his motivational difficulties would make him a poor candidate to adequately instruct counsel, and I recommend that a tutor be appointed for the purposes of the court.
 . Other Needs: Psychological 
As stated above Mr Webster would benefit from ongoing psychological intervention, almost certainly his carers would benefit from input, such as a psychologist, or psychiatrist, to assist in the behavioural management of your client and to assist in providing strategies to cope with his phobia, fears, and obsessive compulsive problems.

Mr Webster has no form of occupational training and it is felt that he is unemployable.

EXTENT OF DISABILITY 
According to the American Medical Association "Guides to Permanent
Impairment", the estimate of the deficits is only for cognitive and psychological functions. Mental state impairment, his degree of whole person impairment is approximately 20% and he requires direction and supervision of his daily living activities. With regards to his emotional/behavioural impairment, he has a moderate limitation of some, but not all interpersonal daily living functions, and the degree of impairment is estimated to be approximately 25%.

DIAGNOSIS 
When Mr Webster was seen on the 19th March 1997 the following diagnoses were made: . Obsessive Compulsive Disorder 
Mr Webster reports a pre-occupation with germs and dirt and ritualised showering and dressing behaviour that is consistent with that of an obsessive compulsive disorder. The expression of the disorder has been altered as a consequence of his motivational problems and he tends not to demonstrate the long extensive behaviours as he does not initiate the activity the characteristic compulsive behaviours are exhibited.
 . Phobic Disorder 
Mr Webster has a specific and selective phobia regarding spiders, that severely limits his mobility in open spaces in the environment.
 . Frontal Lobe Syndrome 
Mr Webster has classical frontal lobe amotivational syndrome with apathy, disinterest and problems with regards to planning/organisation of activity.

Mr Paul Webster presents with a significant number of both physical, psychological and cognitive impairment as a consequence of the injuries sustained in 1987. Mr Webster has an obsessive compulsive disorder which has arisen as a consequence of the motor vehicle accident. There is no past or family history to suggest a predispositional vulnerability to such a state. It would appear that his early experiences in hospital, his loss of vision and his frontal lobe cognitive impairments have combined to produce his obsessive compulsive syndrome. The syndrome has been refractory to pharmacological and behavioural management. In addition Mr Webster has again an isolated phobia which was initiated following his accident whilst he was in hospital and it appeared to be a traumatising event and subsequent to that he had a fear and anxiety about spiders, which significantly limits his mobility.

In addition to the above psychological problems Mr Webster has significant cognitive defects that are consistent with that of frontal lobe impairment. In conjunction with the cognitive and psychological impairments your client is % blind in one eye and 100% blind in the other and has lost his sense of smell and taste. He has no skills and due to new learning problems us unable to learn any form of occupational skill. The combination of his physical, psychological and cognitive deficits result in an individual who is unable to work, interact socially appropriately and requires complete attendant care for a good quality of life. The difficulties and deficits your client describes are consistent with the type of injuries that he sustained. In view of the length of time since the motor vehicle accident, there is no prospect for improvement and it is unlikely that there will be any significant change at this point in time in your client's level of functioning. Mr Wester has a significant degree of physical impairment for his cognitive and psychological functioning his whole person impairment is estimated at 33%. Please note that I do not include the estimate of impairment for his vision and anosmia and this would need to be included as well.

I hope this report answers your queries, should you have any further concerns, please, do not hesitate to contact me" (Emphasis as per original report). 
Dr Jungfer referred to the fact that the plaintiff developed the condition of torticollis which causes a muscle spasm in the neck.. This is a most distressing condition in which the head is twisted to one side, and this tilt is maintained most of the day. He was reviewed by Dr Lethlean, neurologist, on March 1996 in relation to this condition. It was proposed by Dr Lethlean that the plaintiff have Botox injections as the most suitable therapy. He stated that initially the plaintiff would be required to attend for electromyography to define muscle pattern activities and also to have a CT head scan for background information. Dr Lethlean concluded that the initial injury was responsible for the development of the torticollis which would continue indefinitely. He said that regular injections of Botox would be necessary and the plaintiff was referred to Dr J Colebatch for these injections.

On 26 April 1997 the plaintiff was examined by Dr Stephen Buckley, a consultant in rehabilitation medicine, who was called as a witness by the plaintiff in these proceedings. Consistent with views expressed by other medical practitioners, Dr Buckley diagnosed the plaintiff as having had a traumatic brain injury in the extremely severe range resulting in marked blindness, and severe cognitive and behavioural deficits. He said that as a result of the injury to his frontal lobes and the surgical excision of frontal lobe tissue, the plaintiff suffers from a lack of motivation and initiative.
He though it unlikely that there would be any significant change in his neurological or cognitive status.

Importantly, under the heading "Requirements for Care", Dr Buckley reported: "Mr Webster would be unable to live alone. While it might be the case that he would probably survive on his own I believe that Mr Webster would be unable to carry out adequate personal hygiene, would lack the necessary insight to make appropriate arrangements for a nutritional diet and if, for example, he lived in rented accommodation, would be unable to maintain that accommodation in a standard which a landlord would find acceptable. I believe therefore that he requires significant supervision in his day to day management, 
I believe that he requires a carer-companion to supervise his daily activities and that this person should live-in on a 24 hour a day basis.

Such a carer-companion would require significant experience in the management of disabled people and, in particular, those with cognitive and behavioural difficulties. The need for 24 hour supervision is that Mr Webster will be unable to deal with any unusual occurrence or event due to his frontal lobe damage. The duties of the carer will be not only supervision of Mr Webster but also the domestic supervision of the household for activities such as cooking, housekeeping, shopping and cleaning." 
The plaintiff tendered a report dated 18 February 1998 by Ms Janet Crowe, an occupational therapist, with vast experience in rehabilitation settings for persons suffering from severe head injuries. Her area of specialisation is the accommodation, care and equipment needs of persons with disabilities. Ms Crowe was also called to give evidence.

In her report Ms Crowe specifically supported the recommendations of Dr
Buckley in his report dated 26 July 1997 concerning the plaintiff's accommodation, equipment and care needs. In evidence she confirmed her reported view that the plaintiff requires care on a 24 hour basis.

Ms Crowe emphasised that such care is necessary not only for practical and safety purposes but also to develop the morale and emotional well-being of the plaintiff. She stated (and this was not challenged by the defendant) that there are no institutions suitable for caring for brain-damaged persons such as the plaintiff.

I have only really touched upon the medical treatment which the plaintiff has received and the medical experts who have examined and reviewed him from time to time. A large bundle of medical reports has been tendered by the plaintiff.
The solicitors for the defendant have also arranged for a number of medical experts to examine the plaintiff. Only one medical practitioner was called by the defendant, namely Associate Professor Jones to whom I shall refer shortly.
A bundle of medical reports has also been tendered by the defendant. However, at the end of the day, the really significant issue so far as the plaintiff's physical, mental and emotional conditions are concerned relates to the degree of care which he will require upon the assumption that he leaves the family home (which is his wish), and lives in his own premises.

The plaintiff was first examined by Associate Professor Richard Jones on behalf of the defendant on 11 December 1990. Dr Jones reviewed him on 25
August 1993, 27 November 1997, and 31 March 1998. Dr Jones is an expert in rehabilitation. As to the question of care Dr Jones stated in his report dated December 1990: "He is independent in personal care and most activities of daily living, but would not be able to live alone as he is incapable of adequately managing his own financial and management matters." 
And later: "If he were not to live with his parents or a sibling, then he would require to live in a hostel with four or five other similarly disabled adults." 
In his second report dated 25 August 1993, Dr Jones confirmed his earlier findings and opinions. He said: "I confirm those findings and the opinions expressed and would regard him as unemployable, but independent in personal care, but requiring supervision, either by his parents or a sibling or a person who might live-in with him, but not be required to be in attendance for all of his waking hours but who would, for perhaps an hour or two per day, be available to assist him with his financial matters and to supervise daily core chores about the home." 
In his third report dated 27 November 1997 Dr Jones stated: "In response to issues raised in letter of referral (19 June 1997), I continue to be of the view that he has no vocational capacity in open employment and that there is no physical or vocational rehabilitation programme which would improve his level of independence in personal care and activities of daily living. I have opined as to his level of supervision required, and that whilst he is capable of independence as described in this report, he does have a need for motivational assistance on occasions. These requirements will continue into the future. I am not of the view that he would require a live-in house couple, but he may benefit from a carer who would attend intermittently to his domestic requirements and assist in financial affairs. Alternatively, he could be accommodated in a group home." 
In his final report dated 31 March 1998, Dr Jones referred to the fact that he had read the report of Dr Buckley dated 26 April 1997 "which suggests the a need for 24 hour supervision." Dr Jones said: "I do not concur with this prescription. I have previously outlined my views as to Mr Webster's impairments and disabilities and an appropriate level of overall supervision. Prompted difficulties with motivation are acknowledged but these have improved from the time I first saw Mr Webster in 1990 and visual impairments whilst significant, have also improved." 
And later: "Mr Webster's home requirements would depend upon his ultimate placement and whether he is in a small suburban home or in a home unit. He would require some handy-man assistance were he to be in a standard suburban home, but he hourly requirements for such maintenance would depend upon the size of the home. Were he to be in a home unit then this provision would not be required." 
Prior to the accident the plaintiff was in excellent health and had not demonstrated any emotional disorders. After leaving school, with the School
Certificate, he worked in a variety of jobs of a casual labouring kind. He had always had a passion for art and in 1985 he enrolled at Hornsby TAFE in a two year full-time Art Certificate Course. He failed his exams in 1985. He attributes this failure to immaturity. He repeated first year and at the end of 1986 he passed that year. He passed with six B's and one C, which was in fact quite a high pass according to the marking system in place. He said that he intended to complete the course and to continue with his studies, which would involve post-graduate study, and eventually become "a graphic designer of sorts" or obtain a position in the commercial side of art. His pre-injury sketch book was tendered which demonstrates a high degree of skill in that area. In addition to his interest in art he seems to have been something of a fitness fanatic. He regularly engaged in weight lifting, sailing, swimming, and so on.

The plaintiff called as a witness Mr Leonard Smith who taught art at the
Hornsby TAFE. He has had twenty years experience teaching art in TAFE colleges and when he retired in 1995 he was the senior head teacher of art at the
Hornsby TAFE. He is presently a gallery director. He spoke very highly of the plaintiff's ability. He said he was "good across the range, which is important". And "In particular he had a lovely graphic skill which is basically drawing skill and painting, so he was very good, he had a very good quality of illustration".

The plaintiff was reassessed by Dr Rushworth (who performed the initial brain surgery) on 8 April 1997 and he reported as follows: "At your request, I re-examined this patient at the North Shore Medical
Centre on April 8th, 1997. He was accompanied by his father.

Details of his injuries, and his treatment are covered in my report of May th, 1988.

Since being discharged from rehabilitation, Mr Webster has been living with his parents. There was a period of two and a half years (until May, 1996) where he lived in a house at Willoughby with other disabled people. However, he had to move out because he could not manage. There were problems with the other tenants, and because of his psychological problems he overspent and did not observe normal hygiene. He also suffered attacks of food poisoning, because he could not determine whether food was in a condition to be eaten.

He had no further specific treatment, except an eye operation in 1996. This was performed on the right eye, in an attempt to make the eye more central. It was partially successful, 
Because of his visual problem, and possibly also because of inequalities in the strength of his cervical musculature, he had developed a more or less permanent tilt of head to the right. It also rotated to the right. In an attempt to reduce it, he attends Price of Wales Hospital where injections of botulinum toxin have been given into the overactive muscles.

He spends his days mostly in his parent's house. He cannot go out on his own, but has four hours a week `mobility' training in which he walks around in the company of others. He is able to use a computer in a limited way, mainly for the pictures and games. He finds it difficult to read text.

Ideally, he would like to work, but lacks motivation. The CRS tried very hard to place him in some form of employment, but it did not work out.

Present Treatment: 
Nil.

He is no longer taking anticonvulsants, and has had no seizures since leaving hospital. 
Current Status:
He is orientated in time and place.
He has no vision in his left eye, and only 20% vision in his right eye.
He has no sense of smell.
He lacks motivation, and this is one of his greatest problems.
He tends to panic when subjected to loud noises.
He has rapid mood swings.
He has a phobia about spiders, and about running into spider webs.
Because of this, he cannot go outdoors unaccompanied.
According to his parents, one of his greatest problems is smoking. He smoked before the accident, but had given it up for twelve months. Since the accident he has taken it up again, and does not have enough will power to stop. He smokes 12-15 cigarettes a day.

Previous Health 
He had no serious, or relevant illness or injuries.

Personal and Social History 
He presently lives with his parents, and his sister who is aged thirty-four.

EXAMINATION: 
He was a dark haired young man of stated age, with a pleasant and normal manner.

He sat with his head tilted and rotated to the right.

Head: 
His frontal wounds were well healed, and there was only a slight depression above the right eyebrow. The major scar was concealed within the hairline.

He was unable to detect a test odour with either nostril.

Vision: 
He had no light perception in the left eye. The left optic disc showed extreme pallor.

The central vision in his right eye was 20/30. The field of vision was reduced to a small central nasal half field.

The right eye deviated downwards and outwards, and could not be adducted beyond the midline. 
The remaining cranial nerves appeared intact. His hearing was normal to clinical testing.

Cervical Spine: 
The tilt of the cervical spine described above could be voluntarily corrected, and movements of his cervical spine were virtually full in range with the exception of lateral flexion to the left which was reduced by about %.

There was no neurological abnormality of the upper or lower limbs.

INVESTIGATIONS 
There were no investigations available for review.

SUMMARY AND ASSESSMENT: 
The patient is a thirty year old man who sustained a severe compound frontal lobe brain wound ten years ago. This was repaired, and the repair is satisfactory.

The main consequences of this accident have been injury to his frontal lobes, and to his optic nerves.

The injury to his frontal lobes has resulted in neuropsychiatric problems, of which lack of motivation and phobic behaviour appear to be the most serious. A detailed psychiatric assessment is being provided by Dr Jungfer, and I agree with her conclusions.

He has no vision in his left eye, due to optic nerve damage, and only minimal vision in his right eye. He can read with difficulty, and probably not to an extent that he could sustain it for long periods. I think that the tilt of his head is largely due to his visual problems, but inequality of power in the cervical musculature may play a part. This is difficult to assess, because he has had injections of botulinum toxin into the muscles in an attempt to correct the deformity. With the passage of time, this deformity is likely to become more fixed. 
As noted in the examination, he has lost his sense of smell, and this is due to damage to his olfactory nerves. It must be considered permanent.

After ten years, his neurological defects are permanent. I do not think that the possibility of future employment could be ruled out completely, but attempts so far have failed due to lack of motivation. A report should be obtained from the rehabilitation service which managed him, and attempted to find employment for him.

Addressing the questions contained in your covering letter, the replies are as follows:-
The history is as described in my report of May 25th, 1988 and above.
The findings on examination are described.
The injuries and disabilities are consistent with the accident as described.
The treatment received is described in my reports.
No further treatment is indicated, except the possibly further injections of botulinum toxin.
The last examination was ten years ago, and there has been improvement since that time.
No further improvement is anticipated. Further deterioration is unlikely, except in that neurological deficits tend to worsen with advancing age.
The patient is virtually a recluse, by reason of his visual impairment and his lack of motivation.
Fitness for work activities is difficult to assess for reasons described above. I have mentioned it briefly, but a report from the rehabilitation service would be desirable, and he also requires an up to date rehabilitation assessment.
I think that the status quo will be continued indefinitely.
He is on the borderline of requiring continuous care, and being able to manage independently. As recorded above, he was able to manage independently for two and a half years, albeit with difficulty. In more propitious circumstances, I do not think that the possibility of his being able to manage in the company of others with supervision could be completely dismissed.

I trust that the foregoing meets your requirements concerning this patient.
Please advise if any point requires clarification, or if I otherwise may be of further assistance." 
It is of an importance to note that Dr Rushworth agrees with Dr Jungfer's psychiatric assessment.

ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES 
The plaintiff was born on 21 July 1966 and is accordingly now 32 years of age.
The date of the accident was 15 March 1987 which is approximately eleven years and three months ago. The parties have agreed that the plaintiff's life expectancy attracts a multiplier of 948.7 on the 5% tables. The parties have also agreed that the plaintiff's working life expectancy attracts a multiplier of 855.7 on the 5% tables.

I turn then to the assessment of damages under the specific heads.

GENERAL DAMAGES 
The plaintiff was approaching his twenty-first birthday when he suffered the appalling injuries in respect of which he is entitled to compensation. It is only necessary to touch upon the most significant matters for the purpose of assessment of general damages. The plaintiff has suffered a multiplicity of deficits as a result of the accident, embracing physical, emotional, visual and cosmetic injuries of an irreversible nature. The nature of his brain damage puts him in a particularly sad class of case in that he has insight into the enormities of the interference with a normal life which his injuries have occasioned to him. This subjects him to a form of mental torture from which he will never be able to escape. He is painfully aware of the pleasures of his pre-injury life and the hopes which he had for the future, all of which have now been permanently denied to him.

This deep sense of deprivation is a significant aspect of his damages. In
Lindsley versus Hawkins [(1973) 2 NSWLR 581] at 595,
Hutley J.A. emphasized that a deep sense of deprivation can be one of the most painful of human emotions. Hutley J.A.said: "That a sense of deprivation is one of the most acute forms of suffering was stated with incomparable clarity in Marlowe's Dr. Faustus: `Faust: How comes it then, that thou are out of hell? 
Mephistopheles:Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it.

Think'st thou that I, who saw the face of God 
And tasted the eternal joys of heaven 
Am not tormented with ten thousand hells 
In being depriv'd of everlasting bliss?' (Marlowe: Dr. Faustus, Everyman ed., p. 128) and though her pre-accident state could not be described as heaven, certainly her present state could not improperly be described as hell, and a hell of which she is conscious, not in any way which she can express verbally but which she can feel." 
Insofar as the plaintiffs emotional life is concerned, he is forever tormented by his fear of spiders and his other obsessions which interfere with the conduct of a normal life. He also has to suffer, on a day to day basis, the subjective consequences of his significant disfigurement.

The plaintiff has no prospect of marriage or indeed any satisfactory relationship with members of the opposite sex. He is permanently denied the satisfaction of any creative work or intellectual stimulus, and will need care and attendance upon him for the rest of his life. Thus his independence is lost. He will never enter the workforce.

His near blindness and the development of torticollis are of themselves grave disabilities.

Counsel for the plaintiff has submitted that general damages should be in the region of $300,000 whereas counsel for the defendant has submitted that an amount in the order of $200,000 would be more appropriate. The submission on behalf of the plaintiff is, to my mind, closer to the mark and I propose to assess general damages in the sum of: $275,000.
 
OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES 
Out of pockets to date have been agreed at $80,739 
I am also satisfied the plaintiff's verdict should include the sum of $15,205 to cover expenses incurred for liquifilm and liquid tears ($4,498)being lubrication for the plaintiff's eyes and taxi fares ($10,707)necessitated by the plaintiff's inability to travel on public transport. That expenditure has been carefully recorded in a notebook (Ex G) by the plaintiff's father over the period 15 March 1987 to 23 May 1998. $15,205 
Sub-Total $95,944 
FUTURE OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES 
Conversion of Home 
The evidence satisfies me that, as soon as reasonably possible, upon termination of these proceedings the plaintiff will acquire a residence of his own. I consider the probability is that he will acquire a townhouse or a ground floor apartment. For present purposes however, it is necessary to make allowance for the conversion of the proposed residence to suit his particular needs, and to make provision for additional accommodation for a carer. As to this item the plaintiff tendered a report dated 31 December 1997 by Mr
Hardiman who is an expert in the field of architecture for disabled persons.
The defendant tendered a report of March 1998 by Mr John W Baker a building cost consultant. This report consists of comments upon Mr Hardiman's report and such comments were of assistance to me in this somewhat difficult area of the case. Mr Hardiman made certain comments (with which Mr Baker agreed) concerning the type of property suitable to be purchased by the plaintiff bearing in mind the disabilities he suffers. The following criteria were identified by Mr Hardiman in this regard: * The site should be flat or have only minimal slope (maximum 1 in 40) * Ideally a house built with a concrete slab on ground would be preferred, but most older houses are constructed with timber floors and so have at least two steps at the entry. * The internal corridors should either be wide and /or short. The shorter the corridor, the easier movement is throughout the house for a person with mobility difficulties. * Services should be in good condition. * Large bathroom and kitchen areas allow for easier movement in the space. 
I shall deal with the various items in the order set out in Mr Hardiman's report.

CONVERSION OF PROPOSED RESIDENCE . External Circulation 
I accept that providing access to the house from the street and from the house to outdoor recreation areas will probably require the part construction of some new paths to the doorways. Mr Hardiman's allowance of 18 m2, including an allowance for the preparation of site and removal of broken paths, seems to me to be fair. This item attracts an allowance of $1,251.

Mr Hardiman proposes landscaping to make good any areas where paths have been built etc. Having noted Mr Baker's comments with regard to this item I propose to allow $400.

Mr Hardiman proposes an allowance of $719 for security doors but bearing in mind that this is a normal cost associated with modern suburban living I do not accept that an allowance should be made therefor.
 . Additional Room 
The evidence satisfies me that the plaintiff's proposed residence should contain an additional room with facilities dedicated to a carer. This would involve provision of a bedroom, a living area and ensuite/laundry with kitchenette for the carer to allow privacy (which I think is important). Mr
Hardiman's allowance seems to me reasonable and, accordingly, under this hearing I propose to allow $35,100.

As a furniture package for carer facilities, including electrical, linen and crockery etc I propose to allow the figure suggested by Mr Baker $10,000.
 . Bathroom 
This item deals with the conversion of an existing and conventional bathroom to one suitable for use by a person with disabilities such as those with which the plaintiff is required to cope. Mr Baker suggest that certain of the items proposed by Mr Hardiman seem to him to be merely conventional items dependent upon the choice of the resident. However, I feel in respect of these items that I should acknowledge Mr Hardiman's expertise and experience in this field and, accordingly, I propose to allow for modification of the existing bathroom the sum of $4,090.
 . Electrical Services 
I accept Mr Baker's view that there would not be any greater necessity for the upgrading of electrical mains service to ensure safety for the plaintiff than for an able-bodied person. Nor do I think that an allowance for additional power points is necessary. Thus I make no allowance under this head.
 . Telstra Connection 
I am not satisfied that the plaintiff's disabilities call for the additional
Telstra connections specified by Mr Hardiman.
 . Security System with External Alarm 
Mr Hardiman proposes a system to provide alarms on external doors including motion sensors and relevant hard wired - smoke alarms (not windows - windows should be able to be locked partly open).

However I consider that the only additional alarm system to which the plaintiff is entitled is a smoke alarm for which I allow $500.
 . Furniture and Shelving 
Mr Hardiman proposes an allowance to be made of $3,500 for furniture and shelving for special needs in the computer and living areas. This item is not particularised and although I accept that there would be some additional cost for special needs associated with furniture and shelving in both areas, the absence of detail suggests to me that I should discount this item significantly, bearing in mind, also, that computer areas are now commonplace in residential homes. Accordingly under this item I allow $1,000.

Sub-Total: $52,341 
COMPUTER EXPENSES 
The plaintiff makes a claim for computer expenses. The initial capital expenditure being: * Hardware $11,597.00 * Furniture $ 920.00 * Software $ 3,637.00 * Training $ 2,240.00 $18,394.00 together with recurring computer expenses of $8,184.00 per annum, which gives rise to calculation of $157.38 per week x 948.7 = $149,306 
The defendant concedes this item.

Sub-Total: $167,700 
FUTURE MEDICAL CARE 
I propose to allow under this heading four visits per year to a general practitioner, to enable the plaintiff's health to be regularly monitored, bearing in mind his diminished insight in this regard.

This equals 4 x $41 ($164). To this must be added a yearly visit to a consultant physician ($162) which equals $326 per annum or $6.2 per week. $6.26 x 948.7 = $5,939.00 
HANDYMAN AND GARDENING ASSISTANCE 
The defendant agrees that a reasonable hourly rate for a handyman is $22, but there is dispute between the parties as to the period per week which is a reasonable allowance for handyman assistance. This is a somewhat difficult and speculative area. I take into account that because of his arachnophobia the plaintiff will probably reside in premises without any or any significant garden space. In all the circumstances I consider that I should allow one and a half hours per week under this heading. Accordingly $33 x 948.7 = $31,307.00 
BOTULINUM TREATMENT 
Dr James Colebatch, a neurologist whose sphere of expertise includes torticollis, has expressed the view that the plaintiff should continue indefinitely on botulinum treatment, bearing in mind the very clear subjective response the plaintiff has made to such treatment. Dr Colebatch assessed the cost of such treatment upon the basis of a recommended three treatments per year, each requiring three vials of "Botox" plus professional fees for each attendance, a total of $4,937.25 per year at current costing. The defendant submits that such an allowance is excessive and the plaintiff has thus far responded well to botulinum treatment at a lesser rate than three treatments per year. However, it is perfectly clear that the torticollis is a very significant disability which will have to be tolerated by the plaintiff for the rest of his life. In the absence of medical evidence to the contrary, I am of the view that I should accept the opinion expressed by Dr Colebatch.
Accordingly I shall allow $4,937.25 per annum ($94.95 per week x .7) = $90,079.00 
ECONOMIC LOSS: PAST 
I have earlier referred to the fact that at the time of the accident, the plaintiff had commenced second year of a two year Art Certificate Course at
Hornsby TAFE. His head teacher, Mr Smith, to whom I have already made reference, prepared a brief statement dated 12 May 1989, which includes the following "2. Paul Webster would have completed his course in November, 1987.
To further his studies in Graphic Design, Paul would have needed a minimum of two years to complete a Certificate or Degree Course. On completion of this course, he would have gained, without doubt a position as an artist in the Visual Communications Industry. Taking into account Paul's particular talent as a draghtsman, success would have been a foregone conclusion, and within 4 to 5 years he would normally be expected to have risen to the level of Art Director. Of course, the industry is particularly appreciative of talent and he may have gone much further, more quickly. No member of staff who had contact with Paul doubts that he would achieve a successful career." 
Mr Smith expanded upon the statement in his oral evidence. He thought that, uninjured, the plaintiff would have completed the Art Certificate course with a distinction.

He then gave the following evidence: "Q. I think you have had the opportunity, have you not, on previous occasions, to have a look at Paul's portfolio? 
A. Yes, I have but I haven't seen it since 1988 and when I did look through it, it re-enforced all the opinions that I expressed here. In fact, he probably should have been an A student on those drawings I saw, but this is the nature of the first year of a course, not allowing students to have too many As etcetera.

Q. Assuming Paul had progressed as you have anticipated, what was the demand in those days for students with his qualifications in the private industry? 
A. The demand was reasonably high for fine art but Paul had an interest in the design field. At that stage the market was eating our students up. We couldn't produce students quickly enough. It is probably even true today. I would say, because it was the beginnings of the computerisation of design and illustration, it is equivalent of people getting involved in multi media.
There are not enough trained people in that area. The same is true of a good illustrator. That is the reason we started the course at Hornsby. It had only been previously offered at one college, Randwick, and we doubled the number of students that year or the year after that.

Q. In your letter you mention that you would have expected Paul to rise to the level of art director. What do you mean by that? 
A. The art director, initially you mean going out to work - you work as a junior in a design studio, but the art director is the person who sets the direction of all the art and in the design studio he is the number one. I see no reason, through the talent that Paul had (sic) or had, and his ability and drive at that stage he would have reached that level without any problem at all.

Q. How long would expect before he would have reached that sort of level? 
A. To reach a junior art director - what I am saying by junior, there are obviously art directors who are in the industry who are working on major publications in major advertising agencies who may have taken 25 years to reach that stage. In a small studio the art director, Paul could have reached that in about five years, maybe a little longer, maybe a little less, particularly the way the industry was so vibrant at the time." (T -126) 
Mr Smith expressed the view that the plaintiff would have completed the Art
Certificate Course at a high level. He would then have gained almost automatic entry into the Diploma of Graphic Design Course with credits, thus being able to complete that course in two years. Having obtained his Graphic Arts Diploma he would have been in a position to commence work at the beginning of 1990 in a design studio as a designer.

In cross-examination, Mr Smith confirmed his view that the plaintiff would have risen to the position of art director.

The plaintiff tendered a schedule of the range of salaries earned by junior designers, designers, senior designers and art directors in design studios, dated 1 October 1993, under the hand of Ms Vicki Reilly, designer of
Spatchurst Design Associates Pty Limited. Mr Smith said these salaries were "reasonably close to the mark". Obviously however, he said that they have gone up with inflation since that date.

Mr Smith said that some positions of art director required administration skills but others did not - they were completely "hands-on". The significance of this evidence is that the plaintiff considered himself to be a creative, "hands-on" person. However, leaving aside the administration aspects, the plaintiff appears clearly to have had the skills necessary to succeed in an art studio.

Counsel for the defendant has submitted that the plaintiff's past and future wage loss should be assessed by reference to the average weekly wage statistics. I have given close consideration to the matters which he raised in support of this submission but I am satisfied that it is most likely that the plaintiff would have successfully pursued a career in the design field, which attracts a considerably higher income than the average weekly wage. He had a special skill and I am satisfied that he would have exploited it.

Insofar as past wage loss is concerned, I propose to adopt broadly an average of the figures contained in the Spatchurst schedule.

I am not satisfied that I should make any allowance for the possibility of casual income having been earned by the plaintiff during 1987, 1988 and 1989 when, in my estimation, he probably would have been a full-time student.

Thus I assess nett wage loss to date as follows: 
Junior designer 2 x $20,000 $40,000 ---  
Designer 2 x $26,000 $52,000 
Senior Designer 2 x $35,000 $70,000 
Art director 2 x $40,000 $80,000 
Art director  x $40,000 $20,000 
TOTAL $262,000 
In assessing past wage loss I have taken into account, in the above calculation, the distinct possibility that the plaintiff may have earned money from his own art work independently of his salary.

Interest on past wage loss: % on $262,000 for 8.5 years $155,890 ---  
ECONOMIC LOSS: FUTURE 
I propose to assess future age loss using the figure of $800 net per week as the benchmark ie. The basic salary of an Art Director. Thus I calculate future wage loss, allowing 15% for adverse vicissitudes, as follows: $800 x .85 x 855.7 $581,876 ---  
The figure of $800 is intended to take into account the distinct possibility of the plaintiff earning income, on a free-lance basis, additional to his salary.

I do not consider that this sum should be inflated to take account of the possibility that the plaintiff may commence his own business in lieu of working as an employee.. This would introduce in (my estimation) an unjustified element of speculation into the case.

The evidence clearly demonstrates that as a result of his severe disabilities the plaintiff has no residual earning capacity.

PAST CARE 
The calculation of the amount allowable for past care under the principles enunciated in Grififths versus Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1997) 139 CLR 161], and later cases is subject to the ceilings imposed by s.35C of the Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance )Act 1942 . The claim is thus restricted to a maximum of 40 hours per week at the rates specified in s.35C of that Act.

The present claim is confined to services rendered by the plaintiff's parents, both of whom have given evidence in these proceedings. They have been particularly supportive of him and stressed the problems associated with his lack of motivation, which according to his father, "governs everything he does or doesn't do". His father said that the other great problem is his blindness, but interestingly, he said the inertia was far worse because "without being prompted the whole time prompted or cajoled into doing something, then nothing gets done".

The parents also stressed the problems associated with his phobias. Their evidence as to his problems in this regard, within the first eighteen months after discharge from hospital, is very eloquent of the distress which the plaintiff felt. His father said in relation to this period: "He couldn't see very much, he would get flashes in his eyes and he could see monsters and he could feel the monsters he told us too. He could actually feel them crawling on him. He would literally stand in the middle of the room. He wouldn't sit because there might be something crawling up the back of the chair. He would stand in the middle of the room and just shake and scream and this went on hour after hour. (T 98) 
During this period his parents stayed with the plaintiff virtually all night, operating in shifts to allow each other to obtain some sleep.

Bed wetting was also another significant problem and all efforts to resolve that problem were unsuccessful.

Between November 1993 and May 1996 the plaintiff lived at 31 Alfa Road
Willoughby with three other persons also with disabilities. This experience proved to be quite unsuccessful. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that it unequivocally proved that the plaintiff was incapable of independent living.
Twice he was taken to hospital with food poisoning. Hygiene was an obvious problem and the plaintiff's room was in a dreadful state, as described by his father. This attempt at independent living having failed, it was necessary for him to return to his parent's home where they cared for him full-time.

On two occasions his parents left him at home alone so that they could have some respite. It was obvious to the parents when they returned that the plaintiff was incapable of looking after himself. His father said: "When we got home the place was an absolute disaster, because the kitchen was as I described before - worse I suppose, just rubbish everywhere. Nothing had been cleaned up. There obviously hadn't been any washing up done at all. 
Most of the - all the money I left for him - I left the money in envelopes for him, supposed to be day by day so he wouldn't run out of money, but he spent it all on junk food and liquor. Every bed in the house was wet, because he had wet his own bed and then got into sister's bed - she wasn't living there at the time, wet that, then he got into our bed and wet that. So when we got home there was no food in the house at all, he had no money, and it was an absolute disaster". (T 106) 
The stress of coping with, and caring for, the plaintiff was such that the plaintiff's father resigned from a senior position with a private health care organization. At the time of his resignation Mrs Webster had reached the stage where she could cope no longer without more assistance from her husband.

The totality of the lay evidence, supported particularly by the evidence of Dr
Buckley, Ms Crowe and Dr Jungfer, satisfies me that the claim which the plaintiff makes for past care is justified, subject to a qualification referred to later. With regard to his claim, the defendant accepts the rates specified by the plaintiff but disputes the quantum of hours. The claim which the plaintiff makes is as follows: April 1987 to 3 July 1987 
During this period the plaintiff was at Coorabel Hospital. The plaintiff claims: weekends @ $110.00 per day, based upon a 12 hour day.
 $2,200.00 ---  July 1987 to 18 July 1987 
During this period the plaintiff lived at home. The plaintiff claims that he is entitled to be assessed for home care on the maximum allowable of 40 hours per week.
 weeks @ $408.60 per week $10,623 ---  weeks @ $415.20 per week $11,625 July 1988 to 3 November 1988 
During this period the plaintiff was a patient at Hornsby Hospital. The plaintiff claims: weekends @ $120 per day $3,600.00 ---  November 1988 to 4 November 1993 
During this period the plaintiff lived at home. The plaintiff claims that he is entitled to be assessed for home care on the maximum allowable of 40 hours per week.
 weeks @ $442.70 per week $3,542.00 ---  year @ $460.55 per week (av) $23,948.00 year @ $491.75 per week (av) $25,570.00 year @ $505.50 per week (av) $26,286.00 to 4 Nov 1993 @ $533.54 (av) $50,682.00 
TOTAL: $130,028.00 November 1993 to 19 May 1996 
During this period the plaintiff was resident at the Total Living Foundation,
Willoughby. With regard to this period the Plaintiff gave the following evidence: "Q. While you were staying at the Total Living Foundation in Alpha Road,
Willoughby, were you still going back to your parents place a couple of days a week, on average? 
A. As much as I could, actually. Initially, I wasn't, but it got to the stage where I just wanted to stay there for the weekend. I would be on the phone to them the whole time." 
On the basis of this evidence, the plaintiff claims an average of 2 days per week over the whole period, thus: days per week for 2.5 years = ---  weeks @ $200 per week (av) $26,000.00 May 1996 to 30 June 1998 
During this period the plaintiff lived at home. The plaintiff claims that he is entitled to be assessed for home care on the maximum allowable of 40 hours per week.
 weeks @ $600 per week $66,000.00 ---  
Sub-Total Past Care $250,076.00 
The calculations submitted by the defendant for past care correspond generally with those of the plaintiff for the period from the date of the accident to the end of November 1988. Thereafter, there are significant differences.

During the periods when the plaintiff has been at home, and cared for by his parents, the defendant has submitted a range of hours from 14 to 35 per week.
During the period the plaintiff was resident at the Total Living Foundation the defendant submits 6 hours per week over the whole period is an appropriate allowance.

The figures submitted by the defendant generally underestimate in my view, the amount of care which the plaintiff has required since the accident particularly in the light of the principles enunciated by the High Court in
Van Gervan versus Fenton <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 327.] However, there is understandably a lack of particularity in the plaintiff's claim insofar as the evidence is concerned. Particular reference may be made here to the period when the plaintiff was resident at the Total Living Foundation.

Thus, although I may be erring on the side of caution in this regard, I propose to discount the plaintiff's claim by 10%. This is not to be thought to be a reflection on the amount of care which the plaintiff needs, but rather the lack of detail over a period in excess of 11 years of what was in fact provided on a week-by-week basis to the plaintiff.

Therefore under this head of damages, I allow: $225,068.00 
FUTURE CARE 
The plaintiff's basic contention is that I should allow under this head for the cost of a live-in couple for the remainder of the plaintiff's life. The plaintiff gave evidence that upon the finalisation of these proceedings he wishes to purchase premises of his own (T.51-52). I accept his unchallenged evidence in this regard. The plaintiff appreciates, sympathetically and realistically, that his parents should be relieved of the constant day to day burden which his disabilities have placed upon them. The question would have arisen, in any event, as to how long they could stand the pressure of caring for him. It will be recalled that Miss Newman, the clinical psychologist, recorded that "the strains on the family in a situation such as the plaintiffs are often unbearable".

Dr Buckley and Ms Crowe (in particular), provide persuasive evidence to the effect that his accident-caused disabilities have created the need for 24 hour per day supervision to provide the necessary care for him. They rely in expressing this view upon the multiplicity of disabilities from which the plaintiff suffers visually, physically, cognitively and emotionally. It is also clear to demonstration that the plaintiff is at risk of personal injury at any time whilst he is on his own.

The defendant in response relies particularly upon the evidence of Assistant
Professor Jones. However, in my view, Dr Jones has unrealistically underestimated and understated the extent of the plaintiff's disabilities. If his formula for daily care were accepted, it would leave the plaintiff in a lonely, desolate and dangerous situation on a day to day basis.

I have already referred to a paragraph from a report by Dr Buckley in which he expresses the need for 24 hour supervision of the plaintiff.

During the course of his evidence Dr Buckley dealt as follows with this issue: "Q. In your report you refer to a person providing 24 hour a day care, that is in terms of his needs for a carer/companion. How, as a matter of practice, would you see that need being met? In other words, would it be by one person or by a series of persons? How would you see that as being met? 
A. I would see there being a live-in carer/companion who would probably want the weekend off, but nevertheless living over that time in the house, and on the weekend another relief carer providing the supervision.

Q. As a matter of practice, how is the problem solved that you have a carer who is an employee living at a place but having a 24 hour, or potential 24 hour zone of operations in relation to the care giving? Is that new experience met by a house couple or by changes of shift? How is it met as a matter of practice? 
A. Well, you say changes of shift - I don't think a house couple is required in this case because I don't think two people at the one time are needed to provide care or supervision for Mr Webster. I think it is well within the range of one person's general ability, but that one person does need some time off, so that the practical level I would imagine is that one person would still be staying there at night on the weekend, most nights, would make an arrangement with the relief carer just how he wanted to deal with it - if he wanted to go away for the weekend the relief carer would probably stay.

Q. You envisage two people but working in some sort of rotatory or shared duty manner? 
A. Yes.

Q. So as to cover the overall period? 
A. Yes. I mean, I have seen arrangements where one carer does four days a week and another three days a week.

Mrs Dena Blackman, the chairman of Dial-An-Angel Pty Ltd, prepared a report together with a projected weekly cost of providing, through an agency, the regime of 24 hour supervision considered by Dr Buckley to be necessary.

The schedule is costed on the basis of 1 carer 4 days per week and 1 carer 3 days per week on a 24 hour basis.

The schedule makes no allowance for `the respite offered by a visiting social educator'.

The costing is as follows: 
Weekly $ cost 
Cost of carers:  days @ $250.00 per day $1,750.00 
Keep: days @ $21.25 per day $ 148.75 
Superannuation: %
 $ 105.00 
Agency fees % of gross annual salary $ 87.50 
Annual leave:  days for 4 day per week carer ($4,000.00 per annum) plus 7% superannuation $280.00 $ 82.30 days of annual leave for 3 day per week carer ($3,000.00 per annum) plus 7% superannuation $210.00 $ 61.70 
Sick leave  days per year for 4 day per week carer days per year for 3 day per week carer total 7 days $ 37.00 $2,272.25 
Mrs Blackman stressed that the plaintiff's disabilities required a particular quality of carer in order to meet his needs. Persons who are brain damaged but also mobile present a particular problem for carers and in the plaintiffs case, his near-blindness exacerbated these problems. I accept her evidence in this regard which is consistent with other aspects of the evidence.

Drawing upon her vast experience Mrs Blackman would have preferred a full-time live in couple to accommodate the plaintiff's needs. However, holding the balance as fairly as I can between the parties, I am of the view that damages under this head should be assessed on the basis of the regime proposed in evidence by Dr Buckley.

The defendant called in evidence Sister Shirley Wruck, the owner of `Macquarie
Nursing Services', and tendered a report dated 24 June 1998 with costings by
Sister Wruck.

Applying the same cost elements as Mrs Blackman, Sister Wruck calculated the weekly cost of providing the care regime proposed by Dr. Buckley to be $1311.74. The major difference between the costings is that Sister Wruck has allowed only $123.72 per day for carers, contrasted with $250.00 per day by
Mrs Blackman. This conflict was explored in some depth during the evidence and the plaintiff submitted that it would not be possible to obtain the quality of carer required by the plaintiff's disabilities for less than the figure quoted by Mrs Blackman. The rates quoted by Sister Wruck are the minimum rates payable for persons undertaking this type of work. I cannot accept that it would be possible to obtain suitable carers for the plaintiff at those rates, unless an exceptional situation arose.

The lump sum calculation involved in Mrs Blackman's weekly costing is $2,272 x 948.7 $2,155,446.00 
However, there will necessarily be some time lag involved in the plaintiff purchasing suitable premises and setting up the appropriate carer regime.
During this time the plaintiff will no doubt be cared for by his parents.

There is also the possibility that the plaintiff will be cared for by his parents for brief periods, from time to time, during a changeover of carers, and the like. I consider that I should take into account over the long period ahead that a more favourable rate for a carer or carers may be negotiated than those specified by Mrs Blackman.

Thus I propose to allow under this head of damages the sum of: $1,750,000.00 which takes account of the contingencies to which I have referred.

VACATIONS AND TRAVEL 
The plaintiff claims $5000 per year for carer transport and accommodation on the basis of five weeks holiday per year. The defendant concedes that some allowance should be made under this head but disputes the quantum claimed by the plaintiff. To my mind I should only allow under this head the additional cost of taking a carer on holidays with the plaintiff.

I consider that an allowance of $2000 per annum would be a sufficient allowance under this head. Therefore I allow: $38 per week x 948.7 $36,050.00 ---  
LOSS OF SUPPORT 
The plaintiff made a discrete claim for loss of support from a prospective marriage or common law relationship. This submission can be considered upon the basis in that I am satisfied that the plaintiff is quite unable ever to successfully achieve such a relationship. It may also be noted that at the time of the accident the possibility of marriage was within his contemplation.
In this context the plaintiff gave evidence of a close relationship with a young lady which could well have culminated in marriage of the plaintiff had he not been injured.

In Rosniak versus Government Insurance Office ((1997) Aust Torts Reports 81-440),
Mason P speaking for the Court of Appeal said (at 64-464): "The proposition that loss of support from a marriage partner may be compensable where the defendant's wrong has deprived a plaintiff of that support is uncontroversial in principle." 
That statement is expressed in terms wide enough to encompass a male as well as a female partner. However, the two Australian cases where the claim has been allowed as a discrete head of damage, involved female plaintiffs. The first was the judgment of Giles J in Hines versus Commonwealth of Australia ((1995) Aust Torts Reports 81-338), where his Honour allowed to the plaintiff the sum of $400,000 under this head. That could be categorised as a special case in that there was evidence that the plaintiff would, but for the accident, have married an accountant with financial prospects.

The second case was Pelosi versus Commonwealth Union Assurance of Australia
Limited (Unreported, 8 February 1995), where Barr AJ allowed the sum of $100,000 as a separate head of damage for the loss of financial benefit and support of a husband. The plaintiff was a young female paraplegic. Again that was a special case in that his Honour had there discounted the assessment of the plaintiff's future economic loss to take account of a period when the plaintiff would have been out of the workforce for the purpose of having children. Thus on appeal his Honour's assessment for loss of support was not disturbed because there was no overlapping (Unreported, Court of Appeal 2
February 1996). In that case Sheller JA (speaking for the Court of Appeal) said (at 55): "No doubt something must be allowed for the advantages that flow from pooling earnings thereby improving purchasing power beyond the purchasing power of two incomes separately enjoyed." 
Mr Gross ,QC for the present plaintiff has focussed upon this statement to found a claim for loss of support, albeit the plaintiff is a male. However the prospective pooling of resources which is quite commonly associated with a permanent relationship is not of itself sufficient to found the present claim.
There are too many countervailing factors. I have no difficulty in concluding that, uninjured, the plaintiff would probably have married or at least formed a relationship with a member of the opposite sex. But as the High Court pointed out in Sharman versus Evans ((1977) <case>; [138
CLR 563] at -4), "the whole situation must be full of critical uncertainties," such as whether the plaintiff would have married, the success of that marriage and the extent, if any, to which it may have provided the plaintiff with any financial benefit. There has been no evidence (understandably) in the present case to remove those uncertainties. Indeed any marriage, or other permanent arrangement into which the plaintiff may have entered, could well have been financially burdensome to him.

I have assessed future economic loss on the basis that the plaintiff would have been permanently employed, subject to the conventional discount for adverse vicissitudes, and it seems to me so far as future economic loss is concerned the matter must rest there.

Accordingly I make no allowance for loss of support.

A summary of amounts awarded appears overleaf.

Summary of Amounts Awarded $
 
General Damages ,000 
Out-of-pocket Expenses ,944 
Conversion of Proposed Residence ,341 
Computer Expenses ,700 
Future Medical Care ,939 
Handyman Assistance ,307 
Botulinum Treatment ,079 
Economic Loss: Past ,000 
Interest on Past Economic Loss ,890 
Economic Loss: Future ,876 
Past Care ,068 
Future Care ,750,000 
Vacations and Travel ,050 ,729,194 
I propose to stand the matter over to allow the parties to agree upon the appropriate allowance for Funds Management, bearing in mind that an order has already been made under the Protective [Estates
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea103/). The parties may then bring in short minutes of orders.
 * * * 
