

Regina versus Vincent Cofini [1997] NSWSC 69 (4 March 1997) 
REGINA versus Vincent COFINI /96 
Tuesday 4 March 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, HUNT CJ AT CL, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: On 1 April 1996 the applicant pleaded guilty in the Sydney District Court to three counts of using a false instrument, an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act, carrying a maximum sentence of ten years penal servitude. The applicant also asked that six further offences of the same kind be taken into account on a Form 2.

The sentencing proceedings were conducted before Downs DCJ on 25 and 26 July
On each charge, and taking into account the matters on the Form 2, the applicant was sentenced to concurrent terms of two years penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of one year to commence on 26 July 1996, and an additional term of one year. The applicant seeks leave to appeal against those sentences.

In comprehensive remarks on sentence, his Honour summarised the facts of these matters as follows: "In 1990 the prisoner practiced as a solicitor at 8 Wentworth Avenue, Sydney.
His practice almost completely was restricted to acting for a substantial client, Karl Douglas Spies. As well as acting for Mr Spies the prisoner was heavily involved in business dealings with him including being a director, secretary and a shareholder in many of Mr Spies' companies. The various companies were involved in the buying and selling of hotels and property development.

In August 1990 the prisoner acted for a company called Minelake Pty Limited in respect of an advance of $1.9 million made to that company by St George
Commercial Credit Corporation, now the St George Bank. The loan was to be guaranteed by four parties - Ryleclimb Pty Limited, Ballinrobe Pty Limited, the prisoner and a John Shepherd. Negotiations between the prisoner and the bank's legal representatives took place over a period of approximately one month prior to settlement which was on the 30 August 1990, the date of the offences.

The advance arose out of the need to refinance a loan in respect of two hotels - the Mount Druitt Inn owned by Ballinrobe Holdings Pty Limited and a loan in respect of the Pacific Hotel at Balmain owned by Ryleclimb Pty Limited. The prisoner was a director and secretary of Ballinrobe Pty Limited, Ryleclimb Pty
Limited and Minelake Pty Limited. In relation to the refinancing, the prisoner appended his name as secretary of Ryleclimb Pty Limited and Ballinrobe Pty
Limited to the execution of those companies of various security documents under the company seal, in which the co-signature (sic) was J Shepherd, who was stated to be a director of those companies. The stated person, J Shepherd, did not exist and the prisoner knew this.

The prisoner also purported to witness the signature of John Shepherd as part of the execution by that alleged person of a personal guarantee and indemnity.
He also made a number of statutory declarations in which he stated that the directors of the three companies were himself and John Shepherd, that he was the secretary of each company and that the shareholders of each company were himself, as to one issued fully paid up share, and John Shepherd as to the other issued fully paid up share.

The directorships of the companies mentioned were altered from the name of
Karl Spies to the fictitious name of John Shepherd and this was done with the knowledge of the prisoner to disguise from the St George Bank that moneys loaded to Minelake Pty Limited were for the benefit of Mr Spies.

On 20 September 1991 a receiver was appointed over the prisoner's property, pursuant to <case> of the Legal Practitioners Act of 1987 and in June 1994 the prisoner appeared before a Legal Professional Disciplinary Tribunal. At that tribunal the prisoner gave evidence and made a number of admissions. His explanation was that the name John Shepherd was a name used by Karl Spies. Mr
Spies was initially a director of the companies in his own name. The prisoner's evidence was that Mr Spies ceased to be a director in his name and assumed the directorships in the name of John Shepherd. The purpose of the deception was that St George Bank would lend to Minelake Pty Limited, the security would be put up by Ryleclimb Pty Limited and Ballinrobe Pty Limited and John Shepherd and the prisoner would appear to St George Bank to be acquiring those companies from Mr Spies and his father.

There is evidence that Mr Spies had already borrowed approximately $20 million from the St George Bank and reached the limit of his borrowings. It was therefore, necessary for a new borrower to come into being and this was
Minelake Pty Limited. Minelake Pty Limited was to be the borrower for the purposes of refinancing the loan with Ryleclimb Pty Limited and Ballinrobe Pty
Limited putting up the security. Ryleclimb was said to be valued at $1.1 million and Ballinrobe at $2.1 million. The purpose for substituting John
Shepherd, who did not exist, for Karl Spies, who did, was to induce the St
George Bank to lend sufficient moneys to pay out the then current mortgagee who had placed the hotels in receivership in circumstances where the St George
Bank would not otherwise have advanced the necessary moneys.

There is evidence from Mr Catanzaretti, a solicitor, concerning an agreement of guarantee and indemnity document that the St George Bank required to be executed before refinancing of the load would be approved (the first count).
This document required a solicitor's certificate to be completed by an independent solicitor. Mr Catanzaretti's evidence was that the prisoner requested him to sign the certificate stating that he had explained the agreement to both the prisoner and John Shepherd. Mr Catanzaretti very properly refused to do this and wrote the words, 'Vince Cofini' after the word guarantor, so that the certificate only related to the prisoner. The certificate has the words 'And J Shepherd' after the words 'Vince Cofini.'
Before the Disciplinary Tribunal of the Law Society the prisoner stated that in all probability he inserted the additional words and did it to deceive the
St George Bank.

The second charge relates to a security document under the company's seal. It is a mortgage debenture by Ballinrobe Holdings Pty Limited to St George
Commercial Credit Corporation Limited dated 30 August 1995.

The third count relates to a letter of acceptance addressed to S D Ratner and
Co, solicitors, concerning the advance to Minelake Pty Limited. S D Ratner and
Co were the solicitors acting for St George Commercial Credit Corporation
Limited.

On 30 August 1995 the prisoner and the St George Bank representative, Mr Neil
Simmons, solicitor of S D Ratner and Co attended at the settlement at Stamp
Duty's Office in Sydney together with representatives of the other parties. At the settlement the security documents, the subject of the charges, were handed by the prisoner to Mr Simmons. Mr Simmons produced some forty-four documents from his firm's file concerning the transaction. These documents set forth the steps taken by the prisoner to deceive the St George Bank in the month prior to the settlement that I have already referred to. Mr Simmons states that he accepted the documents at their face value and he had no reason to believe they were anything other than what they purported to be.

The advance to Minelake Pty Limited defaulted and after attempts by the St
George Bank to recover funds the loss to the St George Bank is estimated to be $1.452 million dollar.

The police have been unable to locate Mr Spies. The Form 2 which I propose to take into account relates to the mortgage debenture, two deeds and the statutory declarations that have already been referred to." 
His Honour took into account a number of matters favourable to the applicant in determining the sentence. The applicant was then 37 years old, he is now , and had no prior convictions. He is married with three young children. The marriage broke down following the discovery of the offences and the financial hardship which ensued, but he and his wife are now reconciled. The applicant had a close and supportive relationship with his parents and younger brother.
The death of his father in 1988 was said to have a detrimental effect on him, causing him to some extent to lose his way in life.

By the time he appeared for sentence, the applicant had suffered severe financial loss, partly as a result of these offences and partly because he had been declared bankrupt following his failure to honour a personal guarantee, having no connection with the offence. He and his family had been the subject of threats against their lives, the source of the threats being possibly an associate of the man Spies.

The applicant was suspended from practice as a solicitor in 1991 and struck off in 1994. He has since worked as a mail sorter at the document exchange and there was a favourable reference from his employer. There were other favourable references from which it appeared that since 1992, he has become a regular churchgoer and has engaged in parish activities. Although he declined to be interviewed by police and was committed for trial, the applicant ultimately pleaded guilty in the District Court. He admitted his complicity in these offences in proceedings against him in the Legal Professional
Disciplinary Tribunal in 1994 and has since cooperated with the Law Society and the police. The pre-sentence report and some of the testimonials attested to what was perceived to be his genuine remorse.

In this application, counsel for the applicant has acknowledged that a custodial sentence was called for, but has submitted that his Honour's findings of fact were in error in a number of respects.

It was submitted that his Honour overstated the applicant's role in this fraud and paid inadequate regard to evidence that the applicant was in a sense the servant of the man Spies at all relevant times. In written submissions, counsel for the applicant submitted that Spies might be viewed as "clearly a man of means in the way of the 80s, usually other people's means". There may well be considerable force in that observation about the man Spies. It was submitted that the applicant's directorship of the companies was simply to fulfil legal requirements and the companies were in fact controlled by Spies.
The applicant, it was submitted, was the "patsy", using the expression that counsel used in the written submissions. He would take all the risk by presenting a personal guarantee and presenting the false documentation to the bank.

At one stage in his remarks on sentence, his Honour referred to the applicant as the "legal adviser" and fellow director of Mr Spies and before us it was submitted that that did not truly reflect his role. The fact is that he was a fellow director, whatever practical control he may have exercised in the affairs of the company, and he was at all relevant times a legal adviser in the sense that he was acting as a solicitor. His Honour accepted that the applicant was, to use his Honour's own words, dominated by Mr Spies.
Nevertheless the applicant's role was, as counsel expressly acknowledged before us, pivotal in this affair.

Having regard to the whole of the evidence, and having carefully read his
Honour's remarks on sentence, it does not appear to me that his Honour has in any way over estimated the role which the applicant had to play in this affair.

Before us, counsel also challenged an observation of his Honour in the remarks on sentence to the effect that the applicant had, in evidence before him, endeavoured to play down his role in the affair. In particular, we were taken to a passage of the remarks on sentence, where his Honour said: "The prisoner endeavoured in evidence to play down the role that he played in the matter, when he said that it was Mr Spies and Mr Middleton who arranged the loan, and that he merely attended upon the settlement. The fact is that from late in July 1990 until 30 August 1990, many letters passed between the prisoner and the bank's legal advisers so that refinancing of a prior loan could be implemented".

Mr Middleton was the officer of the bank with whom the applicant was dealing for the purpose of the loan. His Honour's reference to the applicant's assertion that he had merely attended upon the settlement presumably derived from parts of the applicant's evidence before his Honour. When asked whether he was present when the loan was obtained, his answer was, "I was present at settlement". He went on to say in evidence that he wasn't present when the initial discussions in relation to the loan between Spies and Middleton took place. He said they met on a particular day during lunch and then came to his office and discussed it with him. I should perhaps say at this point, that it was the applicant's case that Mr Middleton was at all material times aware that the man Shepherd was fictitious, a matter which Mr Middleton denied and a matter which his Honour ultimately did not resolve. If, in the course of the remarks on sentence, his Honour intended to say that the applicant was claiming that his role in this affair was merely to attend upon settlement, that finding could not be supported. I must say that what his Honour meant at that particular part of the remarks on sentence puzzles me somewhat, but his
Honour can have been in no doubt about the extent of the applicant's admission of his complicity in this fraud.

The applicant had pleaded guilty to three counts and asked that a further six be taken into account on sentencing. He did not challenge the voluminous documentation tendered in the sentencing proceedings, tending to show the extent of his involvement throughout the negotiation of the loan until its completion. The whole of his approach to the case was consistent with his accepting responsibility for his role in the affair from an early stage and, when one reads his Honour's remarks on sentence as a whole, his Honour does not appear to have been under any misapprehension about it.

Counsel before us complained that what was said to be his Honour's erroneous finding as to the extent of the applicant's admission of his complicity might well have diminished the effect of evidence of the applicant's remorse.
However, in the course of his remarks on sentence, his Honour referred to the evidence of remorse in the pre-sentence report and in some of the testimonials, apparently without criticism, and his Honour expressed his own view that the applicant had "demonstrated some sense of contrition".

While this aspect of the matter has troubled me somewhat, I am not persuaded, having read the remarks on sentence as a whole, that his Honour was under any misapprehension as to the extent of the applicant's acceptance of his complicity, or that his Honour failed to give appropriate weight to the evidence of the applicant's remorse.

His Honour's reasons were also criticised in relation to his Honour's finding as to whether the applicant was to receive any money as a result of this fraudulent transaction. In the course of remarks on sentence, his Honour said of the applicant: "He said he would not have received any moneys from the transaction. As he did all of the legal work, had virtually no other clients, and had, or as he alleged at one stage, 50 per cent in the Balmain Hotel, I find this evidence is not acceptable." 
Reference to the Balmain Hotel is to the Pacific Hotel at Balmain which the applicant said in evidence was worth about $1.1 million and in which he said he had a 50 per cent interest. He went on to say, however, that he had that interest only "on paper technically", saying that, at the time of the approach to the bank, he did not really have any interest in the hotel as his share had been taken over by an associate of Spies some months earlier.

His Honour did not specify what the financial gain to the applicant would be, or exactly how it would come about. Counsel before us submitted that his
Honour should have concluded no more than that the applicant would have received his professional costs for acting in the matter, and counsel for the
Crown before us submitted that that no doubt was all his Honour meant when he suggested that the applicant would, contrary to his evidence, have received some financial benefit.

In the course of evidence, it was put to the applicant that he anticipated making a substantial amount of money out of the transaction which forms the basis of the charge, to which he replied, "Not at all, not at all". It was suggested that he would gain a substantial benefit if the hotel had later been sold for a profit which, again, he denied. The submission before us was that it was that evidence to which his Honour was referring, and which his Honour rejected, and the true effect of that evidence was that the applicant was saying that he anticipated no share in the profits as a participant in the commercial venture, and that the applicant was saying nothing about professional costs he might receive, or the professional benefit to be gained by maintaining Mr Spies as his client.

Again, I have to say, it is not entirely clear what it was his Honour was referring to when he rejected the applicant's claim that he would receive no money from the transaction. But, in the light of his Honour's observations thereafter that the applicant did all the legal work and had virtually no other clients, it may well be that he was saying no more than that any claim that the applicant was to receive no remuneration at all from this venture could not be sustained.

Finally, it was submitted that the applicant had apparently not been given credit for the fact that it was he who initially exposed the fraud. I have referred to the fact that the applicant claimed, and Mr Middleton denied, that
Middleton at all times knew that the name Shepherd was fictitious and that the person truly to benefit from this loan was Mr Spies. However that may be, it seems to me common ground that in late 1991, when the bank sought to enforce the loan after default, the applicant approached Mr Middleton and told him that the name Shepherd was indeed fictitious, and that no such person existed.
It is true that this is a matter which his Honour did not refer to in the course of his remarks on sentence and it is difficult to say that it stands very much to the applicant's credit. As his counsel frankly acknowledged before us, the circumstance in which the applicant approached Mr Middleton at that stage was that he was being pursued in respect of his personal guarantee, and the conclusion is not readily available that he took the course he did out of remorse for his criminal activity. In my view, it was not a matter of significance and his Honour was entitled to have no regard to it in arriving at the appropriate sentence.

Most importantly, at the end of the day, it can hardly be said that a sentence of two years comprising a minimum term of one year and an additional term of one year is anything but lenient. The applicant's criminality was of a high order. It involved a breach of trust by a member of a profession in which a high degree of personal integrity is essential. On balance, I do not consider that any of the criticisms of his Honour's remarks on sentence have been made good. But insofar as I entertain any misgivings about them, I would have to say that upon my own view of the matter the sentence that was passed could not in any way be described as excessive.

In all the circumstances I consider that leave to appeal should be granted, but I would propose that the appeal be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.
 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court is that leave is granted to appeal, but that the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
