

Regina versus Doyle Matter No 71453/98 [1998] NSWSC 732 (23 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus ADAM DOYLE /98 April 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for bail in circumstances which regrettably cannot succeed. 
At a time at which the applicant had been ordered to perform community service for the crime of stealing a motor vehicle and was subject to a recognizance in respect of that crime, he was charged with possessing car breaking implements and stealing a motor vehicle on two occasions and has subsequently been charged with robbery in company, disguise face with intent to commit a felony and admits a car stealing at about that same time.

Shortly speaking and reading between the lines, his defence to the robbery in company and disguise face charges is that, having stolen a car, he was placed under duress by those minded to commit the robbery and forced to accompany the two gunmen involved. The two car stealing offences I have referred to earlier as allegedly having been committed whilst the subject of the community service order are offences to which he is pleading not guilty. He has a most substantial record for car stealing.

Present today are his family prepared to give evidence on his behalf as to the availability of sureties. His parents are prepared to pledge their home.
Further, I understand that they are prepared to give evidence that he is a worthy person within the family relationship and that they have confidence that he would appear. On the other hand, his record is such, these charges are such, that it is clear that if the charges are made out, that is, simply the car stealing charges (and one is admitted) that he is committing offences on bail and whilst the subject of a recognizance for offences of the very nature of those for which the court dealt with him when giving him the recognizance and offences in respect of which he has a long and substantial history.

In these circumstances it is incumbent upon me to consider whether there is a likelihood of him committing further offences whilst on bail and to consider the protection of the community.

I am told from the bar table that he has experienced the shock of his life being forced into an armed robbery. The question of whether he was or was not forced into an armed robbery is an issue that will have to be decided at trial for that offence. It is a defence that has very, very rarely succeeded and it is a defence that is open to the applicant but it is one about which a court and a jury would at least initially be sceptical. In any event, the car theft makes it plain that unless he has now entirely turned from crime, and on the material before me I cannot say that he has, then further offences might be expected and in any event, even if he has, he would still expect a custodial sentence.

In all the circumstances I am not prepared to grant bail. Bail is refused.
 * * * 
