

Regina versus I Siryani [1996] NSWSC 64 (4 April 1996) 
REGINA v. Iass (Sam) SIRYANI /95 April 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BADGERY-PARKER, SIMPSON J 
CATCHWORDS: NO ABUSE AND NO STAY OF PROCEEDINGS: COMMONWEALTH CHARGES LAID
AFTER NSW PROCEEDINGS FINALISED 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
HEADNOTE 
The NSW Authorities prosecuted Siryani for conspiracy to supply not less than the commercial quantity of heroin, supply heroin and conspiring to commit a robbery whilst armed. The prosecution and the defendant were aware that materials had been forwarded to the Commonwealth. They suggested two conspiracies to import prohibited drugs into Australia.

At the sentence indication hearing for the NSW offences the judge indicated a minimum term of 4 years and an additional term of 2 years. Siryani's lawyers enquired whether there were any other outstanding charges and the prosecution solicitor correctly answered not as far as he was aware. Siryani claimed that he accepted the indication on the basis that there were no further charges.
Neither Siryani not the Crown contacted the Commonwealth Authorities.

Some months later the Commonwealth prosecuted Siryani on two charges of conspiracy to import.

HELD: 
There had been no abuse of process and a stay of proceedings had been incorrectly granted;
The prosecution solicitor had answered correctly what he had been asked.
He had not purported to speak for the Commonwealth;
There had been no prosecutorial misconduct on the part of the
Commonwealth;
If Siryani was found guilty on the Commonwealth charges the judge would take into account the sentences received on the NSW offences. An appropriate sentence for the total criminality would be assessed.

ORDERS 
Appeal allowed.
Discharge the stay of proceedings granted in respect of each count.
 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions has appealed against the order of Judge Patten of 17 October 1995 permanently staying the presentation by the Director of an indictment against Sam Jacob Siryani in respect of these alleged conspiracies: 
That Michael Nelson and Sam Jacob Siryani between March 1992 and February at Sydney and in Lebanon conspired with each other, Tanis Dibes Rahme, aka, Abu George and diverse others to import into Australia heroin being not less than the trafficable quantity; 
That Michael Nelson and Sam Jacob Siryani between about January 1993 and
March 1993 conspired with each other and diverse others to import into
Australia heroin being not less than the trafficable quantity.

The trial had been due to commence on 23 October 1995.

In early 1993 Siryani and Nelson came under police surveillance. Siryani was the proprietor of a service station at Rockdale. On 12 January 1993 an intercept was placed on the telephone service connected to Siryani's office at the service station. On 22 January 1993 a listening device was installed in the same office. The operation was under the control of state police officers.
The recorded conversations revealed the commission of a number of offences against NSW law, including supplying prohibited drugs and conspiracy to commit an armed robbery.

The conversations also pointed to the commission of offences against the laws of the Commonwealth. Those between Nelson and Siryani covered debts allegedly owed by Siryani for a previous importation of 1.4 kilograms of heroin and plans for the importation of 1 kilogram of heroin. Conversations were recorded from 23 January 1993 until 11 March 1993 when Siryani discovered the listening device. The Crown alleges that prior to this discovery the recorded conversations revealed that Siryani and Nelson had come to a final agreement to import 1 kilogram of heroin on flight QF32 from Beirut via Singapore on 12
March 1993. The courier was to be met at Singapore where the drugs were to change hands and be brought into Australia. The Crown alleges that as a result of the discovery of the listening device the importation was cancelled.

The state and federal authorities co-operated with each other. In May 1993 a report and a copy of the relevant transcripts were forwarded to the
Commonwealth authorities. It was not until October 1994 that the Commonwealth authorities laid charges. This delay may be explained partly by Siryani being in custody on NSW offences and there being no pressing urgency.

On 19 March 1993 Siryani had been arrested by NSW police and charged. Bail was refused.

On 27 April 1994 a sentence indication hearing was held in respect of the NSW offences for which Siryani had been committed for trial. Judge Gallen accepted that the Crown could not expect with any certainty that Siryani would be convicted. The magistrate had declined to commit on some of the charges but an ex officio indictment had been filed. Judge Gallen dealt with the NSW offences by assessing the total criminality and making the sentences concurrent. The judge indicated that on the most serious charge that between 20 January 1993 and 2 February 1993 Siryani conspired with Peter Younan to supply not less than the commercial quantity of heroin, the sentence he would impose comprised a minimum term of four years and an additional term of two years. This would take into account being a principal in the second degree to the offence of robbery whilst armed committed on 25 September 1992.

As to the count of on 18 January 1993 supplying heroin the judge indicated a fixed term of 18 months. As to the count of on 21 January 1993 supplying heroin the same sentence was indicated.

As to the further count of on 5 March 1993 supplying heroin the same sentence was indicated. As to the count of between 2 January 1993 and 26 February 1993 of conspiring to commit a robbery whilst armed the judge indicated a sentence of 12 months.

Mr C J O'Loughlin of counsel appeared for Siryani on the sentence indication hearing. Mr O'Loughlin had also appeared for Siryani at committal proceedings in November 1993. During those proceedings Detective Sergeant York told Mr
O'Loughlin that his client may be charged with offences relating to the importation into Australia of heroin and that the evidence against Siryani as to these was to be found on the listening device tapes. Mr O'Loughlin told his client of that conversation.

Mr O'Loughlin said that during the sentence indication hearing he asked the solicitor for the prosecution "Are there any other outstanding charges against my client?" and he said, "No, not as far as I am aware." Mr O'Loughlin believed that before replying the solicitor consulted Sergeant York who was present at court.

Mr O'Loughlin further stated that after Judge Gallen had given his indication the matter was adjourned and Siryani, his counsel, his solicitor and his family discussed the position together. Siryani ultimately stated to his family and his lawyers that he accepted the indication on the basis that no further charges would be laid against him arising out of the police operations and investigations.

Mr P F Singleton, the solicitor for the prosecution stated that as at 27 April the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions had been sent a brief of evidence by the NSW Police Service and was considering whether Siryani should be prosecuted for a Commonwealth offence. Mr Singleton recalled Mr O'Loughlin asking him a question about other charges but he did not remember its precise terms. Mr Singleton believed he conferred with Sergeant York referring specifically to whether the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions had made any determination. Mr Singleton's best collection was that Sergeant York advised that he was not aware of any charges being on foot other than those before Judge Gallen. Mr Singleton believed that he answered Mr O'Loughlin's question to the effect that all charges which had been laid against Siryani were, as far as knew, before the court.

In cross examination Mr Singleton stated that he asked Sergeant York whether there were any Commonwealth charges on foot. He did not take the matter further. Mr Singleton said that Mr O'Loughlin may have asked "Are there any other outstanding charges against my client?" and he (Singleton) may have replied "No, not so far as I am aware" or something along those lines. Mr
Singleton had not read the brief sent to the Commonwealth Director.

In answer to the judge, Mr Singleton said that he understood "outstanding charges" to mean were there any charges which have not been dealt with to finality and "charges" to mean charges which had been laid rather than potential charges being contemplated by somebody else.

In re-examination it was pointed out the Mr Nelson (the co-accused in the
Commonwealth matters) had no involvement in the matters which Mr Singleton was prosecuting.

Sergeant York said that he was engaged on other duties on 27 April 1994 and was not present at the court. His entries in his official duty book support that assertion. Detective Thurtell was involved in the police operation from an early date and ultimately became the case officer. He had prepared the materials sent to the Commonwealth. Perhaps it was he to whom Mr Singleton spoke or perhaps Sgt York was contacted by telephone.

The judge found that Mr O'Loughlin asked Mr Singleton whether there were any other outstanding charges and that Mr Singleton conveyed to Mr O'Loughlin that there were no charges on foot, other than those before Judge
Gallen. The expression "charges on foot" was used in the sense that there were no pending charges actually laid as opposed to investigations which could give rise to charges.

The judge was satisfied that the accused believed that the sentences indicated were to finalise all the matters arising out of the surveillance and that Mr
O'Loughlin intended to ascertain this information even if his question to Mr
Singleton could have been framed with more particularity.

To reach the conclusion mentioned about Siryani the judge appears to have relied on some statements (or notes) made about or shortly before the hearing before the judge to a legal representative of Siryani by his wife and daughter. These were admitted over objection. Neither was called to give evidence and there was no cross examination. Siryani did not give evidence.
These are serious problems.

Mr O'Loughlin's intention is not a major matter. The question is what Mr
Singleton understood or ought reasonably to have understood from the question asked by Mr O'Loughlin. During argument it was submitted that Mr Singleton would reasonably have realised that Siryani would know of any charges which had been laid. He would want to know if there were going to be any further charges.

While I would not wish to take a technical approach, Mr Singleton could only be expected to deal with the question which he was asked. He could hardly be expected to speak for the Commonwealth.

I would have expected Siryani's legal representative to make their own enquiries of the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions if they were concerned about future Commonwealth charges. They could not reasonably rely on
Mr Singleton or Sgt York to speak for the Commonwealth.

It was unfortunate that there was over 15 months between receipt by the
Commonwealth of the materials and the institution of the Commonwealth proceedings but the delay is not of such an order as to be oppressive. There is no evidence of prosecutorial misconduct on behalf of the Commonwealth. The most that can be said is that it was slow moving.

Both counsel relied on Rogers v. The Queen [181 CLR 255.] It was common ground that the categories of abuse of process are not closed. The judge relied on the judgment of McHugh J at 286 and held that it would be unjustifiably oppressive to Siryani to indict and try him on the conspiracy charges and that it would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. I am unable to share the judge's views.

A sentence indication hearing differs markedly from a trial or plea. An accused has the option of accepting the indication or taking his chances at the trial or on the plea. If the two charges of conspiracy to import heroin had been before the judge it would have been incorrect for him to have given the same sentence indication. The proceedings before Judge Gallen wrapped up the NSW charges arising out of the tapes and the investigation. The sentences were lenient and reflected the considerations urged on Siryani's behalf.

There appears to be a substantial case against Siryani on the conspiracy charges. If he is found guilty the presiding judge would take into account the sentence which he has already received. It is the totality of the criminality which has to be assessed and punished.

I would allow the appeal and discharge the stays on both counts.

BADGERY-PARKER J: I agree that the appeal should be allowed and the stays set aside for the reasons given by Smart, J.
 
SIMPSON J: I agree with the orders proposed by Mr Justice Smart and with his reasons therefor.
 * * * 
