

Regina versus Pollard Matter No 70078/95 [1997] NSWSC 402 (15 September 1997) 
Regina versus Harry Pollard /95 September 1997 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division /95 - REGINA versus Harry POLLARD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 6 November 1995 the accused, Harry Pollard, was arraigned upon an ex officio indictment charging that between 8 January and 4 June 1987 at
Tumbarumba, New South Wales, he murdered his wife, Azucena Pollard, and his son, Harry Pollard Junior. To both counts he pleaded not guilty. By notice of motion he seeks an order that proceedings on the indictment be permanently stayed or, alternatively, stayed unless and until he is committed for trial.

The Crown Case and the Decision to Prosecute.

The accused, who is now aged 61, was previously married, but his first wife died in a motor vehicle accident in 1973. Azucena was born in the Philippines in either 1953 or 1954, and the accused became acquainted with her by correspondence in 1984. They were married in the Philippines in April 1985 and returned to Australia, where they went through a further marriage ceremony at
Bathurst in December of that year. In January 1986, Azucena was granted permanent residence status in this country and, in the middle of that year, they moved to the accused's property just out of Tumbarumba, in the south west of New South Wales. On 28 August 1986 their son, Harry Jnr, was born.

Azucena and Harry Jnr disappeared in early 1987. It is impossible to say exactly when from the evidence available to the Crown, which consists of sightings by witnesses and the accused's account of their movements when spoken to by the police. Certainly, it was no later than mid-March, although the Crown case is that they died some weeks earlier. Their bodies have never been found and extensive enquiries by police about their whereabouts have proved fruitless. Subject to a document to which I shall refer in a moment,
Azucena's family in the Philippines have not heard from her since early 1987, although she had been a regular correspondent. Mrs Neneth Cooper, her one close friend in Australia, also has not heard from her since that time.

Apparently as a result of concern on the part of her relatives in the
Philippines, police were notified of the disappearance of Azucena and Harry
Jnr in July 1987, and it was then that enquiries as to their whereabouts commenced. When interviewed, the accused told police that he had not seen them since mid-March, when he returned home to find a note from Azucena saying that she had gone to Melbourne with a man called Kevin, or Kelvin, and that she would not contact him again. He said that he had seen Azucena speaking to this man at a Chinese restaurant in Wagga about twelve months earlier, and that she had spoken of him on a number of occasions since. He did not retain the note.

The accused also told police that in February 1987 Azucena went to Melbourne, ostensibly to visit a friend, taking the child with her. They travelled by train and he drove them to Albury railway station, where he picked them up on their return a few days later. He said that she was vague and evasive in her account of how she had spent her time in Melbourne.

In a statement to police her friend, Mrs Cooper, revealed that Azucena had complained to her before the birth of Harry Jnr that the accused had been demanding and aggressive in their sexual relations. She had never confided in her about an affair with another man.

In mid 1987 relatives of Azucena in the Philippines received a typewritten letter, apparently signed by her. It was in an envelope addressed in her handwriting and bearing Christmas 1986 stamps, but postmarked from Melbourne on 3 June 1987. The effect of the letter is that she had left the accused, taking the child with her, and was living in Melbourne with a man called
Kevin. The letter does not disclose an address in that city. The Crown relies upon expert evidence that the handwritten signature on the letter appears to have been "traced over", and evidence that the form of expression is unusual for her, as is the fact that the letter is typewritten (all her letters having been handwritten). When interviewed by police the accused denied any knowledge of the letter, but there is evidence from which it might be inferred that he was in Melbourne at the time it was sent. It is the Crown case that the letter is a forgery and was despatched in an envelope which Azucena had addressed some months earlier.

Between the time of their disappearance and the police investigation, the accused lied to a number of people about the whereabouts of Azucena and Harry
Jnr. What he said was not entirely consistent but, for the most part, it was to the effect that she had returned with the baby to the Philippines for a visit. He told police that he had done so because he had been unable to face the fact that Azucena had left him and had maintained the hope that she would return. Police searched the accused's property but found nothing of forensic significance. The double bed which he shared with Azucena, which the police wished to examine for forensic purposes, was missing and has never been found.
Likewise, a large quantity of the personal possessions of Azucena and Harry
Jnr have never been found. The accused told police that, after Azucena left, he did not wish to sleep in the bed which he had shared with her and he disposed of it at a tip. He said that he had intended to buy a new bed in anticipation of her return.

The disappearance of Azucena and the baby received extensive publicity in 1987 and 1988, some of it featuring a picture of Azucena. Apart from the Jackson brothers, to whom I shall refer later, the only person who came forward claiming to have seen her since the disappearance was a man called Sargosa, who telephoned the producer of the Willesee programme on Channel 9, saying that he recognised the woman depicted on the programme. The producer's recollection is that Mr Sargosa told him that he was staying in Sydney, but lived in Melbourne. The producer requested a telephone number so that he could follow the matter up, but when he rang it Mr Sargosa was not known there. A day or so later Mr Sargosa rang to say that he had been mistaken and the producer never heard from him again. Subsequent police enquiries have failed to locate him.

An inquest was embarked upon in 1989, at which a considerable amount of evidence, both documentary and oral, was received. However, the coroner terminated the inquest and referred the papers to the Director of Public
Prosecutions under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/s19.html) of the [Coroner's Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/). The
Director decided that no proceedings should be taken against the accused at that stage and, by letter of 6 December 1989, the accused was informed that the Director, "after carefully considering" the matter, had directed that no ex officio indictment be filed against him. Although the Director's file records the decision that no indictment be filed "at this stage", no such qualification was conveyed to the accused in the letter.

Almost six years later, by letter of 6 October 1995, the Director informed the accused that, "after careful consideration of the material furnished by the coroner and after further investigation", it had been determined that proceedings would be commenced against him by way of ex officio indictment charging two counts of murder. The "further investigation" referred to led to the service upon the accused's solicitors of further statements from witnesses. Some of these relate to the allegedly forged letter, tending to confirm the forgery and suggesting that the accused usually dealt with the mail and had an opportunity to retain an envelope addressed by Azucena. Two of the statements tend to contradict the accused's account of his picking up
Azucena and the baby at Albury railway station after the trip to Melbourne in
February 1987. Others contain further evidence of the difficulties in their relationship, suggesting that he was unsupportive of her during her pregnancy and in the care of the child and also that, after the birth, she began to refuse to have sexual relations with him.

In addition, Mr Denis Wiehr, also married to a woman from the Philippines, made a statement to police in February 1995, in which he recounted an occasion in early 1986 when he and his wife were entertaining the accused and Azucena for dinner. He said that, whilst the women were preparing dinner, he and the accused had a discussion about how some Australian men treated their Filipino wives, in the course of which the accused said, "If she doesn't do as I say,
I'll fix her up." The Crown relies upon this as some evidence of motive.

On 13 November 1995 Mr G J Main, solicitor of Cootamundra, who had been acting for the accused, received a handwritten letter to which was attached a handwritten document described as an "affidavit". The document, dated 7
November 1995, is not sworn and purports to be signed by four people. After referring to the contact between Mr Sargosa and the producer of the Willesee programme in 1987, it goes on to assert that Azucena married the accused to escape poverty and a strict family in the Philippines, and that a boyfriend of hers followed her to Australia. The effect of what follows is that she left the accused for the boyfriend in March 1987, settling in Melbourne, where she has since remarried, using a false name. She would not come forward now because she has committed bigamy, does not wish a custody battle over Harry
Jnr, and is afraid of being deported. The authors assert that both Azucena and
Harry are alive, but they decline to disclose their whereabouts because of a solemn promise made to Azucena some years previously not to divulge her address under any circumstances.

Mr Main made the documents available to the police. No fingerprints were detected on them. Despite extensive enquiries, no people bearing the four names appearing on the "affidavit", which have a Filipino flavour, have been located. The handwriting in the "affidavit" is different from that in the letter which accompanied it, and neither appears to be the accused's.
Nevertheless, the Crown contends that this document, like the typewritten letter sent to the Philippines in June 1987, is a sham and that the accused is responsible for both of them. The Crown notes that the "affidavit" is dated 7
November 1995, the day after the accused was arraigned upon the ex officio indictment.

Further Evidence Favouring the Accused.

Not long after the police investigation began, two brothers, Bruce and Basil
Jackson, reported a possible sighting of Azucena and Harry Jnr to Sgt Brian
Grabham, who was then stationed at Tumbarumba. Sgt Grabham died in 1992 and, if he made any record of this information, it has not been produced (and presumably cannot be located). Sgt John Holstein, who was also involved in the enquiry in 1987, is able to confirm that some information was provided to Sgt
Grabham by the Jackson brothers, although he was not present at the time. His recollection is that the information was investigated and eliminated from the enquiry, although he cannot remember the details of that investigation.

Bruce Jackson died in late 1995. Police re-interviewed Basil Jackson in
February 1996. He said that, at the relevant time, he and his brother were employed felling pine trees in the Laurel Hill area of the Bago State Forest.
A small car of Japanese make stopped and the occupants asked the Jacksons for directions to Batlow, saying that they had travelled from Mt Selwyn.
Directions were given and the car drove off. Mr Jackson observed the driver to be a male of Asian appearance, possibly Filipino, in his mid twenties. A young
Asian woman was in the front passenger's seat. In the rear was an older Asian woman nursing a baby. Later, after media coverage of the disappearance, the late Bruce Jackson recognised the woman in the front passenger's seat as
Azucena, and the child being nursed in the back as Harry Jnr.

When this sighting occurred cannot now be established, but the Crown concedes its relevance to the defence case.

Basil Jackson is now 67 years old and was considered by the officer who interviewed him to have a poor memory. It seems that in 1987 no statement was taken from him or his brother and neither was called at the inquest. One of the reasons why the Crown now asserts that this was a false sighting is that there is a direct route from Tumbarumba to Batlow, and Mt Selwyn is a considerable distance from both of them.

When this information came to the knowledge of the accused is unclear.
However, there is evidence before me that an employed solicitor in the
Cootamundra firm now acting for him contacted the detective sergeant in charge of the enquiry in May 1995 and again in October 1995, requesting that the information be followed up. It seems that Bruce Jackson was still alive at that time: certainly in May 1995, if not in October. In a statement in evidence before me, the detective sergeant said that he had no recollection of any contact with the solicitor and that the enquiries he made in early 1996 followed a conversation with the Crown's instructing solicitor.

Permanent Stay.

Mr Brereton, counsel for the accused, has relied on the lengthy history of the proceedings and the death of Bruce Jackson and Sgt Grabham as the foundation of his application for a permanent stay. He noted that the letter from the
Director of Public Prosecutions to the accused in December 1989 informing him that no ex officio indictment would be filed did not suggest that the matter might be reviewed in due course. As a result, the accused was led to believe that he was no longer in jeopardy and that no further steps need be taken to gather evidence. Six years then elapsed before the Director decided to proceed in the matter and, submitted Mr Brereton, such further evidence as had been garnered in the meantime did not justify that change of heart.

Mr Brereton argued also that the delay has occasioned prejudice to the defence which cannot now be remedied. He referred to the inevitable fading of the memories of witnesses through the passage of time, relying on the observations of Rogers J in Kintominas versus The Attorney General for New South Wales [(1987) A Crim R 456] at 462: "Whilst the Crown witnesses have available to them, for the purpose of refreshing their minds, their statements, the recollection of other events which may be material for the purpose of the ... defence will no doubt have faded. In other words, the strength of the Crown case can be retrieved from existing material. The weaknesses may be lost in the passing of memory. With the best will in the world, even the most honest of witnesses would have difficulty in recollecting something which could be helpful to the (defence) case without some document with which to refresh their minds." 
However, Mr Brereton placed greater reliance upon the death of Bruce Jackson (and of Sgt Grabham, who had interviewed him), whose evidence might have supported the accused's account that Azucena had eloped, taking the baby with her.

Further, he submitted that the conduct of the prosecution demonstrated bad faith in a number of respects: 
The failure to adduce evidence from the Jacksons at the inquest; 
The failure to follow up enquiries about the Jacksons in 1995 at the request of the defence, at a time when Bruce Jackson was still alive; 
The letter from the Director to the accused in December 1989 conveying, in unqualified terms, that proceedings would not be brought against him, thereby lulling him into a false sense of security.

In this regard, he relied also on the course of this application, which was initially listed for hearing before me on 14 March 1997. On that day the hearing was adjourned on the application of the Crown, with the consent of the accused, on the basis that the Director wished to give further consideration to whether the matter should proceed. As it happens, some of the additional statements upon which the Crown now relies were furnished shortly prior to that date, but were not served upon the accused's solicitors until the middle of April. In due course the application proceeded because the Director decided that the prosecution should be pursued. Mr Brereton did not suggest that the matter was not reconsidered at that time, but submitted that the Crown had secured the opportunity, by the adjournment, to present further evidence relevant to the application whilst engendering in the accused the false hope that the prosecution might yet be abandoned.

Mr Brereton also relied upon what he asserted was the weakness of the Crown case, which is entirely circumstantial. He observed that there is no direct evidence that Azucena and Harry Jnr are dead, let alone how they might have been killed, whilst there is evidence to suggest that Azucena might not wish to be found. He argued that the evidence of motive is tenuous, that the lies told by the accused about their whereabouts are capable of an innocent explanation, and that there is no satisfactory evidence to link the accused to the typewritten letter forwarded to the Philippines in June 1987 and the "affidavit" produced in November 1995. He argued further that, while there is no doubt of the power of the Director to have presented an ex officio indictment when he did, the fact that the accused had earlier been informed that no proceedings would be taken against him gave rise to what might loosely be described as double jeopardy: cf Walton versus Gardiner <case>; [(1992-3) 177 CLR 378], per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ, at 396-8.

In all the circumstances, he submitted, the trial of the accused at this late stage would be not only unfair, but also "cruel, vexatious and an abuse of process".

I should say at once that the material before me does not admit of the conclusion that the prosecution has acted in bad faith at any stage. However, this is not to deny that the way in which the matter has been dealt with, and in which steps in the investigation have been recorded, leaves much to be desired. It is unfortunate that there is no contemporaneous record of the information supplied to police by the Jackson brothers, nor of the investigation of it, so that the propriety of their not being called at the inquest cannot be assessed. I have no reason to doubt that a solicitor acting for the accused requested police to reassess that information in 1995, at a time when Bruce Jackson was still alive, and it is equally unfortunate that this was not done at that time. If the decision of the Director of Public
Prosecutions not to prosecute in 1989 was provisional, it is regrettable that that was not conveyed to the accused.

The matter then appears to have been laid to rest for some years, until further statements were obtained from various witnesses, and I have been provided with no explanation for the delay. It is not suggested that the accused bears any responsibility for it. Inevitably the passage of time would dim the recollections of witnesses, particularly for matters which were not recorded in statements made within a reasonable time after the events described by them.

The new material which led to the decision to prosecute is summarised above.
The Crown contended that its case is strengthened, particularly in the light of the evidence of Mr Wiehr, which is said to provide some evidence of motive.
The effect of that evidence is that the accused said that he would brook no disobedience from Azucena, and it must be viewed in the light of the further evidence (contained in an additional statement of Mrs Neneth Cooper) that
Azucena began to resist sexual contact after the birth of the baby. The fact that no reliable information about their whereabouts has come to light in the ensuing years strengthens the inference that they are dead. In addition, the "affidavit" forwarded to the accused's solicitor cannot be ignored, even though it came into the picture after the presentation of the indictment.

The approach to the information supplied by the Jackson brothers and the death of Sgt Grabham and, more importantly, Mr Bruce Jackson, raise matters of real concern. Of the two brothers, it is only he who is said to have recognised
Azucena and Harry Jnr as occupants of the car. Clearly, his oral evidence would have been the most persuasive medium of proof of the matter. In addition, evidence could have been given by him and by Sgt Grabham of the terms of his report to police at the relevant time (assuming that the matters reported were then fresh in his memory): [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s66.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). If a record of the information made by Sgt Grabham were now available, it could have been tendered by the accused: [s (8).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s65.html) 
On the other hand, the same provision would enable Mr Basil Jackson to give evidence of his brother's recognition of the occupants of the car, although it may be that this would not have the evidentiary force of a contemporaneous police record. I am also mindful of the description of the surviving Mr
Jackson as an elderly man with a poor memory. Fortunately, what he told police in 1996 has been recorded in a running sheet and, before me, the Crown prosecutor foreshadowed no objection to the tender of the evidence at the trial in any form in which it might then be available. Indeed, the Crown contended that it was put at a considerable disadvantage through its inability now to test the reliability of the evidence: in particular, the circumstances of the sighting, when it occurred and the accuracy of Mr Bruce Jackson's identification of two of the occupants of the vehicle. On the other hand, the hearsay nature of the evidence would require an appropriate warning from the trial judge if the Crown requested it: <case>.

I approach the application for a permanent stay on the basis that the availability of the remedy is not confined to proceedings which would amount to an abuse of process in the traditional sense. The accused does not have to go so far as to show that the proceedings are being pursued for an improper purpose, or that there is no possibility of a fair trial: Walton (supra) at -5. The joint judgment in that case continues (at 395-6): "... the question whether criminal proceedings should be permanently stayed on abuse of process grounds falls to be determined by a weighing process involving a subjective balancing of a variety of factors and considerations.
Among those factors and considerations are the requirements of fairness to the accused, the legitimate public interest in the disposition of charges of serious offences and in the conviction of those guilty of crime, and the need to maintain public confidence in the administration of justice." 
This passage was introduced by reference to the earlier decision of the High
Court in Jago versus District Court  <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 23], in particular per Mason CJ at 30-34, Deane J at 59-61,
Toohey J at 72 and Gaudron J at 76-8. In Jago (at 33) Mason CJ observed that "the touchstone in every case is fairness". The Chief Justice went on to observe (at 34) that a permanent stay should be ordered "only in an extreme case" and only where unfairness to the accused cannot be averted by the conduct of the trial by the trial judge. Other judgments in Jago emphasise the exceptional nature of the remedy and the need to consider whether the procedures and discretions available to the trial judge are sufficient to cure any prejudice to the accused: see per Deane J at 59-60, Toohey J at 71-2 and
Gaudron J at 77-8.

As earlier observed, I reject the suggestion of bad faith or impropriety in the institution of the prosecution, notwithstanding the delay. Nor do I consider that, in all the circumstances, the proceedings would be so unfairly oppressive as to constitute an abuse of process: cf Jago per Deane J at 58 and 60. In so saying, I am mindful of the unsatisfactory features of the manner in which the matter has been handled, to which I have referred earlier, including the element of double jeopardy. On the face of it, the Crown case against the accused is not a strong one, but it certainly could not be said to be "foredoomed to fail": cf Walton at 393.

It may well be that the accused took no further steps to gather evidence in his defence after being informed, in December 1989, that he was not to be prosecuted. On the other hand, the police investigation had commenced almost two and a half years previously and he must have been aware at a relatively early stage that he was under suspicion: certainly by March 1989 when the inquest, at which he was legally represented, commenced. There must have been a substantial period of time before the end of 1989 during which the accused had the opportunity to pursue his own investigations. Certainly, no evidence has been placed before me as to what enquiries he might have made since
December 1989, or where he hoped those enquiries might lead him.

There is no denying the effect upon witnesses' memories of the long delay, a problem faced by the Crown as well as the accused: cf Jago per Deane J at
This, of course, is a difficulty encountered in many criminal trials for one reason or another, and it is commonly dealt with by counsel in their conduct of the case and by the trial judge through appropriate warnings to the jury. Nothing has been put before me to suggest that this case is any different.

Undoubtedly, the greatest concern is the loss of the evidence of Bruce Jackson and Sgt Grabham. However, evidence of the sighting in the Bago State Forest and of the identification of two of the occupants of the vehicle as Azucena and Harry Jnr is still available, albeit in a derivative and attenuated form.
The accused is disadvantaged by the way in which the evidence would be presented but so, to an extent, is the Crown. Certainly, appropriate directions by the trial judge, against the background of the burden and standard of proof born by the Crown, could ensure that the significance of the evidence was not lost on the jury.

I have given the matter anxious consideration, bearing in mind the seriousness of the charges against the accused. In all the circumstances, I am not persuaded that the trial of the accused would be attended by such unfairness that the exceptional remedy of a permanent stay of the proceedings is justified. Certainly, the jury would require careful directions about aspects of the case, and it may be that the parties should consider trial by judge alone. (It needs hardly be said that whether that course is taken is a matter about which I ought not, and do not, express a view.) 
Committal Proceedings.

The accused's alternative application is that the trial be stayed until committal proceedings are held. Mr Brereton submitted that, although the principal Crown witnesses were cross examined by the accused's legal representatives at the inquest, those proceedings were not directed to the question whether the accused should face trial and, in any event, there is now further evidence which ought be tested at a preliminary hearing. More importantly, he submitted that the accused stood a good chance of being discharged by a magistrate, given the asserted weakness of the Crown case.

The place of committal proceedings in our criminal justice system, and the power of a court to stay a trial on indictment until committal proceedings have been conducted, were examined by six justices of the High Court in
Barton versus The Queen <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 75.] The views there expressed, especially in the judgments of
Gibbs ACJ and Mason J and of Stephen J, were considered by the Court of Appeal in Barron versus The Attorney General for New South Wales [(1987) 10 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281987%29%2010%20NSWLR%20215 "View LawCiteRecord" ) All the judgments acknowledge the advantages to the accused of committal proceedings, including the opportunity to test the Crown case by cross examining prosecution witnesses, and the chance of being discharged under [s (6)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s41.html) of the [Justices Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/).
Equally, the judgments recognise that the power of the Director of Public
Prosecutions to file an ex officio indictment is not reviewable by the courts, but that courts may stay proceedings upon that indictment in the absence of committal proceedings if it is necessary to do so to prevent an abuse of process or to ensure a fair trial. However, the fact that an accused is deprived of the opportunity for discharge by magistrate and the other tactical advantages of committal proceedings, does not necessarily warrant that course.
In Barron Mahoney JA had this to say about the power to stay proceedings in these circumstances (at 220): "The power is a purposive power: it is to be exercised if otherwise there would be an abuse of process or the accused would not have a fair trial; and it is to be exercised to the extent that it is necessary to achieve those purposes.

But the fact that the accused will, absent committal proceedings, suffer some disadvantage will not be sufficient to entitle him to a stay of the trial. For the stay to be granted, the court must conclude that the disadvantage which he will suffer is, in the relevant sense, unacceptable, to the extent that the trial would be unfair." 
Whilst acknowledging that the focus of an inquest is different from that of committal proceedings, the accused had the opportunity to test the evidence of many of the Crown witnesses before the coroner. Should the accused perceive that he is prejudiced by the lack of opportunity to cross examine witnesses, such as Mr Wiehr, who were not called at the inquest, he could ask the trial judge to be permitted to cross examine them on the voir dire: Basha (1989) A Crim R 337, per Hunt J (as his Honour then was) at 339. I make no comment about the accused's prospects of being discharged by a magistrate. However, given the Director's decision in 1995 to proceed by way of ex officio indictment, one wonders whether such a discharge would be of any enduring benefit to the accused.

I do not consider that the absence of committal proceedings would render the accused's trial unfair and a stay of proceedings for that purpose is not warranted.

Order.

For these reasons, the application for a stay of proceedings, both permanent and temporary, is refused.
 ----- * * * 
