

State Bank of New South Wales Limited versus See Hoe Matter No 12348/96 [1997]
NSWSC 416 (18 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
State Bank of NSW Limited versus See Hoe /96 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - State Bank of NSW Limited versus See Hoe 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 13 May 1996. The process propounds a monetary claim. It is founded on a Deed of Agreement dated 16 June 1994 (the Deed). 
The process was served on 16 May 1996. The defendant says that he immediately sought advice from his present solicitors. Correspondence passed between the solicitors for the parties. The time for the filing of a Defence was extended.
The defendant sought and was given information and documentation. In September , a final ultimatum for the filing of a Defence was given. No Defence was filed. The defendant decided to pursue other options.

Default judgment (in the sum of $5,088,524.24) was entered and took effect on October 1996. Notification of the entry of judgment was given by letter dated 30 October 1996. In February 1997, the defendant was served with a bankruptcy notice. The defendant then sought further advice from his solicitors. It seems that the prospect of bankruptcy has stirred him into action.

Initially, it was contended that the defendant had consented to the judgment on the basis that it would not be enforced. This untenable contention seems to have been abandoned. On 5 March 1997, a Notice of Motion seeking, inter alia, an order setting aside the judgment was served. It is this application which comes before the Court today.

The defendant relies on a number of affidavits (including a number sworn by the defendant himself). One of them annexes a copy of a Draft Defence and
Cross-Claim. Despite the voluminous material, the evidence is grossly deficient in a number of respects.

I shall briefly refer to some of the material thrown up by the affidavits. In late 1972, the defendant purchased certain land (the property). The property became known as "Sleepy Hollow" Golf Resort. Since the 1970's, the defendant had been in the process of developing the property. In 1989, steps were taken to develop the property as a golf, tourist and residential resort. A loan application was made to the plaintiff. One of the conditions of the granting of approval was a valuation of the property by the Bank. The condition was expressed in the following terms:- "Satisfactory valuation by the Bank's Valuer of the security property/ies offered. Valuation to be at least $2,500,000." 
The valuation was made, approval was given and the moneys were lent to Bill
See Hoe Pty Limited (the borrower). The borrower was in effect the defendant's company. The defendant gave securities to guarantee performance by the borrower. There was default. Proceedings were brought by the plaintiff against the defendant pursuant to the securities. A compromise was reached between the parties. The compromise is embodied in the Deed (a copy of which is annexure `A' to an affidavit sworn by Mr McCarthy). The Deed provides, inter alia, for an acknowledgement of the debt and an agreement to pay moneys to the plaintiff. These proceedings are founded on default by the defendant under the
Deed.

A copy of the valuation is in evidence (annexure `A' to an affidavit sworn by the defendant). It placed a valuation of $3,700,000 on the property. The valuation was first seen by the defendant on 13 May 1997. There is evidence to the effect that a bid in the order of $1,000,000 has been received by the plaintiff for the property.

The Draft Defence denies any indebtedness. The Draft Cross-Claim propounds a number of causes of action. I shall mention certain of the allegations contained therein. The foundation of the various causes of action is the valuation of a property. It is alleged that the plaintiff represented to the cross-claimant that the property had been given a value of at least $2,500,000. It is alleged that the giving of that valuation induced the defendant to provide a personal guarantee and mortgage in favour of the plaintiff. It is alleged that there was a breach of duty of care in the carrying out of the valuation and in the making of the representation. Relief is sought pursuant to the Contracts Review Act, 1980 (the Act). There is an allegation of unconscionable conduct (apparently founded both on equitable principles and provisions of the Fair Trading Act, 1987).

In addition to the matters pleaded in this document, other possible claims were briefly canvassed during submissions. These were insufficiently identified. What was tentatively said, seemed to be of little substance. I gained the impression that, for the purposes of this application, these matters were not really pressed.

It may be observed that a remarkable feature of the case presented on behalf of the defendant is the novelty of the claims propounded and the optimism in the presentation.

Whether or not the claims had any substance prior to the execution of the
Deed, there is the question of what effect the compromise had on those claims (the Deed contains a "Waiver of Prior Claims"). For present purposes, I put that question to one side and briefly refer to certain of the allegations made by the defendant. This reference is not intended to be exhaustive.

The contention that the plaintiff has made a representation is, in my view, unarguable. The claim for relief under the Act has its problems. There is a real question as to whether or not the Act applies in this case (see section (2)). In any event, the evidence simply does not support the contention that there is an arguable case for a favourable exercise of the discretionary powers conferred by the Act. Little was said about the claim founded on the principles of unconscionable conduct. In my view, these claims are devoid of substance. There remains the question of a claim founded on negligence. At best, this can afford some Cross-Claim sounding in damages. It was regarded as the strongest of the claims put forward by the defendant. In my view, it is hopeless. It is unnecessary to go into detail. In my view, it is hopeless to suggest that a duty of care arises in the circumstances of this particular case. The material relied on to demonstrate negligence in the making of the valuation was not persuasive.

It is generally the case that a default judgment will not be set aside unless the defendant can show a bona fide defence on the merits and satisfactorily explain the default in failing to file a Defence. In this case, both of those matters are in issue. These were the issues agitated in this application. The
Court has a judicial discretion to grant the relief sought. The onus rests with the applicant seeking relief.

I am not satisfied that the defendant does have a bona fide defence on the merits. I do not consider that the delay has been satisfactorily explained. In my view, the defendant has failed to discharge the onus of showing an entitlement to the order sought.

The Notice of Motion is dismissed. The defendant is to pay the costs of the application.
 * * * 
