

Sumpter versus The Commonwealth of Australia Matter No 13392/93 [1998] NSWSC (15 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
SUMPTER versus THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA /93 May 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 30 August 1993. The plaintiff was a member of the crew of the HMAS Voyager when it collided with HMAS Melbourne on 10 February 1964. The pleading alleges a cause of action founded on negligence. The plaintiff claims damages in respect of personal injury allegedly suffered as a result of the collision. 
An Amended Defence was filed on 19 May 1997. Paragraphs 12 and 13 thereof, are in the following terms:- "12. Further, and in the alternative, by a document dated 21 June 1966 and signed by the plaintiff's father, the plaintiff, in consideration for the payment of the amount of $1,698.00 to his father to be held in trust for him until his twenty first birthday (25 September 1966), agreed to release the defendant from all actions suits claims and demands including the action suit claim and demand in these proceedings. The defendant will rely upon the whole of the document dated 21 June 1966 as if same were fully set out herein.
The defendant pleads the release executed by his father as his legal guardian or agent or both as a complete defence to the cause of action upon which the plaintiff now claims." 
Part 31 rule 2(a) is in the following terms:- The Court may make orders for - the decision of any question separately from any other question, whether before, at or after any trial or further trial in the proceedings; and 
On 20 June 1997, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. Order 1 sought therein is in the following terms:- "1. That pursuant to Part 31 Rule 2 that the Court determine as a preliminary issue the validity of the purported Release dated the 21st June 1966 and relied on by the Defendant in its Amended Defence dated the 12th May 1997." 
The Notice of Motion came before me on 21 July 1997. By consent, an order was made pursuant to Part 31 rule 2(a). The application did not otherwise proceed on that day. I am now asked to proceed with the hearing of the separate question.

The evidence consists of an affidavit sworn by Mr Foley and Exhibits 1 and 2.
The contents of the affidavit are largely irrelevant. Brief reference only was made to certain parts of it. The purpose of the reference was to provide explanation for the document not being the subject of any Court sanction.
Exhibit 1 is a copy of the document itself. Exhibit 2 is headed "Order To Pay
Agent". It was not referred to during the course of argument. The plaintiff did not place any evidence before the Court.

An unusual feature of this "Voyager" litigation was the presence of some common territory. I shall mention certain of it. The onus rests with the defendant. The proper law for the purposes of the exercise is that of the
State of Victoria. The plaintiff was a minor at the time of the execution of the document. He was born on 25 September 1945 and turned 21 years of age on September 1966. The agreement sought to be effected by the terms of the document has not been the subject of any Court sanction. There is no statutory provision relevant to the determination of the separate question.

A copy of the document is an annexure to this judgment (Annexure `A'). There is some uncertainty as to the characterisation of the document. In the Amended
Defence, it is referred to as a "document". At times during argument, it has been referred to as a deed. It may be a deed poll. It is not an indenture.

It is a unilateral document executed in the State of Victoria. The one party to the document is Norman Sydney Sumpter (the father of the plaintiff). The document purports to have been signed, sealed and delivered by the father on June 1966. It purports to record that his signing of the document took place in the presence of a witness whose signature also appears on the document.

I have not been taken to any relevant legislation. Whether or not the document satisfies any statutory requirements of a deed in the State of Victoria has not been the subject of argument. Accordingly, I shall put that question aside.

I shall now turn to the content of the document. It contains certain recitals (inter alia, recitals that the party was father and next friend, that he had made a claim against the Commonwealth of Australia on behalf of his son, that it has been settled on certain terms and conditions and that the Commonwealth of Australia, without admitting any liability so to do, and as an act of grace only, has agreed to pay the sum of $1,698 (the said sum) in full settlement of the said claim). It purports to witness (in consideration of payment to him of the said sum) a release and discharge, an indemnity and an undertaking to hold the said sum on trust for the benefit of his son and to pay it to him when he attains the age of 21 years. Such release, indemnity and undertaking is expressed to be given by the father.

If the Court was to succumb to the whim of an indulgence in hyperbole, it might describe the submissions made on behalf of the defendant as being parsimonious in content. The only authority prised from the defendant is that of Katundi & Anor versus Hay [(1940) ST R QD 39.] It was the subject of fleeting reference (a reference to a passage on page 42). I do not regard that authority as providing any real assistance in this case.

In Katundi, proceedings had been commenced and the mother was suing as next friend. Philp J was dealing with a compromise between a party and the next friend (or guardian ad litem). There is a reference in the judgment to two other cases (Rhodes versus Swithenbank <case>; [(1878) 4 VLR (L) 123).] 
Glassford was a case that came before an appellate Court. It was decided that a next friend had no authority to compromise an action. A reading of the judgments reveals that the ratio decidendi of the decision was the content of the relevant rule of court.

In Rhodes, judgments were delivered by, inter alia, Lord Esher MR and Bowen
LJ. At p 579, Bowen LJ said:- "The only reason that the next friend of an infant is entitled to bind the infant in matters connected with the cause is that he is an officer of the
Court to take all measures for the benefit of the infant in the litigation in which he appears as next friend." 
The judgments make it clear that, if the next friend does anything more than merely conduct the litigation, the infant will not be bound by whatever is done unless in the opinion of the Court it is for his benefit (p 578).

The plaintiff has provided a written outline of submissions. These written submissions were supplemented by oral argument. There are two principal submissions:- "1. The plaintiff's father did not have authority to compromise his infant son's claims.' `6. Even if the son had contracted a settlement of his cause of action, the contract would remain void and unenforceable against him because of his infancy." 
The plaintiff was a minor who suffered injury as a result of the collision between the "Voyager" and the "Melbourne". His father made a claim against the
Commonwealth. No proceedings were ever commenced. During the plaintiff's minority, a purported agreement was reached between the father and the
Commonwealth and certain terms and conditions have been evidenced by the document. The question of whether or not there was valuable consideration moving from both sides to create an agreement binding at law was not the subject of argument. The document evidenced the giving of a release by the father of all actions, suits, claims and demands, inter alia, had by both the father and son or either of them arising out of the injury. It was not sought to have the purported agreement sanctioned by a Court. It had been reached in an environment where the High Court had expressed the view that such a claim was not justiciable and therefore the Court should not sanction any agreement relating to it (Parker versus The Commonwealth of Australia <case>; [112 CLR 295).] 
The separate question (which concerns the validity of the purported release contained in the document) comes before the Court for final determination. It is raised by way of defence to the plaintiff's claim. It needs to be approached in the light of the terms in which it has been pleaded (paragraphs and 13 of the Amended Defence).

The authorities referred to by the parties are not particularly helpful. They show the relevant law as standing in an unsatisfactory state. They fall short of providing the support required by the defendant.

It has been said that the powers of a guardian, in respect of his ward's property, are both limited and uncertain in scope (Harland, Law of Minors, p ). He is a guardian of the person and not of the estate (p 160).

In the circumstances of this case, it seems to me that the separate question can be determined without embarking on further research concerning the limitations and scope of such powers. The defendant has failed to produce both evidence and authority to substantiate the alleged defence. There is a crucial matter of onus, which in this case is decisive. I am not satisfied that the defendant has discharged the onus it bears in demonstrating a valid release binding on the plaintiff.

Paragraph 13 of the Amended Defence pleads that the release was executed by the plaintiff's father as his legal guardian or agent or both. The document expresses a release from the father. There is no evidence of appointment as agent. It was not said that a minor had the capacity to appoint his father as his agent. The basis of the alleged agency was not spelt out. Indeed, there would not seem to be any basis available to the defendant. Whilst it does not seem to be disputed that the father was the legal guardian, I am not satisfied that the status of legal guardian empowered the father to give a binding release of his son's claim for damages.

Perhaps, for completeness, I should add that this was not a case in which the father had the status of a next friend in proceedings brought for the plaintiff.

I find for the plaintiff on the separate question argued before me. In my view, the execution of the document dated 21 June 1966 did not release the defendant from "the action, suit, claim and demand in these proceedings" and that the release contained therein is not a defence to the cause of action alleged by the plaintiff in the proceedings. The defendant is to pay the costs of the separate question. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
