

John Maxwell Roy versus Margaret Anita Maddocks and Anor [1997] NSWSC 59 (28
February 1997) 
JOHN MAXWELL ROY versus MARGARET ANITA MADDOCKS & ANOR /94; ED 3807/92 
Friday 28 February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Handley JA, Powell JA, Cole JA 
CATCHWORDS: PARTNERSHIP - interests of partners - ordering of accounts - requirement for certainty 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
Two brothers, John and Leslie, had been in business as partners since 1926.
The partnership business began to be scaled down after 1971. The assets of the partnership included two houses in Croydon, one in the joint names of the partners, the other in Leslie's name. Early in 1987 the latter was sold by the partners. Later that year Leslie applied for orders under <case> G of the
Conveyancing Act for sale of the property held in joint names. Neither party sought the winding up of the partnership or the taking of the partnership accounts. In 1991 Bryson J made orders under <case> G. John and his wife borrowed money in 1989 on the security of their own home to pay off a mortgage on the jointly owned property, and in 1991 they commenced proceedings to enforce a charge over that property. In 1992 Hodgson J declared a charge in favour of John's wife for the amount paid to discharge the mortgage but without further interest. John then commenced proceedings seeking a declaration that a property purchased by Leslie in 1987 was an asset of the partnership, or the subject of a constructive trust in his favour, and for the taking of the partnership accounts. The proceedings were dismissed by Hulme J.
On appeal it was common ground that it would be futile to order the taking of the partnership accounts.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: (1) A partner has a beneficial interest in all assets of the partnership, which consists of an entitlement to a proportion of the monetary surplus created when the assets are realised and the debts and other liabilities discharged. The share of each partner can only be determined when the liquidation of the partnership has been completed and accounts have been taken. (2) Any difference between the assets taken from or contributed to the partnership by each partner will be reflected in their shares in the partnership. Partnership accounts are required to calculate these entitlements. (3) Although prima facie Leslie had finished up with more assets than John, the Court could not act on a prima facie view of the case. The only way to ascertain the shares of the partners was by taking the partnership accounts. (4) Neither party sought partnership accounts but the Court could grant no other relief.
 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: Two brothers, John and Leslie Roy, were business partners in Roy Bros Motor Garage. The partnership commenced in 1926 and carried on business for many years. The business began to wind down after 1971, when the sale of new motor vehicles ceased, but it is not clear when business activity finally ceased.

The business was carried on at 27 The Strand, Croydon, the title to which was held by the partners as joint tenants. This property was retained until sold in 1992 by trustees for sale appointed under <case> G of the Conveyancing Act.

Another property at 6 Malvern Ave, Croydon was purchased in the name of
Leslie in 1945. He lived there until it was sold in 1987. John lived at The
Strand until 1973. Leslie ultimately acknowledged that the Malvern Ave property was a partnership asset. In 1973, John and his wife purchased 3
Commonwealth Pde, Manly, and went there to live. John's wife contributed the bulk of the purchase money. It is not clear whether the partnership has an interest in this property arising from funds contributed by John to its purchase.

In January 1987 Leslie, with John's approval, exchanged contracts for the sale of Malvern Ave for $130,000. The sale was completed about 20 March. Without telling John Leslie also exchanged contracts for the purchase of a property at
Canyonleigh on 5 January 1987. John found out about the exchange of contracts for Canyonleigh on or about 5 March. Completion of the Canyonleigh purchase took place on 19 May and required about $140,000, $100,000 being provided by a loan from Westpac on the security of The Strand, the remainder coming from the partnership bank account. After completion about $11,000 remained in the partnership account.

After John discovered that Leslie had contracted to purchase Canyonleigh, he had discussions with his brother and prepared a number of letters which Leslie signed. As Hulme J held, their full import is not entirely clear, and they demonstrate some carelessness in drafting. In particular, it seems that on more than one occasion the letters refer to the wrong brother. There are three letters dated 19 May signed by Leslie which are in the following terms: "Dear Jack, 
In consideration of the amount of $140,391 being paid to settle the purchase of Canyonleigh Property, I herein agree to the following arrangements made between us: ) That I agree to transfer to you my half share in the property at 27 The
Strand, Croydon ... you then being the outright owner of this property.
 ) That after settlement of the Canyonleigh which is in my name entirely you are to hold in your possession the deeds of this property and should it be sold the proceeds are to pay of (sic) any amounts owing on the property at 27
The Strand, Croydon and you are to again be transferred a one half share in this said property".

A second letter reads: "Dear Jack, 
Concerning the matters of the property at Canyonleigh, the following information is placed on record. My letter to you of October 17 1986 that it was necessary to fund the purchase of this property by selling our property at The Strand and your request that it should be undertaken as soon as possible and your promise to me that you would not commit yourself to the
Canyonleigh property without consulting me and my inspection of any documents you might sign which you did not carry out and the resulting problems which arose.

I now place on record that the proceeds of the sale of No. 6 Malvern Ave was a
Roy Bros asset and you were entitled to allocate these funds as you did ...
for some reasons it might be in our best interests for Canyonleigh to be sold and not have to sell No. 27 and I recognise this.

In this event your one half share of No. 27 could be restored".

Another letter addressed to a firm of solicitors was as follows: "My brother, John Maxwell Roy, will be supplying the amount of $140,391 so that this purchase can be settled.

I hereby instruct you after you have transferred the deeds to my name to notify my brother that you have the deeds and then to hand them over to him personally".

According to Leslie, in evidence later given before Hodgson J, these documents were signed under duress. The money was obtained from Westpac and the documents were signed just before the expiry of a notice to complete. Leslie understood that if the purchase was not completed, he stood to lose a large sum of money, perhaps in the order of $30,000. Leslie also said that John told him he would not get the money unless he signed the documents. Notwithstanding the contents of those documents, John did not attempt to obtain possession of the Canyonleigh deeds. Later in 1987, solicitors acting for Leslie wrote to
John, seeking to have The Strand sold, the Westpac mortgage paid out, and the balance divided equally.

In 1987, Leslie commenced proceedings under <case> G of the Conveyancing Act for the sale of The Strand. The summons is not included in the appeal book, but according to Hodgson J, in his judgment of 29 May 1992, it also sought the taking of partnership accounts. These proceedings came on for hearing before
Bryson J. Leslie was legally represented, but despite advice by Bryson J, John was not. John did not attempt to rely on any contract evidenced by the letters of 19 May 1987 as an answer to Leslie's application under <case> G. John may simply have recognised the inevitable, but the issues may have been overlooked because of his lack of legal representation.

On 14 March 1991, Bryson J made an order appointing trustees for sale of The
Strand, although he said that it was probably a partnership asset. Leslie had not pressed his claims for the taking of partnership accounts. John suggested to the Judge that he had had less than justice in the distribution of the assets of the partnership, but he made no claim in the proceedings for adjustment of the partnership affairs, or the taking of accounts. Leslie said in evidence that John had kept the books and accounting records of the partnership, and the Judge concluded that John was, and for many years had been, in a better position than anyone else to bring forward any issues calling for adjustment arising out of the affairs of the partnership. He did not consider that it was appropriate to refuse relief under <case> G "until some shadowy possibility of settlement of partnership affairs is fulfilled".

John did not appeal from this decision. While the <case> G proceedings were pending in the Equity Division, John and his wife took certain steps which, as
Hodgson J later pointed out in his reasons for judgment of 29 May 1992, had disastrous results. The facts, as found by Hodgson J, which the parties accepted before Hulme J were that, in late 1989, or early 1990, John arranged to pay out the amount of $165,000 then owing to Westpac by taking a loan from
Citibank, secured by a mortgage over the Manly property.

According to his wife, John told her that if they did that, Leslie had agreed to give up his half interest in The Strand. John gave no evidence before
Hodgson J of any agreement to that effect. Leslie said in evidence that he did not know about the loan to pay out Westpac until after it had happened. This evidence was accepted and the Judge added that he could only assume that John believed that if he took this course he could persuade Leslie to give up his claim to The Strand, but he did not succeed.

John did not hand over the certificate of title to the trustees for sale who brought proceedings for delivery up of the certificate. Hodgson J made that order, but John and his wife filed a cross claim seeking a declaration that
The Strand property was charged with payment of an amount necessary to pay off their debt to Citibank Ltd, by then some $300,000.

Although evidence was given by both Leslie and John about the dealings of the partnership, neither party sought the taking of partnership accounts. The
Judge accepted Leslie's evidence, but considered that John's evidence about the partnership expenses, and the details of what was done in relation to the partnership, was not reliable. He held however that the loan of $100,000 from
Westpac on the security of The Strand property was a borrowing on behalf of the partnership. When John and his wife borrowed further monies from Citibank which paid off the Westpac mortgage, they kept that mortgage alive for their own benefit. The amount applied was $163,134.50, but the Judge held that John and his wife were not entitled to interest on this sum after the payment to
Westpac.

John's rights in respect of this sum were barred by res judicata estoppels flowing from the judgment of Bryson J, but Mrs Roy had not been a party to the earlier proceedings, and was not affected. Accordingly, the Judge declared a charge in her favour for $163,134.50.

The Strand property was sold and the proceeds distributed in accordance with the orders of Hodgson J. John had been legally represented in these proceedings. There was no appeal from this decision, notwithstanding the rejection of the claim to interest on $163,134.50 after it was paid to Westpac late in 1989 or early in 1990.

On 10 July 1992, shortly after the decision of Hodgson J, John commenced proceedings against his brother. Following Leslie's death on 15 August 1992, the proceedings continued against the executrices of his estate. The summons claimed a declaration that Leslie held his interest in the Canyonleigh property in trust for the partners as tenants in common in equal shares, in the alternative that the property was an asset of the partnership, a declaration that the partnership was dissolved from the date of filing the summons, and an order for the usual accounts and enquiries for winding up the partnership.

The proceedings came on for hearing before Hulme J in February 1994, judgment being given on 10 June. The Judge dismissed John's claims for declarations in relation to the Canyonleigh property. He held that there was nothing in the letters of 19 May 1987, prepared by John, which supported the claim that that property was held by, or on behalf of, the partnership. The letters indicated that John was to have security for the advance of $140,391, but their terms were inconsistent with him having any further interest in Canyonleigh. The
Judge continued: "Though it seems clear that Leslie's purchase of Canyonleigh and the funding of its acquisition were the inspiration for the dealing with the property at The Strand contemplated in the letters, there is nothing to suggest that
Leslie's ownership of Canyonleigh was dependent on his carrying out his promises in respect of the (Croydon) property. Clearly in light of the proceedings before Bryson J, these promises - which I understand to have been to make John the sole owner of this property - were not carried out but I can see no ground for concluding that in consequence any resulting trust in respect of the Canyonleigh property arose".

John's claims to an interest in the Canyonleigh property therefore failed. The
Judge made a declaration that the partnership was dissolved on the day of the filing of the summons, namely 10 July 1992. However he was reluctant to order accounts but said: "... if as may be the case here recent events have unduly favoured one partner over the other but past events are shrouded in complete mystery, it seems to me it may well be appropriate to direct accounts as from a particular date upon the basis of an inference that, prior to that time, there was likely to have been an equal division of profits or alternatively that there would be no advantage to a party seeking an account prior to that time. Such an order in the situation envisaged would amount to a final accounting between the parties".

Neither party had sought an account in this form. Prima facie Leslie had received $40,391 from the partnership which he had not accounted for, but the
Judge said that an order for the taking of accounts would be of no benefit to
John "if he cannot demonstrate that monies received by him were properly applied to partnership purposes". He decided to give John an opportunity of establishing that such an order would not be futile, and the proceedings were stood over. On 28 June he ordered John to file an affidavit detailing the relevant financial transactions of the partnership and between the partners since 1 January 1987. John filed an affidavit which the Judge described as "woefully inadequate as an attempt to comply with my order and did nothing to persuade me that an order for accounts would not be a futility".

The proceedings were again stood over to give John a final opportunity to file evidence demonstrating that there were records which would permit accounts to be taken. No further evidence was filed, and on 22 September the proceedings were before Hulme J for the last time. That day John, appearing for himself, told the Judge that it would be impossible to take partnership accounts because of the absence of records. It followed, as the Judge held, that it would be impossible to determine the respective interests of the partners in the remaining assets and liabilities of the partnership. Accordingly he held that no order for the taking of the partnership accounts should be made.

John appealed. His notice of appeal challenged the Judge's orders with respect to the Canyonleigh property, but did not seek orders for the taking of the partnership accounts. In his written and oral submissions to this Court, Mr
John Roy made it clear that he did not seek orders for the taking of the accounts which he recognised would be futile.

The nature of the interest of a partner in the assets of the partnership is well settled. It was described by Kitto J in Livingstone versus Commissioner of
Stamp Duties <case>; [(1960) 107 CLR 411] at 453 as follows: "... he has a beneficial interest, which the law will recognise and enforce, in every piece of property which belongs to the partnership ... and nonetheless so because the nature of the interest is peculiar, in that his share in the partnership, by virtue of which the interest in the given asset exists while the asset belongs to the partnership, consists not of a title to specific property but of a right to a proportion of the surplus after the realisation of the assets and payment of the debts and liabilities of the partnership ... that is to say, not a definite share or interest in the particular asset, no right to any part of it, but an interest which can be finally ascertained only when the liquidation has been completed and consists of his share of the surplus". (Authorities omitted) 
See also Canny Gabriel Castle Jackson Advertising Pty Ltd versus Volume Sales
Pty Ltd <case>; <case>; [(1980) 143 CLR 440] at 446-7. Although the legal title to The Strand property was held by the partners at law as joint tenants, their beneficial interests could only be properly determined after the accounts of the partnership were taken.
Amounts drawn by one partner in excess of those drawn by the other would diminish the share of the overdrawing partner. Every amount received by one partner on behalf of the partnership, but not paid into the partnership bank account or otherwise properly accounted for, would have the same effect.
Before Bryson J the parties were content, by default or otherwise, to treat each other as having equal beneficial interests in The Strand property regardless of any different entitlements that may have been disclosed on the taking of the partnership accounts. This may have created estoppels, by conduct or by res judicata, but those questions were not argued before us.

Before Hodgson J the parties were prepared to have their rights determined following the sale of the Malvern Ave property, the payments for Canyonleigh, the Westpac loan on The Strand, and the Citibank loan on Manly, as if those rights would not be affected by the taking of the partnership accounts.

Mr John Roy submitted that the result of the orders of Bryson J and Hodgson J was inequitable, because Leslie had finished up with more than his equal share of the partnership assets. The prima facie situation must be acknowledged.
However the Court cannot know what the true position is between the two brothers, without taking the accounts of the partnership. If partners stand on their strict rights, the Court will not make orders with respect to the known assets and liabilities of a partnership on a prima facie view of the facts.
In such a case, the losses and gains must lie where they fall unless the partnership accounts are taken.

The Court can, and will, do complete justice between the partners by taking the partnership accounts. If accounts cannot be taken, the Court does not attempt, unless asked to do so by the parties, to do rough justice between the partners by examining the prima facie situation. To do so may be quite unjust. This may certainly be the case here, where John had control of the partnership books and accounts, and managed its financial affairs at least until 1987. He claims that Leslie broke into the firm's safe and stole the partnership books and accounts early in 1987, but he does not appear to have raised this issue until the hearing before Hulme J after his brother was dead.
In any event, John failed to take effective action after the alleged theft of the partnership books and accounts in 1987 at a time when the fact of theft might have been established and it may still have been possible to reconstruct the accounts from bank and other records held by parties who had done business with the partnership.

The other cause of the present position appears to have been the personal borrowing from Citibank by John and his wife, apparently at high rates of interest, in order to pay off the Westpac loan. Although, as Hodgson J held, this has had disastrous consequences for John and his wife, they have no legal or equitable claim against Leslie's estate in respect of this transaction outside the partnership beyond that upheld by Hodgson J in 1992.

It is impossible for the Court to know whether the informal winding-up of the partnership has occasioned an injustice to John without taking the accounts of the partnership at least from a date such as 1 January 1987 as suggested by
Hulme J. It is acknowledged by all that an order for the taking of such accounts would be a futility. Unfortunately there is no other relief that the
Court can grant John consistent with established principles of partnership law.

The appeal therefore fails and must be dismissed with costs.
 
POWELL JA: I agree with Handley JA 
COLE JA: I agree with Handley JA.
 * * * 
