

Regina versus Aoude Matter No 71800/98 [1998] NSWSC 721 (12 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
REGINA versus HASSAM AOUDE /98 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: In this application bail is sought by an applicant who at the time of the alleged commission of the offences with which he now stands charged, that is, drive in a manner dangerous, disqualified driver, alter number plate, break, enter and steal, breach of community service order and a number of bench warrant matters, was then on a four year recognisance as accessory after the fact to break, enter and steal conditioned upon him attending drug counselling and who was on bail pending appeals from the Local Court to the District Court for various offences including break, enter and steal and possess implements, enter enclosed lands and stealing, illegally use conveyance, drive manner dangerous, disqualified driver. 
He has a most extensive record particularly for matters connected with cars.
There are a number of occasions on which, when he would have been expected to be there, he has not attended before court. These are all matters which, assuming in his favour the adequacy of the surety offered by acceptable persons and their willingness to have him home and under a curfew, would nonetheless dispose me to refuse bail.

What has complicated the matter, however, is that the appeals to the District
Court, on the limited information with which I am presently provided, seem to be appeals in respect of sentences of six months fixed term imprisonment imposed as and from the 10 February 1998 and those appeals are apparently not listed for hearing, notwithstanding they are all grounds appeals, until 18
November 1998, insofar as we can ascertain from the limited information with which we have been provided today.

I have attempted to discover whether that means that there is a real risk that the applicant, because he has been granted bail in respect of those matters, if he is refused bail in respect of the present matters, will find himself with a period of custody which is not referable to any offence unless he is convicted of the offences with which he has latterly been charged.
Unfortunately, little reliable information can presently be elicited either by
Corrective Services or by the applicant's legal representative and regrettably the Crown is not able to assist either. I am now informed by Corrective
Services that indeed this period of custody may not be referable to anything other than any sentence that might be passed upon him for the latter offences.

Further, whilst there may be some difficulties one way or another as to the precise charge, it would seem that some criminality, though what criminality is not entirely clear, might well be made out by the most recent charges.

Nonetheless it remains that there is a continued record of breaches of the law using motor vehicles and continued failures to appear, either by way of failing to attend for sentence, or by way of breaches of the community sentence order, or failure to attend at court.

On the limited information with which I am provided and looking at all the circumstances I am gravely worried concerning what course might be taken with the District Court all ground appeals. I would recommend that all such steps as can properly be taken to deal with those matters in such a way that the applicant is not detained in custody, bail refused, in a custody that may not be referable to any sentence a court may come to pass, should be taken.

This is a very, very difficult situation, but I feel that in the upshot I must refuse bail and I do.

APPLICANT: Can I say something to your Honour please? 
HIS HONOUR: Yes.

APPLICANT: I know what you're saying, right, and you think I'm going to go out there and I'm going to commit more offences, right. Each, I'll tell you something. I promise to I'm not going to go out there and commit any offence out there, all right. I've got two parents here. My Mum, she's very ill you know and all I want to do is just be with them, that's all I want, you know what I mean and if I get found guilty or whatever well then I will serve my sentence and I will do, you know what I mean, what is necessary for me.

HIS HONOUR: I will add to what I say, in view of what the applicant has just said, that in the event that the situation can be satisfactorily ascertained concerning his custody position so as to indicate that this custody is, for instance, likely to be thrown away, that should be the sort of special circumstance which might be considered on a future bail application to avoid the application of s.22A. Your solicitor will explain that to you.

APPLICANT: That means I've got no bail, sir? 
HIS HONOUR: Not today but it does not mean that you will not necessarily get bail.

APPLICANT: So I can apply for it again? 
HIS HONOUR: That you can make an application again if your custody situation is properly worked out.

APPLICANT: So how do they get worked out? 
HIS HONOUR: I will have to let your lawyer explain that to you, Mr. Aoude.

APPLICANT: Sir, can't you give me bail on being home by 8.30 and reporting every day? 
HIS HONOUR: I'm sorry, Mr. Aoude, I cannot give you bail as things stand at the moment.

APPLICANT: Sir, I've got medical certificates saying when I can -- 
SPEAKER: That's all. Come on, mate, we'll work that out.
 * * * 
