

R versus Rogerson; R versus McNamara (No 35) [2016] NSWSC 301 (17 March 2016) 
Last Updated: 15 June 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
See [13]  
Catchwords: 
CRIMINAL LAW - Evidence - Documents produced on subpoena - Claim for public interest immunity  
JUDGMENT EX TEMPORE - REVISED
Earlier in these proceedings, a subpoena was issued at the request of the accused McNamara to the Registrar of the District Court of NSW, seeking production of a large number of documents which are more fully enumerated in the schedule to the subpoena. It is not necessary, for the purposes of determining the present application, to detail the nature of those documents any further.
Upon production of the material, I granted the parties access to it. That access order obviously included access being exercised by the legal representatives of the accused McNamara. In the course of inspecting the material which was produced Mr Reslan, McNamara's solicitor, located a sealed envelope which was endorsed to the effect that it was not to be opened other than by an order of a judge of the District Court of New South Wales, or a judge of any superior court.
Mr Reslan, with commendable propriety for which I am grateful, immediately drew the existence of the envelope to my attention. Upon examination, it became immediately apparent to me that its contents were of a kind which, prima facie, may lend themselves to a claim for public interest immunity.
I determined that the most appropriate course was to provide the material to the solicitor for the New South Wales Police (being the likely claimant) so as to give the Commissioner an opportunity to inspect the material and make some determination. Prior to doing so, I foreshadowed my intentions to the parties, all of whom consented to that course being adopted.
I was subsequently advised by counsel for the Commissioner, Ms Kumar, that a claim would be made.
Yesterday I was provided, in support of that claim, with an open affidavit of Assistant Commissioner Lanyon of the New South Wales Police of 15 March 2016. That was accompanied by a confidential affidavit of Mr Lanyon sworn on the same day, together with exhibit MAL1 to that affidavit. Exhibit MAL1 contains the material which is the subject of the claim.
As is generally the case in matters of this nature, the open affidavit has been provided to Ms Shead who appears for McNamara, but the confidential affidavit has not. The provision of evidence in a confidential form is a practice which is recognised as being appropriate in matters of this nature: R versus Meissner [(1994) 76 A Crim R 81] at 497.
The inability of Ms Shead to be made aware of the contents of the confidential affidavit has placed her in a position where she has simply submitted to me that I should determine the matter by reference to the balancing exercise contained in [s. 130](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s130.html) of the [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) ("the Act"). In conducting that balancing exercise, she has urged that I take into account the issues in the trial, the case which is to be brought by McNamara and the fact that, in the circumstances of the present case, a "cut throat" defence is being mounted by each of the accused.
[Section 130](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s130.html) of the Act is in the following terms: Exclusion of evidence of matters of state 
If the public interest in admitting into evidence information or a document that relates to matters of state is outweighed by the public interest in preserving secrecy or confidentiality in relation to the information or document, the court may direct that the information or document not be adduced as evidence. 
The court may give such a direction either on its own initiative or on the application of any person (whether or not the person is a party). 
In deciding whether to give such a direction, the court may inform itself in any way it thinks fit. 
Without limiting the circumstances in which information or a document may be taken for the purposes of subsection (1) to relate to matters of state, the information or document is taken for the purposes of that subsection to relate to matters of state if adducing it as evidence would:  prejudice the security, defence or international relations of
Australia; or  damage relations between the Commonwealth and a State or between 2 or more States; or  prejudice the prevention, investigation or prosecution of an offence; or  prejudice the prevention or investigation of, or the conduct of proceedings for recovery of civil penalties brought with respect to, other contraventions of the law; or  disclose, or enable a person to ascertain, the existence or identity of a confidential source of information relating to the enforcement or administration of a law of the Commonwealth or a State; or  prejudice the proper functioning of the government of the Commonwealth or a State. 
Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for the purposes of subsection (1), it is to take into account the following matters:  the importance of the information or the document in the proceeding;  if the proceeding is a criminal proceeding--whether the party seeking to adduce evidence of the information or document is a defendant or the prosecutor;  the nature of the offence, cause of action or defence to which the information or document relates, and the nature of the subject matter of the proceeding;  the likely effect of adducing evidence of the information or document, and the means available to limit its publication;  whether the substance of the information or document has already been published;  if the proceeding is a criminal proceeding and the party seeking to adduce evidence of the information or document is a defendant--whether the direction is to be made subject to the condition that the prosecution be stayed. 
A reference in this section to a State includes a reference to a
Territory.
The provisions of [s. 130](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s130.html) reflect, in general terms, the common law as stated in Sankey versus Whitlam [1978] HCA 43; (1978) 142 CLR 1 at 38, and Conway versus Rimmer <case>; [(1968) AC 910] at 940.
As well as the material which is the subject of the claim, I have read carefully the confidential affidavit of Assistant Commissioner Lanyon.
I am mindful of the issues in the trial, and of the nature of the case that McNamara seeks to bring. I have taken into account those matters set out in [ss. 130(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s130.html) and (5) of the Act. Without dealing individually with those matters, and having conducted the balancing exercise, I am satisfied the public interest in admitting into evidence the contents of exhibit MAL1 is outweighed by the public interest in preserving its secrecy and confidentiality. I am satisfied, in particular, that the content of exhibit MAL1 falls into a well-recognised, category of material, disclosure of which the courts have accepted may harm the public interest. In that respect, I have had particular regard to observations made in Sankey (supra), as well as the observations of Kirby P (as his Honour then was) and McHugh JA (as his Honour then was) in Cain versus Glass (No 2) [(1985) 3 NSWLR 230] at 233 and 247 respectively.
It is obviously necessary that the confidentiality of the material contained in exhibit MAL1 be preserved. For that reason, it would be inappropriate for me to deal with the matter in any further detail. However, for the reasons expressed, and having conducted the balancing exercise, I uphold the claim which has been made on behalf of the Commissioner.
 * * * 
