

Mimi's Fine Foods Pty Ltd versus Cimino [2012] NSWSC 1209 (27 August 2012) 
Last Updated: 26 November 2012 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Mimi's Fine Foods Pty Ltd versus Cimino  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): August 2012  
Decision Date: August 2012  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Brereton J  
Decision: 
Leave to rely on expert evidence refused  
Catchwords: 
PRACTICE & PROCEDURE - evidence - leave to rely on expert evidence at late stage - factors considered  
JUDGMENT (EX TEMPORE)
HIS HONOUR: I refuse leave to rely on the affidavit of Matthew John Reynolds sworn 7 August 2012. 
When they were last before the Court on 6 August 2012, the Court fixed these proceedings for hearing initially on 18 September 2012 with a three-day estimate, made the usual order for hearing and made directions in connection with written submissions.
I proceed on the basis that at that time the Court, and counsel for the defendant, were told that there was a further affidavit to be served on behalf of the plaintiff. I proceed also on the basis, which is uncontroversial, that neither the Court nor counsel for the defendant was told that that affidavit was to be one of an expert witness. It is probable that, having been informed that a further affidavit was to be served, I would have said something to the effect that if there was an issue about it, then that could be dealt with at the trial.
No application has been made at any earlier stage of the proceedings for directions in connection with expert evidence and, as I understand the position, no expert evidence has been adduced to this point. 
As it is clear that there is a very substantial issue about the subject affidavit, it has been brought forward to be dealt with today. In circumstances where the Court had been told that the matter is effectively ready for hearing, the matter has been fixed for hearing, and no application has hitherto been made under the expert evidence rules for directions in connection with expert evidence, I think it is quite inappropriate to allow an affidavit of an expert witness to be introduced at this very belated stage. In this, I am particularly influenced by the circumstance that no evidence is put before me to explain why the Court had not earlier been advised that there was to be expert evidence, nor as to why expert evidence is necessary to resolve any issue in the case. 
For those reasons, I refuse leave to rely on the affidavit of Matthew John Reynolds of 7 August 2012.
I order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of today.
The proceedings are otherwise adjourned for hearing to commence on 23 October 2012.
I vary the usual order for hearing as previously made in respect of the dates for written submissions, so that the plaintiff is to lodge and serve its written submissions by 16 October, and the defendant is to lodge and serve its written submissions by 19 October 2012.
 * * * 
