

Regina versus P S Cooper [1996] NSWSC 527 (1 November 1996) 
REGINA versus PAUL STEVEN COOPER /96 
Friday 1 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: Paul Steven Cooper seeks leave to appeal against a sentence imposed by his Honour Judge McGuire in the District Court at Newcastle on 12 April 1996. The applicant pleaded guilty before his Honour to a charge of armed robbery in company. The judge sentenced the applicant to a total sentence of five years nine months comprised of a minimum term of three years nine months and an additional term of two years. The applicant was arrested in relation to the subject matter on 28 December 1995, and he has been in custody ever since. His Honour backdated the sentence to commence on the day upon which the applicant was taken into custody. 
This was an offence in a category for which <case> of the Crimes Act imposed at the relevant time a maximum penalty of twenty years penal servitude.

The applicant's role in the subject matter was detected in somewhat unusual circumstances. The evidence was that a conversation between the applicant and another person was recorded on a legally obtained telephone intercept, which had been arranged for purposes unrelated to the subject offence. In that telephone conversation the applicant referred to his involvement in the subject crime and when he was confronted with a taped record of the intercepted conversation, he admitted his role in the crime for which he was sentenced by his Honour.

A statement of facts concerning the crime was tendered before the sentencing judge. His Honour incorporated that statement in his judgment and it is convenient to refer to part of it, and I quote from that statement: "On the evening of Friday 11 February 1994, the prisoner Paul Steven Cooper went with two other male persons to 31 Rogers Street, Carrington. These premises at the time were occupied by Ian Lane and his girlfriend Nicole
O'Brien. The other occupant of the premises, Leslie John Elliott, was not present at this time.

The prisoner went to this address with these other two people with the intention of robbing the occupants. At the time all three offenders were disguised with balaclavas and two were armed with baseball bats. The prisoner, along with the other two, entered the premises through the open front door and confronted the two occupants O'Brien and Lane in one of the bedrooms.

The offenders then demanded money from Lane and O'Brien and both were struck a number of times with the baseball bats during the robbery. They were also ordered to get on the floor and the wrists and knuckles of Lane were bound with packing tape. A purse, which was being held by O'Brien, was taken from her by one of the offenders. Whilst on the floor a blanket was also thrown over their heads. The prisoner and two other offenders continued with demands for money and continued to strike both victims with the baseball bats. The male victim, Lane, was the main recipient of these blows." 
The statement went on to refer to a list of property taken from the premises with a total value of $2348. None of the property was recovered. Each of the victims sustained some injuries.

When he was interviewed by the police, the applicant gave a version of what happened, attributing the violence directed to the victims to the other two offenders, claiming not to have been armed himself and to have been an unwilling spectator to such violence.

The applicant gave evidence before the sentencing judge and it is clear his
Honour did not accept the applicant's version. Commenting upon the version given to the police, the judge described it as "sanitised" and went on to say, and I quote, "I simply do not believe that he did not know the identity of his co-offenders" as he claimed; and, further, his Honour said that he did not believe that the applicant played the minimal part which he described in the record of interview. He expressed the view that the applicant was "a full and willing participant". His Honour considered that the offence involved premeditation and planning.

In his submissions to this Court today, and the applicant has appeared unrepresented, Mr Cooper has again reiterated that his role was not as serious a one as that of the co-offenders. He has repeated in his submissions the account which he gave to the sentencing judge. The difficulty from the applicant's point of view in urging that view upon this Court is that the finding of fact which the learned judge made about the applicant's involvement was one which was open to him on the evidence that was placed before him, and this Court, in my opinion, is not in a position to ascertain any error.

There was evidence upon which the judge could make the finding that he did.
That being so, there is no error of law in that assessment which would call for any review by this Court.

The applicant was born on 6 November 1961, so that he is presently thirty-five years of age. He has a formidable criminal record, including many offences involving dishonesty.

The applicant has a very unfortunate background. He lost both his parents at an early age in violent circumstances. His father apparently killed his mother and then took his own life and understandably thereafter the applicant had a very unstable upbringing. This was traced in considerable detail in a report from Miss Robilliard dated 3 April 1996, which was tendered before the sentencing judge. One of the features of that outline of the applicant's background is that he developed a serious drug problem, which has not left him, although since 1986 the applicant has been on methadone.

In his remarks on sentence, the judge referred to the subjective features of this case, which included ill-health as a result of a serious back injury, and his Honour recognised the need for the applicant to have rehabilitation for his drug problem and noted that it was very much to his credit that he has been seeking such rehabilitation in prison.

His Honour expressly recognised the applicant's entitlement to some consideration for his plea and for his admissions of guilt. His Honour accepted that, without those admissions made to the police when he was interviewed, it was difficult to see how the Crown could have secured a conviction against him. Those matters were taken into account in the applicant's favour. On sentence, the judge also accepted that the applicant expressed his contrition to Mr Graham of counsel and he accepted Mr Graham's testimonial that such expression was sincere. The learned judge found in the applicant's favour there were special circumstances warranting some extension of the additional term which might have otherwise been fixed.

The applicant has made written submissions to this Court, and those have been considered. He has also addressed the Court in relation to those submissions.

The applicant has argued that the sentence imposed was too severe. He submitted that he was not a participant in the violence in which the other two offenders engaged, and that he did not know what they were going to do. He complains that the judge ought not to have rejected his assertion that he was not involved in the violence, and he draws attention to the part of the intercepted telephone conversation in which he has attributed the violence to the others.

I have already indicated that, in my opinion, it was open to the judge to reject what he referred to as the "sanitised" version, particularly having regard to the account of the victim Lane.

The applicant told the police that he was willing to give evidence against the other two offenders, although he could not remember their names. His willingness to assist the police was a matter that the judge had to consider on the question of penalty. Indeed, <case> of the Crimes Act required him to address features of the evidence in relation to the proffered assistance in order to determine what, if any, discount ought to be allowed on the sentence otherwise proper to be imposed. His Honour took the view that the applicant was less than frank in relation to what he told the court about the other offenders. Having considered the transcript of evidence, it seems to me to be understandable that the learned judge reached that conclusion. In any event though, it was a conclusion which was open to him on the evidence, and it is therefore not a conclusion which this Court can review, having regard to the nature of the appeal to this Court.

Before this Court can interfere on the grounds of the punishment imposed, it must be persuaded that the sentence was manifestly excessive. I am not persuaded that the sentence was outside the appropriate range. On the contrary, I regard it as having been within such range. This was a serious crime.

In the result, I am unable to detect any error in the remarks of the sentencing judge, and I detect no error in the sentence imposed. I see no grounds upon which this Court could intervene.

His Honour had regard to the question of rehabilitation in extending the additional term, and I see no error in the approach that he took to the structuring of the sentence which was imposed. Consequently I propose that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

HIDDEN J: I agree.

STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court will then be those that I have proposed.
 * * * 
