

Collingridge versus Sontor Pty Ltd Matter No 3360/97 [1997] NSWSC 522 (29
October 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
COLLINGRIDGE V SONTOR PTY LTD /97 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Essentially, this case is a dispute over the consequences of a failed conveyancing transaction, the purchaser being the plaintiff. However, it is a conveyancing transaction with a difference and its terms need to be considered in some detail. 
The first defendant is a company which is the registered proprietor of land at Morgan Road, Belrose. The second defendants, Peter and Maureen Dale, are the current owners of the total issued share capital in the first defendant.

The parties entered into a deed on 17 July 1996. At that stage there was erected on the land a building which had been used as a wedding reception centre known as "Kameraigal". That building suited the plaintiff's needs admirably. Accordingly, he was attracted by a proposition that the land at
Belrose would be made the subject of a development application for dual occupancy and that the second defendants were to erect a house on the land for themselves and in fact occupy about half of the site and that the plaintiff would have the other half including Kameraigal.

The deed of 17 July 1996 provided that the plaintiff would pay $250,000 and the second defendants would pay a further $250,000 into the first defendant's bank account. The first defendant would use those moneys, first to discharge its existing mortgage to the State Bank, and secondly, in reduction of the second defendants' loan account. The plaintiff would then pay the first defendant a further $175,000 upon the sale of his property at Killara, but in any event no more than three months from the date of the deed. That $175,000 would be applied first to eliminate the second defendants' loan account, and secondly towards the constructing of the second defendants' dwelling house on the land. The company would then see to it that two dwelling houses were erected, one to be financed by the plaintiff, and the other (subject to what is already set out), by the second defendants. Both parties were to put in building applications for their respective homes. The deed also contemplated that there would need to be a development application for a dual occupancy development. Clause 25.1 of the deed provided that completion was subject to approval of such an application, provided that if such approval was not obtained within four months from the date of the deed, either party might rescind, and if so, all moneys paid by the plaintiff should be refunded within days.

The development approval for dual occupancy was not obtained within the four months, but was granted on 14 January 1997. However, the Warringah Shire
Council had made it clear to the parties that it would not grant the consent unless Kameraigal was demolished. The parties had a talk about this, and there is no doubt at all that the contract between them was varied by reducing the price to be paid by the plaintiff by $25,000. The deed itself provided a mechanism for variation: the parties did not avail themselves of this procedure and although there was some early debate about the matter, as I understand it, it was eventually conceded that the deed was effectively varied so as to reduce the price by $25,000.

There is no doubt at all that the plaintiff paid the $250,000 to which I have referred. He did this on exchange on 17 July 1996.

On 21 February 1997, the solicitors for the first defendant (who also acted for the second defendants), wrote to the plaintiff's solicitor, a letter, the final paragraph of which is as follows: "Accordingly your client is in default of his obligations to pay our client the balance of the agreed contract moneys being $175,000.00 and our client gives formal notice that unless this said sum is paid within fourteen (14) days from the date hereof our client will accept your client's repudiation of the agreement and formally terminate same. Any moneys paid to date will be regarded by our client as forfeited." 
There is no evidence as to the actual date of receipt of this letter, but it would seem that it was received by the plaintiff's solicitor on Monday 24
February 1997. On that day, the plaintiff's solicitor faxed a reply pointing out that the amount still to be paid was $150,000 and not $175,000. The last three paragraphs of this letter were as follows: " My client appreciates that the matter has dragged on for some time. However, my client is using every endeavour to sell his premises ... and has done so for the last 4 months. At the same time your client has had the advantage of $250,000 of my client's money for the past six months. To facilitate this payment my client has borrowed extensively and is not in a position to pay the remaining $150,000 until the sale of his house can be negotiated and certainly wouldn't consider any payment until building approval has been granted.

My client is willing to complete the agreement, but only on the basis that your client withdraw his threat to terminate the agreement if the outstanding monies are not paid within 14 days. The agreement cannot be completed until approval is granted to the satisfaction of both parties - without the approval of the BA, neither party can commence building works. It is oppressive for your client to demand the additional funds prior to approval for building work to commence. To conclude that the initial payment of $250,000 will be forfeited is highly inflammatory, and totally rejected by my client.

Please advise this office as a matter of urgency whether your client intends to terminate the agreement. As the BA has not yet been lodged, it is almost certain it will not be approved within the 14 day period your client has seen fit to allow my client. In the event that your client intends to terminate, we shall have no option but to rely upon clause 25.1 and 25.2 and seek immediate restitution of the monies paid by my client." 
Despite a reminder, there was no reply to this letter until, on 13 March 1997, the solicitors for the first defendant wrote simply saying, "Our client hereby gives formal notice that due to your client's failure to pay to our client the balance of purchase monies as provided in clause 23.3 the agreement dated 17
July, 1996 is terminated." 
The parties then entered into some correspondence, some of which was marked "without prejudice" and which I excluded from the evidence; the other indicated that at least in the latter part of March, the plaintiff was willing to pay the additional $150,000 out of borrowed funds if necessary.

The plaintiff lodged a caveat on 19 March 1997. Schedule 1 to the caveat said that the interest claimed was as purchaser under an agreement to purchase shares in the registered proprietor and that the caveator claimed an interest in the sum of $250,000 paid by way of deposit on a purchase price of $400,000 for an allotment of shares in the registered proprietor. The first defendant entered into a contract to sell the property to the third defendant who is simply named in the summons as "Nicholson" ("Nicholson" took no part in the case. Thus, for ease of reference I will simply use the term "defendants" to refer to the first and/or second defendants). It then lodged a lapsing notice in respect of the caveat. The matter first came before me on 25 July 1997 when
I was Duty Judge. I granted leave to file a summons and granted an injunction to freeze the position re the further sale of the property until the following week. The injunction was continued until 8 August, 1997. On that day, Santow,
J extended that injunction and also extended the caveat until further order.
The matter then came before me again on 20 August where, after discussion, it was agreed that the interim orders might remain in place if there was an early final hearing and I listed the matter for final hearing on 23 September when it was in fact heard.

On 19 September 1997, the plaintiff's solicitor faxed the defendants' solicitor to the effect that the plaintiff was withdrawing any claim to the land or specific performance and would only seek return of the part payment of $250,000 and a declaration that the notice of termination was invalid. The letter also made an open offer.

At the conclusion of the oral hearing I discharged the injunction and the order extending the caveat, and as the defendants did not oppose repaying the $250,000, made an order that that should occur. I was told that the only source of moneys from which the $250,000 could be repaid was the purchase moneys that would be paid by Nicholson. By consent, a special order was made that from the settlement with Nicholson the defendants hand to the plaintiff's solicitor a bank cheque for $250,000. I then reserved my decision on the matters of interest, damages and costs because some complex questions arose and need to be addressed in deciding these issues.

Although the questions which remain are relatively minor, they do involve me in having to determine whether the "notice to complete" contained in the vendor's solicitors' letter was valid and consequently whether the purported termination was valid. I also have to determine whether the deed gave the plaintiff any interest in the land such as would support a caveat. I further have to consider whether the principles of common law, equity or restitution should result in interest flowing to the plaintiff on his $250,000.

It is convenient to deal with the points I must decide under the following heads:
Was the contract affected by the law against unauthorized reduction of capital, and if so, how?
Was there sufficient delay on behalf of the plaintiff as at February 1997 to entitle the first defendant to issue a notice to complete?
Did the fact, if it be the fact, that the first defendant was in breach of contract on 21 February 1997 affect its ability to issue a notice to complete?
Was the notice to complete sufficient in form?
Was the notice to complete sufficient as to time?
Has the fact that the first defendant did not purport to terminate until 13 March 1997 any significance?
Was the first defendant entitled to terminate on13 March 1997?
Did the deed give the plaintiff any interest in the land?
Was the plaintiff entitled to lodge a caveat on 17 March 1997 and to maintain that caveat?
Is the plaintiff liable under <case> of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) in respect of the lodgement or maintenance of that caveat?
Are the defendants entitled to damages?
Is the plaintiff entitled to damages?
Is the plaintiff entitled to interest on his $250,000?
What order for costs should be made?
What is the result of the case? 
I should note that when I refer to "notice to complete" I mean the letter sent by the solicitor for the first defendant to the solicitor for the purchaser on February 1997 and which I find was received on 24 February 1997. When I speak of damages, I should point out that I am only dealing with questions of principle because it was agreed at the time the matter was before me in August that questions of quantum would be postponed for separate decision later if the need should arise. I will now proceed to deal with the issues seriatim.
The deed was one whereby the parties were to contribute moneys to the company. On completion they were to be equal shareholders in the company, the company would build two houses on its land and then the plaintiff would occupy one of those houses and the second defendants the other. It is clear that the land is the only capital asset of the first defendant company. It is also clear that "every transaction between a company and any of its members, by means of which any of the money paid to the company in respect of the member's shares is returned to him, is prohibited, unless the court has sanctioned the transaction." Davis Investments Pty Ltd versus Commissioner of Stamp Duties <case>; [(1958) 100 CLR 392], 413. This passage, though from a dissenting judgment, was approved by the Full High
Court in Australian Oil Exploration Ltd versus Lachberg <case>; [(1958) 101 CLR 119], 132 and was also approved by Harman, J whose decision was affirmed in the Court of Appeal in Barclays Bank PLC versus British &
Commonwealth Holdings PLC [[1996] 1 BCLC 1], 7-10.

This principle was applied by the New Zealand Court of Appeal in Jenkins v
Harbour View Courts Ltd [[1966] NZLR 1], to hold that a scheme whereby a company erected a block of flats and then granted each shareholder a lease for 99 years of one of the flats at a rent only sufficient to discharge outgoings was ultra vires and void. This was a return of capital to the members.

The Australian legislature took the view that the New Zealand case was correctly decided, or at least it was at least arguably so, with the result that the then Companies Act was amended to insert the provisions that now appear as sub-sections (13) and (14) to <case> of the Corporations Law.
However, these sub-sections only give partial relief. Essentially they provide that a grant by a company to a member of a right to occupy its land or building whether for consideration or not, is not to be regarded as a reduction of capital if it is made pursuant to a provision of the memorandum or articles of the company which grants such right. In the instant case, even up to the hearing the memorandum and articles of association of the first defendant company did not make any such provision. The legislature has impliedly accepted the correctness of the New Zealand Court of Appeal's decision and I must too, especially as I consider it is in line with two decisions of the High Court of Australia.

It follows that completion of the contract would be in breach of the rule which is at least implicit in <case> of the Corporations Law that there is to be no reduction of capital without the approval of the court.

It should be noted that there is no current breach of the statute because the statute only applies to the relations between a company and a member, and as at the date of the deed, the plaintiff was not a member. However, it is clear that the deed could not be consummated without the memorandum or articles of association being altered so as to include material which would exempt the scheme from being a reduction of capital because of <case>(13) of the
Corporations Law.

Without such a resolution, the arrangement would appear to be null and void.
However, the Lachberg case proceeds on the basis that the contract was ultra vires and void. Since ss 160-162 of the Corporations Law, or their immediate predecessors, the legislature has intended to abolish the doctrine of ultra vires. However, as Mr Robson remarks in his Annotated Corporations
Law, 2nd ed at p 163, "Although ss 160-162 have abolished the old narrow ultra vires doctrine the wide doctrine appears to be alive and kicking." In any event, <case> does not appear to authorize the company to do something which under the Corporations Law it cannot do. Thus, even after ss 160-162, if a company purports to make an agreement which involves an unauthorized reduction of capital the agreement is ultra vires and void. Indeed this is the attitude taken by Tadgell, J in admittedly a slightly different situation in
Bell versus Burton [(1993) 12 ACSR 325], 331.

When met with this sort of problem, the court leans to the view that the parties have not intended to act illegally or invalidly, but have entered into their agreement on the basis of an implied condition that they will together co-operate to bring about the conditions under which their agreement may be performed legally; see eg Butts versus O'Dwyer <case>; <case>; [(1964) 114 CLR 656], 661. In the instant case it would have been easy to achieve the position where the contract could not have been attacked under the rule I have recently considered by the appropriate provision being inserted into the articles of association. As the second defendants were the sole shareholders of the company, they could have done this without hindrance, though had they sought the plaintiff's approval, he would have been bound to have given it.

Accordingly, the only significance of the matter is that as at the date of the notice to complete, the date of the notice of termination and the date of hearing, this step had not been taken, so that at all three dates the deed was incapable of being consummated and completed.
It is quite clear that a party to a conveyancing transaction called by
Professor Farrand in his book Contract and Conveyance 4th ed (Oyez
Longman London 1983), the "delayee" can give to the other party (the "delayor") a notice to complete setting it an essential time limit for completion if there has been sufficient delay by the delayor. What is sufficient delay has been variously described in the cases. The cases are referred to in Farrand op cit at p 185 and Lindgren, Time in the
Performance of Contracts 2nd ed (Butterworths Sydney 1982) [426]. The most frequent epithets attached to delay are "great and improper": King versus Wilson Beav 124, 126; <case>; [49
ER 772], 773;
Pearce versus Kelly <case>; [(1919) 20 SR 88], ; or "gross, vexatious and unreasonable": Wells versus Maxwell [(1863) 33
LJ Ch 44.] Nowadays, it is fashionable to speak of either "gross and unreasonable delay" see eg Butterworths NSW Conveyancing Service [11212]; or simply "unreasonable delay": Louinder versus Leis <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 509.] 
To come within this expression, there must be not only delay, but delay which has impeded the opposing party. "There must have been such improper conduct on the part of [the delayor] as to justify the rescission of the contract sub modo, that is, if a reasonable notice be not complied with", per Fry, J in
Green versus Sevin (1879) 13 CLD 589, 599. In Re Barr's Contract [[1956] Ch 551], 556, Danckwerts, J said that "At the time when the vendor purports to make time of the essence, the purchaser must be guilty of such default as to entitle the vendor to rescind the contract subject to its being done by a reasonable notice." 
Although I have called the solicitor's demand of 21 February 1997 a notice to complete, and it is so in popular parlance, as a matter of law it is better described as a notice to perform. It is not a notice requiring that the agreement contained in the deed be completed, rather it is a notice to perform a step along the way, namely the payment of the second tranche of purchase money.

The deed provided that that second tranche of purchase money was required, first, to pay off any balance of the second defendants' loan account with the first defendant, and then to finance the construction of the second defendants' house on the land. The evidence is that no building approval had been obtained as at the date of the notice to complete for the second defendants' house. Accordingly, no delay on the part of the purchaser plaintiff could have affected that matter.

The distinction between a notice to complete strictly so called and a notice to perform is clearly made by Mahoney, JA in giving the decision of the Court of Appeal in Gustin versus Taajamba Pty Ltd (1988) 4 BPR 9373, 9376, "It appears now settled that a distinction is to be drawn between, as I have described them, a notice to perform and a notice to complete. Where a party does not in due time perform an obligation prior to the obligation to complete, the other party may, by a notice, fix the time for the performance of that obligation. The effect of such a notice to perform, properly given, is twofold: it fixes a further time for the performance of the obligation; and it makes the obligation an essential obligation of the contract, in the sense that the failure to perform it by the new time is a ground for termination of the contract for breach." 
A notice to perform is not a notice to complete. Ordinarily, the mere non- performance of a non-essential term does not entitle the delayee to give a notice to complete. However, as Mason, J said in Louinder versus Leis supra at 527, "There are of course exceptions to this rule. Sometimes a contract will contain a condition which requires to be performed on or before the date of completion. Unreasonable delay or default in complying with the condition may then amount to delay or default in completion justifying the giving of a notice to complete. At other times the delay or default in complying with a particular provision may be so inordinate as to justify the innocent party in fixing a reasonable time for completion, as, for example, when non-compliance with the particular provision has the practical effect of making it impossible to complete within the time stipulated or contemplated by the contract." 
In my view, the non-payment of the second tranche of purchase money in the light of all the circumstances did not have an effect on completion of the contract. It could not justify the issue of a notice to complete in the true sense.

However, the notice of 21 February only required payment of the second tranche and threatened that if that money was not paid, the vendor would terminate.
The notice in that sense was a notice to perform indicating the attitude of the vendor that it would treat a breach of warranty as a breach of condition if the money was not paid by the extended period.

In viewing the delay in respect of the payment, apart from the question of breach of condition, it does seem to me that there was gross and unreasonable delay. The parties understood that the plaintiff was to sell his Killara house in order to pay the second tranche of the moneys. He was given three months to do this. This would bring the time up to October 1996. Some four months after this he still had not paid the money and did not appear to be likely to pay the money in view of his solicitor's letter of 24 February 1997. He wished to delay payment until the Killara home was sold. We know from other letters of the plaintiff's solicitor written after 13 March that the plaintiff had made contingency plans to borrow the money, but he was only going to put forward that offer as a last resort. It seems to me, accordingly, that he had been guilty in respect of this term of gross and unreasonable delay.
It is said, by Mr Cashion for the plaintiff, that the vendor itself was in breach because it was an implied term of the deed that both parties would lodge applications for building approval so that their respective houses could be built and the second defendants had not done this. Assuming for the moment that the second defendants and the first defendant can be treated as one entity, or alternatively, that the first defendant had to authorize the lodging of the building application because it was the registered proprietor, the question is whether this is such a breach as would disentitle the vendor from giving a notice to complete.

Mr Cashion relies on words of Barwick, CJ and Jacobs, J in Neeta (Epping)
Pty Ltd versus Phillips <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 286], 299, that before a notice to complete can be given, "the party giving the notice must himself be free of default by way of breach or antecedent relevant delay." 
As Lindgren, J says in his book, op cit para [475], these words cannot be read literally. The learned author relies for that comment on McNally versus Waitzer [[1981] 1 NSWLR 294], 299-301. In that case, the breach involved was not supplying full details of registered leases. Hutley, JA at 301 considered that this was such a breach as would disentitle the vendor from giving a notice to complete, pointing out that it was a well recognized principle that until a vendor had delivered a perfect abstract, time did not run for completion and until this obligation had been performed, the vendor could not get specific performance: Hobson versus Bell <case>; [(1839) 2 Beav 17]; [48 ER 1084.] 
In Louinder versus Leis at 523, Mason, J commented on the Neeta (Epping) decision. His Honour said that in respect of a purchaser (that is, the delayor) being guilty of breach or unreasonable delay, those words meant a breach of contract with respect to a time stipulation or alternatively, an unreasonable delay where performance was to be within a reasonable time. His
Honour then said that Barwick, CJ and Jacobs, J meant to include any breach of contract, whether serious or slight. His Honour did not comment on what was meant by breach or unreasonable delay on the part of the delayee. It could be thought that either those words too related to breach in respect of a time stipulation, or a matter that was relevant to completion. However, it may be that Mason, J also meant that any breach, no matter whether essential or not essential, was sufficient to disentitle the delayee from giving a notice to complete.

Although Hutley, JA in McNally versus Waitzer seems to take the second view, looking at the Neeta case and what was decided in McNally v
Waitzer and the law of specific performance generally, in my view it is only a breach of a contract which either goes to time or to completion but does not include every breach of contract essential, non-essential or collateral. Of course, if there is an essential breach the delayor may be able to utilize that to put an end to the contract, but that is a collateral matter. The principle I have just stated is, of course, independent of the principle that a delayee must be able to complete himself or herself at the time at which the notice to complete expires.

The general law of specific performance shows that this is the situation.
Although a plaintiff in a suit for specific performance must show that he or she is ready, willing and able to perform the contract, it is clear that a plaintiff who has committed a breach of a trivial or non-essential nature can still obtain specific performance. So in Dyster versus Randall & Sons [[1926] Ch 932], the purchaser was required to submit plans of buildings to a vendor's architect for approval. The purchaser breached this condition, but that notwithstanding, he was able to succeed in his suit for specific performance.

In the instant case, if it be a breach, the failure of the vendor or the failure of the second defendants to submit their building applications to the council would not seem to me to be in any way related to time or to completion in an essential way. Accordingly, any such breach would not be a barrier to issuing a notice to complete.

That finding makes it unnecessary for me to determine whether there has been a breach. Certainly it would be necessary for both parties to put in building applications, but that would have to be done within a reasonable time, and when working out what a reasonable time was, one would look at all the facts including the plaintiff's failure to pay the second tranche of the moneys, which second tranche was to be used, as least in part, to pay for the second defendants' building.

However, this question is really academic because the first defendant was in no position to force completion on the date when it gave its notice to complete because, for the reasons set out in the answer to question 1, it had not amended its articles so as to permit completion of the agreement to take place without there being an unauthorized reduction of capital. This is a breach which goes to the completion of the contract and is similar to the breach involved in McNally versus Waitzer. Accordingly, the first defendant was not in a position to issue a notice to complete on 21 February 1997.
It follows that the answer to this question is really unnecessary for the decision in the case. However, in deference to the arguments of counsel, I will briefly deal with it.

Mr Cashion submitted that the notice to complete was bad as to form because it set out the wrong balance required to be paid; (b) recited that failure to comply with the notice would be a repudiation of the contract; and (c) threatened too much in that not only would a 10% deposit be forfeited, but the whole of the $250,000 already paid. I will deal with these matters in turn.

It was agreed that the contract had been varied so that the purchase price was reduced by $25,000 and thus the second tranche of payment was $150,000, not $175,000. The notice clearly referred to $175,000 on two occasions.

It is clear that a notice to complete must not call for more than the contract requires, so that in the Neeta (Epping) case, the High Court held that an unwarranted claim for interest on the purchase price was a matter which destroyed the notice.

Mr Bevan, for the defendants, seeks to avoid this problem by saying that the reference to $175,000 was clearly a typographical error. He says that when one looks at the notice of termination, it can be seen that it very carefully refers to the amount required to be paid under the contract and not to a particular figure. This point is weakened by the fact that even though Mr
White, the plaintiff's solicitor, pointed out on 24 February that the figure was wrong, Mr Carmody, the vendor's solicitor, did not acknowledge the letter or correct it. It seems to me that one cannot merely explain the extra amount as a typographical error. The figure is mentioned twice, it is the most significant matter in the letter which constitutes a notice to complete. The amount that was demanded is more than is due and in my view, means that the notice demanded too much and was bad as to form.

The equation of a breach of condition or a breach of an essential term with a repudiation is also one which does not appear to be justified. There is a very real difference between the two; see for instance, Shevill v
Builders' Licensing Board <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 620] and my article "Repudiation" in [(1985) 1 Australian
Bar Review 21.] However, I do not consider that this misuse of the term affects the validity of the notice.

The submission that a notice which threatens too much is invalid comes from Pearce versus Kelly supra at 92, which is taken up by Lindgren, J in his book at para [499.22]. In Pearce versus Kelly Owen, AJ at 92 makes the point that a notice to complete must distinctly state that non-compliance will mean that the delayee may treat the contract as at an end. He then says, "Again, the notice seems to me to claim too much, because I think that under the contract itself, there is no right to forfeit anything more than the deposit, while the notice claims the right to forfeit the instalments as well." It seems to me that this is mere obiter dicta and his Honour was not intending to say that a notice which threatens not only termination but also forfeiture of the deposit and other moneys paid under the contract is invalid. Indeed, it seems to me that decisions such as Taylor versus Raglan Developments Pty Ltd [[1981] 2 NSWLR 117], indicate that provided that the notice draws the recipient's attention to the possibility of termination for non-compliance, any excrescence does not affect its validity.

However, for the first of the points mentioned, the notice to complete is not valid as to form.
Was the notice sufficient as to time? 
It will be remembered that the notice although giving 14 days "from the date hereof", was only received on the Monday following the Friday on which it was sent. Accordingly, only 12 days were allowed for performance. Mr Cashion submits that this was inadequate.

The onus is on the person who seeks to justify the notice to demonstrate that the time and form of the notice are proper: Fileman versus Liddle (1974) 2
BPR 9192, 9205.

I do not consider that it is appropriate to ask whether it was fair and reasonable to expect the purchaser to obtain the $150,000 within 12 days. One takes into account that the purchaser had had some months already to amass the money needed to pay the second tranche payment. Mr Cashion says in reply to this that it would have been better for the vendor to have given some forewarning that it was going to require the moneys within a short period of time. He uttered the immortal line, "It takes two to do nothing".

In Michael Realty Pty Ltd versus Carr [[1977] 1 NSWLR 553], 566,
Glass, JA set out six propositions affecting the quantum of time that should be allowed in the notice. It is clear from that analysis that one must consider not merely what remains to be done by the delayor, but also all the circumstances of the case including what had happened previously. So in
Fiske versus Sterling Investment Co Pty Ltd (1977) 1 BPR 9219, 9222, when dealing with the time required to convert Crown leasehold to unrestricted freehold, Powell, J said that he "must have regard not merely to what remains to be done at the date of the notice, but all the circumstances of the case, including the previous delay on the part of [the delayor] and the [delayee's] attitude to it." 
A person who gives a notice to complete for less than 14 days is usually inviting a challenge that the notice to complete is inadequate as to time. In the instant case, even paying due attention to the fact that four months had passed since the three month deadline for paying the second tranche of moneys, there had been no agitation by the first defendant for the money, nor was there any immediate use for the money because the second defendants' house could not be erected before the building application had been approved by the council. It accordingly may well have been the case that the plaintiff did not pursue obtaining the cash to pay the second tranche with full vigour and that even in the light of previous conduct, 12 days was sufficiently long to get the money.

I consider that the matter is a borderline situation, but that the defendants have not satisfied me that the 12 days allowed in the notice to complete were sufficient.
Mr Bevan said that even if I was of the view that the time in the notice was insufficient, it is significant that the first defendant did not purport to terminate until 13 March 1997. The last day for complying with the notice to complete was 7 March. Mr Bevan says that had the money been tendered at any stage prior to 13 March, the first defendant would have been bound to have accepted it. This submission runs contrary to the decision of the Privy
Council in Union Eagle Ltd versus Golden Achievement Ltd <case>; [[1997] 2
WLR 341](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1997%5d%202%20WLR%20341 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 344. There is some doubt in my mind as to whether this represents
Australian law, see note [(1997) 71 ALJ 580.] The probabilities are that had the plaintiff tendered the money before 13 March it would have been accepted, but the facts are that the plaintiff did not have the money at that stage.

However, the mere fact that had the delayee been asked for an extension of time he would have granted it either before the notice to complete expired or afterwards does not, to my mind, have any effect on the validity of the actual notice itself, and unless the notice is valid, it cannot be effective to make time of the essence. I do not really consider it is necessary to say anything further on this point.
It follows from what I have said that the vendor was not entitled to terminate on 13 March 1997. It follows that in purporting to terminate, it repudiated the contract, which repudiation could be accepted by the plaintiff as putting an end to the contract. It does not matter that between the date of repudiation and the time when the plaintiff actually accepted the repudiation, September 1997, it had sought to enforce the contract by way of an action for specific performance; see Johnson versus Agnew [[1980] AC 367.] Mr Bevan made some submissions that there had been acquiescence and affirmation of the contract so that there could not now be an acceptance of the repudiation and quoted from authority. However, this authority has no relevance in the instant situation which is governed by Johnson versus Agnew.
& 9. I now turn to a completely different issue, and that is whether the deed conferred any interest in the Belrose land itself on the plaintiff.

In Tittman versus Traill [(1957) 74 WN 284], , Walsh, J said with respect to a company home unit scheme, "Although it is true that, under the home unit scheme adopted by the company, the holding of the specific shares in question conferred rights in relation to a specified flat and garage, nevertheless the ownership of the shares could not, as such, be regarded as equivalent to or as including any estate in the land owned by the company, or in any part of it. Any right which the shareholder had in relation to the premises was a contractual right and not a proprietary right."
Even where a company is in voluntary liquidation and all its debts have been paid, a shareholder does not have any interest in the land that is registered in the name of the company merely because the caveator is a shareholder; Ex parte The Canowie Pastoral Co Ltd <case>; [[1931] SASR 502.] 
Counsel cited to me the decision of McLelland, J in Depsun Pty Ltd versus Tahore
Holdings Pty Ltd (1990) 5 BPR 11314 at 11318, that not even a deed in which parties agree that a contractual right may be protected by caveat can turn that interest into an interest in land that can be protected by caveat. Of course, it may be that a court would not aid a person who entered into such a deed in that person's quest to remove the caveat (that is what occurred in the
Depsun case) or the court may consider that such contract created an equitable charge; see Troncone versus Aliperti (1994) 6 BPR 13291, but that is another question.

I have not overlooked the fact that if certain circumstances had happened, separate titles might have issued for each of the relevant portions of the company's land and that those titles might have been transferred to the plaintiff and the second defendants. However, this is not a relevant matter as the events did not occur which could have triggered this particular obligation.

Accordingly, I find that there was no caveatable interest in the plaintiff.
A claim for damages for lodging a caveat must be brought within the terms of [s
P](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74p.html) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). This section has been amended by Act No 87 of 1996 which commenced on 1 February
The present caveat was lodged on 19 March 1997 so the section in its amended form applies. In contradistinction to the earlier form of the section, compensation is payable by a person who lodges a caveat without reasonable cause to a person who sustains pecuniary loss attributable to such act. Prior to the amending Act the words were "wrongfully and without reasonable cause".

One must judge reasonable cause at the time when the caveat is lodged:
Nelson versus Kimberley Homes Pty Ltd [(1988) NSW ConvR 55-394.]
However, it is not necessarily so that a person who has no caveatable interest but who has lodged a caveat has done so without reasonable cause. There may be a situation where a caveat is lodged upon a reasonable but mistaken belief as to the caveator's entitlement to do so: Ceda Nominees Pty Ltd versus Registrar of Titles [(1982) ANZ ConvR 524], 525, a decision of Olney, J in the Supreme Court of Western Australia. In Nelson's case I said at p 57,655, "The authorities show that the foundation for reasonable cause must be an honest belief based on reasonable grounds that the caveator has the interest claimed." I adhere to those words though they do not precisely cover the instant case.

In Young versus Rydalmere Credits Pty Ltd [(1963) 80 WN 1463](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=%281963%29%2080%20WN%20%28NSW%29%201463 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 1473, Macfarlan, J said, "I cannot feel any doubt about the meaning of the phrase `reasonable cause'. It consists of two words and whether the words are considered separately or together their meaning is, I think, well understood by lawyer and layman, alike. Whether there has been an absence of reasonable cause requires, I think, a consideration of the circumstances existing both before and at the time when the caveat was lodged." In Bedford Properties
Pty Ltd versus Surgo Pty Ltd [[1981] 1 NSWLR 106],Wootten, J held that "reasonable cause" was established not by actual possession of a caveatable interest but by an honest belief based on reasonable grounds that such an interest existed; see also National Australia Bank Ltd versus Bridge
Wholesale Acceptance Corp (Australia) Ltd [(1990) 21 NSWLR 96], 101.
However, the decisions to which I have just referred were affected by the decision of the Court of Appeal in Beca Developments Pty Ltd versus Idameneo (No ) Pty Ltd [(1990) 21 NSWLR 459.] The effect of that decision has now been nullified by the amended form of the statute, but it seems clear that to succeed on a claim under the present form of the section it must be shown by the person so alleging: (a) that the caveator did not have a caveatable interest; and (b) that the caveator did not have an honest belief based on reasonable grounds that he had a caveatable interest.

In Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Baranyay <case>; [[1993] 1 VR 589], 600, Hayne, J, when a Justice of the Supreme Court of
Victoria said of the corresponding Victorian section, "It is clear that the onus is on the bank to show that the caveator acted without reasonable cause ... . Is it enough for the bank to show that Baranyay had no caveatable interest or must it show more? Authority suggests that more must be demonstrated ... . Without in any way seeking to give an exhaustive definition of the circumstances covered by the very general expression `without reasonable cause' it would seem to me to be likely that the foundation for reasonable cause will often be ... `not the actual possession of a caveatable interest but an honest belief based on reasonable grounds that the caveator has such an interest.' However ... honest belief on reasonable grounds may not always be enough to show reasonable cause for lodging a caveat, eg in the case where a caveat is lodged not for protection of the caveator's interest but for an ulterior motive and without regard to the effect on transactions to which the caveator had agreed. ..." 
The evidence is very skimpy on the issue of "without reasonable cause" in the instant case. It is clear that at all times the plaintiff was being advised by a solicitor. Furthermore, the transaction, although actually a loan to a corporation with a subsequent allotment of shares entitling the plaintiff to occupy a home on the company's land, was very similar to a transaction in which a person bought a block of land and built a house on it. There was no suggestion anywhere that the caveat was lodged for any purpose other than to protect the plaintiff's rights under the contract. On this evidence I cannot find established that the caveat was lodged without reasonable cause.

It follows that as there is no claim for lodging the caveat and the motive of the plaintiff in maintaining the caveat was the same as before, even if [s
P](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74p.html) is wide enough to cover maintenance of a caveat without reasonable cause, the first defendant's case has not been established.

Accordingly, the claim for damages or compensation under [s
P](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74p.html) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) fails.
The next allegation is that the grant of the injunction caused damage to the defendants and there should be an inquiry as to the damages they have suffered. They say that they have suffered through the sale to Nicholson being held up so that the first defendant did not get its money for that sale and otherwise clear its obligations. The evidence is that the price of the sale to
Nicholson was $770,000 so that, even after repaying the plaintiff $250,000, the first defendant has lost the use of about $500,000 whilst the injunction has been in place.

The leading case in this area of the law is Air Express Ltd versus Ansett
Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 146 CLR 249.] The High Court clearly said in that case that one must distinguish between damage caused by the grant of an injunction and damage which flows from the fact of litigation itself and that it is only in the former situation that damages are recoverable.

It would seem to me that in the instant case the injunction did have the effect of preventing the completion of the sale to Nicholson. As I have not got to consider quantum there is not before me any evidence as to when the sale would have been completed had the injunction not been granted. However, at all material times there was a caveat preventing completion and that caveat was extended after the injunction was granted. It seems to have been extended by a consent order.
 (If my memory serves me correctly, I declined to extend the caveat but granted an injunction instead when the matter first came before me because I did not think the caveat was any good but I may not have vocalised these thoughts).

As the sale could not have been completed whilst the caveat was in force, it would seem to me that no damages flowed from the existence of the injunction so there should be no inquiry.
The plaintiff's claim for damages is an unusual one. The plaintiff says that when he had his first conversations with Peter Dale he told Mr Dale that he owned a property near Wisemans Ferry and a house at East Killara and he would need to sell both in order to fund the purchase. He only sold both properties because of the contract to purchase the shares which would give rise to the right to occupy the Belrose property. Accordingly, when the first defendant breached the contract for the sale of Belrose, the damages that flowed through included damages for having to acquire or rent another property in which to live and moving expenses. He also spent money on preparing plans for a house and paying lodgement fees to Warringah Shire Council. He also says that he repainted his East Killara property preparatory for sale. This, however, could not be damages flowing from the repudiation of the contract.

In an ordinary vendor and purchaser case, where a vendor has repudiated the contract the purchaser is entitled to damages for loss of bargain which loss will at least cover (a) the difference between what was paid for the property and what the property's true value was; (b) costs and expenses thrown away in connection with the sale; and (c) any moneys paid pursuant to the contract. In this case there is no evidence that the property was worth more than what the plaintiff was to pay for it; indeed, if the only evidence of its value apart from the contract price is the sale price to Nicholson, the plaintiff may have paid a little too much. Accordingly, no damages are payable under this head.

The plaintiff is clearly entitled to his wasted conveyancing costs and expenses such as the architectural draftsman who drew up plans for the house and the fees paid to the Warringah Shire Council.

The third head really disappears because it is subsumed in the $250,000 that has already been ordered to be repaid.

The plaintiff claims that he is also entitled to damages for the other matters that I have indicated earlier.

Williams on Vendor and Purchaser (Sweet & Maxwell London 1936) Vol 2 p 1022 says of a purchaser's claim for damages that the purchaser is entitled to his expenses of the agreement but not expenses purely preliminary to entering into the agreement or expenses which were prematurely incurred. In particular, "The purchaser cannot recover, as expenses, any loss or outlay incurred in raising the purchase-money; as a loss by selling any stock, shares or securities to provide the money, or the costs or charges of borrowing the money: but if, before the breach, the contract had proceeded to such a point that it was reasonable for the purchaser to have the money ready to complete the purchase, he may recover, as damages, interest on any money so lying idle, whether it was actually raised or was only held ready by a third party to be applied to the purchaser's use at call." I have omitted the authorities referred to by Williams. 
It seems to me that the plaintiff is not entitled to extra damages for the disruption from his Killara home. The evidence shows that the accommodation in
Killara was inadequate for the plaintiff's purposes and he would have needed to shift in any event. There is no evidence to suggest that he sold his
Killara house at a loss, or if he did, that the defendants were aware of that.
He may have to rent other premises, but he has in his hands the capital moneys from the sale of the Killara property, the interest on which can pay the rent.
If the interest is insufficient because a mortgagee on the Killara property claimed a considerable part of the sale price, then the plaintiff has the countervailing advantage of not having to pay any further interest on the mortgage.

Accordingly, apart from the costs of purchase thrown away and the matter of interest which I will deal with under heading 13, there are no damages payable to the plaintiff.

I am not dealing with the quantum of damages. However, I would have thought that the amount of costs and expenses could be relatively easily identified and that the parties could by consent work out what the proper figure is without the expensive inquiry that would otherwise be entailed.

Of course, this analysis is on the basis that there was a contract and it was repudiated. I believe that this is the correct analysis. The fact that the contract was subject to a condition precedent to performance only meant that it could not be completed unless certain things happened which never happened.
Repudiation of such a contract before the condition happened may leave awkward questions as to what is the quantum of loss of bargain damages, but that is not a problem in the instant case because there is no evidence of any damages other than expenses and the money paid under the contract. Accordingly, it does not seem to me that this is a case where one is dealing with an ineffective contract.
There was considerable debate at the oral hearing as to whether interest should be paid. Part of that debate occurred because counsel had to argue the position on various alternative scenarios including (a) breach of contract; failure of an ineffective contract; (c) an equitable claim; and (d) a restitutionary claim. As I have held under heading 12 that this is a pure claim for breach of contract, I do not need to look at the rather awkward matters that would occur at least under the restitutionary claim.

Where money is paid under a contract which subsequently fails, the payer is not entitled to the money back, that is a right that would only follow if the contract was rescinded ab initio. What the person is entitled to receive is damages for loss of the money together with interest; see eg Day v
Singleton [[1899] 2 Ch 320.] At common law, provided that the case was properly pleaded, such interest was always allowed; see Flureau versus Thornhill (1775) 2 W Blackstone 1078; <case>; [96 ER 635], especially Blackstone's notes at ER 636, de Bernales versus Wood <case>; [(1812) 3 Camp 258]; <case>; [(1817) 7 Taunt 592]; [129 ER 236.] In de Bernales' case Lord Ellenborough held that interest ran from the time when the contract would have been completed.

In the instant case, the plaintiff was seeking specific performance of the deed up to 19 September 1997. It could be argued that interest is to run from that date because up until then, the contract could have been completed.
However, completion became impossible when on 18 July 1997 the first defendant sold the property to Nicholson. It seems to me that, in accordance with the authorities, interest became payable from that day.

Accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to interest on the $250,000 on and from July 1997 at the rate set out in Schedule J to the Court Rules.

Mr Bevan argued that the reason why the problem came about was the plaintiff's inability to pay the $150,000. He says thus that in the court's discretion it should not award any interest to a person whose fault had brought about the problem. However, that only addresses half the story. The first defendants' repudiation and its disinclination to proceed when the plaintiff issued proceedings for specific performance and the first defendant's on selling of the property to Nicholson is what has caused interest to flow from 18 July.

Before leaving the matter of interest I should make a comment on the submissions made by Mr Cashion. He put that these days questions of interest are really matters to be considered under the general doctrine of unjust enrichment and if one can see that there has been an incontrovertible benefit to the person retaining the money, then interest must follow. He bases that submission on the passage from Mason and Carter, Restitution Law in
Australia (Butterworths Sydney 1995) [2812]. That paragraph, however, was written after the Court of Appeal decision in Westdeutsche Landes Bank
Girozentrale versus Islington LBC [[1994] 1 WLR 938], but before the reversal of that case by the House of Lords in <case>; [[1996] AC .]
Although this is an area where the law is developing, it seems to me that in the light of the House of Lords decision even though it was a split decision on a 3/2 basis, the proper approach to cases of interest is that one applies the rules at common law in ordinary damages cases, or in money had and received cases (as to which see the notes by Blackstone to Flureau v
Thornhill supra) or one applies the appropriate equitable principle such as that in International Railway Co versus Niagara Parks Commission [[1941] AC .] On the view taken by the majority of the House of Lords, it is only after one has completed this exercise and found that there is still an unjust enrichment that one applies it at all. Mr Cashion says that this approach is contrary to the way in which the majority in the Court of Appeal approached the question of interest in Akron Securities Ltd versus Iliffe (No 2) 26 June 1997, unreported. I cannot see anything in the majority judgments in that case which goes contrary to what I have just said, and in any event, that case was a pure restitution case, not one for damages for breach.
What order for costs should be made? 
The ordinary rule is that a plaintiff is entitled to costs if he has succeeded. The plaintiff has succeeded in his claim for damages, and the above analysis shows that he would have succeeded for at least that claim no matter what the fate of the claim for specific performance may have been.

Accordingly, in my view the plaintiff is entitled to his costs of the proceedings.

There may be an argument that the open offer of 19 September entitles the plaintiff to costs on a higher basis than the ordinary basis. I do not consider it did; the offer was made too close to the hearing of the proceedings and in any event, I would have expected that the main costs would have been incurred before the open offer was made including delivery of a brief on hearing. As the defendants have wholly failed there is no need to consider any questions of set-off of costs.
Accordingly, in addition to the orders which I made in September, the plaintiff is entitled to additional damages for lost costs and expenses incurred in the purchase limited as I have indicated above and to interest at the court rate on the $250,000 calculated on and from 18 July 1997. The defendants must also pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings. I hope that the parties will be able to agree on the quantum of the further expenses, and for those purposes I will stand the matter over for short minutes to be brought in. To ensure that the matter is dealt with with due expedition, I will list it at 9.30 am on 13 November 1997. However, if no later than 7
November counsel contact my Associate, some less inconvenient day may be able to be arranged.
 * * * 
