

J N Wright versus V Fowler [1996] NSWSC 99 (6 May 1996) 
JOHN NICHOLAS WRIGHT versus VALERIE FOWLER /95; ED 1621/94 
Monday 6 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, SHELLER JA, POWELL JA 
CATCHWORDS: DE FACTO RELATIONSHIPS - FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS - LOANS - CAPITAL LOSSES 
FAMILY LAW - DE FACTO RELATIONSHIP - FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS AS LOANS -
CAPITAL LOSSES.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
Following a de facto relationship between September 1988 and March 1992, the parties sought an adjustment of interests under <case> of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984. The respondent brought to the relationship cash assets of $116,000 while the appellant possessed a house valued at $1.7 million with a liability of $700,000. The respondent made available to the appellant $100,000 to repay part of that liability and another $10,000 to reduce a business overdraft that the appellant had acquired. At the end of the relationship the house was valued at $1.2 million, there was a $1.35 million debt secured over the property and the business had no value. The Master held that the $110,000 contributed by the respondent was by way of loan. An order was made for the $110,000 to be repaid with modest interest calculated from the break-up of the relationship. The appellant appealed on the grounds that the Master had failed to properly assess the parties' financial contributions or to take proper account of the capital losses suffered by the appellant.

HELD: dismissing the appeal: (1) The Master had not erred in assessing the financial contributions and capital losses; (2) The finding that the $110,000 contribution was a loan was correct.

JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Master Macready under the De Facto Relationships Act 1984. The de facto relationship between the parties commenced in September 1988 and continued until March 1992. In a careful judgment, the learned Master reviewed the history of the relationship, the contributions, financial and non-financial, made by the parties, and the situation in which they found themselves financially when the relationship came to an end.

In substance, the Master's primary findings of fact have not been challenged.
At the commencement of the relationship the respondent had available to her cash resources of some $116,000, representing the financial benefits of her former marriage. She had no liabilities other than for current expenses and was in receipt of a salary of some $11,000 per annum from part-time work as a bookkeeper.

At the commencement of the relationship, the appellant was the owner of a substantial house at Bayview, then valued at $1.7 million, and freehold land at Frenchs Forest held through a family company, on which a nursery business was being conducted by tenants. He had obligations to a former wife, to pay her some $700,000 as a settlement of property following the failure of that marriage, and commercial obligations in relation to the property at Frenchs
Forest.

The parties, at a family conference in which they and the children of their respective marriages participated, decided that they would attempt to retain the Bayview house. They made a further decision to acquire a business known as
The Strand Hatters, as a source of income for the support of the combined de facto family.

At the end of the relationship, the respondent had no assets at all, apart from her rights against the appellant, and some modest amounts in a bank, offset by an obligation of much the same amount to Bankcard. The appellant retained his interest in The Strand Hatters business, although the Master found that it had no value, and the home at Bayview which, as a result of the property recession, was worth only $1.2 million, less than the overdraft due to Westpac, secured on that property, of $1.35 million. The appellant submitted that the respondent should bear a proper share of those losses.

The Master found that the non-financial contributions made by the partners to each other and to the other's children were equal. Following the joint family decision to attempt to retain the Bayview house, the respondent made available to the appellant $100,000 which was used as an initial payment to his former wife, and later, a sum of $10,210.66, used to reduce the overdraft of the company operating The Strand Hatters business. In this way the respondent contributed all her cash resources to the relationship and to the appellant.

The Master found that the dominant purpose of both parties in relation to the provision by the respondent of the sum of $100,000 was to enable them to proceed further with their relationship, and to give the defendant funds to make an initial payment to his former wife. He said: "If there had been given to the plaintiff some interest in the property or there had been promised some particular interest in the property or the business, one might have some justification for finding a joint endeavour, which the parties were engaged upon with the penalty that the loss should fall proportionately on the parties".

However, as the Master found, the respondent had not been promised any such interest. She had not been provided with an interest, or treated as having purchased one by her contributions. In these circumstances, the Master concluded that the losses in respect of the diminution in value of the property at Bayview, and the loss in the value of the business, should be borne by the appellant. He regarded the moneys provided by the respondent to the appellant as loans.

The application before the Master was an application by the present respondent, for an adjustment of interests with respect to property. The relevant section for present purposes is <case>, which enables the Court to make such order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property as to it seems just and equitable, having regard to their financial and non-financial contributions to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of the property, and their non-financial contributions to the welfare of the other party and the de facto family, including any children from former relationships.

The Master's finding that the contributions of the relationship totalling some $110,000 made by the respondent were loans by her to the appellant, has not been shown to be wrong. There is no suggestion in the evidence, and none was made by counsel for the appellant, that these amounts were gifts made to the appellant. The Master found that the payments had not been made pursuant to any purchase or promise of an interest in either the home or the business. The conclusion that the amounts were provided by way of loan, in my judgment, was inevitable.

Having assessed the respective contributions, the Master then was called upon to make such order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property as seemed just and equitable. This conferred upon the Master a power to be exercised in accordance with a judicial discretion. This part of his decision, in my judgment, was a typical discretionary decision.

Appellate courts apply rules of restraint in reviewing discretionary decisions of trial judges. An appellate court will not exercise the discretion de novo, unless and until it has concluded that the exercise of the discretion by the trial judge has miscarried, either for error of fact or error of law.

Mr Aldridge for the appellant endeavoured to persuade the Court that the learned Master fell into error in failing to properly assess the financial contributions made by the appellant and in failing to take proper account of the capital losses suffered by the appellant during the de facto relationship.
In my judgment, neither of these errors has been established.

Undoubtedly, the appellant contributed the use of the home at Bayview to the relationship, but he did not contribute the house as such, retaining the title in his own name throughout. The appellant was likewise the sole owner or controller of the business, at least as between himself and the respondent.
One of his sons by his former marriage may have had a beneficial interest in some of the shares in the company owning the business, but these may be disregarded for present purposes.

The business was made available to the parties as a means of employment, and as a means for earning income to cover outgoings and household expenses.
However the business itself was not a contribution made to the relationship.
At the end of the relationship, as between these parties, the appellant was the sole owner of both the house and the business.

Moreover it cannot be said that the learned Master overlooked the fall in the capital values of these assets as a relevant factor for his consideration. All necessary findings of fact were made, and the Master gave reasons for disregarding the fall in the capital value of these assets in making an order for adjusting their financial interests.

In my judgment, the Master did not fall into error in deciding that the fall in the capital value of these assets should not be given dominant weight, having regard to the legal relationship between the parties in relation to these loans of $110,000.

In these circumstances I have concluded that the appellant's challenge to the exercise of the Master's discretionary judgment has wholly failed.

The remaining matter submitted on behalf of the appellant was that the
Master's discretion in relation to costs miscarried when he ordered the appellant to pay the respondent's costs of the proceedings. The appellant was ordered to pay the sum of $135,000, representing the $110,210.66 lent by the respondent, together with interest at a modest rate over the period after the failure of the de facto relationship. The interest works out at something like per cent simple per annum.

The Master had before him Calderbank offers in which the appellant indicated a willingness to pay $80,000, and the plaintiff a willingness to accept $200,000. The respondent recovered substantially in excess of the amount the defendant offered, although substantially less than the amount that she offered herself. In these circumstances no case arose for an order for indemnity costs. On the other hand no occasion arose for depriving the plaintiff of her costs.

In these circumstances I would propose that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: I agree.

POWELL JA: I also agree.

HANDLEY JA: The orders of the Court therefore will be appeal dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
