

Regina versus R H [1997] NSWSC 18 (5 February 1997) 
REGINA versus R H /97 
MONDAY 20 JANUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
CLOSED COURT 
JUDGMENT - On application for bail 
HIS HONOUR: Riad Hamze has applied for bail in respect of charges of aggravated sexual assault, assault with intent to have sexual intercourse, aggravated indecent assault, robbery in company, assault police and resist police.

The Crown case is that about 3.30pm on Saturday 21 December 1996 a 15 year old girl had a conversation with the applicant and a co-young person, Bill El
Hassan. Ultimately she went for a walk with them and they persuaded her to enter an area of bushland beside Cabramatta Creek and near to the Ron Darcy
Oval.

Both the applicant and his co-young person are solid young men aged at the time 16 and 15 respectively. The applicant turned 17 a few days after the alleged incident.

There is no need to recount the detail of the charges, but they involved the co-young person and the applicant pressing on with a sexual enterprise against her wishes. The statement of the girl indicates a sordid incident in which she certainly did not consent, according to her.

The applicant, when spoken to by the police the following day, ran away because, he says, the police conveyed to him that they were going to charge him, and that he would not obtain bail.

The Crown case appears to be one of some strength. The applicant was aware that the police were wishing to apprehend him. He was anxious not to spend a period of time in custody, and the material suggests that he took very positive steps to avoid them, taking flight on a couple of occasions.

He was ultimately arrested on 30 December after a police chase. The police claimed that there was a struggle and that firm measures had to be taken to apprehend the applicant. He was ultimately subdued and brought to the police station, where the police claim there was a further outburst.

The applicant was born in Australia and his father has told me that, although they have family in Lebanon, the applicant does not have a passport and has not been to Lebanon. The father conceded that he told the police that his son had gone to Lebanon. He said that this was a facetious remark made by him when he was very angry about the police conduct at his home and towards his son.

Similarly, he says he was very angry when he made remarks at the police station because he believed from what he had been told by others that the police had assaulted his son.

The applicant does have a history. He was placed on probation about 20 March in relation to an attempt to steal a motor vehicle and malicious damage.
There are other charges outstanding arising from an incident on 8 December involving escape from lawful custody, resist police, offensive language and hinder police. Bail was granted in respect of those matters.

There are some further outstanding charges of malicious damage and malicious wounding, but Mr Dhanji for the applicant has explained to me that prosecution witnesses have not appeared at earlier hearings appointed to deal with those matters, and he submits that I should not attach weight to those matters, and
I think, based on what he told me as to the prosecution having to go over for the non-attendance of witnesses, that he is correct in that submission.

The applicant is a member of a large family. His father has given evidence before me. The applicant lives at home with his parents and his brothers and I think one sister. He left school some three years ago, and since then has obtained work of a labouring kind from time to time.

Mr Dhanji pointed out to me that the applicant had always attended at court when a defendant, and that the only occasion when he had not appeared was when he was a witness. The applicant claimed that he did not know about how to attend the Court as a witness. Apparently it was some distance away.

Evidence has also been placed before me in the form of a letter from MSA Smash
Repairs, indicating that employment will probably be available from that organisation.

The evidence of flight in this case is strong, and there is also significant evidence of avoiding the police. What has come across is, from the material, is that the applicant is somewhat headstrong.

The applicant's father has offered to deposit $5,000 in cash and to attend to his son's welfare.

The solicitor for the applicant submitted that this was not a case where the applicant was likely to be able to interfere with Crown witnesses, as it seems that the girl probably lives on the Central Coast, although the evidence is not entirely clear on this point.

In my opinion a very significant factor is that the committal proceedings are to commence on 5 February 1997. In my view, having regard to the early committal, the gravity of the offences, the evidence as to flight and avoiding the police, and the outstanding matters, this is a case where bail must be refused.
 * * * 
