

Kahler and Anor versus Sabaco P/L [1997] NSWSC 19 (6 February 1997) 
Kahler & Anor versus Sabaco Pty Limited /96 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 21 September 1995, Mr Reimer LCM entered judgment for Sabaco Pty Limited (the defendant in these proceedings) against Jacqueline Kahler and Kevin William Kahler, trading as International Pools & Spas (the plaintiffs in these proceedings) in the sum of $4,135.07 (which includes an interest component in the sum of $865.07).

The Learned Magistrate was asked to state a case. It was signed on 19 March
Exhibit A contains the material placed before the Learned Magistrate, his written reasons and the Stated Case.

On 2 April 1996, the plaintiffs commenced these proceedings by the filing of a
Summons. The Summons brings an appeal from the decision of the Learned
Magistrate.

The Stated Case sets out the Determination, Facts, Grounds of Determination,
Appellants' Contentions and Respondent's Contention. I do not propose to repeat all of that material in this judgment. I shall make express reference to some of the relevant matters.

Mr Findlay conducted business as an earth moving and excavation contractor under the name of Sabaco Pty Limited.

The plaintiffs were registered under the Business Names Act, 1962 (the
Act) as the proprietors and the persons carrying on the business of sales of fibreglass swimming pools and spas under the business name "International
Pools & Spas". I should add that the material provided by the Business
Names Extract shows that no corporation was involved in the carrying on of the business. The plaintiffs were the sole shareholders and directors of at least three companies (one of these being International Pools Pty Limited).

A consensus for the carrying out of certain excavation work by the defendant at a property in Bulahdelah was reached between Mr Findlay and Mr David
MacDonald. Mr MacDonald was at the time a branch manager for International
Pools & Spas. International Pools Pty Limited had contracted to supply and install a swimming pool for the owner of the property (Mr Adams).

Subsequently, the excavation work was performed and an account for payment was rendered to International Pools & Spas. Part payment of the account was made in July 1993 (in the sum of $150) by cheque drawn on the account entitled "International Pools & Spas".

The Stated Case records the following:- "3. GROUNDS OF DETERMINATION 
The Plaintiff's contract was with the unincorporated body `International
Pools & Spas'.

The evidence is that at no time was the Plaintiff made aware that there was one or more corporations involved, and all indications were that he was dealing with an unincorporated body.

The Defendants are registered as the proprietors of the business name of `International Pools & Spas'.

The Defendants are the only shareholders and sole directors of the corporate structures which the Defendants promote as being the entities carrying on the business with which the Plaintiff dealt.

Accordingly, the principles laid down in Press versus Mathers <case>; [(1927) VLR 326]; Re Johnson and Mann; Ex parte Greendale Engineering and
Cables Pty Ltd [(1967) 11 FLR 335]; and Aikman v Brown [(1973) 1 ACTR 121] do not apply as none of them are factually aligned with this case, in that they all related to a situation in which the third party was, in essence, a separate third party.

Alternatively, on the evidence, the Defendants were, in a real sense, carrying on such business under the business name `International Pools &
Spas' at all relevant times.

As more fully set out in written Reasons of 21/9/95.
 . APPELLANTS' CONTENTIONS: 
I misdirected myself in that I failed to recognise the distinction at law between a company on the one hand and its officers, shareholders and employees on the other.

I failed to apply, or erroneously applied, the principles laid down in
Press versus Mathers <case>; [(1927) VLR 326]; Re: Johnson and Mann; Ex parte Greendale Engineering and
Cables Pty Ltd [(1967) 11 FLR 335]; and Aikman v Brown [(1973) 1 ACTR 121.] 
There was no evidence before me to support the finding that the Defendants were, in a real sense, carrying on business under the business name `International Pools & Spas' at all relevant times.
 . RESPONDENT'S CONTENTION: 
That there was ample evidence upon which the Magistrate could make the findings of fact indicated in his Judgment.

There was evidence upon which the Magistrate could conclude, as he did conclude, that the defendants were in a real sense carrying on business under the business name `International Pools & Spas' at all relevant times.

The defendants themselves declared to the world at large that they were carrying on business under the business name `International Pools & Spas'.

The registration of the business name `International Pools & Spas' together with the absence of any ACN Number from the Branch Manager's business card and the cheque which was in evidence together with the Magistrate's finding that `Kevin Kahler was conducting the business of `International Pools & Spas' in the sense of making all commercial decisions and exercising control' is sufficient evidence to entitle the Magistrate to come to the conclusion which he drew.

Having regard to the findings of facts set out above the Magistrate was not called upon to draw the distinction at law between a Company on the one hand and its officers, shareholders and employees on the other.

The Magistrate's determination was not erroneous in point of law." 
At the commencement of the hearing, Counsel for the plaintiffs handed up written submissions. This material was supplemented by oral submissions.

The plaintiffs do not dispute that the defendant entered into a contract with an entity carrying on business under the registered business name "International Pools & Spas". They dispute that they carried on business under that name. It is asserted that, by an oral arrangement, the plaintiffs licensed to various companies the right to use the registered business name.
It is further said that, for the purposes of the contract made by the defendant, the name was being used by International Pools Pty Limited and that it was the party liable under the contract.

In the submissions, reference was made to aspects of the evidence which was said to support these contentions. It is not necessary to repeat that material in this judgment.

Perhaps in passing, I should mention one matter. It may be that the allegations made by the plaintiffs involve activities prohibited by the Act and which constitute offences thereunder. I put these matters aside as they do not appear to have been in issue before the Learned Magistrate.

The authorities make it clear that the remedy of case stated provides a limited avenue of appeal. The Court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law and only such questions of law as are submitted to it (Allen v Kerr & Anor [(1995) Aust Torts Reports 81-354] and The Australian Gas Light Company versus The Valuer-General <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 126).]
The matter of what is a question of law (as opposed to a question of fact) was considered in Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR ]
at 155-156. The facts stated are to be taken as the ultimate facts for whatever purpose the case is stated (Press at p 330).
 
On behalf of the plaintiffs, it is said that errors have been made by the
Learned Magistrate. There has been criticism of his reasoning. Whether or not there be any substance in these submissions, the position remains that the plaintiffs bear the onus of showing error of law on his part. In my view, that onus has not been discharged.

The Grounds of Determination (and the written reasons) reveal two matters which were determinative. They are expressed to be "two distinct but closely related matters".

The second of the two matters purports to be a finding based on the evidence which related to the plaintiffs and the carrying on of the business under the name of "International Pools & Spas". The plaintiffs say that there was no evidence to support that finding. It is accepted by the plaintiffs that the appeal must fail if their challenge on this matter is not successful.

After having regard to the relevant material, I have reached the view that the plaintiffs have not satisfied me that this was a case where there was no evidence before the Learned Magistrate which supported his finding. In my view, there was evidence before him and he made a finding which was open to him on the evidence. A decision that the plaintiffs were liable in contract was open to him on the evidence.

Whilst these conclusions (or any of them) are sufficient to dispose of this appeal, it may be helpful if I make some further observations.

The Learned Magistrate had received submissions based on certain decided cases (including Aikman). He said that he was not persuaded by those "enthusiastically argued submissions". He decided the dispute on the facts and circumstances of the particular case that came before him.

During this hearing, it was said on behalf of the plaintiffs that the cases established a principle (viz, that the entries on the register provided prima facie evidence that was open to rebuttal). It was further said that there was overwhelming evidence before the Learned Magistrate that rebutted the prima facie position.

The cited cases themselves each turned on their own particular facts and circumstances. If any "principle" (which is relevant for present purposes) is to be extracted from those cases, it is little more than that the Act itself does not disclose an intention to impose liability for transactions carried out under a business name upon the persons registered as carrying on business under that name in cases where no estoppel arises.

Clearly, the material which is provided for the purposes of registration may provide relevant evidence in, inter alia, cases where the cause of action is founded on contract. It is material to be assessed in the context of any other evidence placed before the Court by the parties.

I consider that the plaintiffs have failed to demonstrate error of law on the part of the Learned Magistrate. I do not consider that his decision should be disturbed. I affirm the Determination in respect of which the case was stated.
I dismiss the Summons. The plaintiffs are to pay the defendant's costs.
 * * * 
