

Regina versus Graham Matter No Cca 60565/96 [1997] NSWSC 362 (2 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Regina versus Phillip John Graham /96 September 1997 
Newman J, Levine J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
Nature of Jurisdiction: Appeal against conviction from District Court Twigg
DCJ) 
File No: 60565/96 
Delivered: 2 September 1997 
Hearing Date: 1 August 1997 
Parties: REGINA versus Phillip John GRAHAM 
Judgment of: NEWMAN, LEVINE & BARR JJ 
Counsel: 
Appellant- M A GREEN Q.C.

Respondent- W G DAWE Q.C.

Solicitors: 
Appellant- T A MURPHY 
Respondent- S E O'CONNOR 
Result: Appeal dismissed. 
Catchwords: Criminal law & procedure: unsafe and unsatisfactory - sexual offences - admissibility of ERISP - admissibility of "complaint" - spontaneity - [Evidence Act, 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [sections 55](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) & [66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) 
No. of pages: 33 
REGINA versus Phillip John GRAHAM 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of Justice Levine and I agree with both the reasons he gives and the orders he proposes. 
REGINA versus Phillip John GRAHAM 
LEVINE J: The applicant was charged with 4 counts under <case>(1A) of the [Crimes Act, 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), indecent assault by a person in authority, 3 counts under [s 66A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s66a.html), sexual intercourse with a person under the age of 10 years, and one count under [s 66B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s66b.html), attempted sexual intercourse with a person under 10 years of age. 
The applicant was found guilty of 3 counts of indecent assault (by a person in authority <case>(1A)) and [3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s3.html) counts of sexual intercourse with a person under the age of 10 years [(s
A).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s66a.html) 
In respect of the counts under [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s66a.html) the applicant was sentenced to a minimum term of 2 years penal servitude to commence 6 September 1996 and a 2 year additional term, and in respect of the counts under <case>(1A) (indecent assault by a person in authority) a concurrent sentence of 12 months imprisonment was imposed.

The grounds of appeal encompass; first, that the verdicts of guilty on the several counts are unsafe and unsatisfactory; secondly, the learned judge erred in admitting into evidence evidence of complaint made by the victim to one Nadine Parry or, in the alternative, his Honour's directions to the jury on the manner of complaint were inadequate, thirdly, the jury should not have been asked to resolve the question "why should the complainant lie"; fourthly, the trial judge's directions to the jury that they should scrutinise carefully the evidence of the complainant were inadequate; finally, there was discrete ground relating to the admissibility of the ERISP.

For the purposes of the hearing of the appeal, the applicant is prepared to accept the statement of facts set out in the Crown submissions: 
Kristie Lee Morley was born on 2 April 1978, the appellant being her natural father. Kristie's parents separated when she was about three and a half years of age. Early in 1987 Kristie experienced problems with her mother and went to live with her father. She commenced school at Carrington Public School as a result of this move on 9 March, 1987 and she returned to live with her mother in July, 1988.

In about June 1987, whilst living with her father, Kristie was called to his bedroom one morning. The appellant was naked in the bed. He showed her a book (a magazine) with naked people in it and, in particular, a picture of a female performing oral sex on a male. The appellant said that he wanted her to do what the lady was doing in the picture. Kristie replied, "that's gross". The appellant then pulled the sheets off himself and placed Kristie's hand on his penis and moved her hand up and down on his penis (Count 1). This continued for ten to fifteen minutes until the appellant ejaculated. The appellant wiped himself with a towel which had a Canterbury Bankstown Bulldogs motif upon it.

The appellant again asked Kristie to do what the lady was doing to the man in the magazine. He then pushed her head onto his penis, placing his penis in her mouth (Count 2). The appellant told her what happened in the room was "between us" and that it was all right to do what they were doing because "he's her father and she's his daughter".

A few days after this incident Kristie was asleep in her bed. She awoke to find the appellant with his head between her legs, he was licking her vagina with his tongue (Count 3). Kristie told him that she did not want him to do this and he told her to be quiet; he eventually stopped and left the room.
Before he left, he told her not to tell anyone what had happened.

About a week later Kristie was alone at home with the appellant and she was getting ready for school. The appellant called her to his bedroom; again he was naked in the bed. The appellant took hold of Kristie's hand and placed it on his penis, moving it up and down until he ejaculated (Count 4). Kristie then went to school.

A week or two later Kristie was in bed at night when she heard her father come home. He entered her bedroom and pulled down her underpants. Kristie tried to pull her pants back up and the appellant grabbed her hands and held them near her stomach. He then placed his head between her legs and licked her vaginal area (Count 5). After about ten or fifteen minutes the appellant stopped and left the room.

Shortly afterwards Kristie went to the movies with her father. They then went to a Hotel. Later, she left there with Kerrie, the appellant's girlfriend, and returned home. Kristie was in bed when she heard the appellant come home. The appellant asked her if she would like some pizza. Kristie got up and ate some pizza. She then returned to her bed. Shortly afterwards, the appellant entered the room and exposed his penis. He pulled Kristie towards him, forcing her head towards his penis. He asked her to "do what the lady does in the book".
The appellant forced her head towards his penis and rubbed his penis around her lips of her mouth (Count 7). Kristie told him to stop. The appellant told her not to tell anyone and left the room.

About a week later the appellant was in Kristie's room talking to her about punishment for her room being untidy. The appellant pulled down his pants down and placed her hand on his penis and forced her to masturbate him (Count 8).
The appellant ejaculated and then left the room. The appellant told her not to tell anyone.

Kristie met Nadine Parry in early 1994 and shared a flat with her from March until July, 1994. One night, when they were discussing boyfriends, Kristie told Nadine, "when she was a little girl, in the middle of the night she'd wake up with her father's head between her legs". Kristie also told her "he'd just make me lay there while he licked by fanny, and then he'd make me suck him".

Kristie later spoke to her mother and in August, 1994 she spoke to the police.

On 20 October, 1994 the police spoke to the appellant. He denied the allegations in an electronically recorded interview.

The appellants case may be summarised as follows: 
The appellant gave sworn evidence in which he denied Kristie's allegations.
The appellant could not explain why Kristie had made the allegations except that she did show signs of jealousy when his daughter, Sarah, was born in
March 1987.

It was the appellant's case that there was no opportunity for him to have perpetrated the alleged assaults upon Kristie. He gave evidence that the house in which he lived with Kristie in 1987 was small and that there was very little privacy. Numerous floor boards in the house creaked when trodden upon.
There was also evidence that the bed in which Kristie slept was old and its rusty springs were noisy.

Sarah was a colicky baby and Kerrie, the appellant's wife and Sarah's mother, was up at all times of the night to attend to her during the time that Kristie lived with them. In particular, Sarah's clothes were kept in Kristie's bedroom so Kerrie was often in Kristie's room at night to obtain clean clothes.

Both the appellant and Kerrie gave evidence that Kristie was never left alone at home with the appellant.

It was the appellant's case that Kristie could not be relied upon because the incident she alleged took place after a trip to the movies took place in 1985 and not in 1987. The appellant produced a photocopy of a page of a 1985 newspaper showing that the Neverending Story was showing at that time (Exhibit 3). Victor and Vicky McPherson also gave evidence that they recalled the outing took place in 1985.

The appellant also alleged that Kristie's evidence was not reliable because she was mistaken about the appellant using "Canterbury / Bankstown Bulldogs" towel to wipe himself after he ejaculated. He said that this towel was his prized possession and was always kept draped over a chair in the lounge room.
Kerrie gave evidence that the towel was kept in the lounge room and never in the bedroom; she said that it was not used as a towel and that she had difficulty getting the appellant's permission to wash the towel.

A number of witnesses gave evidence that Kristie appeared fond of her father and was affectionate towards him throughout and after the period that she lived with him.

There was also evidence that Kristie returned to live with her mother in July at the instigation of the appellant and that Kristie continued to visit him thereafter for celebrations and other occasions.

The first ground of appeal is that the verdicts of guilty are unsafe and unsatisfactory. It is argued that on the evidence of the complainant at the trial all the offences occurred in June and possibly July of 1987. In cross- examination it is clear the complainant had told police that the last "incident" happened shortly before she moved back to her mother's home which did not occur until July 1988: this, it was argued, was inconsistent with the chronology that she had given the police in the rest of her statement. At the time the complainant was 9 years of age: when she gave evidence at the trial she had turned 18.

She made no complaint about sexual interference until June 1994, almost 7 years after the incidents and then in the "course of a casual conversation" with a friend with whom she was residing. She had ample opportunity, it is argued, to complain to her mother and also to her grandparents to whom she agreed that she was "pretty close".

In his sworn evidence the appellant had told the trial court that the complainant was always affectionate towards him and that after she left his home the relationship was the same and she used to visit regularly. Witnesses called on behalf of the appellant, his ex-wife, step-father and neighbour, all testified to the close relationship between father and daughter both before and after the time of the alleged incidents. The appellant's ex-wife said that the complainant had idolised her father.

From the beginning the appellant stated his innocence. When the police went to his home and put the allegation of sexually assaulting his daughter to him he replied immediately, "What? No way. I never touched her".

In an ERISP he maintained his denials in respect of all allegations put to him. At trial in answer to the Crown Prosecutor he said "no, I have no consciousness of guilt at all. I did not molest my daughter. It breaks my heart it is gut wrenching me even sitting here talking about it. I have never molested my daughter in any way, shape or form".

The complainant gave no evidence in relation to the sixth count in the indictment which alleged between 9 March 1987 and 1 July 1988 an assault with an act of indecency upon her then being under the age of 16 years and under his authority. In respect of this count his Honour directed a verdict of acquittal.

On the seventh count which related to an attempt to have sexual intercourse between 9 March 1987 and 1 July 1988 it is contended that the evidence could be described as "so unsatisfactory" that the Crown Prosecutor submitted to the jury that the Crown had not established its case. This appears to have been acknowledged during the course of summing up. The complainant had been very specific about this matter saying that it had occurred after an outing to the movies with her father, his friend and his friend's daughter. After the movie, The Never Ending Story they had proceeded to the Seven Seas Hotel in
Carrington; she had been there collected by the appellant's wife and the other child's mother both angry that the children had been taken to the hotel and left outside. Later when the appellant had returned home there had been an altercation between him and his wife and she had left the home. It was then that the alleged incident occurred. The appellant was able to establish through his witnesses that the movie was shown in Newcastle not in 1987 but in and thus was able to demonstrate "his innocence". It is contended more particularly, that discrepancy being shown, its impact was so serious on the reliability of the complainant not merely in relation to the allegation but generally with regard to her entire account.

The Record of Interview between the appellant and the police ought never to have been admitted into evidence, it is submitted. It contains denials to each and every allegation put to him. What, it is submitted, it involved was merely setting out for the jury the entire statement of the complainant in relation to all allegations including those on which the appellant was acquitted.

It was argued that as both part of the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground and in relation, more discretely, to the wrongful admission of the Record of
Interview that it was not "relevant" in terms of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) in that it could not rationally affect (directly or indirectly), if it were accepted, the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue in the proceeding.

Certainly from his Honour's reasons for admitting the Record of Interview it appears he did so to "allow the accused the earliest opportunity to put his version" and further to show that the police had not been unfair or inaccurate in the questioning of the appellant. Those matters however, it was contended, were never in issue at trial nor had counsel for the appellant sought to make them so. It is further submitted that the Record of Interview was strictly hearsay and as such it was inadmissible unless it could be bought within one of the exceptions to the rule in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s59.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). It was certainly not admitted for a "non-hearsay purpose" [(s )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s60.html) nor could it have been admitted as first-hand hearsay as it was in no way a "representation of an asserted fact" [(s ).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) 
It is further contended that the ERISP contained matters which are prejudicial to the appellant and which are in no way probative of any issue at trial and thus his Honour should have exercised his discretion under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) to exclude it.

The Record of Interview certainly prior to the enactment of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) arguably would have been admissible on the bases referred to in Regina versus Familic [(1994) 75 A Crim R 229] at .

What the Record of Interview did contain was a series of questions and answers in relation to magazines alleged to have been produced by the appellant from under his bed at the time of the first incident. The relevant part of the
Record of Interview is as follows: "Q. Right, OK. Kristie has told us that about two months after her birthday, which was her ninth birthday, some time in June, an incident happened between you and her. She said that she was, it was in the morning around 10 o'clock.
She said that you were in bed and you asked to go and get the water bottle for you, and she came in and sat down on the bed and talked to you. Do you recall that at all? 
A. Yeah. I can recall that. I can remember Kristie coming' in many mornings.

Q. Right. OK. Kristie said that when she sat down on the bed, you had some magazines underneath the bed and you took them from under the bed and started looking through them. Do you remember that? 
A. No. I would never do that".

And the appellant was pointedly cross-examined on this response: "Q. You're with me there? 
A. Yeah.

Q. Now, this question is out, right, the last question on the page. `Okay,
Kristie said that when she sat down on the bed you had some magazines underneath the bed and you took them from the bed and started looking through them. Do you remember that?' Your answer is, `No, I would never do that'. Is that what's recorded? 
A. Yes.

Q. Is that what you said? 
A. Yes.

Q. Now, what they have put to you there, if I'm incorrect just please tell me. They've put to you in the previous question that this is the scenario.
They put this to you. That you called her in to get the - to bring the water bottle, correct? 
A. Yes.

Q. You concede that that happened? 
A. Yes.

Q. On occasions? 
A Yes.

Q. In the next question they put to you that you had some magazines underneath the bed and you took them from the bed and started looking through them, correct? 
A. That's what they said-- 
Q. Yes, that's what they said to you? 
A. `Do you remember that?' And I said - 
Q. And you said, `I would never do that'. Is that right? 
A. Yes.

Q. There is not one suggestion, sir, perhaps you will agree with me, that those magazines were in any way improper. Isn't that right? 
A. Yes.

Q. There's not one suggestion there that those magazines were Ribald magazines, is that right? 
A. Yes. (emphasis added) 
Q. Let's clear the air. Ribald magazines are pornographic magazines, aren't they? 
A. Yes.

Q. Pornographic magazines that contain explicit, erotic photographs? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Pornographic magazines that contain close-up photographs or oral sexual intercourse between men and women, correct? 
A. Yes.

Q. There's not one suggestion there in that question that the magazines you were about to show your daughter had any sexual connotation at all, is there? 
A. No, I just thought they were talking about the magazines that I had in the cupboard.

Q. And you have said, `I would never do that'? 
A. Well, I'd never show her the magazines I had in the cupboard, that's correct.

Q. But there was no suggestion about magazines in the cupboard, was there? 
A. No. Well, that `s what I thought they were implying.

Q. Sir, at this stage you had a suggestion about a water bottle, right? 
A. Yes.

Q. There's nothing improper you're suggesting or you're answering to the police about the water bottle, is that right? 
A. That's correct.

Q. When you are told about the magazines or about - the allegation is put that some magazines were shown, all of a sudden you start thinking of those
Ribald magazines that were in the cupboard. Is that what you tell this jury? 
A. Well, that's the only magazines that was in the bedroom.

Further, in relation to the Record of Interview the trial judge was specifically asked to exclude the series of questions that in effect amount to "why would the complainant make the allegations (that is, why would the complainant lie?)". The questions were as follows: "Q. Why would Kristie Morley make this allegation? 
A. I don't know. Not in my wildest belief can I understand it".

The appellant was cross-examined by the Crown Prosecutor who was permitted to portray the appellant as a man calling his daughter a "monster" and quite unable to explain to the jury "why she would make this terrible allegation".

Before returning to the more specific question of the admissibility of the
Record of Interview on the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground it is also contended that there was uncontradicted evidence that made it unlikely that the appellant could have committed these offences without detection. There was available evidence, described in submissions as "cogent" from the appellant, his ex-wife and their two next-door neighbours that there was a marked lack of privacy in the appellant's house. The appellant described the walls as thin, the floorboards as creaking and the complainant's bed as noisy. His wife was a light sleeper and certainly she was up and down during the night giving attention to the new baby who was born shortly after the arrival of the complainant at the appellant's home. The appellant's wife was adamant that there was never an occasion when the appellant and the daughter were left alone together.

In Regina versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333] at Hunt CJ at CL summarised the general principles applicable consequent upon the decision of the High Court in The Queen versus M [(1994) 181 CLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%20181%20CLR%20487 "View LawCiteRecord" ) as follows: "The nature of this Court's function in determining such an issue was recently reconsidered by the High Court in M [(1994) 181 CLR 487]; [76 A
Crim R 213](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=76%20A%20Crim%20R%20213 "View LawCiteRecord" ), and the ultimate question which must be answered by this Court was restated[1] as being whether - notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain the verdict this court thinks that, upon the whole of the evidence, it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty.

It is clear from the context in which this question was formulated in M that it is for the appellant to persuade this Court that it was not so open to the jury. In order to provide content to that inquiry, and to provide authoritative guidance in answering it, the following propositions were also stated by the High Court: 
In most cases, a (reasonable) doubt experienced by an appellate court, after making its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence, will be a doubt which a jury ought also to have experienced.

It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving such a doubt experienced by that appellate court that it may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred - that is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, the reasonable doubt experienced by the court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced.

If, from the record itself, the evidence contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the appellate court to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence.

I have added emphasis to the word "ought" used in M, because, to my mind, it emphasises the sense of obligation which was made clear in the test as it was originally stated, for example, in Whitehorn <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 657] at 687: 9A Crim R 107 at 128 and in Chamberlain (No 2) <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 521] at 534, and as it was also often stated (but substituting the word "must" for "ought", apparently interchangeably), for example, in Whitehorn at 688; 129, in Chamberlain at 534 and in Morris <case>; [(1987) 163 CLR 454] at 461; <case>; [28
A Crim R 48](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=28%20A%20Crim%20R%2048 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 53 or (substituting the phrase "bound to" for "must"), for example, in
Chidiac <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 432] at 451; <case>; [52 A Crim R 119] at 131. It is also important to emphasise that the High
Court in M has not stated that the mere existence of discrepancies or inconsistencies in the evidence is sufficient to lead to the verdict being held to be unsafe and unsatisfactory. If they exists, they must be of such a nature as to persuade this Court that there is a `significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted'".

More recently in Regina versus Kurtic [(1996) 85 A Crim R 57] the Chief Judge at Common Law at 60 said: "Where the appeal against conviction pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s5.html) is from a trial by a judge sitting alone pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal
Act, the position is exactly the same. This court has no power to rehear the issues at trial or to make any finding which could have been made in the court of trial. In some of such appeals in which this issue has arisen, the stated attitude of the court has been complicated by the fact that it has been considering a ground of appeal that the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory.
In such a case, it is the duty of this Court - whether the appeal is from a jury or a judge alone trial - to make its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence, in order to see whether the jury (or judge trying the case alone) ought to have a reasonable doubt or whether this Court itself experiences such a doubt or is persuaded that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. It has nevertheless been accepted by this Court that an appeal against conviction from a trial by a judge alone pursuant t <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act, is not an appeal by way of rehearing. In the statutory context to which I have referred this must be so. As the finding of a judge in such a trial is to be given the same effect as a verdict of a jury for all purposes, error may be demonstrated if there is no evidence to support a particular finding, or if the evidence is all one way, or if the judge has misdirected himself or herself leading to a miscarriage of justice (emphasis added)".

It is argued in the context of the principles that have evolved since the decision in Regina versus M that whilst in this case there were questions of the complainant's hesitancy, her lack of ability to remember dates properly, difficulties with the chronology, she had a mental block, there were non- contentious arrangements made for her during the course of her evidence to confer with counsel, she was insecure, the jury's advantage could then displace any doubt that the appellate court might have in relation to such matters but, it was submitted, if the appellate court is able to come to a position of doubt outside of such matters, by reason, for example, of the incontrovertible fact of the lengthy delay in the making of a complaint and the nature of the complaint, then the appellant is entitled to a finding that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory and be acquitted.

Again in the context of "unsafe and unsatisfactory" and particularly the question of delay in the making of complaint, the complainant did give explanations on several occasions as to why she never complained about her father's conduct with her until she told her best friend during a conversation which could be expected to bring the incidents to her mind and cause her to mention them to a peer. She was frightened to tell her mother and other people, for many reasons not the least of which were her feelings that she had done something wrong herself and that her account would not be accepted.
These, it is contended by the Crown, are jury matters. Further, the acquittal on the seventh count was consistent with the jury giving proper consideration to all the matters that had been thoroughly ventilated before them both as to delay, reasons therefor, poor memory problems in relation to chronology and they had the benefit of observing in terms of the demeanour of both the complainant and the appellant.

In the Record of Interview there were some inconsistencies on the part of the appellant in relation to the circumstances of the complainant and her friend being picked up by the appellant's then wife from the hotel after the pictures incident and it is clear by reason of the acquittal that the jury was cognisant of that conflict which the appellant explained in his evidence on oath and there is nothing remarkable, in the end, by reason of the acquittal taking into account all those factors and the convictions in fact returned.
Insofar as it was submitted by the Crown that there was no evidence showing or capable of establishing that the film was not shown in 1987 that easily can be dismissed: if the appellant having made a case that so impugned the complainant's chronology it would have been open to the Crown to take appropriate forensic steps in regard thereto.

The appellant presented a case on this particular count, attacked the chronology, and was acquitted.

For myself, having considered the relevant principles applicable to an "unsafe and unsatisfactory" ground of appeal, I am not persuaded that it has been made out (bearing in mind the question that arises as to the admissibility of the Record of Interview, the "why would she lie" point and the admissibility of the evidence as to complaint).

Having read the evidence and viewed the video tape of the ERISP, nothing in that material persuades me to have a doubt and that thus the jury ought to have had a doubt in relation to the counts upon which the appellant was convicted and I say that taking into account Mr Green's particular submission as to matters outside of, as-it-were, those areas affecting the credibility of the complainant in relation to, for example, the layout and particular characteristics of the residence in which the events are said to have taken place. These are factual matters for jury, nothing upon my reading of the evidence in relation to them creates any doubt in my mind going to the principal matters to be proved.

The complainant gave her evidence some years after the events on her oath with all the attendant difficulties and characteristics of a young woman in such circumstances. The appellant gave his denials on oath, it was made clear to the jury from the oral evidence of the police officers that his denials were uttered from the moment the first suggestion of misconduct was made to him.
The appellant gave no evidence in relation to one charge and her account in relation to another (the movies incident) was such that the jury properly found and, within the context of unsafe and unsatisfactory consistently found, that the Crown had failed to prove its case.

This ground of appeal to my mind has not been made out.

As to the admissibility of the Record of Interview: it is certainly an interesting question as to whether or not the mere putting of an allegation and a clear denial is "relevant" in terms of <case>. Whether or not an accused person committed the actual offence is, of course, the ultimate fact in issue to be determined as having been proved, beyond reasonable doubt. I am of the view that the width of <case> is such as to make "relevant" an exchange between the police and the accused persons even if they constitute denials and that the general principles referred to in Familic are still of general application.

Insofar as it was argued that the component of the Record of Interview that constitutes statements by police as to what the complainant had said were not admissible for "non-hearsay purposes" (s 60), I am in agreement with that proposition. I am, however, in doubt about the proposition that the material could not have been admitted as first-hand hearsay under <case>. I see no present reason to resolve this interesting dilemma because I am of the view that, in the end, his Honour in fact erred in the exercise of his discretion in admitting the document, that is, the ERISP. Having said that however, I am not persuaded that this error amounted to a miscarriage of justice. The ERISP did contain irrelevant material in relation to what I will simply describe as sex education matters; it did contain relevant material in relation to the magazines; it did contain the contentious questions as to seeking an explanation from the appellant as to why it was that his daughter was making the allegations. The probative value of the ERISP as a whole, in my view, fairly could be held to have been outweighed by the introduction of prejudicial and irrelevant material. However, I am of the view that no miscarriage of justice occurred fundamentally by reason of the appellant having, in any event, to deal with the question of the magazines, the appellant having always had had (give the oral evidence of the police officers), the opportunity to deny and in fact, having denied the allegations and even taking into account what may well have been the adverse effect of the cross-examination on the Record of Interview by the Crown Prosecutor to which
I have referred above.

Objection was taken at the trial as to the admissibility of evidence of complaint made to Nadine Parry. The objection was taken on the basis that the complaint was not made at the first reasonable opportunity and did not have the element of spontaneity about it. It appears from his Honour's reasons that his Honour was relying upon the decision of the Chief Judge at Common Law in the Queen versus JAH (unreported, 12 October 1990).

It is conceded by the Crown that the evidence of Nadine Parry was not admissible of evidence of "complaint" as that term was understood before the commencement of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

The delay in complaint was almost seven years and as has been stated, it is the appellant's position that the complainant had ample opportunity to complain shortly after the last alleged incident on her account because she moved out of the appellant's home and back with her mother, and she had agreed she was able to talk to her mother.

The complaint only arose according to Ms Parry's evidence during a casual conversation she and the complainant were having in relation to Nadine Parry's fiances' brother who, it appears, had some attraction for the complainant.
Although it cannot be argued that the complaint was "induced" or "led" in the strict sense, it is nevertheless submitted that no complaint would have been made had not that conversation taken place. It is therefore submitted that the evidence of complaint is this case lacked the "spontaneity" required by the authorities.

I do not agree with this proposition. It is certainly not a "spontaneous" complaint in terms of the old "hue and cry". As however was held in
JAH a complaint is made spontaneously where it is not assisted or lead in any way by suggestions as to what should be said. This is not a case where the complaint was made after questions which suggested to the victim a particular story which might not otherwise have been told; the spontaneity of the complaint need not be measured in terms of the "time" in my view. It is the nature of the utterance that constitutes what is said to be the complaint and the circumstances giving rise to it that affect whether or not the complaint was "spontaneous". From the evidence of the complainant and Nadine
Parry it is clear that a general conversation was taking place and that merely during the course of it circumstances arose that permitted the complainant to state what had happened to her some years before. I am of the view that in the conversational context in which the statements were made by the complainant they had the requisite "spontaneity" even though the conversation giving rise to that spontaneity took place some years later.

It is clear that his Honour erred in failing to apply [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) of the recent legislation and it is argued for the appellant that the requirement in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) that the facts are "fresh in the memory of the person who made the representation" was a powerful argument against the admission of complaint evidence in this case.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) permits evidence of out-of-court statements as "first-hand hearsay" and directly therefore, as evidence of the truth of what was said subject to [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html), [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) discretions to exclude or limitations upon its use, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) (see Queen versus Geoffrey Arthur Hall (CCA, unreported 28 February 1997). In
Hall the phrase "fresh in the memory" used in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) was discussed by the Chief Judge at Common Law at pages 6 and following, it being clear in my respectful view from what his Honour there said that the test should be a flexible one. His Honour emphasised that the test is different to that which was applied at common law in relation to evidence of complaint.

His Honour discussed the matters of research referred to by Mr Odgers in his textbook on the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) referring to the proposition that "the rate at which memory is lost varies according to the nature of what it is that is sought to be remembered. A memory of a single event is unlikely to become unreliable after 24 hours if it took place in circumstances which impressed it into the witness' memory". Shortly stated, common sense would seem to indicate that the notion of "freshness" particularly in this area of the law is not anchored to nor determined by simply notions of the "lapse of time". It is concerned with, in my opinion, the "quality" of the memory. A person might never forget the details of an event many years previously because it took place in circumstances which impressed it into the witness' memory. In the instant appeal there is nothing in the evidence of the complainant, in my view, other than the natural difficulty given her age, in remembering with precision matters of chronology, that derogates from the "impression" she said the events have made upon her, the memory of which came to her during the conversation with Ms Parry.

I am of the view that no miscarriage occurred by reason of the evidence having been admitted and that this ground of appeal fails.

It is argued that in the alternative the judge's directions to the jury on complaint were inadequate. His Honour directed the jury on the issue of delay in complaint in terms of "the credibility of the complainant" and as "strengthening the credit of the complainant". His Honour `s directions to the jury were limited to the matter of complaint going to the credibility of the complainant which in all the circumstances is a subject matter of which the appellant cannot take issue. His Honour did not use the word "delay" in his summing up but said to the jury "the defence, in asking you to examine how you can use it (the evidence of complaint) as put by the prosecution, to strengthen the credit of the complainant, says look at the time difference between the alleged offence and when she complains". His Honour then proceeds to refer to the evidence of explanations for not complaining and states, "but remember the evidence of complaint is not admitted to prove the facts deposed to, regarding the complaint, but only do they come before you to be considered as strengthening the credit of the complainant".

These directions which essentially were inadequate and incorrect however cannot be said to have operated adversely to the interests of the appellant, the more so in the absence of any directions by his Honour as to the effect of [s 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) and the status of the evidence of complaint going to the truth of the subject matter of the complaint.

It wasn't until the conclusion of his Honour's summing up to the jury that the
Crown Prosecutor drew his Honour's attention to <case> which requires the trial judge to warn the jury that the absence of complaint or the delay in making of a complaint "does not necessarily indicate that the allegations are false" and to inform the jury that there may be good reasons why "complaint" was not made or was delayed. His Honour to an extent had traversed the issues of delay though he did not use the word itself and the defence case in regard to it but, as I have said, limited to the issue of credibility.

The exchange and subsequent direction to the jury were in the following: "Crown Prosecutor: With respect your Honour, in my submission, section 405B, although your Honour did deal with complaint, it requires you tell the jury that a delay in complaining does not necessarily indicate that the allegation that the offence was committed was false and I rely on the section.

His Honour: Well, that's true, do you agree Mr Turnbull? 
Turnbull: Yes, I do your Honour.

His Honour: I did not say it in so many words. I sought to put the elements of it that the Prosecution relies upon, and then seek to highlight what the defence says, as it were, on the other side, in telling you how you would look upon that complaint as strengthening or not, the credit of the complaint. What the prosecutor just said is correct law, and you will take notice of it in those terms".

It is submitted that the delay here was objectively substantial (this cannot be gainsaid). What is put is that delays of that order require a trial judge to give "the jury a direction which (is) meaningful and which (is) adequate to enable the jury to make a responsible evaluation of the matter" (see
Crofts versus The Queen <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 917] at 927-930).

I am persuaded that there is some merit in the submission: it was open to his
Honour more specifically and clearly to imprint his authority upon directions to the jury as to the objective length of the delay in the making of the complaint and how it would have affected and was available to affect their consideration of the evidence as establishing the truth of its contents and the credibility of the complainant. In the end however, cursorily though was the manner with which his Honour dealt with this area, its findings in terms of the application of current law and principle cannot be said, in my view, to have operated to the prejudice of the appellant and constitute a substantial miscarriage. I am not persuaded that the deficiencies in his Honour's summing up in this area were such as to deprive the appellant of the opportunity of acquittal in relation to those charges of which he was found guilty. The misdirections or want of directions with the principal focus on credibility and not the available focus on the truth of the facts as asserted in the complaint, the references by his Honour to the lapse of time and the evidence of explanation and the short, if not perfunctory, reference to <case>, viewed fairly, did not constitute a deficiency in the trial to warrant a conclusion that there was a substantial miscarriage. Arguably it could be said that proper compliance by his Honour with the relevant law and directions would themselves have had the effect which it is now contended non-compliance has had.

This ground of appeal has not been made out.

Finally, it is contended that the jury should not have been asked to resolve the question, "why should the complainant lie?" This arises inter alia from the Record of Interview and the questions referred to above, and the cross-examination by the Crown Prosecutor of the appellant to which reference has also been made.

In his summing up his Honour said: "The accused says ` I deny the allegations. I deny them emphatically. I cannot explain' he says to Bassingthwaite and to you, through the Prosecutor `why my daughter would make the allegations'".

It is argued that his Honour erred in allowing the evidence (supra) and in his direction to the jury, it being the equivalent of putting to the jury the question "why should she lie", having the effect, it is said, of reversing the onus of proof and inviting the jury to convict if the accused cannot provide an adequate explanation for the allegations or if he cannot satisfy the jury that the complainant is a liar: see Regina versus E [(1996) 39 NSWLR ]
at 464.

The particular component of the cross-examination in respect of which complaint is made must, as was submitted by the Crown, be viewed in context.
The context was not unconnected with the extract set out above concerning the magazines and the suggestions made by the appellant as to how it might have come about it that the complainant had some idea of the pictures in those magazines and the suggestion in the appellant's evidence "but she also could have learned that in later years too before she made these allegations". This led to the question: "Q. This is a person you have given in the Record of Interview, when asked on three occasions, it has staggered you, you have not been able to provide any explanation for her actions? 
A. That's correct.

Q. So what happened, can you give us any assistance, between what happened then and why she makes this terrible allegation now? 
A. No I don't. That's what devastates me so much. I can't understand why she would".

What is here contended for the Crown is that this is no more than what would, in effect, inevitably arise in a trial in which there is a denial from beginning to end by the appellant. The inevitable and human response comprised in the question "why would she say these things" (or words to that effect) cannot in every case and in all circumstances be taken to be the equivalent of "why would she lie", (there is no necessity here to remark upon the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s108.html) (b) of [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) as to which see Regina versus BD (CCA, unreported 28 July 1997 at 18 and following, per
Hunt CJ at CL - there would always, one would think, arise during the course of a trial of this kind, in fact it would be forensically necessary, for it to be put to a complainant whose every allegation is denied, that at worst she is making it up).

I do not see any component of his Honour's summing up constituting the impermissible transference of onus involved in the proposition "why would she lie". His Honour made it quite clear in his summing up that the onus of proof beyond reasonable doubt rested upon the Crown from beginning to end and nothing his Honour said in this area derogates from the significance of that proper direction. This is a case where there was a complainant making allegations and an accused who denied them absolutely. It is inevitable that the issue would arise first, that she is making them up (as I have remarked in parenthesis above) and second, why would she make them? 
Nothing in the course of the case, including the Record of Interview or the cross-examination of the appellant or the directions of the trial judge, amounted to the unacceptable and improper question "why would she lie". This ground of appeal has not been made out.

It is finally submitted that the trial judge was in error in his directions to the jury that they "should scrutinise carefully the evidence of the complainant" in that those directions were inadequate.

What his Honour said was as follows: "Nonetheless, you should scrutinise carefully the evidence of the complainant. It is not corroborated and should be treated by you with caution because of that fact. But bear in mind the two points of view. What the prosecution says to you is that there are only two witnesses to these events and, therefore, it's not unusual. And what the defence puts to you is that it is easy to make such an allegation, but difficult to refute it".

It is submitted that the focus of cases dealing with appropriate warnings (Longman versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79]) is on dangers arising from considerations which may not be apparent to the jury, such as the delay in the making of a complaint making it difficult for the defence to obtain evidence relating to the circumstances of each alleged act of wrongdoing.

It is argued that this is particularly so in this case because the appellant was able "to demonstrate" his innocence in relation to the movies incident and the hotel incident because he was able to obtain evidence which flatly contradicted the complainant's account. It is to be noted that it contained its own inherent contradiction as well of course, to which reference was made by the Crown in terms of the circumstances of the ladies coming to pick up their children. It is argued that the jury ought to have been warned that the reason why they should scrutinise carefully the complainant's evidence - apart from the lack of corroboration which would have been apparent to the them - was that the long delay between incidents and complaint rendered it very difficult for the appellant to produce evidence suggestive of his innocence on all counts.

No direction was sought in these terms.

In this trial there was a long delay. The length of that delay did not preclude the accused from obtaining evidence in relation to the screening of
The Neverending Story. In relation to the other incidents the position was that they did not occur, evidence was called that circumstances in that household were such that the accused and the complainant were never left together, (that was a jury question), evidence was called in relation to the difficult environment on the foundation that it was a practical impossibility for any of these events to have occurred in secret: that also was a matter for the jury to determine.

The Crown case did rest on the evidence of the complainant; there was no corroboration. The appellant was able to produce evidence "suggestive of his innocence" and consistent with his denials, not only as to the movies incident but as to all incidents. I am not persuaded that there was any way his Honour could have given a direction that would meet the complaint made before this Court without highlighting flawed nature of or derogating from the broad case in answer the appellant had otherwise presented to the relevant incidents in addition to the movies. I am not persuaded that this ground has been made out.

Accordingly, the appellant having failed on all grounds I would propose that the appeal be dismissed.

REGINA versus Phillip John GRAHAM 
JUDGMENT 
BARR J: I agree with Levine J. [1] At 493-495; 215-217, in the judgment of Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey
JJ, with whom Gaudron J agreed (at 508: 228) upon this formulation.
 * * * 
