

Ricardo Pty Ltd versus P Toppi Matter No 1730/98 [1998] NSWSC 127 (3 April )

Last Updated: 20 May 1998 `RICARDO PTY LIMITED versus P TOPPI` ` 1730/98` `3 April 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings commenced by an alleged vendor of a property at Coogee for a declaration that the purported contract for sale of that property to the defendant allegedly made on 24 February 1998 does not have any binding effect. 
The contract in question was signed by a young solicitor in the litigation department of a suburban firm of solicitors. He gave evidence before me that he had never done a conveyance before and his work is solely that of litigation. He purported to sign the contract on behalf of the plaintiff vendor on 24 February 1998.

His evidence, which I accept, is that he had no express authority to sign the contract. He thought it was something he could do in all the circumstances.
The vendor is a company which is controlled by a Mr Hill. Mr Hill gave evidence that he gave no instructions about the signing of any contract, though he did say he thought that his solicitors would sign a contract after auction as a matter of course. The solicitor was of the view that if the property had gone to auction, the auctioneer would have signed the contract, which is probably the case.

It is not necessary to go into the complications of this case. The simple fact is there was no authority on the solicitor to sign the contract. The High
Court laid down in Pianta versus National Finance & Trustees Limited <case>; [(1964) 38 ALJR 232] at 234 that ordinarily solicitors only have authority to draw up documents and possibly to negotiate, but not make contracts on behalf of their clients.
Here, because there was no authority, there was no contract. Accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to declarations 1 and 2 in the summons and I order that the defendant pay the costs of the claim.

Needless to say there is a cross-claim against the solicitors for breach of warranty of authority. That matter has been postponed to be dealt with separately. I will stand that over for mention in my list at 10.10am on 8 May .

Mr Evatt for the defendant, in light of the evidence the solicitor gave, very fairly said he must withdraw paragraph 4 of the cross-claim and accordingly I give leave to do so.
 * * * 
