

Regina versus Utiger Matter No 72124/98 [1998] NSWSC 752 (24 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus MICHAEL ANDREW UTIGER /98 June 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: The present applicant seeks bail pending the determination by the Liverpool District Court on 17 June 1998 of severity appeals in respect of break, enter and steal charges, a larceny charge and a breach of a recognisance by the applicant. 
It is apparent that the applicant has had an extensive drug habit. The applicant has an extensive criminal record. The convictions and sentence by the Local Court are challenged only to the extent of a challenge to the length or mode of punishment.

Tendered on the applicant's behalf is a Probation and Parole Service report prepared on 9 June 1998 for other purposes than this bail application which notes the applicant as unsuitable for non-custodial options, except for those requiring supervision and involving a long-term rehabilitation centre to address drug and alcohol issues.

It noted that the applicant had been in touch with Linden House and that the applicant and his wife appeared committed to there being rehabilitative action.

This is the applicant's first significant relationship. He has a wife, and 18 month old son, and his wife is pregnant. He has an unfortunate prior background which no doubt explains quite a deal of the matters on his record.
It may be that this is an applicant who has turned the corner and in that regard he may require some assistance with rehabilitative institutions but between now and the matter getting to the District Court it would seem that there is not enough time to assess the applicant for the purposes of any particular rehabilitative institution.

It has not been possible to ascertain from the Probation and Parole Service whether or not they would be prepared to accept the daily supervision that Mr.
Townsden, who appears for the applicant, has submitted might be an alternative and which might enable an assessment to be obtained from that Service which might assist in obtaining an assessment from an institution prior to the hearing.

In my view such an application should be made at the District Court, the sentencing court, to enable it to retain control over the sentencing process.

It is, however, a matter in which these questions have been canvassed on the basis that the hearing date in the District Court is so close to the application. In the event the matter were not to proceed on that day and it were necessary to come to the Supreme Court to seek bail for the purposes of assessment or entry into a rehabilitation centre, I would not like to think that the refusal of bail by me today because the hearing date was so close would stand in the way of a properly prepared application.

Bail is refused.
 * * * 
