

Australian Securities and Investments Commission versus Rich [2009] NSWSC 1456 (18 December 2009) 
Last Updated: 23 December 2009 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission versus Rich <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /01  
HEARING DATE(S):  December 2009  
EX TEMPORE DATE:  December 2009  
PARTIES: 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (Plaintiff) 
John David Rich (First Defendant) 
Mark Alan Silbermann (Fourth Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Austin J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
P Durack SC with A Kuklik (Plaintiff) 
D L Williams SC with M J Steele (First and Fourth Defendants)  
SOLICITORS: 
Georgina Hayden, Solicitor for Australian Securities and Investments
Commission (Plaintiff) 
Thompson Eslick (First and Fourth Defendants)  
CATCHWORDS: 
COSTS  interim costs  whether court should entertain application for interim costs when final costs hearing was being expedited  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Civil Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) , [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html)  
CASES CITED:  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Application for Notice of Motion for interim costs to be made returnable instanter, denied.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
AUSTIN J  
FRIDAY 18 DECEMBER 2009  /01 AUSTRALIAN SECURITIES AND INVESTMENTS COMMISSION V JOHN DAVID
RICH & ANOR 
JUDGMENT (Ex tempore, revised on 21 December 2009) HIS HONOUR: On 27 November 2009, one of the orders made by the Court was to list the proceedings at 9.30am today for further directions and for hearing of any application to be made for orders under [s 98(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) for an interim payment to the defendants by the plaintiff on account of costs. The Court also made provision for a mediation, which took place, I am told, yesterday.  This morning the defendants made application to file in Court a Notice of
Motion for an interim determination of costs in the sum of $3 million, to be made returnable instanter. The application was supported by an affidavit and bundle of documents giving particulars as to costs.
 The plaintiff objected to making the Notice of Motion returnable instanter on three grounds. The first ground was that the plaintiff is not ready to have the matter dealt with today. The plaintiff wishes to put on evidence as to the prejudice it would suffer if an interim costs order were made as sought. It wishes to raise the issue of whether the Court has the power in the present circumstances to make such an order and it proposes that there be an exchange of outline submissions before the application is considered. Today is the last day of term and there are four business days after today before Christmas. The plaintiff says it is not ready, principally because its attention has been directed towards the mediation.
 The correspondence before me indicates that on several occasions, from
November onwards, the defendants indicated that if the mediation or were to be unsuccessful, it would wish to proceed with its application for interim costs today. On 3 December 2009 the defendants supplied the plaintiff with the folder of costs documents on which they now seek to rely. ASIC submitted today that it treated the folder of documents as information relevant to mediation of costs, and did not see it as the evidentiary support for an application for interim costs, to be made this morning.
 It seems to me that ASIC has had notice for some time of the prospect that the defendant would seek interim costs today, but it did not receive confirmation of the defendants' intention to push forward until yesterday afternoon, when a draft Notice of Motion was served.
 I regard it as reasonable for the plaintiff to take the view that the application should not go ahead today, notwithstanding that degree of advance warning. I can see that there could be a question of power to be carefully considered, and that outline submissions are likely to be helpful, and I am persuaded that the plaintiff has a case for seeking leave to provide some additional evidence.
 After questions from me, the plaintiff indicated that its evidence could be prepared by lunchtime on 23 December. That would mean a hearing on the interim application on Christmas Eve at the earliest. It seems to me a very real prospect that an adjournment would be needed. Unfortunately, for various reasons of a personal kind, I cannot make myself available during my vacation in January. If the matter were part heard before me, it would have to resume in February. If the application were not commenced before me, it could be brought before the vacation judge, but there would have to be appropriate provision made in terms of directions, so as to prepare the matter for hearing.
 The plaintiff's second point was the defendant has not adduced any evidence of any urgent need why interim costs must addressed separately and urgently.
That is true. I take notice of the fact that, inevitably, substantial costs have been incurred by the defendants in defending an action in which their defence has been successful, but that does not seem to me to justify the bringing of an application during vacation on an urgent basis, particularly when the Court is doing what it can to have the final determination of the costs issue made in the period from 10 - 12 February.
 The third point made by plaintiff is also one that weighs upon my mind. I was told that the mediation process is continuing. It was submitted that the
Court should not disrupt this motion by bringing on the interim costs application and diverting ASIC resources for that purpose. I was told that the plaintiff has attempted in good faith to resolve the question of costs in the mediation, and it was not submitted that the defendants had approached the question of costs other than in good faith. I am not in a position to know what the prospects are of resolving the quantum of costs by further mediation.
But I should not do anything to divert the attention of the parties away from mediation while mediation is still alive.
 In all the circumstances, I will not make the notice of motion returnable instanter. My inclination is to grant leave to file it returnable on 10
February before me and to make directions for filing of evidence, if the defendants wish to pursue it as a separate matter.
 
LAST UPDATED:  December 2009 * * * 
