

Advance Commercial Finance Ltd versus John Aarons and Sheriff of New South
Wales Matter Nos 2089/91 [1997] NSWSC 327 (25 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
Advance Commercial Finance Ltd versus John Aarons & Sheriff of New South Wales` ` 2089/91` `5870/92` `25 August 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /91 /92 ADVANCE COMMERCIAL FINANCE LTD versus JOHN AARONS & SHERIFF OF NSW 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The problem that arises in this case is that the Sheriff has a writ for levy of property, the property being shares, which, under the company title scheme, entitle the holder to the use of the property at 6/67 Yarranabbe Road, Darling Point. The question arises as to whether that property is "land" or "property other than land" within the meaning of Part 45 of the Supreme Court Rules. 
I consider that when one looks at the history of writs of execution, there has been a very marked distinction between sale of real property strictly so called, though probably including leaseholds, on the one hand, and everything else on the other hand. Accordingly, in my view, shares in a company title home unit are not land within the meaning of Part 45.

That being so, Pt 45 r13(1)(a)(ii)(B) of the Rules provides that the Sheriff is to obtain the purchase price within a period not exceeding two working days after the sale as the Sheriff may determine prior to sale. Everyone acknowledges that that is absurd for the sale of a company title unit at
Darling Point.

Various possible solutions have been urged. The most practical is that under
Part 2 rule 3 of the Rules. Thus, under that Rule, I extend the time by nominating the period of six weeks from the date of sale provided that, if there is no completion at the end of six weeks, the Sheriff may give a 14 day notice to complete.

The attention of the Rules Committee should be drawn to these particular problems with Part 45 rule 13. Not only is there need for a definition of "land" which will include the present case, but also something needs to be done to provide for notices to complete.

The Sheriff does not seek costs of his application.

This morning the plaintiff says that the defendant conducted himself in such a way as to give it the impression that an application was to be made this afternoon to restrain the sale. It thought it appropriate to come this afternoon with senior counsel to oppose such an application. However, Mr
Parsons for the defendant says that having sighted some documents, he does not intend to make any such application.

Mr Oakes SC for the plaintiff applies for costs. I do not consider at the moment that there is power, or if there is power, that it is appropriate to make an order for costs under such circumstances, but I have at the back of my mind that there is some rule dealing with this sort of scenario. If there is not, there ought to be. Accordingly, I will reserve the question of the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
