

Memorex Telex Pty Ltd versus National Databank Ltd [2002] NSWSC 1111 (2
December 2002) 
Last Updated: 9 December 2002 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Memorex Telex Pty Ltd versus National Databank Ltd <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 4654/98  
HEARING DATE{S): 28, 29, 30 and 31 October 2002  and 21 November 2002  
JUDGMENT DATE: 02/12/2002  
PARTIES: 
Memorex Telex Pty Ltd (Plaintiff) 
National Databank Ltd (Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Bergin J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
CRC Newlinds (Plaintiff) 
S Bell (Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Baker & McKenzie (Plaintiff) 
Ian B Mitchell (Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS:  [CONTRACT] - Claim by plaintiff for amounts owing in outstanding invoices for computer goods and services (the System) - Cross-Claim by defendant for liquidated damages for late and incomplete delivery of the System and additional claims for expenses incurred in rectifying the System and for loss of revenue or loss of opportunity - No claim made under warranty - Completion of delivery of the System made by defendant's employees (who had previously been employed with plaintiff) without any claim upon or notification to the plaintiff until delivery complete. [DAMAGES] - Measure of damages to which the defendant/cross-claimant is entitled - Whether inference as to quantum of damages is able to be drawn from evidence of problems with the System and low revenue without any evidence from users of the System that they experienced problems and terminated their subscription with the defendant because of problems with the System.  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
See paragraph [156].  
JUDGMENT:  - 51 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
BERGIN J   DECEMBER 2002  /98 MEMOREX TELEX PTY LTD versus NATIONAL DATABANK LTD  
JUDGMENT  This litigation arises out of a dispute in relation to the provision of computer goods and professional services (the System) by the plaintiff,
Memorex Telex Pty Ltd, to the defendant, National Databank Ltd, pursuant to agreements entered into by the parties in July 1997.  The plaintiff claims that the defendant is indebted to it in the amount of $336,444.44 being an outstanding amount of a total of $1,724,814 for the provision of the System. The defendant denies that indebtedness and cross- claims against the plaintiff for damages in the amount of $2,376,620 for alleged breaches of the Systems Integration Agreement (the SI Agreement). The major part of the claim for damages is $2,200,000 for loss suffered due to alleged inadequacies or deficiencies in the System.  This case was heard on 28, 29, 30 and 31 October and 1 and 21 November 2002 when Mr CRC Newlinds, of counsel, appeared for the plaintiff, and Mr S Bell, of counsel, appeared for the defendant.  On the first day of the trial Mr Bell admitted on behalf of the defendant that the plaintiff had rendered invoices to the defendant in respect of the delivery of the System in the amount claimed, $336,444.44, and that the plaintiff had supplied the goods and services referred to in those invoices.
After those admissions the plaintiff closed its case and the defendant's case on the Cross-Claim commenced.  
The Agreements  The parties entered into a Consultancy Agreement dated "July 1997" which referred to an SI Agreement and defined it as the agreement between the defendant and the plaintiff dated the same date as the Consultancy Agreement, concerning the acquisition by the defendant of computer equipment, ancillary items and services from the plaintiff.  The plaintiff was appointed as consultant from the date of the Consultancy
Agreement for a period of twelve months unless terminated earlier pursuant to clauses 13 and 14 of the Agreement (cl. 2.1 and 3). The plaintiff agreed to provide Services defined as (a) Computer Consulting and (b) Project Scoping
Report (the Report). In respect of the Computer Consulting Services the plaintiff agreed to provide "general analysis and design of software, network and hardware requirements" for the defendant's "Business Information Service and Internet Connection Service Report". There was a regime and timetable for the production of the Report about which there does not seem to be any issue between the parties. The parties agreed that after the Report was issued they were required to agree on:  
A detailed timeline and relevant Milestone Dates for software development, hardware and software supply, system supply, installation and software and system testing; 
Delivery dates for software and the system; 
Acceptance tests and acceptance dates for the system and for the customised software to ensure compliance with the specifications and the production of a commercially viable system as judged by (the defendant); 
The price for the implementation of the service.
 (Sch. 2 Pt. 2, par (b)(vi)) Annexure A to the Consultancy Agreement, "Details of Project Scoping
Report", relevantly provided:  
What the Scoping Report Will Achieve 
The broad requirement of this project is to establish a Web Site using the
Netscape Publishing system which will integrate feeds from the ASX, ASC, LTO and others. 
The scoping report will define the project, propose a solution and produce a plan for the development. It is already determined that the Netscape
Publishing system will constitute the main part of the solution, and Memorex has indicated that many of the technical aspects have been investigated. By producing this scoping report, the technical solution already investigated, will be put into a framework that will be measured against NDL's functionality requirements so that a proper project development plan may be produced that meets the requirements and expectations of NDL.  ...  
Key Components of the Scoping Report  
This is a proposal for the undertaking of a scoping study which will produce a report with the following components: 
A Functional Specification - Detailing the exact requirements and expectations of NDL for the Web Site integration and functionality intended to be delivered through the system. 
Technical Specification - Detailing how the requirements of the
Functional Specification are to be implemented including considerations for limitations or alterations required to best fit the Functional Specifications.
Identify the solution. 
Project Plan - A full implementation plan detailing the development of the first stage of the Internet Web Site as defined in the Technical
Specification. This will include the tasks to completing the project, time required to complete each task, costings, materials, equipment and resources will be included in the report. This will state the roles and responsibilities of all entities that Memorex will engage for each of the task of the project. 
Systems Integration Agreement Matters - Those other matters described in the Systems Integration Agreement to be included in the Project Scoping
Report.  Clause 4 of the Consultancy Agreement included the following:  . SERVICES  .1 Provision of Services  
Memorex must:  provide the Services in a proper, efficient, skilful, diligent and competent manner and to the satisfaction of NDL;  ...  in performing the Services, comply with all resolutions, regulations and directions made or given by NDL from time to time in respect of the nature and scope of the Services  ...  .2 Skill and Judgment 
Notwithstanding clause 4.1, Memorex must exercise its own skill and judgment and utilise its skills as it considers most appropriate to achieve compliance with any resolutions, regulations and directions made or given by NDL and to otherwise comply with all such resolutions, regulations and directions made or given by NDL.  .3 Materials and Equipment 
Memorex must, at its own cost, supply all materials and equipment and engage all employees and agents as are necessary and appropriate to enable Memorex to effectively provide the Services in accordance with this agreement.  .4 Warranties by Memorex  
Memorex warrants that:  each officer, servant and agent engaged by Memorex to provide the Services is competent and has the necessary skills and qualifications to carry out
Memorex's responsibilities under this agreement and has the requisite skill to provide the services;  ...  The SI Agreement recited that the plaintiff had represented to the defendant that the plaintiff:  
Conducts project management of computer software development and the supply and installation of computer systems and sub-contracts computer software development; 
Carries on the business of a value-added reseller of computer software and hardware; 
Can supply certain computer equipment; 
Has expertise in relation to integrating computer programmes, installing and maintaining computer systems and providing support services in respect of computer programmes; and 
Is capable of developing or causing the development of the Customised
Software, providing the Licence, Software and the Hardware and installing and maintaining the System.  The plaintiff agreed to supply "the Hardware and Licensed Software, develop or cause the development of, and supply the Customised Software, install and maintain the System and provide additional services" to the defendant subject to the SI Agreement. The SI Agreement defined the following:  "Acceptance Testing" is the acceptance tests specified in the Project Scoping Report.  "Acceptance Testing Certificate" is the certificate issued by NDL under clause 29.  "Hardware" means the computer equipment specified by Memorex in the Project Scoping Report and approved by NDL, which is to be supplied and incorporated within the System pursuant to this Agreement and includes replacement hardware provided by Memorex under clause 16.  "Licensed Software" means software owned by Memorex, or software concerning which Memorex has the capacity to sub-license or software owned by a third party which Memorex will procure to be licensed to NDL, which is to be licensed to NDL pursuant to this Agreement and incorporated within the System and without limitation includes rectified, replacement and substituted software.  "Customised Software" means the computer programmes to be developed by or for Memorex pursuant to this Agreement and each and every component thereof consisting of a set of instructions or statements in machine readable and human readable medium and any associated Documentation.  "System" means the computer system, more particularly described in the Specifications, which is to be supplied, installed and configured pursuant to this Agreement and includes without limitation the Software and Hardware.  "Documentation" means documentation relating to the System including, without limitation, operating manuals, user guides, training manuals, modification manuals, flow charts, drawings and software listings, which are designed to assist or supplement the understanding or application of the System or any part, including without limitation the Software and the Hardware.   The commencement date of the SI Agreement was the date specified by the defendant in a notice to the plaintiff (cl. 2.1(e)). The "system acceptance date" was defined as the date upon which the defendant "accepts the System in accordance with clause 29". Clause 29 provided as follows:  . ACCEPTANCE TESTING  .1 Time of Testing 
Memorex will perform, within the time specified in the Project Scoping Report,
Acceptance Testing on:  the Customised Software;  the Hardware;  the Licensed Software;  the System integration; and  the entire System.  .2 Acceptance Testing Measure 
All Acceptance Testing will be measured against details and specifications contained within the Project Scoping Report. For Acceptance Testing to be successful the expectations of the Project Scoping Report must be met or exceeded.  .3 Certification 
NDL must, after satisfactory demonstration of satisfactory completion of all
Acceptance Testing without any error or malfunction being found or suspected by Memorex required in accordance with clause 29, issue an Acceptance Testing
Certificate stating that the System has been tested as required by this agreement and has satisfied all Acceptance Testing.  .4 Failure of Acceptance Testing 
If NDL notifies Memorex that the System has failed to satisfy the Acceptance
Testing, in accordance with clause 29, or the System fails the Acceptance
Testing within the period specified in the Project Scoping Report, Memorex must immediately remedy the System or any part of the System at its own expense to enable the parties to conduct further Acceptance Testing. If the
System fails to pass Acceptance Testing within 90 days of the System delivery
Date, and the failure has a material effect on the operation of the System, then the failure will be deemed to be a total failure to perform by Memorex.
If the failure is agreed to be minor and not critical to commercial, technical or operational requirements as described in the project Scoping Report, then
Acceptance Testing may be accepted with qualifications as and if agreed by both Memorex and NDL and NDL must then issue the Acceptance Testing
Certificate. If agreement is unable to be reached, it is to be resolved in accordance with clause 38.  .5 Total Failure 
If the Acceptance Testing is a total failure or has been deemed to be a total failure to perform by Memorex, then: 
Memorex must, if NDL so elects in its absolute discretion, immediately refund all money paid by NDL to Memorex pursuant to this agreement, in which
NDL will be discharged from any past, present or future obligation to pay moneys to Memorex pursuant to this agreement; and 
NDL will be entitled to pursue such remedies as are provided by this agreement or at law or in equity for such failure, including any termination of this agreement.  The "System Delivery Date" was defined as the "due date for the delivery of the System" to the defendant, as specified in the Report. Clause 3 of the SI
Agreement provided as follows:  . SCOPE OF AGREEMENT  
Memorex must from the Commencement Date:  perform the Customised Software Development and deliver and install the
Software in accordance with the Specifications;  license the licensed Software to NDL;  transfer all Memorex's right, title and interest in, and cause all third parties to transfer all of their right, title and interest in, the
Intellectual Property in and associated with the Customised Software in the
Territory and all media embodying the Customised Software to NDL;  supply and install the Hardware in accordance with the Specifications;  install the System in accordance with the Specifications; and  provide the Training;  in accordance with this agreement and by the relevant Milestone Dates.  "Project" was defined as the development, supply and installation of the
Software, Hardware and the System and the performance of the other obligations of the plaintiff as specified in clause 3. "Project Timetable" was defined as the timetable specified in the Report as approved by the defendant.  The defendant was entitled to withhold any remuneration otherwise payable to the plaintiff if the plaintiff was in breach of any warranties specified in clause 4.3 or failed to perform any of its duties or obligations under the SI
Agreement.  Clause 4.4 provided:  .4 Withholding of Payment  
Without limiting or derogating from clause 4.3: 
If Memorex fails to complete the work necessary to  reach a Milestone by the relevant Milestone Date, at any time before any of instalments in the Project Scoping Report would otherwise fall due, NDL may withhold payment of the instalment or instalments until the work necessary to reach the Milestone is completed. 
NDL must pay the withheld instalment (or, if more than one, the first such withheld instalment) on the day on which the work necessary to reach the
Milestone is complete. 
If the System Delivery Date occurs more than seven days before the date on which the last instalment in the Project Scoping Report would otherwise become due, NDL must pay Memorex the whole of the instalments in the Project Scoping
Report remaining unpaid as at the Delivery Date within seven days of the
System Delivery Date.  Clause 5 provided relevantly:  . PERFORMANCE AND LIQUIDATED DAMAGES  .1 Performance 
Memorex must commence performance of its obligations immediately upon receiving notice in writing from NDL under clause 2.1(d) and perform its obligations within the time period detailed in the Project Timetable.  .2 Time of the Essence 
The parties acknowledge that time is of the essence in relation to the completion of the Project and that NDL will suffer loss and damage in the event that Memorex fails to complete the project on time.  .3 Liquidated Damages 
Subject to clause 35.2, if Memorex fails to complete the Project in accordance with clause 5.1, NDL shall be entitled to deduct 0.05% of the Price for each
Business Day after the day on which it was due. If Memorex does not complete the Project within 20 Business Days after the due date, NDL may, in addition to any other right, immediately terminate this agreement.  .4 Genuine Pre-Estimate 
The parties acknowledge that the deductions referred to in clause 5.3 represent a genuine pre-estimate of the cost to NDL of such a breach by
Memorex and are no more than is reasonably necessary to compensate NDL for such a breach.  .5 Payment dependent on Acceptance Testing Certificate 
Payment of the last instalment of the Price for completion of the Project will only be made on the issuing of the Acceptance Testing Certificate by NDL, and
Memorex shall be entitled to no fee whatsoever, unless and until NDL issues an
Acceptance Testing Certificate.  The warranties were contained in clause 10 as follows:  . WARRANTIES  .1 Warranties by Memorex 
In addition to any other warranty, express or implied in this agreement,
Memorex warrants that:  the Customised Software is original and the Intellectual Property in the
Customised Software will be valid and subsisting and Memorex has the right to grant the rights granted in this agreement; 
Memorex will have full and complete right, title and interest to transfer the Intellectual Property in the Customised Software to NDL;  the Customised Software will be properly installed and will perform in accordance with the Specifications and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, will correctly identify, process and present all date changes including the date change from 31 December 1999 to 1 January 2000 and all date information for the year 2000 and beyond;  the Documentation contains sufficient information to enable NDL to use the
Customised Software (and any component thereof); and  the Customised Software has been developed with reasonable diligence, skill and care by appropriately skilled persons.  .2 Rectification and Replacement 
If the Customised Software is found to be defective and if NDL notifies
Memorex of the defect during the Warranty Period, Memorex must immediately rectify or, if necessary to remedy to the defect, modify the Customised
Software at its own expense.  .3 Warranty of Replacement Software 
Memorex warrants that any replacement software supplied to NDL, will be properly installed and will perform in accordance with the Specifications.  The plaintiff agreed that from the commencement date of the SI Agreement it was required to undertake the "Customised Software Development" in accordance with the Specifications and continue the Development so as to comply with the relevant Milestone Dates (cl. 6.1). The plaintiff also agreed to deliver the
Customised Software and "associated Documentation" in a form to the defendant's reasonable satisfaction on the Customised Software Delivery Date as specified in the Report. It agreed to install the Customised Software in accordance with clause 29 of the SI Agreement and the Report (cl. 7.1-7.2).  In October 1997 the plaintiff provided to the defendant a document entitled "Proposal to National Databank Ltd for Prime Contracting Network Services and
Software Development" (the Proposal) together with a document produced by
Electronic Dimensions (Edime) entitled "Documentation for the Scope of Works for National Databank Ltd" (the Scope of Works). These two documents were produced in compliance with the requirement upon the plaintiff under the
Consultancy Agreement to produce the Report.  The Proposal noted that the plaintiff understood that the primary objective of the Project was to implement the defendant's communications and technology infrastructure and to provide a fully integrated corporate Wide Area and Local
Area Network. It was noted that this was to be done alongside the implementation of the Netscape Publishing System to enable the defendant to implement a commercial service to link consumers with multiple information warehouses.  The Proposal also noted that the plaintiff had entered into an agreement with Edime for the establishment of electronic commerce. It noted that Edime was a Web Presence Provider, particularly focused on the establishment and maintenance of web sites. The Proposal referred to the feeds planned in the first phase including with the ASX, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS),
ASIC, LTO, NSW Government Information Service, Australian Government
Publishing Service, RWE Australian Business News and Dun & Bradstreet
Information Services.  The Scope of Works indicated the size, nature and development effort involved in the implementation of the System together with a risk analysis (cl. 9). Clause 14 of Annexure C provided:  Stage Three - Testing/Acceptance 
The goal of the acceptance test phase is to prove to the user that the project team has delivered what was promised. An acceptance test plan will be developed by Memorex and approved by the user before testing the system. The process is merely to run through the tests in a formal ordered session to demonstrate the promised system functions.  
Was there a breach of the SI Agreement?  The defendant was established to create and operate a Business Information
System whereby the defendant's clients would dial into the defendant's computer site via the Internet and access information from a variety of State and Commonwealth government departments and private companies who supplied information. The System would request information from information sources, obtain it, reformat it, and show it to the customers on their screens. The clients would be charged a fee over and above the costs of obtaining the information from the sources.  Brenton Edward Avery was the Managing Director of the defendant from
February 1997 to November 1998. He gave evidence that he had worked with computers prior to joining the defendant but that such experience was limited to small computer systems. He claimed he did not consider that he had the experience, expertise or knowledge to develop a large-scale computer system such as was needed by the defendant to operate the Business Information
Service. In about June 1997 the defendant called for tenders to develop the
System and Mr Avery was of the view that the plaintiff had the required experience, knowledge and expertise to undertake the development of the System for the defendant.  In September 1997 the defendant issued a Prospectus to raise funds to pay for the cost of developing the System and to provide working capital. The
Prospectus referred to the defendant's objective to become a one-stop-shop for business information products providing access to corporate, financial and social activity information from the government sector and commercial organisations.  The Prospectus stated that the defendant offered "one data connection to obtain access to a range of business information products". Those products were referred to as including the Australian Securities Commission (ASC, but referred to in this judgment as ASIC), the Australian Bureau of Statistics , the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX), the Australian Government
Publishing Service, Dun & Bradstreet Information Services, RWE Australian
Business News, NSW Land Titles Office (LTO), NSW Government Information
Service and the NSW Department of Fair Trading.  In the Forecast Financial Information section of the Prospectus the following appeared:  
The Directors' forecasts for the financial periods ending 30 June 2000 are based on their assumptions relating to anticipated developments, market growth and share which in turn are based on independent advice obtained where considered necessary.  The assumptions were stated to be:  
Assumptions 
The principal assumptions made in these forecasts include, but are not limited to, the following: 
It is the intention of the Company on completion of the offer to write off the issue and underwriting expenses (estimated at $400,000) against the share premium account. The effect on the proforma consolidated balance sheet of the
Company of doing so is detailed on page 34 of the Prospectus; 
The Company will acquire the assets and rights referred to in the
Independent Accountant's Report; 
Application of the accounting policies set out at note 1 of the
Independent Accountant's Report; 
Accounting depreciation of plant and equipment over three to seven years; 
No new share or option issues - no future shares or options to acquire shares in the capital of the Company will be issued during the term of the forecast period; 
Average time, in hours per month, online for each proposed category or plan of Internet customer is: Standard 2, regular 5, Ultimate 20, Pro 40,
Corporate 100, Global 150, Multi National 150; 
Rates charged by Telstra for months 4, 5, 6 and 7 are based on Australia wide Zone 1 termination; 
Rates for months 8 and onwards are based on 90% local Zone 1 termination and 10% Australia wide Zone 1 termination (ie. $1 per hour); 
Telstra internet fees are based on average data throughput of 28,800 bps and 20% utilisation; 
Interest income based on 4% per annum calculated monthly; 
Retail pricing of business information products is consistent with industry pricing and constant over the forecast period; 
No over subscriptions from the issue have been included in the forecasts; 
Wholesale price of business information products are constant during the forecast period; 
Company income tax rate of 36%; 
Advertising budget is sufficient to attract forecast number of sales and customers; 
The Business Information market will increase by 5% per annum; 
Market share of the Business Information market is 18% by the year 2000; 
There are no differences between Accounting and Tax depreciation; 
Forecast market sizes have been based on reported sales volumes contained in various 1995/96 Annual reports from government and commercial organisations; 
Material Information Supply Contracts - all material information supply contracts are maintained and performed in accordance with their terms and conditions; 
No revenue from sales of Dun & Bradstreet products have been included in the financial forecasts; 
No revenue from online bookshop sales have been included in the financial forecasts; 
No revenue from Other Information products have been included in the
Financial forecasts.  The Prospectus also referred to risk factors including increased competition in the online information environment resulting in significant pricing pressure and thus, significant reductions in the average selling price of the company's services. There was also reference to computer viruses and the prospect of delay or cessation in service to the company's customers.
Another relevant risk factor was stated as follows:  
There can be no guarantee that the assumptions on which the financial forecasts and market strategies of National Databank are based will ultimately prove to be valid or accurate. The forecasts and market strategies depend on various factors many which are outside the control of National Databank.  In November 1997 the plaintiff commenced work on building the System. The plaintiff provided the services of Stephen Deadman as Project Manager and
Anthony Firth, Brett Lane and Robyn Bermanseder. Mr Avery understood that
Messrs Firth, Lane and Bermanseder were either employees or sub-contractors to
Edime and recalled that Marcus Dawe, the principal of Edime, and others attended the defendant's premises from time to time during the development of the System.  There is no issue that according to the timelines and Milestones the System was due to be completed in February 1998 but that the "sign-off" did not occur until 29 May 1998. A meeting was held on 20 May 1998 during which Mr Avery was handed a number of documents including a document entitled "Integration
Testing Document" dated 20 May 1998 endorsed as having been "developed" by
Edime. That document was 140 pages in length and recorded the results of various searches made in relation to various products including ASIC company extracts and business name searches, LTO dealings, plans, historical and title searches, ABS and ASX searches, and Ralph Wragg Enterprises Business News searches. It also included what was referred to as "Quest testing" and "ASX
Stock Profiler Performance testing".  The Integration Testing document records the dates upon which the searches were performed. The ASIC searches were performed on 27 and 28 April 1998 and 4
May 1998. The LTO searches were performed on 15, 16 and 17 April 1998 and 4
May 1998. The ASX searches were performed on 6 May 1998 and the Quest testing was performed on 27 April 1998. The document does not contain any overview or narrative report as to the status of the results in respect of the various products as at 20 May 1998.  Mr Avery signed a document entitled "Conditional Acceptance Certificate
Software Developement" on 20 May 1998. It was in the following terms:  
This certificate certifies that National Databank Ltd (NDB) accepts all further responsibility for Software development (Customisation) portion of the project in accordance with clause 29.1 of the Systems Integration Agreement with the following exceptions (These exceptions to be resolved no later than
May 29th 1998).  * Final Documentation relating to the Development Project.  * SIG-q (Issues associated with Comm's to be resolved before this portion of the project is totally accepted).  * Escape client data (Minor bug relating to user input).  * Organisation Purchase Privileges (Command line entries to be modified so that CGI can handle this requirement).  * Addition of Bankcard credit facilities to the site.  * User individual credit limits.  * CRR/DOCIMAGE yet to be approved by LTO (Minor modifications may be required).   Mr Avery recalled that at the time of this meeting on 20 May 1998 there were at least two distinct computer systems. One system was a development system that the programmers used to develop and test the system. It used either test data or a test data feed from information providers. The second system was the production system which was to be available to clients of the defendant. This system used data feeds from information providers. When Mr
Avery looked at the system as it was being developed he claimed he did not always know if he was looking at test data or production data. He gave evidence that he was more concerned with the "look and feel" of the system and its functionality rather than checking to see if the data was correct or not.  Another meeting was held on 29 May 1998 attended by Mr Avery on behalf of the defendant, Mr Deadman, David Harris-MacBride and Kevin Regan from the plaintiff and Marcus Dawe, the Managing Director of Edime. This meeting lasted approximately three hours and Mr Avery gave evidence that during this meeting he had a conversation with Mr Deadman and Mr Dawe in the following terms:  
Mr Avery: You want me to sign-off. I have seven hundred shareholders to answer to. Does the system work?  
Mr Deadman: Yes, it works.  
Mr Dawe: It works.  On this occasion Mr Dawe showed a document entitled "Acceptance Testing
Document" to Mr Avery. That document was 32 pages in length and was endorsed as having been "developed" by Anthony Firth. It was dated 5 May 1998 on the front sheet and 7 May 1998 on each of the other 31 pages. The document was divided into sections dealing separately with (1) Registration, (2) Product
Purchasing with sections for the various "products" ASIC, LTO, ABS, ASX, and
Ralph Wragg, (3) PublishingXpert Administration and (4) the Arrow Accounting system. Each of sections (1), (3) and (4) contained four columns entitled "Action", "Description", "Accepted" and "Notes". The first two columns contained the relevant information and the last two columns were blank.  Section (3) contained an additional column entitled "check billing" which was either ticked or not as the case required. This indicated whether the billing in respect of the particular aspect of the product needed to be checked. There were also additional columns under the "Accepted" heading for the purpose of recording the results of specific tests to be performed in respect of each of the products. All the columns were blank.  At the time of showing the Acceptance Testing Document to Mr Avery, Mr Dawe said, "we have gone through and tested the system." Mr Avery said, "aren't all the columns in the document supposed to be ticked?" to which Mr Deadman responded, "it is for you to go through the qualifications and test." Mr Avery recalled that either Mr Dawe or Mr Deadman said, "we have done integration testing, which is our acceptance testing, which tests the same thing."  Shortly after the conversation with Mr Dawe, Mr Avery looked at the System.
He said he did not test the System but rather looked at some screens. He did not know if he was looking at the test/development system or if he was connected to live information feeds, being the production system. He did not consider that he had to test the whole System because he had been told that the System worked and he believed what he had been told. He was of the view that as the plaintiff's representatives had performed the testing there was no need for him to do any testing.  At the meeting on 29 May 1998 Mr Avery signed a document entitled "Project
Completion Certificate". He noticed that attached to the document was a document on Edime letterhead signed by Mr Dawe and dated 20 May 1998:  
Electronic Dimensions certifies that it has tested to the best of its ability the NDL system as delivered in the Integration Testing Document. All cases presented in the Integration Testing Document were performed satisfactorily and constitute the requirements under the contract as outlined in the scope of works.  Mr Avery's evidence was that he would not have signed the Project
Completion Certificate unless he had been assured by Messrs Deadman and Dawe that the defendant's System was working properly. Mr Deadman accepted in his evidence that Mr Avery was informed at the meeting that the System worked (tr.191-193). Mr Dawe did not give evidence in the proceedings.  The Certificate signed by Mr Avery on 29 May 1998 was entitled "Project
Completion Certificate" and was in the following terms:  
This certificate certifies that as at Friday 29th May 1998 the Systems
Integration Agreement managed by Memorex-Telex Pty Ltd has been fully completed and National Databank Limited accepts all further responsibility for the equipment, software and customisation that has been installed in NDB's site(s).  
This project comprises the following major components:  * The installation and commissioning of a backbone infrastructure and data feeds between Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra using CISCO communication equipment.  * The installation and commissioning of a computer room facility in the Canberra offices.  * The Installation and commissioning of the LAN infrastructure in the Canberra and Sydney offices.  * The installation and commissioning of a complete Internet infrastructure, including all necessary servers to permit NDB to operate a competent Internet site.  * The conversion and Customisation of the Netscape Publishing Expert Base code to cater for NDB's specific requirements.  Subsequently the defendant, through Mr Avery and others, noticed a number of problems with the System. The first of these problems was with the use of the Microsoft Internet Explorer 4.0. Users were receiving messages on their screens asking them if the system could be re-directed. This was referred to in the evidence as a "re-direct message". This message required the user to either accept or reject the message. If the user accepted the message, they would be sent to a blank page. Mr Avery referred to this as the user "bombing out". There were no other options available to the user for obtaining the information.  The next problem identified by Mr Avery related to multiple subscribers.
Where there was a corporate subscriber, for instance the law firm Deacons, the individual employees or partners of the firm were unable to perform particular searches under the umbrella of the corporate subscriber's account.  The third problem identified by Mr Avery was that when users wished to cancel their subscription or, as he put it, "unsubscribe" from the System, the user would receive information that the subscription had been terminated but would apparently be billed for further transactions.  A further problem was that the System was not year 2000 compliant. This created difficulties both in respect of the ASX requirements of the defendant to produce information to the shareholders and also created problems for its users who had a credit card expiring after 1999. In this latter regard the
System would not accept the card or appropriately bill that client.  The next problem was in relation to the use of a proxy server. When a proxy server was utilised for the purpose of making an inquiry of the ASX or ASIC the first inquiry would provide information as requested but the second and subsequent inquiries would not update the information. In other words, the inquirer received only the old information which was on the first search result.  A further problem was that there were multiple errors in the reports produced. Some information was scrambled, some information was omitted. The
LTO documents were not in the required form which created problems for the clients when they sought to rely on these documents in Court. Another problem was with the credit card payments. The first transaction of the day was defective and the line through to the bank had to be re-established each morning.  The next problem was the ASX feed. For a time the defendant was only able to access half of the alphabetical list of companies on the ASX and was thus only able to obtain information on half of the corporate community listed on the ASX. Mr Avery was asked about problems with the ASIC feed but was unable to recall what they were.  There was also a problem with the billing system as it related to the accounting system in the Arrow software. The detail on the billing software was exported into accounting software. This enabled the defendant to have a full accounting of all the bills that had been rendered or charged during the course of the day/week/month. Although the billing software listed all the amounts that had been billed, it did not export or transport that information correctly or accurately to the accounting software. The transportation or exportation contained incomplete transfers of some of the items billed.  Mr Avery accepted during his cross-examination that if problems had arisen in the warranty period, a six month period from 29 May 1998, the defendant could have made a claim under the warranty. Mr Avery gave oral evidence, led in chief with leave, of a conversation that he said he had with Mr Regan of the plaintiff. This conversation took place after the plaintiff had been attempting to obtain payment from the defendant for the outstanding amounts owed to the plaintiff. After this conversation Mr Avery wrote to Mr Regan by letter dated 17 September 1998. That letter included the following:  
Our Company placed a considerable reliance on the professional ability of
Memorex Telex and its sub contractors to be able to build a real time online information system. Our reliance seems to have been let down. The result of the development was National Databank being left with a system that was riddled with bugs, unstable and was unable to perform many critical business functions.  
The problems that Memorex and its sub contractors left National Databank with, have been huge, and has resulted in National Databank being months behind our schedule, and incurring large amounts of overhead expenses resulting from being 83 days late and months of clean up work to rectify the mess and have a saleable product.  
Some of the main business errors and problems are:  * Users that use IE 4.0 get "redirect" messages.  * Users under an organisation are unable to buy a subscription.  * Users unable to unsubscribe.  * Users can not select a particular page range on ASIC doc images per the API.  * Major problems with client using a proxy.  * Netscape Public System installed in not Y2k version 2.2 is but we do not have a copy nor is it installed.  * Web design and general HTML pitiful - we have had to redo every single page.  * Lack of easy use in the overall design.  * Multiple errors on customer reports.  * Multiple spelling errors throughout the entire site.  * Major flaws in security - now fixed.  * General overall unprofessional software development.  * Unable to reliably use credit cards for over a month of July.  * Uses GMT time and date.  ....  
The project completion was signed by Mr D MacBride & Mr K Regan of Memorex
Telex and Mr S Deadman and myself of National Databank Limited on 29 May 1998.
The agreed completion date was 1 February 1998. In accordance with clause 5.2
Time of the Essence and clause 5.3 Liquidated Damages, National Databank
Limited is entitled to deduct 0.05% of the cost of the project for each business day after the day on which it was due.  
The 0.05% of $1,583,216 is $791.61 per day for the 83 business days between 1
February 1998 and 29 May 1998 which totals $65,703.47. 
As a summary:  
Total cost per Scoping report 1,475,263.00 
Additional approved invoices 107,953.00 
Total 1,583,216.00 
Less amount paid 1,348,370.33 
Cost of & installing air conditioner 17,566.00 
Penalty 656,703.47 
Balance 151,576.21  
We understand your position, however, we have already paid over $1.3 million for a system which had been unable to be productive and generate significant revenue due to the major problems detailed above. We have signed up and lost many significant clients all because when they began to use the system they had technical difficulties, resulting from MTX implementation.  
With all the above being said we do not wish to be involved in legal actions and do not wish to fight this matter but rather work on a solution that is agreeable.  
The technical problems and delay have put significant stress on National
Databank's cashflow and we are not prepared to pay any lump sums in the near future, but would be willing to negotiate.  Mr Avery gave the following evidence:  
Q. Did you make a claim under the warranty provisions during the six months that started on 29 May 1998, Mr Avery? 
A. I do not believe so.  
Q. Why not? 
A. I am - I don't know why not. I am unable to recollect reasons from the time as to why not.  ...  
Q. You cannot think of any reason why no claim was made on the warranty, is that right? 
A. I can't recollect the reason, reasons behind that.  
Q. Okay. Is this a possible reason: that you were happy or at least satisfied with the system that had been installed during that period? 
A. No, we were not happy.  
Q. Help me out here, Mr Avery. What explanation could there be? I accept you say you can't remember but can you proffer any suggestion as to why a claim would not have been made other than the suggestion I have made to you? 
A. The only one that I could - I think the word that you used was "proffer" - the only explanation I could really bring to the table is just that we had been dissatisfied with Memorex and we had been jerked around by every person involved from a management point of view from Memorex and we had, we had taken on board the people with knowledge. I would hazard a guess we were looking at saying well let's just try and see if we can do this without having to invoke any warranties at this point in time. Let's see if we can fix it ourselves. It would be quicker, faster and easier as we knew that there was, the warranty did not run out immediately.
 (tr. 52-53).
 It is apparent that during the development of the System regular meetings were held between the representatives of the defendant and the plaintiff, in particular with Mr Avery. It is also clear that from time to time Mr Avery forwarded emails to Mr Deadman referring to specific issues or problems that he saw with the System as it was being developed. After the Certificate was signed on 29 May 1998, the Chairman of the company, Mr Avery's father, Mr Ted
Avery (Mr T Avery), wrote a Memorandum dated 9 June 1998. That Memorandum was written at a time when Mr Avery claims that Mr T Avery well knew that the
System was not working because it was a separate issue and was "common knowledge" amongst the directors.  The Memorandum of 9 June 1998 makes no mention of any problems with the
System. The focus was on a desire to improve sales to potential customers and
Mr T Avery wrote, "we still have a good range of products available for sale and we know that there is an established large market for these. In particular we have the advantage that with the ASC and NSW Land Titles Office products we are one of a very small number of authorised suppliers of these products". It was noted that the "bottom line" was that the defendant had failed to generate sales of any consequence.  On 13 July 1998 Mr Avery, as Chief Executive Officer of the defendant, reported to the Board of Directors. That Report included the following:  
June has been a month of mixed reactions. The 'end of financial year' seems to have taken the shine (off) our young company with many potential customers and new customers simply too busy to either look at NDB or to fully integrate NDB into their daily schedule at the present moment. This is not to say that they do not like our services or do not want to use NDB, but simply require more time than anticipated to make use of NDB and start purchasing products from us. There has been a very positive response to the Company's products and almost all seem to think that the lack of subscription fees and the use of standard web browser technology are the crucial selling points.  Mr Avery accepted that this report does not refer to any of the problems he alleges were in existence at the time that he wrote this Report. He said, "I don't know why I didn't put it in the report." It was suggested to him that the reason he did not put it in the Report was that any of the problems that were being suffered were not significant. Mr Avery rejected that suggestion and said that the problems were dealt with separately and were matters of separate discussion amongst the directors.  The 1998 Annual Report of the defendant was signed by Mr Avery and his father on 28 September 1998, just eleven days after Mr Avery had written to Mr
Regan with his complaints. That Report included the following:  
National Databank engaged Memorex Telex (a Kanamatsu company) to design, supply and install its computer hardware and software, the network system and the establishment of the web site. Many delays were experienced with the installation and the system was not operational until mid-April, 1998 much later than originally contracted and even after that date many problems were experienced with the installation. The web site as initially designed did not meet the professional standards required and was re-designed by the company's own IT staff over the following five months culminating in unexpected delays in the development of our online information system and causing a complete revision of our original sales forecasts.  
Despite these early unforeseen problems the Company now has one of the most advanced E-commerce applications in Australia with its systems capable of delivering information in real-time from disparate data stores around
Australia through sophisticated software and communications, simultaneously conducting real-time accounting clearance and payment functions.  In cross-examination Mr Avery said that these statements were true but that they dealt only with part of the System. He maintained that there were problems with other parts of the System, as he had complained to Mr Regan. He agreed that he did not inform the shareholders of these alleged problems in the Annual Report.  The defendant relied upon statements of evidence of Brett Lane and Anthony
Firth, who were not cross-examined. Mr Firth described himself as an "IT professional" holding a Bachelor of Arts degree majoring in computer studies.
He is experienced in many computer environments and was employed with Edime as a computer programmer. He worked on the System at the defendant's premises whilst employed by Edime between December 1997 and May 1998.  Mr Firth expressed the opinion that in May 1998 the System created for the defendant by the plaintiff and Edime was not complete and had many software errors. He stated that there were many problems with the software, including but not limited to the base software, NPX, the ASIC feeds, the LTO feeds and numerous bugs both in the screens and the update routines. He recalled that the System did not pass usage data to the accounting system as the third party accounting software, Arrow, was unable to import the data as required. Mr
Firth described himself as the de facto Project Manager for Edime on the
Project and stated that he managed the tasks of Brett Lane and Robin
Bermanseder. Mr Firth stated that as far as he was aware Mr Dawe did not test the System personally.  Mr Firth also expressed the opinion that a cause of the bugs was partly due to the use of the NPX software. As far as he was aware the defendant's site was the first site in Australia to use the software and neither he nor any of the staff who were working on the defendant's System had used the software previously. He found that the software was not adequate for the task and that he and the other employees had to write many software routines themselves because the NPX system could not produce the required functionality.  Mr Firth expressed the opinion that the Project was under resourced. He stated that Edime could not finish the software development in time and did not have the time or resources to properly test the System in the period from
December 1997 to May 1998 inclusive. His view was that the Project needed another four people to properly write and test the software.  During the development of the System Mr Firth and the other programmers did some unit and integration testing of particular parts of the System that they were working on at the time. He did not perform a full or proper System test, or acceptance test, at any time prior to June 1998 and only tested parts of the System after that date. He was not aware of any other software developer who was working on the Project doing a full, or proper System test. Mr Firth developed an Acceptance Test document for the defendant, however, he was not aware that the tests in the document were ever executed as acceptance of the
System.  Mr Firth recalled continued problems with the data feeds from the LTO and
ASIC. He also recalled problems with a system known as Quest, a credit card authorisation system. As at 29 May 1998 the integration of the Quest credit card system was operational only in test mode and required alterations to process the first transaction of the day.  Mr Firth commenced employment with the defendant in about June 1998. His role with the defendant was to complete and repair the System, which he referred to as "bug fixing". He was employed for approximately six months until the System was sold by the defendant, he thought, in about December 1998 or January 1999. Mr Firth's evidence was that he was not asked and did not say to anyone, let alone Mr Dawe, Mr Deadman or Mr Avery, that the System was "working properly". He said that if he had been asked he would have said that it did not. Mr Firth maintained that the System had not been properly tested at the time of "hand over" in May 1998. In a supplementary statement dated 29
October 2002, Mr Firth referred to some tests that were done that were performed internally at the defendant's premises on computers connected directly to the defendant's System.  During the period June 1998 until December 1998 Mr Firth spent almost 100% of the first ten weeks of his employment with the defendant fixing errors and rectifying the System. After the first ten weeks his work principally involved developing the invoicing system. He estimated that 70% of his time was spent on developing that system and 30% was spent on fixing errors and rectifying the System.  Mr Lane gave evidence in his statement that by June 1998 several aspects of the System did not work properly. The problems included, but were not limited to, that: (a) data feeds from organisations such as ASIC and the LTO did not work correctly or reliably; (b) the online registration of customers did not work correctly; (c) the payments and billing system did not work according to the specifications for the System, produced inaccurate bills and did not record payments correctly; (d) components of the LTO system did not work; (e) invoicing for the use of the System did not work correctly; (f) the Arrow accounting package did not work correctly; (g) there were problems for customers who used the System with certain Internet browsers, in particular
Internet Explorer 4.0, which was a commonly used Internet browser; (h) the credit card gateway used for payment by users did not always work; (i) there were errors on the screens that the System sent to users as results for the search requested; and, (j) users were unable to unsubscribe from the System.  Mr Lane also gave evidence that he did not test the System himself by going through each of the tests in the document entitled "Acceptance Testing
Document". He was not aware of any other person testing the System using that document as a guide. Mr Lane was employed by the defendant from June 1998 to
December 1998. He estimated that he spent 30% of his time "rectifying defects" in the System.  The plaintiff relied upon the evidence of Mr Deadman who described himself as an "IT consultant" employed as Managing Director of his own business,
DataSource Pty Ltd (DataSource) which has been operating for about fifteen years. Mr Deadman's services are generally contracted to various companies through DataSource.  Between late May 1997 and late May 1998 Mr Deadman was contracted to an IT consultancy firm, Careers Connections, which contracted with the plaintiff for the supply of Mr Deadman's consulting and project management services to the plaintiff. Between October 1997 and May 1998, excluding a vacation in
December/January, Mr Deadman was working full time for the plaintiff in developing the System for supply to the defendant. From June 1998 until August Mr Deadman was contracted to the defendant as the Manager of its IT
Development. He became and remains a shareholder of the defendant which is now known as Global Business Solutions Ltd. He presently holds forty-six hundred shares.  Mr Deadman was responsible for all aspects of the installation, including the sub-contracting of services, quality control for the infrastructure of servers, data communications and software development and the sign-off for payment both of invoices rendered by the plaintiff and invoices rendered to the plaintiff by its sub-contractors in completing the development and supply of the System.  During the time that he was the Project Manager and also when he was employed as the defendant's IT Development Manager, Mr Deadman described himself as "good friends" with Mr Avery. During the period October 1997 to
August 1998, he and Mr Avery would regularly go out for a drink. During conversations on these occasions they would speak of the "great future" the defendant had and "where we could take it". They spoke about additional products, services and content and a vast range of topics in respect of the defendant's business. Mr Deadman gave evidence that during these outings Mr
Avery did not complain to him about the problems about which Mr Avery wrote to
Mr Regan in September 1998.  Mr Deadman exhibited what he referred to as a "curriculum vitae" to his first affidavit. That affidavit was sworn on 13 June 2001. The curriculum vitae included a reference to Mr Deadman's role as the Project Manager in installing the System for the defendant. It included the following:  
As the Project Manager for this large and complex Project, I had responsibility for making the pre-defined Scope happen on time and on budget.  Mr Deadman was challenged as to the accuracy of this statement. He initially suggested it was "poetic licence" which he said he allows when he is marketing himself. He said, "however when I am sitting in front of a judge I tend to tell the truth". Mr Deadman subsequently conceded that he knew that this document was to be placed before a judge and ultimately accepted that the statement was simply false. The falsity was that it was not a project that was delivered "on time".  Mr Deadman also gave the following evidence:  
Q. I want to go right back to the start of your cross-examination and just ask you this question: Is it a true or false statement that you had the responsibility on behalf of Memorex to bring this job in on time and under budget? 
A. No, that is a false statement.  
Q. Why is that a false statement? 
A. The budget associated with the job was never, ever mentioned. I managed the personnel in the job and they were charged out to me at a rate. The figures I had to work with for the budget were the full value of the advanced service figures. The external contracts, such as Edime, Netscape and Datas were all fixed price contracts. We had actually agreed on a price prior to starting a job. I never, ever had anything to do with the costings as far as the hardware is concerned.  
Q. It was your job to bring the job in on time if you could? 
A. Yes, it was my job to bring the job in on time.  (tr. 263)  This evidence establishes that not only was the statement false in respect of bringing the job in on time, but was also false in respect of bringing the job in "on budget." It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that the statement in the curriculum vitae only referred to Mr Deadman's responsibilities rather than to what actually occurred. That submission may have had more force but for Mr Deadman's evidence. He was the author of the document and, although he was given ample opportunity to adopt such a position, he did not do so. I am satisfied from his evidence that the statements were intended to convey not merely what Mr Deadman was responsible for, but also what actually happened with the Project. Those statements were false.  There is no issue between the parties that instead of being completed in
February 1998, the System was "signed off" on 29 May 1998. Mr Deadman claimed that one month of the delay was caused by the defendant by reason of problems experienced with the air conditioning not working effectively or alternatively, not being installed by the due date. The balance of the delay was accepted to be caused by the plaintiff with Edime being under resourced and not meeting the Milestones or deadlines.  Mr Deadman claimed that all of the bugs in the System which had been identified by Mr Avery, the defendant and the defendant's support staff had been fixed by the time of sign-off on 29 May 1998. Based on his experience in the computer industry, Mr Deadman said it is common for a computer system to experience bugs from time to time. Indeed Mr Avery accepted that in his evidence. Mr Deadman described "bugs" as mistakes or malfunctions of the software or hardware component of a computer system. He said that a computer system is an organism and fixing or altering one part of a computer system can cause bugs in other parts of that system. He said the idea of testing a computer system is to identify and fix any bugs in the system.  Mr Deadman said a number of times in his affidavit evidence that as far as he recalled, no significant problems were raised with him in respect of the
System. He gave evidence that the Internet Explorer 4.0 problem was outside the plaintiff's control and that "if this had been a problem" the defendant could have raised it either prior to sign-off on 29 May 1998 or under the six month warranty. In respect of the inability to unsubscribe from the System, Mr
Deadman said that he was "never" made aware of any problem in this regard. He also said that he was never made aware of any problem in relation to users' inability to select a particular page range on ASIC searches. Mr Deadman accepted in cross-examination that it was more accurate to say that he could not recall being made aware of these problems rather than saying that communication about these problems did not happen.  Mr Deadman was cross-examined at length about his knowledge of the testing of the System prior to the Certificates being signed on 20 May and 29 May
In his affidavit sworn on 13 June 2001 Mr Deadman referred to a meeting on 17 April 1998 at which the protocol for the final testing of the System to confirm that it complied with the Report was discussed. Although in his cross- examination Mr Deadman gave evidence that he asked Mr Wickman of the plaintiff and Mr Dawe of Edime to prepare that protocol, it is apparent from the minutes of the meeting of 17 April 1998 that Mr Firth and Mr Wickman were asked to prepare such a document. Once Mr Deadman was shown those minutes he accepted that his memory may not have been accurate and that it may well have been Mr
Firth instead of Mr Dawe. The document that was ultimately produced was endorsed as having been "developed" by Mr Firth and Mr Firth's unchallenged evidence was that he developed the document.  In his affidavit of 13 June 2001 Mr Deadman gave evidence as follows: 
On 20 May 1998 Edime delivered a written confirmation which stated that it had tested the NDL system in accordance with an Integration Testing
Document it had produced. Edime confirmed that the system had met the requirements under the Project Scoping Report. A true copy of the Integration
Testing Document and Edime's letter of 20 May 1998 are exhibited to this affidavit and marked with the letters "SAD 21". 
Brenton Avery, Marcus Dawe, Ted Avery, David McBride, Kevin Regan and I all met on 20 May 1998 to review the Computer System, the Integration Testing document and any outstanding issues. The agenda of the meeting is exhibited to this affidavit and marked with the letters "SAD 22". Marcus Dawe said words to the following effect:  
Here is the Integration Testing document and our confirmation that we have tested the system in accordance with this document. We recommend that you test the system against this document as well to ensure you are satisfied.  
Brenton Avery then told me that we were to issue a Conditional Acceptance
Certificate for software development a true copy of which is exhibited to this affidavit and marked with the letters "SAD 23". Brenton Avery signed this
Certificate for NDL. This Certificate excepted certain incomplete items. Apart from these it confirmed that the Computer System was completed. The final sign-off was set for 29 May 1998.  In cross-examination Mr Deadman was referred to paragraph 47 of his affidavit and the statement alleged to have been made by Mr Dawe. He gave the following evidence:  
Q. At that time you saw the Integration Testing Document? 
A. Based on ...  
Q. On 20 May 1998? 
A. Yes I did.
 (tr. 177) 
Q. Wasn't the Acceptance Testing document shown to Mr Avery at the meeting of May 1998 as well? 
A. The document - sorry, on 29 May?  
Q. On 20 May 1998, the Acceptance Testing document? 
A. Marcus actually brought an Acceptance Testing document with him, yes.  
Q. He spoke with Mr Avery about the Acceptance Testing document? 
A. It was presented to Brenton, yes.  
Q. The Acceptance Testing has not been done, but it is a document that shows what should be done? 
A. I can't attest to that. As I said, I was not in the loop in the development of the Acceptance Testing document. That was developed between NDL and Edime.  
Q. Have you seen the Acceptance Testing document? 
A. I have seen it, yes. I have briefly looked over it.  
Q. But you didn't see it prior to the meeting of 20 May? 
A. No.  
Q. So you didn't read it at that meeting? 
A. No.  
Q. You didn't read it after that meeting? 
A. No, I was running the meeting. I didn't have the opportunity to actually go through the detailed documents.  
Q. You didn't keep a copy and go through it at a later time? 
A. No.  ...  
Q. You never saw anyone conduct the test on that document, did you? 
A. No I didn't.  
Q. However, it was Memorex' responsibility to conduct acceptance testing? 
A. Yes, and that responsibility was given to Edime, who was a sub-contractor of Memorex.
 (tr. 181) Mr Deadman gave evidence that he was told by one of his employees that the acceptance testing was done (tr. 182). He said that he had confidence in Edime that they had done the testing properly (tr. 184). This was an odd statement particularly in the light of Mr Deadman's evidence that he had "waved a big stick" at Mr Dawe on numerous occasions to try to force Edime to comply with its contractual obligations (tr. 139). In later cross-examination Mr Deadman was shown the "Acceptance Testing Document" and did not recall having seen it (tr. 202). Mr Deadman's recollection was that the document was delivered on sign-off and that he did not look at it (tr. 203). He also gave the following evidence:  
Q. If it had been acceptance tested it might well have revealed a number of errors prior to 29 May 1998, mightn't it? 
A. If it had been acceptance tested, yes.  
Q. And that wasn't done? 
A. I've discovered today, yes, that it wasn't done as I would have liked it to have been done.  
Q. You certainly can't say here without it being acceptance tested that the system was delivered according to the functional specifications on 29 May , can you? 
A. On 29 May I was under the impression that it had been acceptance tested and that's what I wrote.  
Q. Yes but you didn't know that because you didn't do the tests, did you? 
A. No I relied on other people within the organisation to do the tests which is what my job was.
 (tr. 260-261) Mr Bell submitted that it is clear on the evidence that the plaintiff breached the terms of the SI Agreement. There is no issue that the Project was not completed on time. The plaintiff's failure in this regard was in breach of clause 5.1 of the SI Agreement. Mr Bell also submitted that the Court would be satisfied on the evidence that the plaintiff did not perform acceptance testing properly or at all in breach of clause 29 of the SI Agreement and that the plaintiff breached the warranty in clause 10 that the System would perform in accordance with the specifications.  Mr Deadman blamed Edime for a failure to comply with the Milestones and it is clear on the evidence that Mr Deadman was utilising various methods to try to pressure Mr Dawe to comply with the deadlines and Milestones. In a facsimile of 5 February 1998 Mr Deadman advised Mr Dawe that he agreed with Mr
Avery's complaints that had apparently been made about the development of the
System. The fax continued:  
Additionally notwithstanding the fact that we did finally get the site on-line on Wednesday, there are serious deficiencies that at this time essentially make the site unusable. Specifically:  * Issues associated with Internet Explorer. Although you were consistently advised of the requirement for all code to be IE3, IE4, Netscape N4 and Netscape N4 compatible, no qualification of this compatibility was carried out until I again brought the subject up.  * Billing, although, 'Sort of Works' has some serious problems.  * ASC results formatting is still incomplete.  * RWE is not yet completed.  
Marcus, quite frankly electronic dimensions are not performing to their contracted milestones. Not one milestone has been achieved by the time specified. Additionally I have been awaiting your revised milestones for the balance of the project for more than a week.  
It is obvious that this project is undermanned and your milestones are consistently extending.  
Additionally the lack of qualified 'Artistic Input' into this site coupled with what would appear to be your personal lack of interest in the successful on time completion of this project leaves me no choice but to consider a review of your contracted responsibilities.  On 2 March 1998 Mr Deadman wrote again to Mr Dawe and advised that he had reviewed and suitably modified Edime's proposed Milestone amendments. Mr
Deadman then advised that such would be approved on the basis of progress payments being reduced with a balloon payment of the final payment and that if the Milestones were not met, reduced Milestone payments based on $1,000 per day would occur. Mr Deadman advised that 31 March was the final acceptable date for delivery otherwise a penalty clause would be invoked.  Notwithstanding the fact that Edime seems to have been a major cause of the delay, it was the plaintiff's responsibility to comply with its contract with the defendant to install the System on the date promised. Although there was complaint about the air conditioning being installed late and/or ineffectively, I am satisfied the plaintiff was clearly in breach of clause .1 of the SI Agreement.  The plaintiff submitted that Mr Avery acknowledged that the defendant "had gone through the System prior to sign-off and that it appeared to work". In reliance upon this evidence it was submitted that such "puts paid" to the allegation that there was reliance on some representation made by the plaintiff to the effect that acceptance testing had been carried out. It is conceded by the plaintiff that the words to the effect that acceptance testing had been carried out were said by Mr Dawe, but it is submitted that "the true state of affairs" (whatever they may be) must have been known to the defendant at the time the words were said, and accordingly the defendant could not possibly have relied upon any such statement.  The evidence given by Mr Avery on this topic was as follows:  
Q. And you say that you did not test the System at all because of what they told you? 
A. I did not test the System, no.  
Q. That is nonsense, isn't it, Mr Avery? 
A. What, that I didn't?  
Q. You did test the System. You were testing it the whole way through this
Project, weren't you? 
A. There were - we did do testing, not formalised testing. I did using usage of it but I didn't sit there with the testing documentation that was somewhere probably in this pile of documents here (indicated).  
Q. To test whether the System works or not all one needs to do is to go to a computer terminal, pretend that they are a customer, dial it up, pay on their credit card and see if they can do a search, for example, of the Land Titles
Office. If you can, it worked and if you can't, it didn't. Am I missing something? 
A. When I was shown the System ..  
Q. Please. What am I missing? 
A. Have you asked the question?  
Q. What am I missing? 
A. What you're missing is that on the final sign-off meeting the System that was shown to me, and we went through the System, appeared to work. I was not involved with the formal testing and the System appeared to work at that meeting on the 29th.  ...  
Q. Wouldn't a reasonable person who wanted to see if the System worked or not simply pretend that they were a customer and see if it worked? 
A. That is one form of testing ... what I was continuing to say was there were a number of different types of testing that is done in an IT system. In this environment one of the most important processes was the technical testing of the System. It does, on the surface, do what you are talking about in terms of going through as a customer but it goes more in depth in terms of what the actual code is doing in the process. Just going in as a straight-out customer and seeing if it works might be good and well from your point of view, but there is a multitude of processes that happen on the other side of the transaction from the internal process of the organisation.
 (tr. 59-61).
 There is no doubt that both Mr Dawe and Mr Deadman informed Mr Avery that the System "worked". It is also the case that Mr Avery gave evidence in his affidavit that because he was informed by the defendant that the System worked he did not believe that he had to do any further tests.  It is clear from the Integration Testing Document that no tests were conducted after 5 May 1998. Even if I were to accept that the integration testing was the same as the acceptance testing (which would seem to be a somewhat dubious conclusion to reach particularly when one compares the two testing documents), then no acceptance testing was done after 5 May 1998. Mr
Deadman said he relied on Mr Dawe who claimed that the System had been tested.  It is clear that after the Conditional Acceptance Certificate was signed on May 1998 further adjustments and changes to the System occurred. Mr Deadman was cross-examined as follows:  
Q. What I suggest to you is that Acceptance Testing of the System should have been done after the final changes had been done, do you agree with me? 
A. Not necessarily. The final changes between the provisional sign-off and the final sign-off were, in my opinion, just a small portion of the complete
System.  
Q. They were changes, weren't they? 
A. They were minor changes, yeah.  
Q. Minor changes that took nine days to do? 
A. Mmm.  ...  
Q. Don't you say that when you changed one part of the System, it may effect another part? 
A. It can effect another part.  
Q. It can? 
A. It depends.  
Q. If one was making changes to the ASX System, one should re-test at least the whole ASX System? 
A. Of course.  
Q. One should also test the method of navigation to the ASX System? 
A. Yes.  ...  
Q. In regards to the LTO System, changes were being made to that through April and May 1998? 
A. Yes, they had.  
Q. It was part of the conditional sign-off something about the LTO System? 
A. It was also part of the final sign-off. That product had not been approved at the time.  
Q. Work was continuing on that System through May 1998? 
A. Yes.  
Q. You would have expected it to have been tested after the work had finished, wouldn't you? 
A. Yes, I would have.  
Q. There should have been a test in May 1998? 
A. Yes.
 (tr. 184-185).
 There is no doubt that under clause 29.1 the plaintiff was required to perform acceptance testing. It is also clear that for that testing to be successful, the expectations of the Report had to be met or exceeded (cl.
.2). The defendant was required by clause 29.3 of the SI Agreement to issue an Acceptance Testing Certificate stating that the System had been tested as required by the Agreement and had satisfied all acceptance testing. That
Certificate was required to be issued by the defendant "after satisfactory demonstration of satisfactory completion of all acceptance testing without any error or malfunction being found or suspected" by the plaintiff. It was the defendant who had the responsibility to issue the Certificate after such "satisfactory demonstration". If the System failed to pass the acceptance testing within 90 days of the System's delivery date and the failure had a material effect on the operation of the System, then the failure was deemed to be a total failure to perform by the plaintiff (cl. 29.4). The defendant had the option of notifying the plaintiff of such a failure. It did not do so.  The plaintiff submitted that the defendant must have known the true state of affairs in respect of the acceptance testing because Mr Wickman had been allocated the task of creating the testing document with Mr Dawe. As I have said, Mr Deadman accepted that the minutes of 17 April 1998 demonstrate that the task was not allocated to Mr Dawe but more probably to Messrs Firth and
Wickman. Mr Firth gave unchallenged evidence that he prepared the Integration
Testing Document. He made no mention of Mr Wickman being involved in that process. The Acceptance Testing Document is endorsed "Developed by Anthony
Firth" with the date 5 May 1998. There is no mention of Mr Wickman. Mr Firth also made no mention of Mr Wickman being involved in any discussions in relation to testing. I am not satisfied that the defendant's failure to call
Mr Wickman should result in an adverse finding against the defendant on the issue of acceptance testing.  On the evidence of Mr Firth and Mr Lane and in the absence of evidence from
Mr Dawe I am satisfied that it is more probable than not that the acceptance testing was not done in accordance with clause 29.1 of the SI Agreement. The defendant was entitled to require the plaintiff to comply with its obligations to satisfactorily demonstrate to it that the expectations of the Report were met or exceeded in the acceptance testing. Mr Avery's evidence was that Mr
Dawe and/or Mr Deadman informed him that the defendant had to go through the
Acceptance Testing Document itself to confirm that it was satisfied with the
System. There is no evidence that the defendant followed that suggestion.  The relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant became somewhat peculiar in May 1998. At that time all of the computer programmers from Edime, formerly the sub-contractor to the plaintiff for the installation of the
System, were employed by the defendant. Mr Deadman also was contracted to work for the defendant. That meant that all of the personnel who had knowledge of what is conceded to be a large and complex system, had left the plaintiff's employment and were working for the defendant. The exception to that is Mr
Dawe.  The Conditional Acceptance Certificate issued on 20 May 1998 certified that the defendant accepted all further responsibility for the Software development "in accordance with clause 29.1" of the SI Agreement. It was not up to the defendant to accept it "in accordance with 29.1". The defendant was required to issue a Certificate pursuant to clause 29.3. It was the plaintiff's obligation to comply with clause 29.1 of the SI Agreement. Although I am satisfied that the testing was not done by the plaintiff in accordance with clause 29.1, I am also satisfied that the defendant failed to exercise its rights under clause 29 in respect of the acceptance testing.  The cross-examination of Mr Avery suggested that any problems the defendant experienced with the System after 29 May 1998 were minor. The plaintiff relied upon the lack of disclosure in the Annual Report of 1998 of any of the alleged current problems and the failure to include any complaints in Mr Avery's
Report to the directors of the defendant on 13 July 1998. It was submitted that the defendant has not proved that these problems were such that would amount to a breach of the warranty contained in clause 10 of the SI Agreement and it was submitted that, in any event, no claim was made under the warranty.  The defendant sought to rely upon the letter to Mr Regan of 17 September from Mr Avery as a claim during the warranty period. The letter to Mr
Regan of 17 September 1998 does not comply with Clause 10.2 of the SI
Agreement. Under that clause, the defendant had an obligation to notify the plaintiff of the defect during the warranty period so that the plaintiff could immediately rectify it or if necessary modify the Software at the plaintiff's expense. This was not a letter notifying the plaintiff for that purpose. This was a letter seeking to negotiate with the plaintiff in respect of the plaintiff's claim for payment of its outstanding invoices. Mr Avery's evidence puts beyond doubt that this was not a claim under warranty.  The plaintiff's representatives knew in late May 1998 that there were problems with this System. One example of a communication demonstrating that knowledge is an email sent from Mr Wickman to Mr MacBride, which was forwarded to Mr Deadman on 27 May 1998, which reads as follows:  
Over the last two days we have been experiencing problems with particular
Organization users purchasing products. After some trouble-shooting exercises we narrowed the problem to Organizations with multiple users (I.E &gt;1 user) not being allowed to make purchases. This is a problem that should have been identified in the Memorex/Edime integration product testing that Memorex/Edime have already certified as being complete! This problem has prevented sales from most of our organisation's users and strained relationships with several of our important clients.  
Further, on notification of this problem to yourself at -11.00 am today it was not until - 3pm that one of the Edime team members appeared at National
Databank and then he was not aware of the problem!! 
Is Edime taking this issue seriously? This attitude/approach by Edime can only jeopardise a sign-off on this project for Friday. Please advise what is going on.  Mr Deadman forwarded that email to Mr MacBride stating as follows:  
I just received this from Grant, and have immediately forwarded to you. 
Some background! 
Grant called me at 11am and I immediately telephoned Marcus and requested that he get someone in to resolve this after discussing the problem with Grant direct (I didn't fully understand the problem and felt that direct dialogue between Grant and Marcus would be best). I rang Grant back about an hour later and he told me that Marcus had called him and following their discussion,
Marcus agreed to get hold on Anthony and resolve this problem. The following email says the rest.  The defendant relied upon a series of Customer Service Reports prepared by the defendant's staff in respect of complaints made about the System. In the
Report for the week ending 17 July 1998 there is reference to the log of outstanding user problems and the IT personnel addressing the bugs on the site. There is also reference to the NPX which was said to be "particularly buggy" (Ex. 2, p 66).  In the Report for the week ending 24 July 1998 (Ex. 2, p 39) the credit card transactions were said to be a "significant source of problems". The proxy problem appeared to have been resolved but it is clear that the users were somewhat ambivalent about the resolution. Otherwise the Report referred to the majority of user problems stemming from the user rather than the
System. However there was also reference to the difficulties of individual users within organisations accessing the System.  The Customer Service Report for the week ending 31 July 1998 included the following:  
Customer Service has had a busy week trying to keep our explorer users happy in the midst of the latest Proxy Problem. This problem effects any of our users behind a proxy with an Explorer Browser. We are sending a generic e-mail with a basic explanation as to why the problem has occurred, a link to download Netscape (we are still unclear of the legalities of this) and an offer of any services performed and forwarded by Customer Service at the usual price.  
Although we are trying to minimize the effects of this it is becoming quite detrimental. Users are responding with the question "Why am I able to access any other site but yours? - Even other interactive sites." We have already lost a few small users. I spoke to Pat McVean at Antanaskovic Hartnell recently about it and she was a little concerned as they have standardized their office with Explorer. She is a very reasonable lady and has agreed to download Netscape 4 onto her staffs PCs. I offered to send someone out there to assist. She was grateful for the offer but declined - whew! - Who would go?
She pointed out though that she would perform this task gradually so it may take some time until all users there have access.  
Credit Solutions Australia are the other major client that was brought on this week. Thankfully they are using Netscape V3 so we shouldn't have any problems there.  The Customer Service Report for the fortnight ending 14 August (Ex. 2, p ) referred to the continued struggle with the proxy problem. It was noted that some users had only just started to experience the problem although they had always been behind a proxy and had always used Internet Explorer Version These are the only Reports in evidence from which problems with the System can be identified at specific dates. Although the plaintiff submitted that the complaints about the System made by Mr Firth and Mr Lane were general and vague, I am satisfied that their unchallenged evidence establishes that there were problems with the System that needed rectification for it to work satisfactorily. Their unchallenged evidence is that they spent a particular percentage of time to rectify those problems.  I am satisfied that the plaintiff breached the SI Agreement by failing to deliver the System on time and failing to deliver the System in compliance with the Specifications. The next question is the measure of damages to which the defendant is entitled.  
Damages  The plaintiff relied upon the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale [(1854) 9 Ex ]
as stated by Alderson B at 354:  
Where two parties have made a contract which one of them has broken, the damages which the other party ought to receive in respect of such breach of contract should be such as may fairly and reasonably be considered either arising naturally, ie according to the usual course of things, from such breach of contract itself, or such as may reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties, at the time they made the contract, as the probable result of the breach of it.  Mr Newlinds submitted that what was contemplated by the parties for the breach was liquidated damages pursuant to clause 5 of the SI Agreement. The plaintiff acknowledged in clause 5.2 that the defendant would suffer loss and damage if the plaintiff failed to complete the Project on time (cl. 5.2). It was agreed that if the plaintiff failed to complete the project on time the defendant would be entitled to deduct 0.05% of the purchase price for each business day after the day on which it was due (cl. 5.3). The defendant was also entitled to withhold remuneration pursuant to clauses 4.3 and 4.4 of the
SI Agreement. The defendant did not at any stage purport to rely upon clause .3 or 4.4 in respect of the failure to pay the amounts in the plaintiff's outstanding invoices until after the proceedings were commenced.  The further matter in the contemplation of the parties was under clause 10 of the SI Agreement in respect of a breach of warranty. The defendant's remedy for defects in the System in this regard was to notify the plaintiff of the defect during the warranty period, which triggered the plaintiff's obligation to "immediately rectify or, if necessary to remedy the defect, modify the customised software at its own expense".  The evidence discloses that the defendant's Business Information Service was sold in about December 1998/January 1999. Although the System was sold for a price less than the cost to install it, no case has been mounted by the defendant that its measure of damages is the difference between the sale price it achieved and the sale price it could reasonably have expected to achieve in the absence of the alleged defects. This case was simply not run.  Mr Bell submitted that the defendant is entitled to damages by way of liquidated damages for the late delivery of the System from the scheduled delivery date of 15 February 1998 to 29 May 1998. There is little issue about this aspect of the defendant's claim. Although the evidence in relation to the air conditioning system suggests that the temperatures were at times uncomfortable, I am not satisfied that this was a reason for the delay in the delivery of the System. The defendant is entitled to liquidated damages for the delay in the delivery of the System.  Mr Bell submitted that the defendant is also entitled to approximately 75% of Mr Firth's salary, 30% of Mr Lane's salary and 25% of Mr Avery's salary as costs of rectification of the System. This aspect of the damages claim is troubling. If the problems had been identified and notified to the plaintiff during the specific period when they were being rectified, the plaintiff would have had the opportunity to consider the nature and extent of the problem and to decide whether it was obliged under the terms of its contractual obligations to rectify the problem at its cost. It was not given the opportunity to make that assessment and was not informed that money, in the form of wages to Mr Firth and Mr Lane, was being spent on rectification of problems, for which the defendant now alleges the plaintiff should bear responsibility.  During the period the defendant claims the problems were being "fixed" by
Messrs Firth and Lane the defendant was further "developing" its IT system.
Indeed Mr Deadman was employed by the defendant specifically to manage that process. Had a warranty claim been made the plaintiff could have made the judgment as to its liability to "fix" the various problems including deciding whether the ongoing development of the defendant's IT system had any relevant impact upon the System and upon its liability in this regard. However it is clear on the unchallenged evidence of Messrs Firth and Lane that the System did not comply with some aspects of the Specifications in the Report.  Although the plaintiff, and indeed the Court, does not know the specific steps Messrs Lane and Firth took to deal with the problems to achieve what Mr
Avery referred to in his letter of 17 September 1998 to Mr Regan as a "saleable product", I am of the view that more probably than not the System was in a completed state by September 1998. This view is based upon the contents of Mr Avery's letter to Mr Regan, the terms of the 1998 Annual Report and the evidence of Mr Firth and Mr Lane. Although Mr Firth and Mr Lane refer generally to their employment continuing until December 1998 and January 1999 respectively and then allocate a percentage of their time spent on fixing the
System, I am satisfied that in the light of the documents prepared by the defendant in September 1998 any "problems" experienced after that time were not such that affected the "saleable product".  Mr Avery's evidence as to why the defendant did not make any claim under warranty was in my view quite telling notwithstanding the fact that he said that he was hazarding a guess. He was the Managing Director of the defendant and had secured all the relevant employees of the plaintiff. He gave evidence in part that the defendant was saying, "let's just try and see if we can fix it ourselves ... it would be quicker, faster and easier". Even after the letter to Mr Regan dated 17 September 1998 and for the remaining three months of the warranty period, the defendant did not "notify" the plaintiff of any defect that it required the plaintiff to remedy or rectify.  The parties agreed that liquidated damages would be payable for the plaintiff's failure to perform its obligations within the time period detailed in the project Timetable. "Sign off" for the System occurred on 29 May 1998.
The plaintiff submitted that if I am against it on the main submission that there should be no award of damages for any problems after 29 May 1998, I might regard the delivery of the System as at September 1998 and award the defendant liquidated damages up to that time. There is in my view a problem with that approach. It may have been appropriate if the System had been delivered by the plaintiff as at September 1998 but it was the defendant's employees who worked on the System as a consequence, not of the delay breach, but as a consequence of the System not complying with the Specifications as referred to in Mr Lane's and Mr Firth's evidence.  In respect of the delay in delivery of the System up to 29 May 1998 it is appropriate to implement the intention of the parties to award liquidated damages without requiring proof of and irrespective of the actual damage.
After 29 May 1998 the defendant is required to prove its actual damage. I am satisfied that the appropriate measure of damages for the delay is that contemplated by the parties in clause 5 of the SI Agreement and that the defendant is entitled to liquidated damages from 15 February 1998 to 29 May
That figure is agreed between the parties as $57,787.53.  Notwithstanding the defendant's failure to make a warranty claim I am satisfied that there should be awarded a reasonable amount for costs incurred by the defendant in placing the System into a complete state as it should have been delivered. I am satisfied those costs arise naturally as a consequence of the breach: Hadley versus Baxendale at 354. The quantum of that amount is difficult to assess having regard to the very general nature of the evidence given by Mr Firth and Mr Lane. However they were not cross examined and doing the best I can to make an assessment I am reliant upon their evidence of the percentage of time they spent on remedying the System between 29 May 1998 and mid September 1998. Although Mr Avery did not descend into any detail of the particular tasks he performed in this regard it is obvious that he had to spend time, although more probably than not less than the time spent by Messrs
Firth and Lane, dealing with the various problems to which they each referred in their evidence.  The additional amount to which the defendant is entitled by way of damages for reasonable costs of rectifying the System is assessed on the basis of an equivalence to 14 weeks of Mr Firth's salary and Mr Lane's salary and 12 weeks of Mr Avery's salary. This is not a strict approach or an exact science. It is a process of assessment to reach an amount that is reasonable in all the circumstances of the evidence. Mr Lane's annual salary was at the time $50,000 and the equivalent of 14 weeks salary is approximately $13,500. Mr Firth's annual salary was at the time $60,000 and the equivalent of 14 weeks salary is approximately $16,200. Mr Avery's annual salary at the time was $90,000 and the equivalent of 12 weeks salary is approximately $21,000. Therefore in addition to the liquidated damages of $57,787.53 the defendant is entitled to $50,700 for reasonable costs of rectifying the System to the state in which it should have been delivered.  The further claim the defendant makes for "damages due to inadequacies or deficiencies in the System from 29 May 1998"was put in the following way: (1) the Directors of the defendant made certain forecasts in the Prospectus in ; (2) the forecasts were fair and reasonable; (3) the forecasts were not achieved; (4) an appropriate measure of damages in the circumstances is the amount forecast reduced by 40% for vicissitudes. That amount, as agreed between the accounting experts, is $2.2 million.  In this regard Mr Bell relied upon The Commonwealth versus Amann Aviation Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64], in particular the following portions of the judgment of Mason CJ and Dawson J at , 81 and 83 respectively:  
The onus of proving damages sustained lies on a plaintiff and the amount of damages awarded will be commensurate with the plaintiff's expectation, objectively determined, rather than subjectively ascertained. That is to say, the plaintiff must prove, on the balance of probabilities, that his or her expectation of a certain outcome, as a result of performance of the contract, had a likelihood of attainment rather than being mere expectation.  ...  
The expression "damages for loss of profits" should not be understood as carrying with it the implication that no damages are recoverable either in the case of a contract in which no net profit would have been generated or in the case of a contract in which the amount of profit cannot be demonstrated. ...
If the performance of a contract would have resulted in a plaintiff, while not making a profit, nevertheless recovering costs incurred in the course of performing contractual obligations, then that plaintiff is entitled to recover damages in an amount equal to those costs in accordance with Robinson v
Harman, as those costs would have been recovered had the contract been fully performed. Similarly, where it is not possible for a plaintiff to demonstrate whether or to what extent the performance of a contract would have resulted in a profit for the plaintiff, it will be open to a plaintiff to seek to recoup expenses incurred, damages in such a case being described as reliance damages or damages for wasted expenditure.  ...  
The settled rule, both here and in England, is that mere difficulty in estimating damages does not relieve a court from the responsibility of estimating them as best it can. Indeed, in Jones versus Schiffmann Menzies J.
went so far as to say that the "assessment of damages ... does sometimes of necessity involve what is guesswork rather than estimation". Where precise evidence is not available the court must do the best it can. And uncertainty as to the profits to be derived from a business by reason of contingencies is not a reason for a court refusing to assess damages.  Other than claims made by Mr Avery to which I refer below, the only evidence that the defendant lost any customers is contained in the Customer
Service Report dated 31 July 1998 where it is stated that the defendant had lost "a few small users". There is no evidence as to the extent of the use or revenue that might have been expected from those small users but it follows that there was some loss incurred by their departure and the inference from the Customer Service Report is that their departure was caused by the particular problem identified in the report. The last date upon which the
Customer Service Reports evidence any problems is in the middle of August Mr Avery made a statement in his affidavit (par. 28, affd. 21/12/2000) that "a large number" of the persons who commenced using the System in 1998 stopped using the System. Mr Avery's letter of 17 September 1998 to Mr Regan also claimed that the defendant had "signed up and lost many significant clients because when they began to use the system they had technical difficulties". Mr Newlinds challenged Mr Avery on this topic (tr.70, 72 & ). The defendant has not called any witness to give evidence of problems experienced from the consumer/customer's point of view. There is no evidence before me of any customer who was "in the door" terminating their relationship with the defendant, other than the reference in that one report about the few small users.  There is ample evidence that there were registrations with the defendant and that some were significant clients. Those clients are named in the defendant's documents that are in evidence. These included firms such as
Gilbert & Tobin, Clayton Utz, Antanaskovic Hartnell, the Canberra offices of Malleson Stephen Jaques and Blake Dawson Waldron, and the law firm Deacons.
Corporate clients included Credit Solutions Australia, described as a "major client", and Circular Quay Business Services, described as a "twenty-six user client".  It is apparent from those documents that between 20 May 1998 and 14 August a number of new registrations occurred each day. It appears from Exhibit that there were approximately 421 registrations in that period. To this figure is added the early users prior to the sign-off of the System bringing the figure up to approximately 500 customers. There was just no evidence of any of those clients leaving the defendant after subscribing with it. There is some evidence in relation to a problem Deacons had with their individual solicitors subscribing under the corporate membership but that is the extent of it.  If there were a large number of customers who complained and, more importantly, a large number of customers who left the defendant because of problems with the System, it was a simple step to name them and to call evidence, documentary or otherwise, to prove that fact. Every opportunity was given to Mr Avery in his evidence to point to any document from any client who had departed and he was unable to do so. Nor did he give oral evidence as to the identity or number of any clients who had departed for that reason. I am not satisfied that a "large number" of clients left the defendant because of problems with the System. The defendant lost a "few small users" in July 1998.  Mr Bell submitted that I would infer from the evidence in relation to the problems that were identified by Messrs Firth, Avery and Lane and in the
Customer Service Reports that the System was flawed and as a natural consequence, the subscribers were not using the System. Mr Bell submitted that
I could draw that inference from the low revenue identified in the Profit and
Loss Statements of the defendant.  This claim is in part based upon a premise that the forecasts in the
Prospectus were reasonable and that they should have been achieved if the
System was working. It is submitted that because the forecasts were not achieved, I would be satisfied that the defendant has established its entitlement to damages in the amount of $2.2 million.  The defendant's accounting expert, Paul Mentzalis, dealt with the forecast results in the Prospectus that were: for the financial year 1998 an operating loss before income tax of $982,000; for the financial year 1999 an operating profit before income tax of $1.529 million; and for the year 2000 an operating profit before income tax of $3.746 million. The actual results compared to forecasts were: for the financial year 1998 a loss of $934,000 instead of $982,000; and for the 1999 financial year an operating loss of $1.804 million instead of a profit $1.529 million.  Mr Mentzalis based his conclusions as to loss suffered by the defendant on an assumption that there was a connection between the installation of the
System and the reduction in the defendant's operating activities and resultant profitability. There is a question as to whether that assumption can be justified on the facts in this case. The alleged "reduction" is, of course, only able to be measured against the directors' forecasts because this was a start-up business without a history of trading against which a "reduction" could be measured.  The Prospectus contained a letter dated 3 September 1997 signed by Mr T
Avery as Chairman of the defendant. It included the following statement: "This is the era of technology and the Internet. Companies which recognise this and move to the forefront of technology utilisation and creation will be successful, irrespective of fluctuations in the economy". There is nothing within the Prospectus, or indeed the evidence, to support the proposition that a company that utilises technology and creates technology is cocooned against the fluctuations in the economy. That opinion seems to have been a matter affecting the directors' forecasts.  The forecasts in the Prospectus were based on the directors' assumptions relating to anticipated developments, market growth and share, which in turn were based on independent advice obtained where considered necessary. Those forecasts were qualified by the statement that there were often "material differences" between the forecasts and the actual results and that no guarantee could be given that the forecasts were achievable because it was not possible to substantiate the assumptions, the details of which are set out earlier in this judgment.  BDO Nelson Parkhill's "Independent Review" of the directors' profit forecasts was included in the Prospectus. That Review included the following:  
This review was limited to enquiries of the Directors as to the process used in preparing the forecast statements, consideration of the assumptions and the underlying data supporting amounts in the forecast statements, and testing of the application of the assumptions in compiling the forecast statements.
Further, we have relied in part upon the conclusions reached in the
Independent Market Intelligence Report, completed by Greg Baker &
Associates, Marketing Consultants.  ...  
We do not express an opinion as to whether the actual future financial performance of the Company will approximate those forecasts by the Directors, as future assumptions by their nature are uncertain and only capable of substantiation through the use of evidence that is future-oriented and therefore speculative in nature.  BDO Parkhill did not comment at all upon the reasonableness of the assumptions and it is clear that its brief was limited to determining whether the directors' forecasts were consistent with the assumptions.  Greg Baker & Associates' Independent Market Intelligence Report (IMI
Report) included in the Prospectus was stated to be for the purpose of providing an independent assessment and evaluation of the market into which the defendant planned to expand and consolidate its business activities and to review the directors' assumptions as to the market share the defendant expected to achieve. It is clear that the IMI Report did not touch upon any other assumption made by the directors. Indeed no person was called by the defendant to establish the reasonableness or otherwise of those other assumptions.  The defendant's directors made estimates of sales as follows: for the 1998 year $1.486 million, for the 1999 year $8.783 million and for the year 2000 $12.960 million. Mr Baker assessed the reasonableness of the directors' assumption as to expected market share by "using research regarding the adoption of diffusion of innovations". That research was used because Mr Baker considered the products to be offered by the defendant and the technology that delivered them to be sufficiently new so as to warrant treatment as an innovation rather than a product extension. The IMI Report stated:  
The methodology is based upon the observation that the first group to adopt and trial a new product in any normally distributed statistical population are termed "innovators". Innovators generally comprise between 2.5% and 5% of any normally distributed distribution. Innovators act as evaluators and it has been found that a positive attitude to a new product or service by this group results in adoption by the next segment who are termed "Early Adopters" and comprise between 12.5% and 15% of a statistical population. Favourable adoption by this group creates peer pressure for product adoption by the "Middle Majority" of between 55% and 65% of the market.  
It is the graduated adoption over time by these three key groups which give rise to graphs of market penetration of new products such as VCRs, Personal
Computers, Automatic Teller Machines and Microwave Ovens etc. having a classic "S" shape initially displaying increase by increasing amounts and then increase by decreasing amounts.  
An estimate of the size and rate of adoption by Innovators, Early Adopters and
Middle Majority within the target segments of Solicitors, Accountants and
Commercial Decision Makers for National Databank Limited's Business
Information Products was conducted. The number and type of new clients acquired in each phase was accompanied by an estimate of their potential annual revenue contribution.  The IMI Report expressed Mr Baker's view that the products to be offered by the defendant were "unique" and that none of the other information brokers offered services comparable to that planned by the defendant. It also referred to his view that the achievement of the estimated sales revenue was dependent upon "an effective sales campaign to secure subscribers". The sales strategy was described as follows:  
National Databank's sales strategy will include face to face selling to major government and institutional clients and direct marketing to investors and professionals. The campaigns will be supported by targeted media placements to ensure prior favourable knowledge of the product. Target media will include national and metropolitan press supported by magazines servicing specific professions where required. Direct marketing campaigns have the benefit of targeting prospects in each segment in a measured and systematic way.
Information from both pre-launch tests and post roll-out sales will be used to continually evaluate formats and minimise down side risk.  
A two step marketing campaign (step 1 contact & qualify followed by step 2 of face to face selling) is expected to be the most appropriate sales vehicle.
Results would of course be dependent upon the quality of the offer and the attractiveness and simplicity of the conversion package for the target market.  In the segment headed "Conversion of current users to the integrated package" the IMI Report noted that the defendant would "have to convert many" who would be using "single sources of data". The Report concluded with the opinion that the directors' revenue forecast appeared to be fair and reasonable.  Mr Baker's report relied upon in the trial was dated 25 September 2000 and claimed to "re-visit" the initial assumptions underlying the market assessment of the defendant's business proposed in the 1997 Prospectus. In that report Mr
Baker referred to subsequent commercial developments and analysed a company,
Legalco Ltd (Legalco), incorporated on 29 November 1999 and admitted to the
Official List of the ASX on 30 May 2000, commencing official quotation on 1
June 2000. The purpose of referring to Legalco was to suggest, as the report did at page 8, that its progress indicated the level of performance that could have been achieved by the defendant. In submissions emphasis was placed upon the Legalco Annual Report for 2002 in which it was noted that 51% of the operating revenue was earned from the Internet based activity and that the percentage was continuously increasing. It was also noted that the revenue had increased from $15.070 million in 2001 to $28.712 million in 2002.  The existence of Legalco has significance for other reasons. In the
Legalco Prospectus the Chairman stated:  
From 1990, Legalco and its predecessors pursued the objective of servicing growing need by legal firms and other professional institutions for legal support services. The Company has successfully expanded the range of services provided, the market segments targeted and the utilisation of leading edge technology to deliver services on a cost-effective and efficient basis. Most notably, since 1997, Legalco has provided an increasing number of these services via the Internet, and particularly through its main website, www.legalco.com.au.  Legalco's principal business activity was referred to as a "business provider of public, legal, business and financial information and ancillary services". The Prospectus listed its customers as lawyers, financial institutions, valuers, conveyancers, companies, accountants and councils. The services to be provided were listed as settlements and exchanges, property inspections, business names, property titles and images, property inquiries, company searches and credit reports.  Mr Baker expressed the view that the target market and the service profile of Legalco were extremely similar to that of the defendant. The Annual Report of Legalco demonstrates that although its revenue had increased it made an overall loss in both 2001 and 2002. It is apparent from Legalco's Chairman's statement in the Prospectus and from the evidence of the plaintiff's expert
Ramin Marzbani, a principal of AC Neilson.Consult, that Legalco and its predecessors were offering the same range of services, but for the ASX, that the defendant planned to offer at the time the defendant's Prospectus was published in 1997. Mr Baker did not appreciate or analyse this fact either in the IMI Report or the report relied upon dated 25 September 2000.  Mr Marzbani was critical of a number of the assumptions made by the defendant in its Prospectus. In respect of assumption 11 - that retail pricing of business information products was consistent with industry pricing and constant over the forecast period - Mr Marzbani opined, and was not successfully challenged, that it was clear by September 1997 that the price of business information products had been declining since 1995.  In respect of assumption 13 - that wholesale prices of business information products were constant during the forecast period - Mr Marzbani expressed the opinion that there was a decreasing trend in wholesale services and an increasing trend in retail services. Providers of services such as land titles searches were moving away from wholesaling them to third parties to providing them directly. He gave the examples that in 1995 Reuters were providing Yahoo Internet users with free quotes for stock and that operators such as Dun & Bradstreet were providing direct electronic services. He also referred to the increasing trend for the provision of free services online as Internet portals provided free news and stock quotes online.  In respect of assumption 15 - that the advertising budget was sufficient to attract the forecast number of sales and customers - Mr Marzbani noted that only $2,699.73 was spent on advertising in the period ending 30 September and expressed the view that as the defendant was a start-up company and did not have an established customer base, such amount was not sufficient to achieve the level of business forecast. He expressed the view that a more realistic figure would have been five to ten times that amount.  Mr Marzbani also expressed the view that there was no demonstrated relationship between the advertising, marketing and sales budget and the number of customers that the defendant sought to attract. He was of the view that calculation of the budget should have been approached in terms of the cost of acquiring customers, migrating customers from competitors and in later years, retaining customers.  In respect of assumption 17 - that the defendant's market share of the business information market would be 18% by the year 2000 - Mr Marzbani expressed the view that it would be extremely unlikely that the defendant could have achieved such a forecast. This was because such a percentage was an extremely aggressive growth rate and to achieve it, a number of the defendant's competitors would have had to forego the equivalent revenues and possibly go out of business. The defendant would have had to win a lot of customers from competitors that were already established in the market who were servicing higher volume demand customers.  In respect of assumption 19 - that the forecast market sizes had been based on reported sales volumes contained in various 1995/1996 Annual Reports from government and commercial organisations - Mr Marzbani expressed the view that there was no demonstrated connection between the types of products and services provided by those government and commercial organisations and the types of products and services that the defendant was intending to provide.
There was no consideration or demonstration of the ability of the defendant to capture the markets for the products and services offered by those organisations. Mr Marzbani expressed the view that in those circumstances the comparison between the sales volumes of those organisations and the defendant's forecast market size appeared to be unfounded.  Other aspects of the way in which the defendant prepared to market itself were the subject of criticism in Mr Marzbani's report. There is no evidence that the defendant conducted any research as to the level of market demand for the particular services it was intending to offer. Indeed Mr Baker accepted in his evidence that all that he did was what is known as secondary research.
That included looking at statistics from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, consulting newspapers and the like. He conducted no primary, or dedicated, research such as putting together a focus group and consulting with the intended market as to what they wanted or assessing how to approach the particular market.  Mr Marzbani was critical of the defendant's assumption that the particular services it was intending to offer would be compelling to the market place. He suggested that it was a big assumption to make in the absence of comprehensive market research on the demand for the specific services the defendant was intending to offer. He also noted that there were gaps within the services offered by the defendant. He expressed the opinion that the Internet service providing market was already very competitive and sophisticated in 1995, and even more so by 1997 and 1998. By the end of April 1998 there were 632
Internet access providers or Internet service providers in the Australian market. It appeared to Mr Marzbani that the defendant had not taken into account the research available in Australia as to the competition within the
Internet service provider and business information system markets at the time it established its business.  It appears to me that the defendant did not prepare properly for its entree into the market and from the evidence of Mr Marzbani I am satisfied that its marketing strategy was more probably than not the cause of its failure to thrive. This was recognised in the June 1998 Memorandum written by
Mr Avery in which he said that the defendant had "failed to generate sales of any consequence". There was also the effect on the defendant of what was described as "many potential customers and new customers" being "simply too busy to either look at NDB or to fully integrate NDB into their daily schedule" at the end of the financial year. A further factor which probably had some impact, although Mr Avery said it was not significant, was the alleged inadequate service provided by the Customer Service Manager during the set-up period. That person's employment was terminated.  In the circumstances of the operating losses suffered by Legalco and the findings I have made in respect of the defendant's failure to properly market itself I do not intend to make the inferences Mr Bell asks me to make that the defendant's customers failed to use the System because there were problems with the System. In the absence of the evidence to which I have referred above
I am unable to reach that conclusion based on the defendant's Profit and Loss statements.  The System was "working" by September 1998 and the evidence does not establish that the problems with the System prior to or after that time caused other than a few small users to either leave the defendant or stop using the defendant's System once they were subscribers with the defendant. I am not satisfied that the defendant has proved the causal connection necessary for the loss of revenue or loss of opportunity aspect of its damages claim other than an entitlement to loss suffered by the departure of those few small users.  The date of the sale of the defendant's Business Information Service is far from clear. Mr Avery said it was December 1998 or January 1999. The plaintiff's expert accountant referred to a contract dated February 1999.
Assuming that these few small users would have stayed with the defendant until the sale of the business I assess that their revenue would have been a small percentage of the revenue generated from the clients of the defendant. Having regard to the other products available in the market and the income/revenue forecasts for the defendant I am satisfied that in the circumstances of this case an appropriate amount in respect of this loss during the period mid July to February 1999 is $20,000.  Although there was a claim that the plaintiff was estopped from seeking to recover any sums alleged to be owing in the outstanding invoices I am satisfied that the appropriate result in the light of the admissions made that the goods and services referred to in the invoices were delivered, is to enter judgment on the plaintiff's claim and on the cross claim. The plaintiff is entitled to the entry of judgment on its claim in the amount of $336,444.44.
The defendant is entitled to entry of judgment on its Cross-Claim in the amount of $128,487.53. The parties are to bring in Short Minutes for the entry of those judgments including interest and a costs order at 9.30am on 6
December 2002. The parties have not argued that interest should not be allowed, however should the parties be unable to agree on interest and costs and wish to argue either of those matters, they may do so on 6 December 2002.  *  
LAST UPDATED: 02/12/2002 * * * 
