

Regina versus Leanne Helen Croker [1997] NSWSC 194 (14 May 1997) 
REGINA versus Leanne Helen CROKER /96 
Wednesday 14 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Leanne Helen Croker seeks leave to appeal against the severity of her sentence comprising a minimum term of one year six months with an additional term of six months for assault occasioning actual bodily harm and a concurrent fixed term of one year for malicious damage to some gold chains.

There was a brush between the applicant and the victim on the day prior to the incident now under consideration and that brush appeared to be of no consequence. The applicant and the victim knew each other, both being patients of a Methadone clinic at which they attended for their daily dose.

About 11.30am on 9 April 1996 the victim was walking along Kensington Road,
Kogarah with a male. She was accosted by the applicant who was holding a knife with a 12 centimetre blade in her right hand. The applicant grabbed the victim's hair with the left hand, pushed the victim backwards against a car and pressed the knife against the victim's throat. With the knife held against the victim's throat the applicant pulled the victim by her hair and pushed the victim backwards against a fence and held her there.

The applicant let go of the victim's hair and pressed the knife against the victim's stomach. The applicant punched the victim two to three times in the face. The applicant grabbed three gold chains which the victim was wearing around her neck and pulled them, causing two of the chains to break. The applicant cut the remaining chain.

The victim was fearful of being stabbed. She suffered pain in the nose and pain and swelling in her upper lip and scratch marks around her neck.

The judge found that the applicant had given no reason for the attack and rejected the suggestion that it was a fight. The judge held that the applicant had attacked the victim with a knife without provocation or justification.
Fortunately, the injuries were minor. The judge correctly regarded the assault as a serious one, aggravated by the use of a knife.

The applicant, who was born on 6 August 1960, had a bad record. There were many offences from 1980 onwards, including offences in Victoria and
Queensland. They included burglary, dishonesty and drug offences. She has been to gaol quite often since 1986. In 1991 she was sentenced to two and a half years imprisonment for armed robbery. In 1993 she was sentenced to two and a half years imprisonment with a recommendation that she be considered for parole after eight months. This was for twenty-eight dishonesty offences.

She was sentenced in March 1994 to imprisonment for a further batch of dishonesty offences. There were also offences of assault police and assault.

The judge held that the applicant's record showed her to be a criminal who will not cease criminal activity whatever punishment is imposed upon her and who will not be rehabilitated. That finding, was, unfortunately, open to the judge and it is hard to disagree with it. The judge held that there was no contrition.

The judge took into account the applicant's pleas of guilty, her upbringing and background as set out in her detailed affidavit. The judge applied the principle of totality of criminality and held that there were no special circumstances.

The applicant in her written submissions on 12 March 1997 and 8 May 1997 has submitted that the offences should properly have been dealt with in the Local
Court. This was because the victim only suffered pain in her nose and swelling of her upper lip.

She complained she was wrongly advised by her solicitor. She said that she pleaded guilty because she thought she would only receive six to eight months.
She complained about her solicitor doing everything by affidavit and not putting her in the witness box so she could tell her side of the story. She complained that a man had, on the day on which she was sentenced, received a lesser minimum term for a more serious offence. She lamented that she would not be home for her son's tenth birthday. She was also concerned about the welfare of her four-year old daughter. These proceedings should have been and were properly dealt with in the District Court. Placing the applicant in the witness box would have been imprudent. She could probably have been cross- examined to great effect. It is difficult to see what she could usefully say about the attack. Any attempt to minimise it, when she used a knife, ran the risk of being counter-productive.
The explanation of self-defence in her submissions illustrates the point.
Understandably, that matter was not raised before the judge. It is evident from the detailed affidavit filed by the solicitor for the applicant that considerable care was taken in the material which was placed before the Court.

The solicitor was rightly concerned at the prospects of cross-examination.
While a period of two years and a minimum term of eighteen months are substantial, the criminality revealed was substantial and it cannot be dismissed or discounted in the way in which the applicant has suggested.

It is not permissible for us to have regard to sentences which were imposed in respect of different offences and as to which we do not have full details.

She has complained about her treatment in gaol, as meted out by other inmates.
She was placed in protection and, after she took an overdose, in segregation for 3 months. On 12 February 1997 she was returned to protection.

The applicant is anxious to move to Queensland at an early date. She stressed that she is finding the incarceration extremely difficult and is worried about her children.

Unfortunately, the assault was a serious one. Her record was a big hindrance to leniency. The sentence imposed was not excessive.

I am of the opinion that leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders are as I have proposed.
 * * * 
