

N E Hedley versus B Withers; M Brown versus B Withers; R D Bates versus B Withers [1996]
NSWSC 252 (3 July 1996) 
NARELLE EDITH HEDLEY versus BRIAN WITHERS (t/as B WITHERS & SON) & 3 ORS 
MICHAEL BROWN & 1 ORS versus BRIAN WITHERS (t/as B WITHERS & SON) & 3
ORS 
RAYMOND DEREK BATES & 1 ORS versus BRIAN WITHERS (t/as B WITHERS & SON) & 3 ORS /95 55051/95 55006/96 
Wednesday, 3 July 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
CONSTRUCTION LIST 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
There are several motions before the Court in relation to the report, made on February 1996, (the report) by Dr Paul Walsh (the referee) pursuant to Pt of the Supreme Court Rules in the following proceedings: 
Matter No 55036 of 1995 (the Hedley proceedings) 
Matter No. 55051 of 1995 (the Brown proceedings) 
The report also purports to report in respect of matter No. 55006 of 1996 (the
Bates proceedings), although no order of reference was made.

Each of the proceedings were brought by the respective owners of dwellings situated at Lake Macquarie seeking damages against the builder of those homes and Lake Macquarie City Council (the Council), it being the authority responsible for the building approval of the plans for those homes.

In each of the proceedings the plaintiffs alleged that the footings designed and built for each of the dwellings were inadequate to prevent damage arising from the movement of the foundation materials which were said to be reactive clay soils.

The plaintiffs' case was a comparatively simple one. It was alleged that the footings design did not comply with AS 2870, an Australian Standard specification for footings systems suitable for construction in reactive clay soils. It was further alleged that, had the footings been constructed in accordance with that Standard, the movement alleged to have occurred in the subject dwellings would not have occurred.

Although there was no direct evidence of the financial position of each of the personal parties to the proceedings, it was apparent that the subject dwellings were modest constructions and that, probably, the personal parties were of comparatively modest means. Each of the proceedings seemed to me to provide an excellent opportunity to demonstrate the capacity of a reference under Pt 72 to resolve the questions raised by those proceedings expeditiously and in a cost efficient manner. It was with this in mind that, in making an order under Pt 72, I delivered the following reasons in relation to the Hedley proceedings and the Brown proceedings: "There are two sets of proceedings brought respectively by Narelle Edith
Hedley (the Hedley proceedings) and Michael Brown and Gloria Brown (the Brown proceedings) against common defendants being in each case the builder of residential premises for the respective plaintiffs and the council which is the responsible authority in respect of the area where the residences were so constructed by the builder. The defendants have joined by way of cross-claim the engineer who provided structural details for those residences.

As it appears to me, the surface conditions upon which these residences were constructed consisted of what is known as reactive clay soils, although I am informed that is the subject of contention in the proceedings. Allied to those subsurface conditions is the questions whether the footings for these residences were adequate. Having regard to certain issues raised, one assumes an allied question arises, whether those subsurface conditions should have been known or ascertained by any of the defendants for the purpose of designing, approving or implementing the subject structural footing details.

A quantum question also arises. If it is found that the footing engineering details were inadequate, as a result of which the construction in accordance with those details has led to a defective building, the question arises whether that defect has resulted in damage which may be rectified by incidental repairs or, as has been suggested, by demolition and rebuilding.

All of these matters, it seems to me, are matters that could be conveniently dealt with by an experienced referee, and the parties have agreed that Dr Paul
Walsh is such an expert. He is unavailable unfortunately until sometime after February 1996, but I understand he has indicated his availability shortly thereafter to hear evidence in relation to these issues and report accordingly under a reference which I propose to order pursuant to Pt 72.

I think it is appropriate in making that order to make the following comments.
I have no details concerning the financial position of the plaintiffs, but my impression is that they are people of modest means and that the subject residences are their homes. From the outset of the hearing of directions in these matters, I have made it clear that the parties should work as fairly as they can, consistently with their clients' respective interests, to ensure that these proceedings are dealt with expeditiously and financially efficiently. I think that the making of a Pt 72 order will have the capacity to achieve that in these ways: first, so far as time is concerned, it will permit the hearing of the major issues at a time which I think would be well in advance of any currently available time in this division for such a hearing; second, if the referee, who I understand has had no experience in a reference of this kind but whose qualifications eminently suit him to conduct this reference and report, avails himself of the powers that Pt 72, in particular r 8, gives to him, I think an expeditious hearing at a minimum of cost would be achieved.

I request that these observations are brought to the attention of Dr Walsh so that he knows that, in pursuing such an expeditious course, he will have the full support of this court in so doing. As I understand it, the Court of
Appeal has lent its support to referees who have endeavoured to adopt this philosophy.

The referee will be aware that under r 8 he may conduct the proceedings as he thinks fit, that he is not bound by the rules of evidence, and he can inform himself in such manner as he thinks fit in relation to the matters in issue and may take evidence orally or in writing and only if he so requires in a solemn form. By way of example it would be, I think, perfectly acceptable for the referee to visit the site, preferably with experts representing the parties, questioning those experts at the site, with provision being made for notes of that process, and to conduct further hearing in similar fashion informally inquiring of a witness or indeed a number of witnesses in joint conference, again in the presence of the parties, and again with provision for adequate note-taking of that process.

I think the main thing the referee would need to be concerned about is the question of fairness to ensure that whatever he does is either in the presence of the parties or made known to them so no question could arise of there being some denial of natural justice. If the reference is conducted in this way, I could see it being resolved within the space of a day or two. Under the Rules the parties are required to provide the referee within the time fixed by him a statement of the findings of fact and law for which each contends.

To facilitate the referee's task I propose to include in the order of reference a direction that by 26 January each of the parties serve upon each other and the referee statements of evidence and any expert reports upon which each would seek to rely. In that respect I direct that only one expert witness be used for the purpose of adducing evidence in each of the two disciplines, namely, geotechnical and structural engineering, by the two defendants. That is to say, they will have a common expert witness in each of those fields or none at all. Similarly the plaintiff should be so restricted.

Again, in an attempt to facilitate the hearing of the reference I direct that the experts confer with the view to submitting a joint report to the referee by 6 February 1996 setting out matters in respect of which they are in agreement and identifying matters in which they are in disagreement." (My emphasis) 
The events that occurred upon the referee undertaking the reference bear little resemblance to what those reasons had in contemplation. Not without significance was the time that the referee had available for the hearing of the reference and the publishing of the report. The order under Pt 72 which I made on 15 December 1995, so far as is relevant, contained the following directions and orders: "3. Direct that the parties deliver to the Referee forthwith a copy of this order together with a copy of Part 72 of the Rules.
Direct that: subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) hereof the provisions of Part 72 Rule 8 shall apply to the conduct of proceedings under the reference; the reference will commence by 8 February 1996 (unless otherwise ordered by the Referee) by the holding of a preliminary conference; the Referee consider and implement such manner of conducting proceedings under the reference as will without undue formality or delay enable a just determination to be made including if the Referee sees fit the making of enquiries by telephone, site inspection, inspection of plant and equipment and communication with experts retained on behalf of the parties; any evidence in chief before the Referee shall unless the Referee otherwise permits be by way of written statement signed by the maker of the statement; the Referee submit the report to the Court in accordance with Part 72 Rule addressed to the Commercial Division Deputy Registrar on or before 4 April .
 ......
Grant liberty to the Referee or any party to seek directions with respect to any matter arising in proceedings under the reference upon application made on twenty four hours' notice or such less notice as the Court deems fit through the Associate to the Judge for the time being administering the
Construction List.
 ......
The plaintiff provide particulars of the damage occasioned to the Home by reason of it having been erected on footings which were standard footings only and not an M slab or its equivalent and/or which did not comply with AS 2870 and AS 2870.1 to the Defendants on or before 22 December 1995." (My emphasis) 
The questions that were referred to the referee were as follows: "1. Whether the Property is a moderately reactive clay site and by reason of its reactive clay soil is prone to differential soil movement and settlement.
Whether the Plans provided for the Home to be erected on footings: which were standard footings only, and not an M slab or its equivalent; and which did not comply with AS 2870 and/or AS 2870.1.
Whether having regard to the answer to Question 1, the Property required an M slab or its equivalent.
Whether having regard to the answer to Question 1 a builder of reasonable skill and competence would have designed or built the home including only standard footings, as opposed to an M slab or its equivalent; and/or with footings which did not comply with AS 2870 and/or AS 2870.1.
What, if any of the damage particularised by the Plaintiff pursuant to order made on 15 December 1995 has been occasioned to the Home by reason of it having been erected on footings which were standard footings only and not an M slab or equivalent, and/or which did not comply with AS 2870 or AS 2870.1.
What work is reasonably required to rectify: the footings, to the standard to which a builder of reasonable skill and competence would have designed and built then in respect of the Property; and the damage referred to in answer to Question 5; and in particular whether such rectification will require demolition and rebuilding of the residence.
Whether the engineering details incorporated in drawing by Norman Best dated 2 August 1989 conformed with: normal engineering practise; relevant ordinance; and 
SAA codes; as therein certified and if not, in what specific respects it does not conform.
Whether given the sub-stratum, the footings and slab for which drawing by
Norman Best provided, were adequate for the proper construction of the proposed residence?
Whether the drawing provided for footings and slabs which would conform with: the requirements of Ordinance 70; 
Australian Standard 2870; 
Australian Standard 2870.1?" 
As evidenced by the affidavit of Mark James Brothers (Brothers) sworn 6 May (the Brothers affidavit), he being the builder's solicitor, by letter dated 9 January 1996, he forwarded to the referee a copy of Pt 72 of the
Supreme Court Rules together with an engrossed copy of the orders made by me on 15 December 1995. This covering letter, rather than forwarding a copy of the transcript of my remarks on making the subject orders on 15 December concerning the method of conduct of the reference, set out a summary which so far as it went, I think, was unexceptional. However, the summary was incomplete. It would have been of more assistance to the referee to have received the full copy of my comments which included, with more particularity, the means by which he could consider it appropriate to conduct the reference without a denial of natural justice to the parties.

Notwithstanding the direction that each of the parties were required to serve upon each other and the referee statements of evidence and any expert reports upon which each would seek to rely by 26 January 1996, this was not adhered to.

It is extremely difficult to elicit from the facts just when the reference commenced. It certainly did not commence with a preliminary conference as ordered. Had the referee observed this direction I am quite confident he would not have fallen into the difficulties which beset the conduct of the reference.

No statement of the findings of fact and law for which each party contended were given to the referee by the parties pursuant to Pt 72 r 8(5).

Brother's letter of 9 January 1996 contained the following statement to the referee: "There is a possibility of a third action being commenced during January.
Should this materialise, his Honour directed that the plaintiff should apply to the Court for an order that the matter be referred to you and be incorporated as part of your enquiries." 
This is a reference to statements by me during the course of the delivery of reasons on 15 December relating to the Bates proceedings in the following terms: "I have been informed from the Bar table that a third lot of proceedings of substantially similar form is likely to be instituted by the end of January and that the same representatives and probably experts will be retained by the existing parties to the Hedley and Brown proceedings. If that be the case, clearly those proceedings should be heard with the Hedley and Brown proceedings and the reference should encompass those third proceedings. With this in mind, although I am not in a position to make any order in relation to it, I invite the plaintiffs' legal representatives to apply to the court during vacation with the view to instituting any such further proceedings and to the making of an order consistently with the order that I propose to make under Pt 72. In that respect, the order that I have outlined concerning representation by experts would embrace that third lot of proceedings, so that whether there are two or three current proceedings the defendants will be limited to a common (expert) in each of the two mentioned disciplines." 
That order was never applied for and the parties proceeded during the reference as though an order had been made under Pt 72 in the Bates proceedings in like terms to those orders made in the other proceedings. To compound that irregularity, each of the parties have moved the Court for orders in the Bates proceedings in relation to the report as though it was the subject of a Pt 72 order. It has not been made clear to me by any of the parties how it is proposed that I should make an order in the Bates proceedings under Pt 72 r 13 as each party now seeks.

As no statement of evidence or expert report was served by any party upon the referee by 26 January as directed by me, the joint conference of experts retained by the respective parties did not take place so as to permit the submission of a joint report to the referee by 6 February 1996, "setting out matters in respect of which they (were) in agreement and identifying matters in respect of which they (were) in disagreement".

Rather than moving to commence the proceedings by 8 February 1996 by the holding of a preliminary conference, the referee, for reasons that are not explained, preferred to make direct contact by telephone with Brothers on 29
January and 30 January 1996 following upon his earlier than expected return from vacation. The February date for commencement of the reference had been directed to meet the convenience of the referee who was known to be unavailable on vacation until 5 February 1996. I think it is unfortunate that during the course of a somewhat lengthy telephone conversation between
Brothers and the referee, the former did not take the opportunity of reminding the referee that a preliminary conference should be appointed. In his affidavit, Brothers deposed to the details of his conversation with the referee at that time. It is clear from the content of that conversation that the referee was quite inexperienced in the procedural matters attaching to a reference and was seeking guidance and some basic information concerning the reference. Brothers elected to supply information rather than utilise a preliminary conference in accordance with my directions.

It was during the course of that January telephone conversation with Brothers that the referee disclosed that he had a comparatively short time frame within which to conduct the reference, as he was departing from Australia on 4 March for a period of approximately four months. The state of preparation for the conduct of the reference is reflected in the letter of 1 February 1996 from the plaintiffs' solicitor , Peter John Kilmurray (Kilmurray), to
Brothers. That letter referred to a telephone discussion between them on 30
January 1996 and noted that "we still await receipt from you of the Engineer's
Report of Barker Harle in connection with the Brown residence". At that time the experts were planning a meeting for 6 February 1996, presumably, as a result of the direction by me to confer with the view to reaching agreement on a joint report. I infer from the terms of that letter that, although expert reports had been served by the plaintiffs' by 1 February 1996 in all proceedings, the defendants' expert reports in relation to the Brown and Bates proceedings were outstanding.

On 2 February 1996 Brothers forwarded the outstanding expert report in respect of the Brown proceedings to Kilmurray. In that letter, Kilmurray was informed of the referee's intention to proceed overseas on 4 March 1996. The letter gave no indication when the defendants' expert reports would be available in respect of the Bates proceedings. Nevertheless, it was suggested by Brothers that the matter proceed on the "current timetable on the reports we currently have whilst attempting to obtain the other reports as soon as possible". It was made reasonably clear by Kilmurray that he preferred to defer joint conferences amongst the experts and accordingly any further submission to the referee until all experts reports were available in respect of the three sets of proceedings. The letter of Brothers of 2 February 1996 concludes with the following statements: "If you wish to wait until a joint report can be prepared we believe that the only course is for you to re-list the matter before Hunter J to have the directions varied to permit this course. In the meantime, Dr Walsh has requested to see the reports we have and we are willing to proceed on that course.

If you do not propose to allow your experts to attend next Tuesday, please let us know and inform Mr & Mrs Bates that as our experts have set that time aside, they will conduct their inspection on Tuesday morning." 
Kilmurray did not take up the invitation to apply to the Court pursuant to par of the order of reference. By agreement between the solicitors on 5 February , there was forwarded to the referee the expert reports of the parties in respect of the Hedley proceedings and the Brown proceedings. The planned meeting of the experts was adhered to for the purpose of those proceedings. On February 1996, Brothers, by letter to Kilmurray of that date, confirmed the forwarding of the reports to the referee and requested an inspection by the defendants' experts of the Bates property on Thursday 22 February 1996. The letter did not address the problems that such a delay in the preparation of reports by the defendants' experts would occasion to the due conduct of the reference. Given the extremely limited time which the referee had made available to the parties and the need for the experts to comply with the direction of the Court to confer to reach agreement so far as was practicable in respect of technical matters, it is difficult to see what real prospect there was of the reference being conducted in the manner contemplated by the order of reference. No explanation has been offered by any party for the failure of Kilmurray to take up Brother's invitation of 2 February 1996 to relist the matter before me to vary the directions given in order to accommodate the then existing circumstances.

Brothers delivered the reports in the Hedley proceedings and the Brown proceedings to the referee personally on 5 February 1996 and, as might be expected, he became engaged in conversation with the referee. Brothers deposes to that conversation as follows: "When I delivered the report to Dr Walsh's Office he said to me words to the effect of, "Are you the disseminator of information?" 
I said "No., it is the responsibility of all parties and you should contact them directly. I have organised this today simply in the interests of getting the matter moving. But if you have trouble in getting in contact with anyone, please let me know and I will assist you." 
He said "What do I have to do - do I have to speak to everyone involved?" 
I replied "As pointed out in the letter I sent you in January, the manner in which you go about this is up to you, but it is important that what you do is procedurally fair." " 
I think it is clear from that conversation that the referee revealed his inexperience in the conduct of this reference. Again, I regard it as unfortunate that on that occasion he was not reminded of the direction to hold the preliminary conference which I think would have gone a considerable way to clarifying the procedures required of him in reaching an acceptable report.
Instead, in his letter to Kilmurray of 7 February 1996, Brothers raised the matter of procedure in the following terms: "Our engineers advised that it was agreed at the meeting on 6 February 1996 that they would meet again at the same time and place on 16 February 1996 with a view to finalising their joint report. At the same time, our reports on the
Bates dwelling will be finalised and discussed at that meeting.

Given the time restraints on Dr Walsh's availability (he will only have about days to finalise his report from that day), and the fact that all the engineers will be present, we suggest that preliminary meeting with Dr Walsh in the presence of the lawyers take place immediately following the engineer's conference, with the view of enabling Dr Walsh to ask any questions he may have at that stage, and so he can indicate what he requires of us.

It seems to us, based on the short conversations we have had with him, that Dr
Walsh is a little uncertain of how he should conduct the matter, and may appreciate the parties involved taking the lead. Could you please let us know your views as soon as possible." 
It also appears from that letter that the timetable for the preparation of the defendants' expert reports in relation to the Bates proceedings had been brought forward and that a meeting of the engineers in relation to the other proceedings had taken place, concluding with an agreement to reconvene on 16
February 1996.

That letter also evidenced the fact that further reports had been received by
Brothers from Kilmurray in relation to the Hedley proceedings. The letter sought confirmation that those further reports were to be forwarded to the referee and also offered to forward to the referee the plaintiffs' expert reports in relation to the Bates proceedings, even although the defendants had not yet obtained their reports. Kilmurray acceded to that proposal.

By 15 February 1996 the experts retained by the respective parties had reached agreement on various matters in relation to the Hedley proceedings and the
Brown proceedings, which agreement was reduced to writing and dated 7 February
The terms of that agreement were as follows: "The items of which agreement was found between all experts are listed below.

Hedley Residence, 44 Palisade Street, Edgeworth 
Item of agreement include: 
The site is of classification M.

Footings are council footings and do not comply with the requirements of
AS 2870.

Footings at the front of the house where founded in clay have a maximum potential vertical movement of approximately 10 mm due to reactive clay movements.

Section 4.4 of Coffey Partners International report dated 6 October 1995 was accepted by all experts.

The infill slab form of construction is the crux of the problem with regard to internal damage.

All experts possibly agree that the damage has occurred at several periods of time.

That the internal damage is due to movement of material beneath the slab.

That differential movement of the slab has occurred.

Brown Residence, 29 Palisade Street, Edgeworth 
Items of agreement include: 
The site is of classification M.

Footings do not comply with the requirements of AS 2870.

The sag in the floor of the computer room is possibly a construction fault.

That some shrinkage has occurred in the concrete floor slab.

That the sag in the rear patio slab is due to settlement of fill.

The primary cause of the crack in the garage is due to drying shrinkage of concrete.

This is to say that all experts have read the above and regard it to be a true record of the items of agreement." (My emphasis) 
For reasons that have not been explained, the agreed second conference of experts did not take place, nor was there ever held a joint conference of experts in relation to the Bates proceedings. I infer that the second meeting and further joint conference in relation to the Bates proceedings was not held as a result of the delay in the submission by the defendants of their expert reports in relation to the Bates proceedings. They were not received by the plaintiffs' expert until 26 February 1996, although dated 12 and 16 February respectively. They had not been served upon Kilmurray until Friday 23
February 1996.

No explanation has been offered for that delay given the extraordinarily short time available to the referee to report on this matter.

On 21 February 1996 the referee again made direct contact with Brothers seeking copies of the plans for the dwellings the subject of these proceedings. Brothers conveyed this request to Kilmurray and to the solicitors for the Council and obtained their consent to the provision of those plans together with a copy of the joint report to the referee. Those documents were forwarded by Brothers' letter to the referee dated 21 February 1996. I note that the documents forwarded did not include the defendants' expert reports in relation to the Bates proceedings. Par 15 of Brother's affidavit is in the following terms: "Expert reports by the defendants engineers in respect of the Bates property were served on Trisley Kilmurray, and copies forwarded to Dr Walsh on 16
February 1996 (Coffey Partners) and 23 February 1996 (Barker Harle) following an inspection of the property on 9 February 1996. The defendant's reports were already in possession of Dr Walsh as outlined in paragraph 12 above." 
Brothers does not stipulate how the referee obtained the reports of the defendant's experts relating to the Bates property. I assume that the reference on par 15 to "The defendants' reports" is intended to refer to the plaintiffs' reports. The provision of the defendants' expert reports in relation to the Bates proceedings appears to be the last statement of evidence supplied to the referee by any of the parties.

On 21 February a telephone conversation took place between Brothers and
Kilmurray to the following effect: "On 21 February I spoke to Peter Kilmurray on the telephone. He said words to the effect of: "We want to submit the reports of Horton & Wise to Dr Walsh, along with some statements from neighbours whose houses are not suffering damage." 
I replied using words to the effect of, "There may not be any problem with that, but I will need some time to think about it and discuss it with the Council and Simon (Harben). I will get back to you as soon as I can." 
According to the evidence of Brothers, following this conversation, he formed the view, after discussion with the council's solicitor, that Kilmurray's request to submit further reports and statements to the referee should be resisted. On Friday 23 February 1996 Kilmurray wrote to Brothers in the following terms: "We acknowledge receipt from you today of the Report of Barker Harle in connection with the Bates property. We have conveyed that Report to Mr
Dockrill and asked for his comments as to same. We have also asked him to liaise with your experts with a view to agreement being reached on some items, in a similar way to the Hedley/Brown matters.

With regard to the Reference of Dr Walsh and the views expressed by Justice
Hunter, it is the view of our Counsel, Mr Brereton, that a preliminary conference should be held with Dr Walsh and the legal representatives of the parties as soon as possible, preferably early next week. In our view the matter should proceed by way of Witnesses Statements, Reports of experts and
Legal submissions.

In view of Dr Walsh's imminent departure overseas it may well be that the finalisation of the Reference should be deferred until his return. The questions raised are too important to be rushed through and completed prior to his departure. There are many considerations additional to the opinions of experts.

May we have your views as soon as possible concerning the above.

We are forwarding a copy of this correspondence to Phillips Fox and also to Dr
Walsh." (My emphasis) 
By facsimile of the same date that letter was forwarded to the referee with the following comment by the plaintiffs' solicitors: "We enclose copy letter this day forwarded to Rankin & Nathan. May we have your views concerning same as soon as possible." 
No response to this facsimile was received from the referee and accordingly on the following Tuesday 27 February 1996 a further facsimile was forwarded to him by Kilmurray in the following terms: "We refer to our letter to Rankin & Nathan of Friday last, a copy of which was forwarded to you. We reaffirm the views expressed, in that we believe it is essential that you thoroughly inspect all three properties in the presence of the respective experts and that the experts be given the opportunity of making submissions to you. We would also wish to make submissions before you finalise your report.

We should say that one of our concerns is as to the manner in which you are conducting the Reference. We do not know what is being put to you by the experts retained by the defendants any more than they know what is being put to you by our client's experts.

We reaffirm that we believe that you should appoint a conference at the earliest possible date to determine how the Reference should proceed." (My emphasis) 
The only response received by Kilmurray from the referee was a telephone message which he left at his office on 29 February 1996 informing him that a report "had already (been) submitted to the Supreme Court". The referee's apparent discourtesy in not responding to the request for a preliminary conference was, no doubt, the result of the belated nature of that request and the pressures imposed by the referee's imminent departure for Australia.
Still, having regard to the direction given to him to commence the reference with a preliminary meeting, it is difficult to have any sympathy with the referee's position, given his obvious need for assistance through the mechanism of a preliminary conference, he being inexperienced in the procedures expected of him.

I have no doubt that the procedures, in fact, followed by the referee were a combination of inexperience in these matters, a lack of assistance from the representatives of the respective parties, the failure by the parties to adhere to the directions given on the order referring these matters to the referee, factors, the effect of which were exacerbated by the demands self imposed upon the referee by his need to complete his enquiry and report under
Pt 72 prior to departing overseas on 4 March 1996.

As to the proposal in Kilmurray's letter of 23 February 1996 that a preliminary conference should be held, one is minded to ask why it took so long for that initiative to be taken. Quite independently of the direction given on the ordering of the reference that the conduct of the reference should commence with a preliminary conference, Brothers had suggested such a preliminary meeting in his letter to Kilmurray of 7 February 1996.

About the time of the receipt of Kilmurray's letter of 23 February 1996
Brothers developed an illness which prevented him from responding to it personally, although he was able to arrange for a facsimile to be forwarded to
Kilmurray on 26 February in the following terms: "We refer to our telephone conversation on 21 February 1996 and after discussions with Counsel and the Solicitors for Lake Macquarie City Council we advise that we object to both proposals.

Both ourselves and the Council believe that the Horton & Wise report relates solely to quantum which is not an issue the referee has to decide. So far as your statements from the neighbours are concerned, Lake Macquarie City
Council believe that they are not relevant and we believe that should they be put before the referee we would need the opportunity to produce similar statements and have the opportunity to both produce similar evidence and inspect the properties of those witnesses." 
The plaintiffs' expert Anthony Robert Dockrill (Dockrill) in his affidavit sworn 26 April 1996 deposed to the fact that his first contact with the referee was in a telephone call made by the referee on 26 February 1996. It is quite clear from Dockrill's evidence of this conversation that any thought of a preliminary conference was rejected by the referee and that he was proposing to proceed to the preparation of a report without the benefit of any joint report of the parties' experts in the Bates proceedings. It is equally clear that the reason for rejecting a meeting with experts lay in the referee's time constraints. The following passage in the exchange that took place during that conversation throws light on events which are addressed below: "Our discussion was to the following effect:- 
I said: " I assume you are calling me to arrange a meeting to discuss the three residences at Edgeworth. " 
He said: " No, I wish to ask you a few questions over the `phone. " 
I said: " I'd be happy to meet with you to discuss the issues. " 
He said: " I do not have time for that, as I am going overseas and will be submitting my report within the next few days. " 
I said: " Did you receive correspondence from Trisley Kilmurray O'Sullivan indicating how to arrange access for inspections and meetings, etc. " 
He said: " Yes, but I'm not interested in that, as I do not have the time. " 
He then said: " I cannot see how the damage is related to reactive soil. " 
I said: " Have you inspected all houses? " 
He said: " I have looked at them all from the outside, and have briefly inspected the inside of No. 44. I cannot see how it is related to reactive clay, but I am giving you the opportunity to raise any points you think are important and may influence my findings. " 
He also said: " I expected the damage to be much worse. " 
I said: " Why? " 
He said: " From reading the reports I expected the damage to be much worse, as you are going for demolition and rebuild. " " 
That evidence, which I accept, I think, clearly demonstrates a referee under pressure to cut corners in the course of his enquiry, not for the purpose of cost saving but rather in order to permit him to meet commitments other than those required of him in conducting the enquiry and preparing his report for this court. The second point, I think, that should be made is that the referee appears to have been daunted by the prospect of the consequence of the demolition of the subject dwellings should the damage to them be the consequence of differential movement in the reactive clays. Finally, in relation to that conversation, I think it is fair to describe his general approach in discussing details of damage in the Hedley proceedings as a querulous one.

Prior to this telephone attendance it appears that the referee had carried out a preliminary inspection of the subject dwellings. On 9 February 1996 a telephone message was left with Kilmurray's office in the following terms: "Dr Walsh will be taking a drive out to the various properties today, just to have a look at the location etc of each home.

Then next week sometime he will be going back to each home and he will possibly take a survey of each block.

He phone to let you know of his intentions and to make the various owners aware of the same." 
That message was not communicated to the plaintiffs.

On 9 February, without any further notification to the plaintiffs, the referee called at the various dwellings the subject of these proceedings. When he arrived at the Hedley home, the plaintiff in the Hedley proceedings, Narelle
Edith Hedley (Hedley), was present. The referee was shown around the exterior of the dwelling by her and from Hedley's description of the inspection it is clear that it was intended by the referee as a preliminary examination. I think this is illustrated from the following extracts in the conversation between the referee and Hedley: "He said; " I just wanted to have a quick look at the area and I might have a quick look around the house if that's alright. " 
I said; " Yes, do you want me to show you where the cracks are in the brickwork. " 
He said words to the effect; " That may be quicker, but I will come back at a later date to discuss it with you and shoot some levels. " " ........

We then walked back to the front of the house and the boy walked back across the road to the car. I said; " Do you want to have a look inside. " 
He said; " No not now, I'm in a hurry. I just needed to have a quick look at where the houses were for when I read the reports, but I will be back. " 
I said; " Please could you just take a quick look at the damage in my en suite. " 
He said; " Well just a quick look. " " 
On the same day the referee made an unannounced visit to the Brown home. At the time of his visit there was present at the home, the owner's son aged nine. The referee's inspection was limited to the exterior of the dwelling.

In the case of the Bates dwelling, his inspection was unannounced and there were present only the owner's two children aged twelve and thirteen respectively. They refused the referee entry into the dwelling.

From the nature of inspections and from the statements made by the referee both prior to and during the inspections, it is clear that they were not intended by him to be other than a preliminary, somewhat superficial examination and that there was in contemplation a more detailed examination involving a survey.

It appears that on 27 February 1996 the referee revisited the subject dwellings. In the case of the Hedley dwelling, this may be inferred from the presence of his business card which was left in Hedley's mail box on 27
February 1996. In the case of the Brown dwelling, on the same date the referee called at the dwelling where there was present the father of the owners. The referee requested permission to have "a quick look inside" with the assurance that it wouldn't take very long. His stay at the property was estimated to be no more than ten minutes.

A calling card of the referee was also found in the letter box of the Bates dwelling on 27 February 1996.

Conflicting evidence has been given by Dockrill and by a consulting engineer
Robert Bruce Barker (Barker), one of the experts retained by the defendants, as to the adequacy or sufficiency of the inspections of the subject dwellings by the referee for the purpose of his report. In particular, Barker expressed the view that "in order to determine whether the damage suffered was caused by inadequate footings, it would not be necessary to carry out a detailed examination of the interior of any of the houses. Any damage caused by reactive soil induced footings movement would be most apparent in the external walls." Dockrill was of a contrary view, in that he considered that an adequate inspection would involve an internal inspection of the subject structure. I do not find it necessary to resolve that conflict largely because the referee himself in statements made to various people, to which I have referred in these reasons, made it clear, I think, that he considered a more detailed inspection , involving a survey and including internal examination was required of the subject dwellings. This examination was not carried out in all cases and where the referee entered any of the subject dwellings it appears to have been a cursory examination.

The conclusion I have reached is that the reference was conducted in an entirely unsatisfactory manner. I place the responsibility for this at the door of the inexperience of the referee compounded by his failure to take advantage of the direction to commence the reference with a preliminary conference and exacerbated by the time constraints which his overseas travel had imposed upon him. Furthermore, I regard the assistance afforded to the referee as quite inadequate given his obvious inexperience and uncertainty as to the procedures which he should be following. Although, between themselves, the legal representatives of the parties considered the appointment of a preliminary conference, this was not pursued with the referee until a point when he had committed himself to the publishing of his report. The referee was further frustrated in the proper conduct of the reference by the failure of all parties to comply with the direction as to the provision of statements of evidence and of expert reports together with the failure to comply with Pt 72 r 8(5). It was always open to any of the parties to apply to the Court for further directions. Indeed, Kilmurray was so invited by Brothers to apply when the timetable became imbalanced with the failure of the parties to provide expert reports in time: particularly, in the case of the defendants, who failed to provide expert reports in relation to the Bates proceedings until a matter of days prior to the handing down of the report.

I regard the irregularity of the conduct of this reference by the referee and by the parties to be such as to warrant the non-adoption of the report. It remains to be considered what order should be made that might still result in a comparatively cost efficient resolution of these proceedings. Involved in that consideration is the necessity to work out what should be done in particular with the Bates proceedings. Though required so to do, the parties have never applied for, nor taken out, an order under Pt 72 in relation to the
Bates proceedings and have been content to treat the matter before the referee as though it was a reference of the Bates proceedings under Pt 72. I think that is, to say the least, irregular, with considerable doubt as to its efficacy. Whatever else occurs in these proceedings it will be necessary to regularise a reference of the Bates proceedings.

Together with this conduct of the referee on the reference, there are aspects of his report which lead me to reluctantly conclude that the correct step to be taken is to reject the report and issue further orders of reference to encompass all proceedings calling for the report of another referee. As I have earlier stated, the referee appears to have been somewhat confounded by the claim of the plaintiffs that the subject dwellings should be demolished when that claim was contrasted with his observed damage of the subject dwellings.
His approach to Dockrill appears to have been querulous.

A further matter which gives me some concern in relation to the referee's report is his rather entrenched views of AS 2870. The questions which were referred to the referee, in effect, proceed on an assumption that, if the foundation material of the subject dwellings was properly classified as "moderately reactive clay", then Australian Standard 2870 or 2870.1 applied to the design of the required foundation.

AS 2870 - 1986 was first published in July 1986. The circumstances of its publication and the purpose of the standard was expressed in its preface as follows: "The standard was prepared in response to an Australia-wide need for guidance on the design of slabs and footings for houses on the commonly encountered foundation conditions of sands, silts and clays, including reactive clays and certain types of fill. General principles are only given on design for mine subsidence, collapsing soils and landslip, as these conditions require individual design specific to the particular site." 
In its foreword its purpose was described as follows: "The purpose of this standard is to give general design principles and to lay down specific designs for footing systems for conditions commonly found in
Australia. Although a wide range of conditions is covered, this standard places particular emphasis on the design for reactive clay sites susceptible to significant ground movement due to moisture changes. This standard may be used to satisfy the requirement that the structural design of footings and floor slabs shall take into account of the following: 
Swelling and shrinkage movements of reactive clay soils due to moisture changes.

Settlement of compressible soils or fill.

Distribution to the subgrade of the applied loads; and 
Tolerance of the superstructure of movement." 
The application of the Standard was set out in par 1.2 in the following terms: "1.2 APPLICATION. The standard applies to houses and to one or two storey buildings containing more than one dwelling. It may also apply to other forms of construction, including some commercial and institutional buildings, if they are similar in size, loading and superstructure flexibility to houses.

The standard requires that sites be classified in accordance with Section 2 and footings shall be designed in accordance with Sections 3, 4 or 5, as appropriate. All construction shall comply with Section 6. Additional provisions specific to certain states shall be in accordance with Section 7.

The performance requirement of the standard is the avoidance of significant damage as defined in Appendix A provided that the site is properly maintained in accordance with the recommendations in Appendix A.

Specifically, the standard should not be used to prevent the use of locally proven designs or alternative designs by a qualified engineer.

This standard shall not be interrupted to prevent the use of materials or methods of design or construction not specifically referred to therein." (My emphasis) 
The Standard acknowledges the acceptability of some form of damage flowing from construction in reactive clays and seeks to define the limit of what may be described as acceptable damage. The classification of damage in appendix A of the Standard as set out in table A1 is instructive in its division of "visual categories" which related to cracking in walls less than five millimetres and "significant damage" which contains categories of cracking from five millimetres to greater than twenty-five millimetres. Each of these categories are accompanied by a description of the likely repair work involved. In the case of the visual categories, these are regarded as cases involving minor filling and redecoration of recurrent cracks, whereas, in the case of the significant damage categories, demolition is envisaged.

The express "Application" of the Standard also bears commenting on, in that the performance requirement is "the avoidance of significant damage as defined". Further, the application of the Standard specifically acknowledges that it "should not be used to prevent the use of locally proven designs or alternative designs by a qualified engineer".

S 4.2 sets out the Standard for the design of footing systems for a reactive site. It provides that a system shall be designed in accordance with one of two methods, namely, one which sets out in some technical detail the
Standard's requirements and the other which is described generally as follows: "footing system designed by a qualified engineer either by calculation in accordance with appendix E or by the selection of a proven local design".
Appendix E is a quite technical description of design principles to which s .2.1 requires recourse if a "proven local design" or one of the specified systems is not selected.

AS 2870.1 - 1988 was approved by the Standards Association on 11 November 1988 and published on 12 December 1988. The period within which the design considerations were addressed in respect of the subject dwellings took place over a period commencing in the second half of 1989.

In its preface AS 2870.1 - 1988 stated its purpose in the following terms: "The purpose of this Standard is to lay down specific designs for footing systems for foundation conditions commonly found in Australia. Although a wide range of conditions is covered, this Standard places particular emphasis on the design for reactive clay sites susceptible to significant ground movement due to moisture changes. This Standard takes account of the following: 
Swelling and shrinkage movements of reactive clay soils due to moisture changes." (My emphasis) 
The preface notes that the Standard partially supersedes AS 2870 - 1986 as it "includes the technical requirements for site classification, Standard footing design system, and construction. All other material previously covered in AS - 1986 will be incorporated into AS 2870.2 - Guide to design by engineering principles".

The application of AS 2870.1 is expressed as follows: "1.2 APPLICATION. The Standard requires that all sites shall be classified in accordance with Section 2 and that footing systems shall be designed in accordance with Sections 3, 4 and 5, as appropriate. All construction shall comply with Section 6." 
S2 classifies clay sites according to damage categories as appears in the following table for classification M: 
TABLE 2.1 
SIMPLE CLASSIFICATION OF CLAY SITES (Damage categories are given in Appendix A) 
Characteristic performance of masonry (veneer or full) buildings on light strip footings  
Classification of site  
Rare Category 0 or 1 damage 
S  
Often Category 1 damage but rarely Category 2 damage.

Category 3 damage is very rare even in extreme environmental conditions.
 (The site may show surface cracking in dry periods.) 
M  
Appendix A describes categories 0, 1, 2 and 3 in accordance with the following
Table A1: 
TABLE A1 
CLASSIFICATION OF DAMAGE WITH REFERENCE TO WALLS 
Description of typical damage and required repair  
Approximate crack width limit (see Note 1)  
Category and damage degree (see Note 2)  --- 
Hairline cracks  &lt; 0.1 mm  
Negligible  
Fine cracks which do not need repair  &lt; 1 mm  
Very slight  
Cracks noticeable but easily filled. Doors and windows stick slightly.  &lt; 5 mm  
Slight  
Cracks can be repaired and possibly a small amount of wall will need to be replaced. Doors and windows stick. Service pipes can fracture. Weather- tightness often impaired.  mm to 15 mm (or a number of cracks 3 mm to mm in one group)  
Moderate  
Extensive repair work involving breaking-out and replacing sections of walls, especially over doors and windows. Window and door frames distort. Walls lean or bulge noticeably (see Note 3), some loss of bearing in beams. Service pipes disrupted.  mm to 25 mm but also depends on number of cracks  
Severe  
Accordingly under AS 2870.1 a classification M site should have a footings system which permits wall movement in category 1 but rarely in category 2 and very rarely in category 3: in other words wall cracking of 1 mm and less than mm should occur only rarely in a site classified M: cracking of 5 mm and less than 5 mm very rarely.

S 4.2 of AS 2870.1 sets out the design of footing systems for a class M site by prescribing that the footing systems be designed in accordance with one of two methods, one being a specific specification, whereas the other is described in general terms as follows: "Footing systems shall be designed in accordance with engineering principles. Such design can include a selection for modification without calculation of a design given in" the preceding part of <case>.2.1.

As quoted earlier in these reasons, the joint report of the experts retained by the respective parties concluded in relation to the Hedley and Brown dwellings that each site should be classified M and concluded that the footings system did not comply with the requirements of AS 2870. It is not clear whether the reference to AS 2870 was intended to distinguish that
Standard from AS 2870.1. It would be unusual if the experts had intended not to refer to the later Standard, given the questions referred to the referee.
In any event, I doubt that anything flows from a strict reading of the joint report limiting the conclusion as to non-compliance to the 1986 publication: although the 1988 publication may be seen as imposing a stricter standard on the control of movement.

In the introductory section of the report the referee offered an interpretation of AS 2870.1 as a Standard which gave engineers a "clear option .... to choose prescribed designs such as a raft for class M sites or to completely override these prescribed designs using engineering principles although no calculations were required .... clause 4.2.1 in itself could justify the compliance of the actual footings selected with AS 2870.1 although they were not class M stiffened slabs". In so stating he referred to the above quoted passage from <case>.2.1 of the Standard. I do not agree with his construction of the section. In particular I do not understand the quoted passage to justify the abandonment of the prescribed designs by recourse to "engineering principles (without) calculations".

While the paragraph quoted permits of a footing system different from the specified systems within <case>.2.1 I think it is reasonably clear that in permitting a design by recourse to engineering principles it is not opening the door to a design which would result in damage greater than slight damage requiring the replacement of sections of walls and involving fracturing service pipes and the like (see table A1 of appendix A to AS 2870.1 - 1988).
Clearly, in my opinion, while permitting freedom of alternative design for the engineer, it is contemplated that such a design will accommodate engineering principles whose objective would achieve comparable standards as those laid down by AS 2870.1 - 1988. The final sentence of the paragraph which permits of a design without a calculation I think is limited to a selection of one or other of the specified designs in <case>.2.1 or a modification of one or other such designs. It was not suggested that the footings systems as designed for those dwellings represented a selection or modification of the <case>.2.1 specification. Moreover the referee does not address the question whether the alternative footing proposed for the subject dwellings were designed upon engineering principles calculated to achieve the avoidance of category 2 damage within the meaning of AS 2870.1.

In his brief tracing of the history of AS 2870 the referee appears to place great emphasis on the "legal status" and the absence of a "requirement .... to adopt a Class M slab in accordance with AS 2870.1". I do not see those factors as necessarily warranting a conclusion that it would be reasonable therefore not to have regard to that standard.

This has led the referee to an opinion expressed later in his report that I think raises some difficulties. The section of the report to which I refer is as follows: "3 Need for Class M Slab 
Even if AS 2870.1 itself was regarded as mandatory by virtue of being state of the art, engineers were free to chose other designs such as the locally accepted version of a footing slab under Clause 4.2.1(b).

Moreover at the time of the designs, the requirements of Lake Macquarie council for strip footing designs which applied to footing slabs was compliance with Ordinance 70 not with AS 2870.1. Indeed AS 2870.1 was regarded by the Council as only as a guide. Although with hindsight it is clear that AS .1 was the best available information about footing design for reactive clays, there was considerable problems around that time in the acceptance of the Standard by all building authorities throughout Australia and it was reasonable that lake Macquarie preferred the tradition and `legal' requirements of Ordinance 70 to the recently introduced AS 2870.1.

Thus neither by reasonable Lake Macquarie Council policy nor indeed by AS .1 itself did the properties require an M slab." 
In various sections of his report the referee places reliance on certain measurements or calculations carried out by him or to which he had access. It appears that this material was not made available to the parties nor were they given any opportunity to address that material. Had the referee followed the procedure outlined for him in my reasons for ordering a Pt 72 reference or had he followed the terms of that order he should have been saved from that fundamental error. I refer to the "private communication" disclosed at p 4 and the "calculation" at p 6 of the report.

It may well be that the slabs actually designed and provided in respect of the subject dwellings are capable of being shown to satisfy AS 2870.1 notwithstanding the finding to the contrary in the joint report of the experts. Even if that be the case I would expect the referee before coming to such a conclusion to afford the parties the opportunity of addressing this question. It is clear from the evidence of his lengthy telephone conversation with Dockrill of 26 February 1996 that he has some fairly firm views about the operation of this Standard, no doubt stemming from his high level of involvement in its formulation. In this respect I have not overlooked the high qualifications of the referee in this field.

At no stage, in my opinion, does the referee satisfactorily address the question whether the footing system for the subject dwellings was ever designed with the class M reactive clay soils in mind and that what was designed was calculated to combat effectively significant damage within the meaning of AS 2870 or AS 2870.1. The referee seems to be preoccupied with the satisfaction of council standards through Ordinance 70. On the face of it, that, in my opinion, may beg the question.

During the course of the proceedings before me the plaintiffs sought to tender evidence of proprietors of residences in the immediate and near vicinity of the subject dwellings whose homes were designed with a footing system to comply with a class M specification. I did not admit this material as evidence of the facts. It was admitted on the limited basis that it was the material which the plaintiffs unsuccessfully sought to place before the referee late in
February immediately prior to the publication of his report and which may have included material relevant to his report. On the face of that material, I think it is capable of being relevant.

Despite the lateness of the attempt by the plaintiffs to put such additional material before the referee I think he was obliged to consider whether the plaintiffs should be given that indulgence. He failed to do so.

For the foregoing reasons I think the report should be rejected. However, I remain firmly of the view that the most efficient and least costly method of resolving these proceedings is by recourse to Pt 72. There remains, then, the question whether further orders of reference should appoint another referee.
In any event, an order pursuant to Pt 72 is required in the Bates proceedings.

The conclusion I have reached is that it would be undesirable to re-appoint the referee and that fairness in the determination of these proceedings will be best achieved by the appointment of another expert. I consider that the procedures adopted by the referee and the opinions on which his report are founded combine to indicate that a fresh mind is needed. It is not implicit in the rejection of the report that I hold the opinion that either of the defendants are liable to any of the plaintiffs. Indeed the evidence of the extent of any damage to the subject dwellings is far from clear. I expect in any subsequent reports the referee will report separately in respect of each of the three proceedings and in so doing will identify any such damage with particularity. It follows that I express no opinion on the adequacy of the footings systems installed nor any opinion as to the reasonableness of any rectification methods that may be adopted should it be found that any of the subject dwellings are defective. In respect of such a further reference I would propose that the questions for reference should be as set out in the
Schedule to these reasons. I will hear submissions from the parties in respect of any objection to the form of such a reference. When the questions for reference are settled an order pursuant to Pt 72 is to be made in respect of each of the three proceedings. Subject to submissions on the question of costs
I consider that the parties should bear their own respective costs of the reference and of these motions and that the expenses of the reference should be borne by the plaintiff as one party and the defendants as another, in equal shares. My reasons for proposing such an order lies in the fact that I consider a large measure of the difficulties which I have led to the rejection of this report may be attributed to the failure of the parties to comply with the directions of the court and to their failure to ensure that the referee so complied. The parties are directed to bring in short minutes reflecting the findings and proposed orders in these reasons and in doing so should submit the name of a referee acceptable to all parties with provision made for the time of commencement of such a reference stipulated in accordance with the ascertained availability of the proposed referee. A directions similar to the order made on 15 December 1995 should be incorporated 
It would be desirable for the parties to agree upon a practitioner with significant practical experience in the field.

SCHEDULE 
In respect of the subject dwelling what damage, if any, was caused by differential movement, the result of swelling and shrinking movements of reactive clay soils in the foundations.
Within the meaning of damage in 
AS 2870 - 1986, or 
AS 2870.1 - 1988 what were the categories of any damage suffered by the subject dwelling.
What was the classification of the site within the meaning of 
AS 2870 - 1986, or 
AS 2870.1 - 1988 
A. Was the footing system of the subject dwelling: as designed, or as built in conformity with <case>.2.1 of 
AS 2870 - 1986 or 
AS 2870.1 - 1988 
B. In particular, if the site was a classification M site, was the footing system as designed, or as built in accordance with the standard of reasonable care and skill required of an ordinary skilled person exercising and professing to have specialised skills in the design, or building of such footing systems.
If the answer to question 4 is in the negative, was that departure the result of a failure to design or build the subject footing system with reasonable care and skill required of an ordinary skilled person exercising and professing to have the special skill of a designer of such a footing system or the builder of such a footing system
Should a person with reasonable care and skill required of an ordinary person exercising and professing to have the special skill of a designer of such a footing system or the builder of such a footing system have ascertained the Australian Standard site classification of the subject site for the purpose of carrying out the design and building of such footings
Was the footing system as designed, or as built in accordance with the standard of reasonable care and skill required of an ordinary skilled person exercising and professing to have specialised skills in the design, or building of such footing systems.
If any damage to the subject dwelling was the result of such a failure to design, or build a footing system with reasonable care and skill: what reasonable rectification work is required to remedy any damage caused by such a breach and 
What, if any, diminution in value of the subject dwelling has been occasioned by such breach.
 * * * 
