

Regina versus Jade Mata Haitoua [1998] NSWSC 1014 (9 April 1998) 
REGINA v. Jade Mata HAITOUA /96 
WEDNESDAY 9 APRIL 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, POWELL JA, SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Smart J to give judgment in the matter.

SMART J: The Director of Public Prosecutions has appealed against the sentence of 500 hours community service imposed upon Jade Mata Haitoua for malicious wounding upon the ground that that sentence was inadequate.

Haitoua has not appeared but the Crown seeks to proceed pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s14a.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). Mr Zahra of counsel has appeared amicus curiae to assist the Court by advancing anything that could be said on behalf of Haitoua and we are grateful for his detailed written and oral submissions. Mr Zahra had previously appeared but in view of circumstances which will later appear he and the Legal Aid Commission regard their instructions to appear for Haitoua as withdrawn.

The offence was committed on 26 March 1995. A plea of guilty was entered on 8
December 1995 and the sentence was imposed on 13 March 1996.

On 28 March 1996 the Crown forwarded a letter by security post to Haitoua, advising that it was considering the question of appeal and that he would be advised of the Director's decision as soon as possible. On 15 April 1996
Haitoua signed an acknowledgment of receipt of a letter and I would infer it was the letter of 28 March 1996.

The Crown's notice of appeal of 12 April 1996 was filed on 15 April 1996 and served on Friday, 2 August 1996 at Ashfield Police Station. The delay in service has been explained. There were considerable difficulties in locating
Haitoua. He had left his previous address and an attempt was made by those at that address to divert the police by stating Haitoua had gone overseas.
Service was probably effected when Haitoua reported on bail to Ashfield Police
Station on another matter. On the occasion of Haitoua being served with the notice of appeal he also received a letter from the Solicitor for Public
Prosecutions that the appeal was listed for mention on Monday 5 August 1996 at .15 am and that he was required to attend. Thus Haitoua, while given notice of the Court mention, was given very little time to prepare for it.

Further letters and other material were sent to Haitoua advising him that the hearing of the appeal had been fixed for 30 September 1996 and of the date by which his submissions were required. However, it did not appear whether this material had reached Haitoua. When the matter came before this Court on 30
September 1996 it was stood over to enable the Crown to ascertain Haitoua's whereabouts and what he was doing.

It appears from the Court records that on 28 October 1996 Haitoua appeared in custody and was represented on that occasion before the Registrar. The matter was further adjourned before the Registrar until 11 November 1996. On that day
Ms Farnam of the Legal Aid Commission appeared for Haitoua and the hearing was fixed for 18 December 1996. It also appears from the Court file that legal aid had been granted to the applicant. On 13 December 1996 detailed written submissions prepared by counsel for Haitoua were received in the Court
Registry. Counsel was Mr Zahra, a public defender, who has helped us today.

There was no appearance by Haitoua at the hearing on 18 December 1996. Counsel appeared. The matter was stood out of the list to be re-listed before the
Registrar in the first call-over in 1997.

The affidavit of Helen Margaret Locke reveals that Haitoua left Australia on 8
December 1996 for New Zealand, his home country. He had been in custody serving a gaol sentence between 22 October and 22 November 1996. He had still to complete his additional term of eleven months. This was in relation to another offence. The Legal Aid Commission and counsel no longer have instructions and it is not known where Haitoua resides, but he is believed to be somewhere in New Zealand.

Should the Court pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s14a.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) deal with the Crown appeal in the absence of Haitoua? The Court may do so where it is satisfied that the respondent has been given notice of the date on which the appeal was to be heard. Haitoua must have been aware of the hearing date of the appeal on 18 December 1996. Having spent a month in gaol he returned to
New Zealand about sixteen days after his release and ten days before the hearing of the appeal. The Court may also proceed where the respondent's whereabouts are unknown. There is the further requirement that it would not be unjust to deal with the appeal and pass sentence in the absence of the respondent.

After sentencing Haitoua the Judge warned Haitoua that his non-custodial sentence could be reviewed if the prosecuting authorities decided to take the matter elsewhere and that the sentence which had just been imposed may not be the end of the matter.

It is inconceivable that the legal representatives appearing for Haitoua would not have warned him that there was at least a possibility if not a probability that he would receive a full-time custodial sentence.

The facts and circumstances point strongly to the conclusion that Haitoua left
Australia to avoid being present if the result of the appeal should be adverse to him.

It would not be unjust to deal with the appeal in his absence. Haitoua has been given every opportunity to put his case and there is no sufficient reason not to proceed. It would certainly not be unjust to do so.

Haitoua and the victim were friends of many years in New Zealand. They had gone out drinking together. They were with their girlfriends and had been expelled from a nightclub apparently because of Haitoua's conduct. The prisoner was angry about being asked to leave the club. There was an altercation. As the victim sought to restrain Haitoua he stabbed the victim twice with a Swiss Army knife, once in the right side of the chest penetrating into the right lung and once above the left nipple piercing the left lung. The girlfriends removed the two men from the scene, the victim going to hospital where he spent about three days with collapsed lungs. It took the victim an appreciable time to recover. The evidence does not disclose if he made a full recovery.

The Judge rightly regarded the offence as a particularly bad instance of malicious wounding and recognised that a custodial sentence would almost always be imposed for such an offence. However, he was much influenced by the subjective features. He also relied, avowedly to a small extent, on some explanatory or allegedly mitigating factors.

Haitoua pleaded guilty. He had served ten days pre-sentence custody. Haitoua was twenty years of age at the time of the offence and about the same age as the victim, who was a bigger man. Haitoua began drinking to excess when he was fifteen or sixteen and the problem had continued.

His criminal record began in January 1992 when he received non-resident periodic detention for six months. Some of his offences were liquor-related.
He came before the New Zealand Courts on four separate occasions during 1993 for separate offences and on four separate occasions during 1994 for separate offences. He was placed under supervision for one year. He was imprisoned for fourteen days for theft in March 1995. His offences included disorderly behaviour, assault and dishonest behaviour.

Haitoua's alcohol problem was serious. It led him to commit offences. As directed, he enrolled in the Bridge Programme conducted by the Salvation Army in New Zealand and was attending counselling about four nights per week for about five weeks before he came to Australia for a short visit in July 1995.

Despite his alcohol problem the material from New Zealand indicated that
Haitoua spent substantial periods in employment. No dates were given for the various periods.

The initial pre-sentence report of 7 December 1995 described him as an unreliable character and the Probation Service was unable to offer any community-based sentencing options. By 15 February 1996 this had changed and the supplementary report indicated that he appeared to be changing and was suitable for a community service order or periodic detention.

There was evidence from Haitoua's mother, which the Judge accepted, that
Haitoua had expressed sorrow for what he did. Since she and her husband and young child came to Sydney he had not drunk as much as he did beforehand and he was aiming to play more sports for which he appeared to have some natural ability. The probabilities were that once he was free to do so he would return to New Zealand.

There was also material indicating that he had embarked on an alcohol rehabilitation programme. The real basis for not imposing a custodial sentence appears in this passage in the Judge's reasons: "[T]he change in his lifestyle, which has been brought about in the last few months, does auger well for the future. It seems likely that his participation in sport, his employment and his drug counselling and treating, if successful, will bring an end to his involvement with the criminal law. That rehabilitation has been substantial but it is early days yet. More importantly, as I have already said, it has reached what can only be regarded as a very delicate stage at this time. There seems to me to be a very real risk that a period of full time custody, even a relatively short one, would be likely to retard, if not negate, the effect of what has been achieved so far." 
The Crown contended that the Judge, in the course of his lengthy discussion which dwelt on the subjective features, placed too much weight on these and insufficient weight on the gravity of the offence.

The Crown submitted that there were additional errors. The subjective features were not unduly favourable and the evidence of rehabilitation or potential rehabilitation was slight. It was more a case of signs of hope. There is considerable substance in this submission. Hindsight, which reveals a further offence attracting a twelve-month sentence with a minimum term of one month, shows how tenuous the hopes were.

The Crown correctly contended that that Judge was incorrect to rely on these matters by way of mitigation to any degree, namely, the consumption of liquor and the fact the two men had had a robust relationship. Haitoua was well aware of his liquor problem and knives had not been used by anyone in previous rough-housing.

In his extensive submissions Mr Zahra emphasised that the Judge had acknowledged the seriousness of the offence and dealt with the various subjective features including the question of rehabilitation. After anxious consideration, the judge had concluded that the matter of rehabilitation was sufficiently substantial to warrant the unusual course which he was taking.

I have earlier expressed my view as to what the material as to rehabilitation revealed. Insufficient attention was directed to the gravity of the offence and the sentence was manifestly inadequate on any view.

The question arises whether this Court, in the exercise of its discretion, should refrain from re-sentencing Haitoua. As Haitoua was notified by the
Judge that the matter may go further, a letter was sent promptly advising that the Director was considering an appeal and there were difficulties in service the matter of delay would not be a ground for declining to re-sentence.
Haitoua had only served some 50 hours community service by early September.

There is no good reason for not proceeding to re-sentence. In re-sentencing, there are special circumstances to be considered, including Haitoua's age and the need for rehabilitation.

The correct sentence which should be imposed by this Court, bearing in mind that this is a Crown appeal, is one of two years comprising a minimum term of twelve months, which should commence today and expire on 8 April 1998, and an additional term of twelve months commencing on 9 April 1998. There should be an order that the applicant be released on parole at the expiration of the minimum term.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

POWELL JA: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court are that the Crown appeal is allowed, the sentence imposed by Graham DCJ is quashed. In lieu thereof the respondent is sentenced to penal servitude for a period of two years commencing today made up of a minimum term of twelve months which will expire on 8 April 1998 and an additional term of twelve months. The respondent is to be released to parole on 8 April 1998.
 * * * 
