

Moroney versus Nationwide News Pty Limited [2001] NSWSC 1139 (14 December 2001) 
Last Updated: 27 December 2001 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Moroney versus Nationwide News Pty Limited <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law  
FILE NUMBER(S): 20179 of 2001  
HEARING DATE{S): 29 November 2001  
JUDGMENT DATE: 14/12/2001  
PARTIES: 
KENNETH EDWARD MORONEY  v  
NATIONWIDE NEWS PTY LIMITED  
JUDGMENT OF: Levine J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
T K Tobin Q.C.  
T Blackburn  
SOLICITORS: 
Verekers  
Blake Dawson Waldron  
CATCHWORDS: 
Imputations - capacity - identification - particulars  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
See paragraph 16  
JUDGMENT:  
DLJ: 1  <case> 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DEFAMATION LIST  
JUSTICE DAVID LEVINE   December 2001  of 2001 
KENNETH EDWARD MORONEY  v  
NATIONWIDE NEWS PTY LIMITED  
JUDGMENT (Imputations - capacity - identification - particulars)  The first matter complained of in respect of which the plaintiff sues is an article in the edition of "The Australian" newspaper of 21 October 2000. The article bears the headline "Police drunken bullies: reformer", is by Martin
Chulov and the text is Appendix A to these reasons.  The article also is accompanied by a cartoon (not here reproduced). The cartoon is of two police officers consulting some papers and has the caption "IS IT GOOD OR BAD THAT THE NSW POLICE KNOW ALL ABOUT CORRUPTION?"   The plaintiff is not named in the matter complained of and the plaintiff has appended to the Statement of Claim the following Particulars of
Identification:  "At the date of publication:  the Commissioner's Executive Team consisted of six members: three being the Commissioner and the two Deputy Commissioners (including the Plaintiff) and three civilian members;  the two positions of deputy Commissioner in the NSW Police Service were filled by the Plaintiff and Deputy Commissioner Jeff Jarratt".  The sufficiency of these particulars has been dealt with by me in my judgment in Moroney versus John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd  <case> which was argued on the same day as this matter.  The plaintiff contends that the first matter complained of carries the following imputations defamatory of him:  "4(a) that the plaintiff misused his position as a senior officer of the NSW
Police Service to oppose reform of the NSW Police Service;  that the plaintiff corruptly opposed reform of the NSW Police Service;  the plaintiff as a Deputy Commissioner of the NSW Police Service engaged in drunken, threatening, bullying conduct towards other members of the NSW
Police Service".  The second matter complained of is an article published in "The
Australian" newspaper of 24 October, the text of which is Appendix B hereto.
The plaintiff is named in this publication. He contends that it carries the following defamatory imputations:  "7(a) that the plaintiff misused his position as a Deputy Commissioner of the
NSW Police Service to obstruct reform of the NSW Police Service;  that the plaintiff, by initiating unfounded investigations to intimidate reformers in the NSW Police Service, misused his position as Deputy
Commissioner of Police Service (sic)".  
First Matter Complained Of   It is the submission for the defendant that the proper application of what is described as the rule in McCormick versus John Fairfax & Sons Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR 485] at 491 brings it about that as a matter of capacity this article cannot be understood as identifying one member of a small group or class as responsible for the conduct alleged. There is nothing in the article which points to any particular member of the group or class. This is a situation distinguishable from that which applied in Moroney versus John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd where there is express reference to the Commissioner's
Executive Team and the article was found to be capable of allocating to all members of that team the conduct alleged.  The statement in line 13 of Appendix A is non-specific as to anything capable of identifying either all or any one of whatever is to be understood by "hand picked members of the Commissioner's team".  Accordingly, I hold the first matter complained of to be incapable of carrying imputations 4(a), (b) and (c).  As to imputation 4(b) it was argued that the pleader fell into the "trap' identified in Drummoyne Municipal Council versus Australian Broadcasting
Corporation [(1990) 21 NSWLR 135] at 138F.
I do not have to decide this point however I would be disposed to forming what
I understand still to be an available view that where, as here, in the cartoon, the word "corruption" is used without embellishment, it is appropriate to plead "corruptly" without penalty (see Drummoyne at -8).  
Second Matter Complained Of   The defendant argues that imputation (b) is incapable of arising. It is submitted that there is no suggestion in that matter that anybody has initiated any investigation to intimidate reformers. With that submission I agree.  The headline speaks of "Anti-reform police to face inquiry"; the article goes on to speak about officers to Deputy Commissioner level "hunting in packs". The reformers faced "obstructive and intimidating tactics", were being warned off, and were being told "you will be targeted, you will be investigated". Those components of the matter complained of are capable of giving rise to what the plaintiff seeks leave to do namely, to plead a further imputation using the word "threatening" rather than "initiating".  Thus, I hold that the second matter complained of is incapable of carrying the imputation 7(b).  I will grant leave to the plaintiff to file an Amended Statement of Claim in respect of the second matter complained of only and to plead the proposed imputation employing the word "threatening".  The defendant has succeeded totally with respect to the first article and should have its costs in relation thereto.  Accordingly, the formal orders are: 
Imputations 4(a), (b) and (c) are incapable of being carried. 
I enter a verdict for the defendant in respect of imputations 4(a), (b) and (c). 
Imputation 7(b) is incapable of being carried. 
I enter a verdict for the defendant in respect of imputation 7(b). 
Plaintiff has leave to file within 21 days of today, an Amended Statement of Claim with respect to the second matter complained of only 
The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs in respect of the first matter complained of; otherwise, each party is to pay his and its own costs.  
Appendix A Police drunken bullies: reformer  Martin Chulov  The NSW Police Service was rocked yesterday by allegations that stirred ghosts of its infamous  past, with a reformer, appointed to overhaul the force's culture describing some senior officers as  drunks, bullies and incompetents. The claims are the most serious the service has faced since the  1996 police royal commission which led to a much-lauded cultural change and an overhaul of  managers from inspectors through to commissioner level.  A team of consultants hired by Commissioner Peter Ryan appointed in 1996 to restructure the  service yesterday passed on a dossier of complaints to the police integrity commission.  Reform consultant James Ritchie made a series of allegations against senior police in the respected  crime agencies unit and internal affairs, which, in turn is investigating the members of the reform  team for alleged rorts. Mr Ritchie said three years of reform efforts had revealed a world of "total  incompetents, of drunken, threatening, bullying, hand-picked members of the
Commissioner's  team ... of constant last-minute scrambling to make the commissioner look good".  "Senior executives of the police service are not committed," he said.  Mr Ritchie alleged he and the leader of the Crime Management Support Unit,
Detective  Superintendent Ken Seddon, had been "stitched up" by two Internal Affairs inquiries launched into  their use of travel entitlements. He said that the allegations could be disproved if investigators  made calls to the commissioner's office.  Mr Ryan yesterday asked the police integrity commission, set up after the royal commission  exposes (sic), to expedite an inquiry into claims about the service's senior officers. Both Mr Ryan  and Police Minister Paul Whelan refused to comment further.  Opposition police spokesman Andrew Tink called for any inquiry to be conducted by the officers  from outside the state . "Make no mistake, this is a watershed day in policing in this state," he said.  "The allegations, in essence, suggest there is something of a civil war developing within the NSW  Police Service over reform".  Mr Ritchie described allegations made against Mr Seddon and himself as a witch hunt for which  both men had been preparing.  'They have been undermining us constantly for the past three years," he said.  "Internal affairs using malicious and unfounded investigations into individuals as a means of  maintaining the old control and punishment mechanisms in order to derail and delay genuine  reform".  Internal affairs chief Mal Brammer and the commander of crime agencies,
Clive Small, declined to  comment.  
Appendix B Anti-reform police to face inquiry  Barclay Crawford Martin Chulov  A Police Integrity Commission inquiry into claims that officers up to deputy commissioner level  were "hunting in packs" was announced last night.  Police commissioner Peter Ryan said he supported the investigation but otherwise remained silent  on public revelations of turmoil rocking the service at its senior levels.  Reform consultant James Ritchie was brought in by Mr Ryan to oversee behavioural changes  deemed necessary in the wake of the Wood royal commission, which uncovered widespread  corruption. Mr Ritchie claimed yesterday that dedicated reformists had come up against a wall of  obstructive and intimidating tactics.  "They are warning reformers off. They are saying, "if you are a reformer in this organisation you  will be targeted, you will be investigated" Mr Ritchie said.  He said a network of anti-reform police, including some of the most senior officers in the service,  had told fellow commanders not to cooperate with the reform group.  Mr Ritchie would not name any officers and deputy commissioners Jeff
Jarrett (sic) and Ken  Maroney (sic) refused to comment on his allegations.  Mr Ritchie, who sought the PIC inquiry, said: "If they don't do anything about it, I will go even  further and release more documents and more names,"  In a memo to senior police, obtained yesterday by The Australian, assistant commissioner and  Crime Agencies head Clive Small said officers would fight Mr Ritchie's allegations.  "I roundly condemn the allegations that have been made and regard them as a patchwork of  exaggeration, gross distortion, misrepresentation of fact and in some cases outright lies," Mr Small  said.  He added that the PIC investigation would provide an opportunity to "confront these accusers".  Mr Ritchie yesterday released documents that he said supported his allegations. They included  internal memos between police officers.  One described a directive not to invite Mr Ritchie to a seminar. Another sought to "play down" the  effectiveness of behavioural change in policing.  
LAST UPDATED: 14/12/2001 * * * 
