

Regina versus Luu; Regina versus Cheung Matter Nos 60434/96 [1998] NSWSC 1004 (12
March 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 April 1998 
REGINA versus CHAN QUAN LUU 
REGINA versus CHUN TUNG CHEUNG /96, 60498/96, 60450/96 March 1998 
Smart J, Newman J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: (Cheung) Appeal against conviction and sentence (Luu) Appeal against conviction, Crown appeal against sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60434/96, 60498/96, 60450/96 
DELIVERED: Thursday, 12 March 1998 
HEARING DATE: Friday, 20 December 1996 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Chan Quan LUU 
REGINA versus Chun Tung CHEUNG 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART J, NEWMAN J, HIDDEN J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: (Luu) C L Steirn, SC; G J Jones 
G R James, Q.C.; M A Marty 
Crown: C A Davenport 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: (Luu) Borak & Co. 
Respondent: (Cheung) Murphy's Lawyers Inc. 
Crown: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - DIRECTIONS TO JURY - WHETHER DIRECTIONS CONFUSING AND LIKELY TO MISLEAD - MANSLAUGHTER - UNLAWFUL AND DANGEROUS ACT - WHETHER VERDICTS UNSAFE AND UNSATISFACTORY - ADEQUACY OF SENTENCES 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO. OF PAGES: 84 
REGINA versus Chan Quan LUU 
REGINA versus Chun Tung CHEUNG 
HEADNOTE 
Following an argument between Cheung and Chan in which Cheung acted aggressively towards Chan, Cheung and Luu confronted a group of men including
Chan and the deceased, Leung. Cheung was armed with a knife, Luu a screwdriver. In the ensuing altercation, all of the combatants were wounded,
Leung fatally by a knife wound. Leung had struck Cheung with a club-lock.

Cheung was convicted of the manslaughter of Leung and of maliciously wounding
Chan but was acquitted of maliciously wounding Chow and Tam. Luu was acquitted of murder and manslaughter and of maliciously wounding Tam but was convicted of maliciously wounding Chan and Chow.

Held: 
There was no inconsistency between the findings of guilty of the malicious wounding counts and the acquittal of murder, verdict of guilty of manslaughter and the acquittals on the malicious wounding counts.

As to Cheung's appeals against conviction and sentence - the judge's directions as to murder, self defence and provocation (including where murder is reduced to manslaughter) were not confusing and not likely to mislead the jury.
 - The judge did not expressly say that if Cheung's acts were done in self defence they were not unlawful, nor that if the jury were not satisfied that
Cheung's acts were not unlawful, the Crown had not established that the acts were unlawful and there could be no offence of manslaughter. There was no miscarriage as the jury were instructed that they could not find the applicant guilty of manslaughter unless the Crown negatived self defence.
 - the judge made it sufficiently clear that the matter of self defence had to be approached from Cheung's point of view as the person under attack - the directions were defective in that the judge did not develop what constituted an unlawful and dangerous act in accordance with Wilson v. The
Queen <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 313] at -336. However, there was no miscarriage as the production and use of a knife on the torso of the deceased was obviously unlawful as involving the deliberate application of force and the alleged act was obviously dangerous as it involved an appreciable risk of injury to the deceased and a reasonable person in Cheung's position would have taken that view.
 - a jury who had heard the evidence and accompanied the judge on the summing up and through the written directions would have been able to deal with
Cheung's case adequately.
 - the judge's directions as to malicious wounding were adequate - the verdicts were not unsafe and unsatisfactory. Cheung's contentions that the judge's directions were inadequate, confusing and not sufficiently related to the facts and that on the evidence the court and the jury ought to entertain a reasonable doubt rejected.
 - the sentences imposed on Cheung were not excessive.

As to Luu's appeal against conviction - there is no significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. The verdicts were not unsafe and unsatisfactory.

As to the Crown appeal against Luu's sentence - while the sentences imposed were manifestly inadequate, Hidden J dissenting, the appeal should be dismissed on discretionary grounds.

Orders
Appeal by Cheung against convictions dismissed.
Grant leave to appeal against sentences to Cheung. Appeal against sentences dismissed.
Appeal by Luu against convictions dismissed.
Crown Appeal against the sentences imposed on Luu dismissed.

REGINA versus Chan Quan LUU 
REGINA versus Chun Tung CHEUNG 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: 
Introductory 
Chun Tung Cheung ("Cheung") and Chan Quan Luu ("Luu") were tried together on four identical counts, one of murder and three of malicious wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm (s. 33 of [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) ) in respect of 4 different men. Each of the charges arose out of events which occurred in the early hours of 27 December 1993 at the intersection of Little
Hay and Dixon Streets in Chinatown, Sydney.

Yiu Faih Leung (aka David Leung) died as a result of a stab wound. Both Cheung and Luu were acquitted of the murder of Leung. Cheung was found guilty of the manslaughter of Leung but Luu was acquitted of that charge.

Hoi Shan Chan (aka Ben Chan), Chi Wai Chow (aka James Chow or Alan Chan) and
Piu Yuen Tam (aka Eddie Tam) sustained injuries which the appellants, by their counsel, accepted amounted to wounding for the purposes of [s.33.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s33.html)
Cheung was convicted of maliciously wounding Ben Chan and acquitted of maliciously wounding James Chow and Eddie Tam. Luu was convicted of maliciously wounding Ben Chan and James Chow and acquitted of maliciously wounding Eddie Tam.

The appellants have appealed against their convictions.

The Crown alleged that the appellants had a common purpose, that there was principal and accessorial liability and a joint attack. In the alternative the
Crown relied on each accused acting individually.

After the jury verdicts it was accepted by the Crown and the appellants, by their counsel, that the jury rejected common purpose and that it found each appellant guilty in relation to those acts it found him to have committed personally with relevant intent. The trial judge also accepted this view. The verdicts involved the rejection of self defence to the charges on which the appellants were convicted.

The Restaurant and Leaving It 
On the evening of 26 December 1993 a group was dining in a particular part of the Shanghai Village Restaurant in Dixon Street and Cheung joined the party.
At one stage a game was being played and a dispute developed between Cheung and Ben Chan over Cheung declining to drink some liquor as part of the game.
The argument became heated. According to several prosecution witnesses, Cheung addressed some offensive abuse to Ben Chan. Cheung contended that it was Ben
Chan who became abusive and offensive. There seems to have been an exchange of offensive abuse. There was substantial evidence that Cheung left the restaurant in an angry mood and that Ben Chan was also angry.

There were differences in the accounts given by the Crown witnesses as to exactly what happened in the restaurant and as to the circumstances in which
Cheung left the restaurant including whether he left alone or with another or others and, if so, whom. A couple of witnesses stated he left with Luu. Luu stated that he went to the restaurant looking for Cheung, that he remained in the main part of the restaurant and that Cheung came out of a private room and was very angry. A number of witnesses stated that Cheung left the restaurant saying in effect that he was going to return with some re-inforcements. Cheung left the restaurant about 2.50 am. The others in the restaurant left in small groups a few minutes later. It was closing time.

Ben Chan and Tiffany Wong (now his wife) walked to where Ms Wong's black
Celica was parked in Little Hay Street close both to the intersection with
Dixon Street and to the restaurant. Ms Wong entered the Celica and remained there for a couple of minutes before getting out of it and standing nearby.
Chan ultimately joined Leung, Tam and a woman named Gillian in a Mercedes Benz which had pulled up behind the Celica.

James Chow had come to the restaurant with Josephine Cheng and Tammy Han. The three of them left the restaurant. The two women walked to Tammy Han's car (a blue Mazda), which was parked nearby, while Chow waited at the restaurant.
The two women returned with the car, parked outside Dixon House in Dixon
Street and remained in the car.

The Fracas 
A group of people gathered at the corner of Little Hay and Dixon Streets, reasonably close to the Celica. A car, a Ford TX5 driven by Cheung, drove up behind the Mazda in which the two women were seated. Cheung and Luu alighted and hurried across to this group. There were some differences in the accounts of the various witnesses as to when the various men joined the group and the exact sequence of events. That is not of much importance. At one point, the group included Chan, Leung, Tam and Chow. There may have been a fifth man.
There was some shouting and pushing and a fight ensued. Some were combatants.
Others claimed that they were trying to stop the fight.

The Wounding of Ben Chan - Cheung 
There was a body of evidence that on reaching the group Cheung pushed one of the group. Chan, Tiffany Wong and Tam deposed to Cheung pushing Chan and poking or pushing Chan and Chan being wounded on the left arm. Chan said that
Cheung had a little silver blade with which he stabbed him (Chan). Josephine
Cheng saw Cheung pushing one of the men initially. She saw much other fighting. She could not see whether Cheung had anything in his hands. At a later stage she saw him engaged in a downwards stabbing motion many times.
Tammy Han gave no evidence as to Cheung pushing Chan. She saw that someone was being pushed but she could not see who was doing the pushing nor who was pushed. Chow said that Cheung pushed Chan and Leung a couple of times in the face and chest and that Chan tried to push Cheung back. The fighting began.
Chow said that Chan was knifed by someone in the Dixon House area. Cheung said that he did not stab anyone. While there were differences as to the details and the order of events there was a substantial body of evidence that, close to the start of the fracas, Cheung pushed Chan and wounded him.

Mr Dumas, an Ambulance Officer, said that Ben Chan was treated for a stab wound on the lower left side of his chest and lacerations to his middle and index fingers on his left hand and a minor laceration on his upper left arm.
Some dressings were applied and Chan was given some oxygen. The dressing applied to the chest wound was air-tight to stop air entering. Chan was cannulated and haemocell was administered through the cannular.

Chan was seen about 4 am on 27 December 1993 by Dr M J Morgan, a Surgical
Registrar at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. The wound which was just above the bottom of the rib cage and on the side of the chest, had at least a depth of 2 cm. There was some blood coming from it. Intra-venous access was obtained and
Chan was given some fluids. A chest X-ray was performed and the vital structures of Chan's chest were examined. On clinical examination he had some tenderness of the chest area and also of the abdomen. The abdominal cavity also required observation. It turned out that there was no injury to the vital organs and Chan was discharged on 28 December 1993. There was suturing to the web space between the fingers and to the base of the middle finger. There was no reference by the doctor to the minor laceration on the left arm. The ambulance officer had dealt with that. The injury or wound to the left arm was inflicted by Cheung and the others by Luu.

The Killing of Leung - Cheung 
At a relatively early stage of the encounter Leung and Cheung engaged each other. According to Chan, Leung moved to prevent Cheung attacking Chan and
Cheung pursued Leung.

Josephine Cheng said that Cheung and Leung were just away from the main group and fighting. As Cheung swung around with the deceased they moved closer to her car. She saw that Cheung was punching Leung. Cheung was deploying his hand in a stabbing motion and was striking Leung who tried to stop Cheung pushing him.

Josephine Cheng stated that these men were holding a "club-lock" and that each was trying to obtain total control of it. She said that the "club-lock" was not wielded. Leung had it above his head and Cheung was trying to force it down onto Leung. He was almost half-kneeling on the ground while Cheung was standing. Leung appeared to lose his strength and slipped to the ground. Both were holding the "club-lock" with one hand. Cheung made a stabbing motion with his other hand many times. The fist was closed. She could not see whether
Cheung had anything in his hand as everything happened so quickly.

At the committal proceedings she said that Leung was the aggressor and she adhered to that statement at the trial. She was conscious of two separate fights, one close to her car between Cheung and Leung and the other involving
Luu and Leung's friends.

Tammy Han saw Cheung and Luu get out of their car which was parked immediately behind her car. A fight occurred. At first she could not see who was doing the pushing or who was being pushed. Initially, all the men were fighting together and she did not see anybody fighting with a weapon. She saw Cheung and Leung break away from the other combatants and continue to fight. She saw the deceased with a steering lock and thought that he was trying to strike Cheung.
Cheung fought for control of the lock. She saw the deceased fall to the ground and Cheung strike him more than twice. She saw Cheung go off in the direction of Little Hay Street.

Ben Chan, Tiffany Wong and James Chow all denied seeing the "club-lock". There was a great deal of evidence that it was used in the fight. Stephen Leung said that the "club-lock" he was shown was virtually identical to the one kept in the Mercedes. The Crown accepted that David Leung emerged from the Mercedes carrying the "club-lock". Counsel for Cheung contended that Leung had the "club-lock" when he first left the Mercedes and that he would not have had time to return for it. The evidence does not enable a Court to say at what point the "club-lock" was obtained.

Chan stated that after Leung moved to prevent Cheung stabbing Chan, Cheung chased Leung and seemed to be holding something silvery. Chan said that then he saw both Cheung and Luu stab Leung who was trying to ward off their attack with his arm. Chan stated that the blade in Cheung's hand was silver, about 10 to 15 cm long. Chan said that Chow was trying to stop the fight. Leung was using his hands to protect himself from the stabbings of Cheung and Luu.

Eddie Tam, who arrived with Leung in his Mercedes, stated that he saw Cheung and Luu approach Chan. A fight started and everything became chaotic. Tam claimed that he, too, tried to stop the fight. After feeling a pain in his side and seeing blood there, Tam started to leave but after he had gone a few yards he turned around and saw Leung lying on the ground in Little Hay Street.
Cheung and Luu were in a stabbing posture on top of Leung. Each made a stabbing gesture at least 4 times. Cheung and Leung were holding something and struggling over possession of it. Leung had 2 hands on the object and Cheung had one hand on it; with his other hand he was making a stabbing gesture. Tam was too far away to be able to tell what was in Cheung's hand, if anything.
Early in his cross examination Tam stated that he had not previously seen the "club-lock" which was shown to him (being the one which Leung had used). Later in his cross examination, and after he had been absent from the witness box for over one day, he recalled that he had seen the "club-lock" when he turned as he was running away. That was the device over which Leung and Cheung struggled. Tam stated that he did not see Leung get out of the Mercedes with the "club-lock" or holding it any time prior to the struggle.

Tiffany Wong, now the wife of Ben Chan, said that she was sitting in the
Celica and that after a short period she got out and walked towards the
Mercedes. She saw Cheung and Luu walk towards Leung and Chan and call out.
Leung, Chan and Tam met Cheung and Luu. There was some pushing. After Cheung poked his finger in Chan's chest, Chan's arm began to bleed. She saw Leung try to separate Chan and Cheung. She said that she saw Cheung swing his arm as if he were stabbing Leung. Leung ran towards the Shanghai Village and Cheung chased Leung. Cheung kept stabbing at Leung many times. She saw something silver in Cheung's hand. She saw nothing in Leung's hands. Luu went to where
Cheung and Leung were and Cheung kept stabbing Leung on the front of his body.
Leung ended up on the ground. Cheung and Luu ran from the scene. She and Chan waited with a man in a uniform for the ambulance to arrive.

Ms Wong said that she did not see Leung with a "club-lock". She agreed that if he had been carrying it and swinging it around she would have been able to see it from where she was. She would also have been able to see if Cheung had got it. She said that she did not see Leung use the "club-lock" to strike Cheung.

She stated that about 30 seconds after the fight commenced there were 2 separate groups, one of which included Cheung and Leung with the other included Luu, Chan and Tam. The effect of her evidence was that Cheung and Luu were the aggressors, particularly Cheung.

James Chow stated that he was seated in the blue Mazda of Tammy Han when
Cheung and Luu pulled up in a car behind them and walked across to the intersection. There was an argument with Cheung "yowling"(yelling loudly).
Cheung pushed Chan and Leung in the face and chest. Chan pushed back and a fight started. Cheung and Luu were fighting Chan and Leung. Chow said that he left Han's Mazda, walked across the road and intervened. He and Luu engaged each other. Tam had left the Mercedes and joined the group. He saw Leung sit down in the street and Cheung and Luu continue to stab Leung. Chow subsequently explained that Leung was kneeling down.

Chow said that he saw Cheung's hand stabbing Leung "all the time". Cheung had a knife and was squatting down and bending over. Leung was being pressed down and could not move. After Cheung and Luu had finished stabbing Leung they ran from the scene. The stabbing took place very quickly. Chow said that Cheung was wearing a jacket and that Cheung removed a knife from his jacket and used that to stab Leung. All the other witnesses said that Cheung was wearing a
T-Shirt. The Crown accepted that Cheung was not wearing a jacket and that this portion of Chow's evidence was incorrect. Luu was wearing a jacket. This suggests some confusion by Chow as to some of the details.

When shown the "club-lock" Chow did not recognise it and did not know what it was. He had never seen a steering wheel lock similar to the one in question before the day of his evidence. He did not see Leung with the "club-lock" during the fight. He was too far away to be able to see whether Cheung and
Leung were struggling over that item. Nor did he see Cheung strike Leung or carry that item away. Chow said that he did not watch the whole of the fight between Leung and Cheung. He did not know if Leung tried to help Chan. He did not know what was in the hands of the various combatants.

Dr Schwartz, a forensic pathologist, detailed the injuries to Leung. There were two significant lacerations (5 cm & 4 cm in length) on the back of the head, penetrating the full depth of the skin tissue, an area of abrasion 7 cm in length immediately below the second one and a superficial laceration of .5 cm beneath the right nostril. There were no fractures of the skull or facial bones. The injuries to the back of the head were caused by a blunt object. Those injuries and that on the upper lip had a zig zag pattern and that zig zag may have been caused by the pattern on a segment of the steering lock. The injuries mentioned were consistent with having been so caused. She thought that the degree of force needed to produce the injuries to the back of the head was mild. It appeared that there was one blow to the face and two blows to the back of the head.

There were two wounds to Leung's chest on the right side just above the nipple. The first wound was 1.8 cm in length on the surface of the skin with a blunt upper outer edge and a sharp edge towards the lower part of the wound towards the centre of the body. This wound was 3 cm deep and directed slightly upwards. The second wound which was slightly lower and slightly to the centre of the body, had a sharp lower edge towards the centre of the body and a rounded or blunt upper or outer edge. This wound was also just above the nipple.

The first wound started between the second and third ribs and went through the upper lobe of the right lung and the membrane which covers the heart, ending at the outer surface of the aorta and not penetrating it. The wound was 13 cm deep. The wound travelled upwards and backwards and from right to left. The second wound on the right side of the chest also began between the second and third ribs. It penetrated the upper part of the right lung, the membrane which covers the heart and the ascending aorta, the main blood vessel. This wound was 17 cm deep and the wound track was close to and parallel to the first wound and followed the same direction. Once the aorta is injured the person bleeds copiously and will be rendered inactive quite rapidly. It was the last or one of the last wounds inflicted. The loss of blood caused Leung's death.

These two wounds were caused by a sharp object such as a knife and probably the same object. These wounds were probably made in quick succession.

There was a wound on the right lumber area above the right buttock. That wound was 7.5 cm deep and directed upwards towards the front. It was most likely caused by a knife, like the one that caused the chest wounds. There was another wound to the lower back. That wound was on the left side above the left buttock. It was 4 cm deep and it travelled upwards, forwards and from left to right. The two wounds on the back were caused by a sharp object. The wound on the right side was probably caused by a knife similar to the one used on the chest and the wound on the left side by a long, thin object, most likely a screwdriver. She agreed that it was most likely a Phillip's type screwdriver. The wound on the left side was not life threatening.

There was a wound on the back of the right forearm, such wound being about 2 cm in length and 4 cm deep. It passed through the muscles on the back of the forearm between the 2 bones of the forearm and penetrated the muscles on the forearm where it ended. This wound was caused by a sharp object, most likely a knife. There was another wound to the right forearm, such wound being 1.4 cm in length. It passed through the muscles of the forearm. It was also caused by a sharp object, such as a knife. The wound went towards the back of the arm.

There was an area of dot-sized bruises measuring 32 x 7 mm on the right wrist and some scratches on 2 fingers of the right hand. There was an abrasion on the left forearm along with other minor injuries to the left elbow and the 2nd and 5th fingers of the left hand. The wounds on the right forearm were typical defensive wounds, caused as a person used his arms to protect vital parts of the body. The wounds on the arm and hands were most likely caused by a knife.

Dr Piedmont examined and treated Cheung in the Emergency Room of Sydney
Hospital on 27 December 1993. A 5 to 6 cm laceration on the top of Cheung's scalp was cleaned and stitched. The history recorded was that Cheung had fallen over and hit his head. The doctor said that the laceration could have been due to that cause or something else. It was possible that it could have been caused by Cheung being struck with a blunt instrument.

About 7.22 pm on 27 December 1993, after Cheung had been in custody for some hours and had talked with the police and accompanied them to a friend's flat at Strathfield and to the scene of the fight, a lengthy, electronically- recorded interview took place.

During the interview Cheung gave his version of what he did on the night of December 1993 and during the early hours of 27 December 1993, his visit to the Shanghai Village Restaurant and what occurred there. Cheung covered some matters in detail. Some of the questions and answers were repetitive. Amongst other things, he claimed that Ben Chan had become aggressive and abusive.
Cheung said that there was a confrontation after which he left the restaurant.
Cheung drove his car, having met with Luu. Cheung stopped the car and he and
Luu got out of the car. Cheung said that Ben Chan was very emotional and rushed towards him. He resisted Chan who hit him first. Suddenly, Cheung was hit with a "club-lock". Cheung ignored Chan and struggled with the person who had hit him. Cheung managed to get hold of the "club-lock" and hit him (Leung) with it in return several times. Leung was lying down. Luu was underneath
Cheung. Luu asked Cheung to leave and he did so. Cheung said that there were 2 "club-locks".

Cheung was bleeding and was taken by 2 men to the hospital. The doctor told him to stay at the hospital until 7.30 am. Cheung said that he slept until 5 to 6 am when he asked the doctor if he could leave. The doctor asked what had happened and should he call the police. Cheung said that he told the doctor that it was just a fight and that he was drunk. Cheung took a taxi to the flat of his friend, Stephen, at Strathfield where he gave his clothes to be washed to a lady called Lisa. It appeared that the yellow jacket and the other clothes of Luu were also washed. The circumstances in which these were obtained do not emerge. After a lapse of some time and probably after 11 am
Cheung telephoned a friend in Chinatown to check about his car. A little later he telephoned that person again. Then the police spoke to Cheung on the telephone and he agreed to meet them at Campsie Police Station.

At the Campsie Detectives' Office, after Cheung had been searched and a number of scratches upon him were seen and noted and the allegations of murder had been put to him, Cheung stated "Got in fight at Chinatown". Cheung agreed to a search of the Strathfield flat where he had stayed. In the car outside Campsie
Police Station this conversation was recorded by the police and signed by
Cheung: "Freudenstein: Why did you stab this person? 
Cheung: It was a fight in Chinatown. I get hit with clublock.

Freudenstein: Where is the knife you used to stab this person? 
Cheung: I didn't stab, I don't know where it is.

Freudenstein: Did you or did you not stab this Asian person whilst in Dixon St
Mall near the Shanghai Village restaurant? 
Cheung: I was fighting. I was fighting. I just did this (rotates hands in boxing motion).
 ... ...

Freudenstein: Are you able to tell me anything about 2 men being stabbed in
Dixon St Mall near SH Village Restaurant in which one person died? 
Cheung: No." 
After some discussion with the police, Cheung took the police back to the
Strathfield flats. It was a large block with an intercom system for gaining access. Despite police instructions to the contrary, Cheung spoke in
Cantonese. He later agreed that he had told Stephen, his friend, who had answered the call, to place the clothes, which were wet, in a green garbage bag and put it in a garbage disposal area at the flats. When access was gained to the flat and the clothes were not in the laundry the police questioned
Cheung as to their whereabouts and he took the police to the green garbage bag. Cheung later said that he did not understand the question and that he did not tell Stephen to put the wet clothes in a bag in the garbage disposal area.
The bloodstains had not come out and the clothes were damaged. Cheung stated that they could no longer be decently worn. The Crown contended that the actions of Cheung in causing the clothes to be washed exhibited a consciousness of guilt. Cheung contended that he would not have taken the police to the flat or told them of the location of the clothes in the green garbage bag if he had a consciousness of guilt. Cheung stated that he wanted to get the clothes clean.

The police and Cheung next went to the scene of the killing. Cheung indicated his Mazda sedan parked at the north-western corner of Dixon and Little Hay
Streets and a green post on the south western corner adjacent to the Shanghai
Village Restaurant as the location of the fight. Cheung said "I went to
Shanghai Village. I come out and fight." Later, in the interview room at the police station, Cheung said loudly and emotionally "I didn't stab, I didn't stab. What has happened. Someone killed." 
Detective Freudenstein referred to the altercation earlier that morning, stating that it involved 4 Asian males and continued "a person of similar description to you, wearing dark jeans and a dark T-shirt, has been identified as stabbing a David Leung. David Leung has since passed away in hospital
Another 2 persons were stabbed. Can you tell me anything about this?" Cheung replied "I fight. I fight. No stab. No tell anyone." Cheung confirmed that he wore glasses. Earlier he had said that he was wearing dark jeans and a dark
T-shirt with writing on the front of it. Cheung was asked if he was prepared to take part in an identification parade. Initially, he was prepared to do so but, on the procedure being further explained, Cheung decided not to do so. He was worried about the identifying person making a mistake and confusing fighting and arguing with killing and that being very unfair to him. He asked on a couple of occasions how many witnesses the police had against him. In the police interview Cheung rejected the suggestion that as he left the restaurant he yelled out that he would bring some more guys back. Cheung said that he only asked Ben Chan to wait because he had an argument with him. Cheung said that he became upset at the restaurant and that when he left he went looking for, and found, Luu. Cheung said that he was afraid that Ben Chan might get someone to hit him. Cheung claimed that when he and Luu left his car and walked towards Ben Chan he wanted to go up to him and talk to him. With
Cheung's fears and Luu having been recruited and having armed himself with a
Phillip's screwdriver, it is not easy to visualise Cheung approaching the confrontation with Ben Chan unarmed.

During the interview Cheung's assessment of his state of sobriety during the fight seemed to vary. When being asked about Luu's use of a knife he said: "Yes, I can see him using something like that but I was a bit drunk. I was drunk and then I was hit in the head so I was all hazy and my ... was bleeding." 
At a later stage when he was asked if he was drunk "last night early this morning", he replied "I drank but I wasn't drunk. I was hit on the head and then the blood came out and I felt dizzy". He also said "I don't admit that I was affected by alcohol but I did drink some wine." 
Cheung's statements about Luu's use of a knife or similar instrument involved some fudging. About an hour before the recorded interview this exchange occurred: 
Freudenstein: "What did Eric do to leave the country? 
Cheung: He stabs people.

Freudenstein: Did he use a knife? 
Cheung: Yes.

Freudenstein: Did you see him do this? 
Cheung: Stephen told me he did this.

Freudenstein: Did you see him use the knife about 3 am this morning in Dixon
St Mall? 
Cheung: Yes." 
During the recorded interview Cheung said that he agreed that he had seen Luu stab a person but Cheung said that he was hazy and added that Stephen had told him afterwards. Cheung said that he was not sure whether Luu was stabbing someone or hitting someone. Later Stephen told him that Luu had stabbed someone. Cheung said that he did not know that Luu had a knife.

Cheung stated that he did not report the matter to the police because it was just fighting. He thought that no-one was injured or had died. He said that he was afraid that "they" would come and look for him so he did not report it. It is not clear to whom the "they" refers. He then said that he would have reported the matter if he had realised how serious it was.

Cheung made a lengthy dock statement extending over 21 pages. He detailed the events which occurred on 27 December day and the unseemly argument he had with
Ben Chan who hurled very offensive abuse at him. He said that he left the restaurant with Stephen and Luu. He and Luu waited in a car outside the Mah
Jong house. Luu joined Stephen in the Mah Jong house and Cheung returned to
Shanghai Village Restaurant. After a short period of calm there was another confrontation between Cheung and Ben Chan. There was some further offensive abuse from Ben Chan which was reciprocated by Cheung. They were separated and, according to Cheung, Ben Chan yelled very loudly to him "you beware." Cheung replied "you wait for me." 
After leaving the restaurant, Cheung remarked to a friend that he still worried that in the future he would be attacked. Cheung drove his car to and entered the Mah Jong house. After speaking with Luu and Stephen, he left with
Luu and drove to the Shanghai Village. The journey took less than a minute. He got out of his car and tried to walk very fast towards Ben Chan to explain what had happened and to avoid future revenge. He did not pay attention to what Luu was doing except to note that Luu was following behind.

Eddie Tam got out of a deep red car, walked towards them and spoke to Luu.
Cheung heard his name called and saw Ben Chan raise his fist. Cheung used his hand to defend himself. He lost his glasses. After he and Ben Chan had been fighting for a short period he felt a lot of pain in his head and blood coming down. He was being attacked from behind by Leung with a "club-lock". He saw
James Chow attacking Luu with a steering wheel lock. Cheung said he had to watch the people attacking him. He struggled with Leung for possession of the "club-lock", they punched each other and fell to the ground with Leung below
Cheung. Cheung got hold of the "club-lock" using his last available strength and got up. Leung was lying on the ground. Cheung "fought" Leung a few times.
Luu came over towards them. Cheung said that as he was punching Leung he heard
Luu say "let's go." Cheung said that he stopped and followed Luu. They were being chased by some people. Cheung claimed that it was only after he arrived at the Strathfield flats that he was told by Stephen that Luu had said that he had stabbed somebody.

Cheung asserted that he was in much pain and that Luu had been wounded and was in pain. They went to Mah Jong house from where he was taken to hospital.
About 7 am he told the attending doctor that it was not necessary to call the police. The doctor told him that he could leave at any time.

Cheung said that he proceeded to the Strathfield flat and gave his clothes to
Lisa, Stephen's girlfriend, to wash. Sometime later he took them out of the washing machine, decided that they were torn and not worth keeping, put them into a garbage bag and took it out to the garbage room. At the request of the police, Cheung made arrangements to meet them at Campsie Police Station.

Cheung told the jury that he had not killed anybody. Cheung's statement does not readily explain how Leung received his stab wounds. The picture, in brief, is of Leung attacking Cheung, Cheung mastering Leung by obtaining the "club- lock", Cheung ending up being above Leung when they fell, Cheung standing up and dominating Leung who was lying on the ground. Cheung did not say that when
Luu came over towards them he stabbed Leung. According to Cheung, Luu suggested that they should leave. Cheung claimed that he had been exhausted in his fight with Leung for possession of the "club-lock".

There is other material strongly suggesting that Luu inflicted a wound, which was not life-threatening, on Leung's back with a Phillip's head screwdriver.
While Cheung made a passing reference to others attacking him, he did not suggest that they attacked Leung. One of his complaints seemed to be that most of the people around the area at the time were friends of Ben Chan. On
Cheung's account of what occurred he used no knife and it was neither necessary nor reasonable for him to use one. Yet, when Cheung left Leung,
Leung was dying and died within a couple of hours at St Vincent's Hospital.

On Cheung's version, someone else, who appears by implication to be unknown to
Cheung, stabbed Leung a number of times. This is a little hard to fathom when
Cheung and Leung were so close to each other wrestling over the "club-lock" and given the fatal wounds on the right side of the chest. Cheung is not entitled to conceal the commission of a felony by another if he knows who committed the felony. It is not easy to accept that one of Leung's friends or acquaintances did so; Leung was not fighting them. The combatants appeared to be Leung and Cheung with Luu intervening at a relatively late stage. Cheung's denial of his use of a knife and his account of the events made it difficult to raise the question of self defence.

As the Crown sought to put its case against Cheung and Luu in four different ways (individual acts, common purpose, principal/accessory and joint attack) and questions of self defence and provocation arose and there were separate charges of malicious wounding as to 3 other men, the directions given to the jury were necessarily quite complex and extensive. The judge gave each member of the jury extensive written directions which were helpful and facilitated their deliberations. The judge recognised the problem of giving directions which dealt with all the possibilities and yet were not confusing. She told the jury in a concise manner the elements of the various offences and explained the relevant concepts such as common purpose and what had to be proved. She gave a useful summary of the various versions of the facts and pointed out the differences. While the summing up was lengthy it was not interminable. The judge was conscious of the need to retain the jury's interest. This is an acute problem with a long summing up with many factual disputes and legal alternatives. Generally, the law was applied to the facts briefly but adequately given the constraints which existed. The jury had heard the addresses of the Crown Prosecutor and counsel for each accused and those addresses appear to have been substantial.

There was also the further difficulty that while Cheung contended that he had neither had nor used a knife, the evidence established that a knife was used to inflict the serious and fatal wounds. Luu had used a smallish Phillip's head screwdriver which left a different type of wound. It was not used to inflict any fatal wounds. The evidence established that it was Cheung who was in close combat with Leung and that it was highly improbable that anyone else stabbed Leung.

Cheung's counsel endeavoured to persuade the jury that Cheung did not have a knife and did not stab Leung. That was an uphill battle. Counsel for Cheung emphasised the weaknesses in the Crown case and the inconsistencies. Much reliance was placed on the failure of some Crown witnesses to accept that
Leung attacked Cheung with a "club-lock". It was said that a number of important Crown witnesses were not credible, namely Chan, Wong, Tam &
Chow. Counsel for Cheung put that Leung had attacked Cheung with the "club- lock", a formidable weapon, and that Cheung had defended himself by seizing the "club-lock" and wresting it from Leung. Cheung was thus able to repel
Leung and fight him back. Cheung denied having killed Leung. The judge herself left the question of self defence and provocation to the jury. This was correct. It was probable that the jury would be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Cheung had a knife. The evidence suggested that self defence and provocation should be considered. If the jury took the view that Cheung either neutralised the attack with the "club-lock", held his own or won the battle for the "club-lock" they may well have regarded the use of a knife as wholly unnecessary.

Grounds of Appeal 
Ground 2, which was that the judge failed adequately to relate the directions of law to the facts, was not pressed as a separate ground but that argument was advanced on some of the other grounds. I propose to take these grounds together.
 "1. Her Honour's directions as to the elements of the offences charged, manslaughter, self defence and provocation were inherently confusing and, in particular, in relation to manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous act, such that the jury may have been misled in reaching their conclusion.
Her Honour's directions as to the various scenarios were confusing and likely to mislead the jury.
Her Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that unless they could be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant was not acting in self defence then they could not be satisfied that the applicant's actions were not unlawful even if the applicant had an intent to kill or intent to inflict grievous bodily harm unless it were proved that such went beyond what is believed to be necessary in self defence." 
There were two bases upon which the jury could have returned a verdict of manslaughter. The jury could have been satisfied that Cheung had the requisite intent to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm and had stabbed Leung to death, rejected self defence, as I would, on the basis that the use of a knife was wholly unnecessary but not been satisfied that the Crown had negatived provocation. The alternative basis was that the jury was not satisfied that there was an intent to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm but were satisfied that there was an unlawful and dangerous act.

Early in her summing up the judge gave the jury a page containing the definitions of murder, manslaughter and malicious wounding. The judge defined murder in conventional terms. The written directions read "Murder is committed when a person does an act which causes death, with the intention of killing or causing really serious injury." She repeated that definition in her summing up (SU 17).

The judge also explained at that time and in her written directions that manslaughter was committed when a person did an act which was both unlawful and dangerous and that act causes death. (SU 17) 
Having dealt with the instance of murder where a person does an act which causes death with the intention of killing, she dealt with the cases of joint enterprise, principal and accessory and joint attack. As the jury, by their verdicts, negatived the applicability of these three last mentioned approaches it is not necessary to deal further with any of them.

The jury was told (SU 24) that if they were satisfied that Cheung inflicted the fatal wound they had to consider the question of self defence and that the
Crown had to prove that the accused was not acting in self defence. The judge said "I will come back to the things you have to be satisfied about before you come to the question of self defence because this is something that you come to after you have reached some views about what happened." The judge handed the jury this written direction: "SELF DEFENCE 
A person who believes that he or she is under attack or about to be attacked may take such action as he or she believes, on reasonable grounds, is necessary to defend himself or herself.

A person who believes that another person is under attack or about to be attacked may take such action as he or she believes is necessary to defend that other person.

What such a person is entitled to do is limited to what he or she believes, on reasonable grounds, is necessary in order to defend himself, herself, or the other person.

Unless the Crown proves beyond reasonable doubt either: "(i) that the accused did not believe that, in order to defend himself or his companion it was necessary to do what he did; or he had no reasonable grounds for that belief: the accused cannot be convicted.

Whether the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt the absence of reasonable grounds for the belief must be assessed in the light of all the circumstances that existed at the time, and bearing in mind that the accused had to make a decision in the heat of the moment." 
She repeated the substance of these directions orally. Correctly, she invited the jury to approach the matter from the point of view of the person being attacked. She said (SU 25): " ... a person who believes that he or she is under attack or is about to be attacked is entitled to take such action as he or she believes, on reasonable grounds is necessary for the purpose of defending himself or herself and similarly, a person is entitled to defend another who is thought to be believed to be under attack or about to be attacked. That really is the statement of the first two paragraphs." 
She continued (SU 27-28): "Whether the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt the absence of reasonable grounds for the belief has got to be looked at in a commonsense context. That is, in the light of all the circumstances that you find existed at the time. And bearing in mind that the accused had to make a decision about what to do in the heat of the moment. It would be quite wrong to look back on it, with some cold mathematical precision and say - if I take a different case to this one - It was all right to bash a person on the head once, but it was not all right to bash him on the head twice. You have got to bear in mind that a person who is defending himself or herself or another person does not have the time to stand back and consider with precision precisely what is necessary in order to repel the attack upon him or her. So that the paragraph just below the middle of the page really encapsulates what it is that the Crown has to prove and that is, one or other of those two propositions either that that accused did not believe that in order to defend himself or his companion it was necessary for him to do what he did or that he had no reasonable grounds for any such belief that he may have had. You do not have to come to a conclusion that he did have that belief, incidentally, before you come to paragraph 2. If the Crown has not proved that he did not have that belief, or if you think that he may have had that belief, then you have got to consider whether he had reasonable grounds for any such belief that he might have had and if you are not satisfied of the absence of one or other of those two circumstances, then neither of the accused can be convicted of the particular charge which you are considering in this case. Of course, as I have said to you before, these directions are given in general terms but they have to be applied to each of the two accused in relation to each of the four charges that accused is facing." 
Having explained to the jury the conceptual framework within which they had to work and the general principles which they had to apply she later turned to their application to the facts of the present case.

A little later in the Summing Up (SU 42-44),the judge summarised the factual contentions of the Crown and Cheung, namely, that the Crown conceded that
Leung had struck Cheung with the "club-lock", that Cheung took the "club-lock" and struck Leung twice on the back of the head and once on the nose and that during these events Cheung produced a knife. The judge outlined Cheung's denial of stabbing anybody and his denial of killing Leung and Cheung's assertion of being attacked by Leung and being confronted by James Chow (aka
Alan Chow) holding a similar object and of wresting the "club-lock" from Leung and fighting back.

The judge gave a useful summary of the evidence of the witnesses at or near the murder scene, pointing out the similarities and differences and highlighting what each said about the "club-lock" including whether they saw
Leung using it.

The judge returned to the subject of self defence substantially later in the
Summing Up. After reminding the jury that there was evidence from two Crown witnesses that Cheung had a knife and evidence from other Crown witnesses that they saw Cheung employing a stabbing motion the judge reminded the jury that there were two separate parts to the question of self defence. She reiterated correctly, what the Crown had to negative (SU 92) and then referred the jury to the evidence of what had happened at the intersection and other relevant evidentiary material including the medical evidence. She reminded the jury of the strong challenge to the credibility of the witnesses who denied having seen the "club-lock". She invited the jury, to consider the question of self defence on the basis of Leung coming from the Mercedes wielding the "club- lock" and going after Cheung. She told the jury that one relevant matter to consider when answering the two self defence questions was what was done by
Cheung. At SU 107-108 she returned to the evidence at the request of Cheung's counsel and further elaborated upon it pointing out weaknesses in the evidence of the two witnesses who said that Cheung had a knife and counsel's argument that the "stabbing motion" was equally consistent with a "striking motion" which accorded with Cheung's statement that he was striking at the deceased.
The judge summarised for the jury (SU 108 of 21/6/96) all those matters relied on by Cheung as supporting that he did not have a knife.

Once the jury was satisfied that Cheung had and used a knife, the issue on self defence was stark. Had the Crown proved that there were no reasonable grounds for Cheung's belief that it was necessary to stab Leung to defend himself or Luu. Leung and Cheung had been fighting over the possession of a "club-lock". The use of a knife transformed the fight. That issue was adequately exposed and dealt with in the Summing Up. It was one that the jury could not miss or be confused about. Cheung's denial of having a knife, if the jury were satisfied that he had one, did not help him on the issue of self defence.

The judge explained that provocation arose only in relation to the murder charge and if the Crown had otherwise proved all the matters establishing that
Cheung was guilty of murder including disproving self defence. The jury were told that if the Crown failed to disprove provocation the correct verdict was manslaughter.

The judge gave the jury the following written direction as to provocation: "PROVOCATION 
Where a person commits an act causing death which would otherwise be murder, he or she will be not guilty or murder, but guilty of manslaughter, unless the
Crown proves beyond reasonable doubt either: the act was not committed as the result of a loss of self control induced by some conduct of the deceased towards or affecting the accused; or that conduct on the part of the deceased was not such as could have induced an ordinary person in the position of the accused to have so far lost self control as to have formed an intent to kill or to inflict serious injury upon, the deceased.

The question of provocation only arises where the Crown has proved that the accused whose case you are considering stabbed David Leung with the requisite intent." 
These directions were reiterated and slightly expanded orally, it being pointed out that the Crown had to prove one or other of these negative propositions (SU 28-30). The judge returned to the question of provocation towards the end of the summing up, repeating the two questions to be considered and summarising the evidentiary materials. The jury was told that they would have to consider whether Leung's conduct had been shown in fact not to have induced Cheung to act as he did because of a loss of self control.
Reference was made to the production of the "club-lock" by Leung and Cheung's statement that he felt a lot of pain in his head and blood coming down, dizzy and that he was being attacked from behind by somebody with a metal object.
Cheung referred to the attack on Luu by James Chow (aka Alan Chan)Chan with a steering wheel lock. Cheung had lost his glasses. The judge quoted part of
Cheung's statement relating to the attack and the struggle including this section (SU 98): "I was in a struggle with that person to get hold of the steering wheel lock and we were punching each other with our own fists. During the struggle both of us lost our gravity, we fell onto the ground. He was below me and I got up to grab the steering wheel lock from him. Maybe it was due to the reason at that time that I had been seriously attacked by him and I was bleeding so severely I became very angry, therefore I used some strength and I was lucky, with that strength I was able to get hold of the steering wheel lock and then
I got up myself and he was lying on the ground in front of me and naturally I fought him back. I fought him a few times and I saw Eric come over towards us.
I did not know the movement of punching or attacking or fighting by him".

The judge added (SU 99): "That is what he [Cheung] told you about his state of mind at that time. Of course, that question in respect of provocation deals with his state of mind, whether whatever he did was committed as a result of a loss of self-control induced by some conduct on the part of David Leung towards or affecting him.

If the Crown has not proved the absence of that loss of self-control then you consider whether the Crown has proved that that conduct was not such as to have induced an ordinary person in the position of the accused to have so far lost self-control to have formed an intent to kill or commit really serious injury upon the deceased." 
The judge further stated (SU 99-100) as to the second question: "You may take into account the facts as you find them to be in relation to what occurred earlier in the evening concerning a confrontation that took place at the intersection and the fact that the accused were near to and facing a group of five. If you consider that the accused were attempting to resolve a previous conflict in a peaceful manner or you think that may reasonably be the case and were met with hostility and violence, you can take that into account in their favour. If, on the other hand, you consider they were the aggressors, you may take that into account in the Crown's favour.
When you have considered all those matters you consider whether the conduct on the part of David Leung ... has been shown to have been such, that it could have induced an ordinary person in the position of the accused to have so far lost control to have formed that relevant intention, that is to kill or commit really serious injury." 
The judge, in the concluding portion of her summing up, summarised the position on the various charges. She dealt first with the charge of murder against Cheung and handed the jury a set of written directions, pointing out that there were a series of alternative cases one of which they (the jury) must find in totality before Cheung could be convicted of murder.

The written direction handed to the jury as it related to the first basis on which Cheung could be convicted of murder read: 
CHEUNG
MURDER 
Before you can convict Cheung, of murder you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the following: 
A. (a) That Cheung had a knife and that he used it to inflict the fatal blow with the intention of killing or causing serious injury to David Leung; 
AND (i) that he did not believe that it was necessary for him to take the action he did in self defence, or in defence of Luu; or that he had no reasonable grounds for any such belief.

AND (i) that the act was not committed as the result of a loss of self control induced by the conduct of David Leung towards or affecting Cheung; or that the conduct on the part of David Leung was not such as could have induced an ordinary person in the position of Cheung to have so far lost control as to have formed an intent to kill or inflict really serious injury upon Leung." 
The other bases are no longer relevant. In explanation the judge said: "The first of those scenarios is this that he had a knife and that he used it to inflict the fatal blow with the intention of killing or causing really serious injury to David Leung. That is a scenario which you might find on the evidence that Mr Cheung acting alone is equipped as suggested with the knife and he used the knife for that purpose with the relevant intention, but that is the first step in that process.

The second thing that you need to be satisfied of beyond reasonable doubt before you can convict him of murder is that he did not believe it was necessary for him to take the action he did in self defence, or in defence of
Luu, or that he had no reasonable grounds for any such belief.

The Crown only has to prove one or other of those two in (b) but the Crown does have to prove it beyond reasonable doubt. As well as that the Crown has to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the act was not committed as the result of a loss of self control induced on the part of David Leung towards or affecting Cheung, or that conduct on the part of David Leung was not such as could have induced an ordinary person in the position of Cheung to have so far lost control as to have formed that intention.

Now if the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt to your satisfaction all of these matters in A then you may convict Mr Cheung of murder." 
I reject the submission that the directions of the judge as to murder, self defence and provocation (including where murder is reduced to manslaughter) were confusing and likely to mislead the jury. She made it clear that they had to find that Cheung inflicted the fatal blow with the intention to kill or cause grievous bodily harm and that if these were proved beyond reasonable doubt they next had to consider self defence, and if the Crown negatived this, they proceeded to consider whether the Crown had also negatived provocation.

As to manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act the judge told the jury that they could convict Cheung of manslaughter if they were satisfied that by an unlawful and dangerous act he caused the death of David Leung. The judge explained to the jury that establishing this was the first step towards establishing manslaughter but that the Crown had to exclude self defence. She continued (SU 113 of 21/6/96): "That is that at the time of committing the act whoever it was who stabbed
David Leung did not believe it was necessary for him to do so, in self defence or in defence of the other man or that he had no reasonable grounds for that belief. If all of those things were established, then you may convict the accused Cheung of manslaughter." 
The written direction which she handed the jury was in these terms, omitting irrelevant parts: "Cheung may also be convicted of manslaughter if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that: by an unlawful and dangerous act, he caused the death of David Leung 
AND ... (a) that at the time of committing the act ... [stabbing Leung, Cheung] did not believe it was necessary for him to take that action in self defence, or in defence of his companions; or that he had no reasonable grounds for any such belief." 
Near the end of her summing up the judge handed to the jury a further set of written directions which she described as a check list. It dealt, in summary, with the matters which the Crown had to prove depending on the particular scenario being considered. She gave the jury these written directions: "2. If you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt: that Cheung stabbed David Leung with the intention either of killing or causing really serious injury; 
AND that Cheung did not believe that it was necessary to act as he did in his own defence or in defence of Luu; or that any such belief he held was not based upon reasonable grounds; 
BUT 
You are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt:- (i) that the act was not committed as the result of a loss of self control induced by the conduct of David Leung towards or affecting whichever of them stabbed Leung; and that the conduct on the part of David Leung was not such as could have induced an ordinary person in the position of whichever of them stabbed David
Leung to have so far lost control as to have informed an intent to kill or inflict really serious injury upon David Leung; then Cheung is not guilty of murder but is guilty of manslaughter" and "9. If you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt:- that, by an unlawful and dangerous act, Cheung caused the death of David
Leung; 
AND that he did not believe that it was necessary to act as he did in his own defence or defence of Luu; or (ii) that any such belief was not based on reasonable grounds: then Cheung is guilty of manslaughter." 
These directions were contained amongst many other directions which proved to be of no consequence in the light of the jury's findings. The various possible scenarios were set out clearly in the written directions and were well separated. Confusion was unlikely, especially as the judge took the jury through the directions and explained them.

She gave this explanation: "If you are satisfied that one of the accused produced a knife and that that was an unlawful and dangerous act, and that as a result of that, the death of
David Leung was caused, then you may return a verdict of manslaughter.

I remind you that it is not necessarily unlawful to carry a knife. It may be unlawful and it may be dangerous to produce a knife in certain circumstances.
What those circumstances are of course is a matter for you to decide on the evidence that you have heard. Bearing in mind all of the other matters in relation to what occurred at that intersection.

That is one basis on which you might return a verdict of manslaughter as an alternative to the verdict of murder." 
After the jury retired they asked the judge to clarify the directions as to provocation. She further explained the position as to provocation and no exception was taken to that further explanation.

Cheung developed the complaints in ground 4 in his written and oral submissions. He complained that the summing up did not contain a sufficient explanation of "excessive force in self defence and the post Zecevic consequence, nor of the impact of self defence on the `unlawful' act founding murder under [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s18.html) or
Wilson manslaughter". Cheung submitted that the necessity to judge the facts from his view point and the concept of reasonableness in that context received little attention. Cheung further submitted that it was not reasonably open to reject self defence yet find provocation on the manslaughter count. Cheung submitted that factors which might have spoken against intention to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm or recklessness causing death were not examined in context.

While the judge dealt extensively with the issue of self defence, and in my view sufficiently related the law to the facts, she did not expressly say that if Cheung's acts were done in self defence they were not unlawful. Nor did she say that if they were not satisfied that Cheung's acts were not unlawful then the Crown had not established that the acts were unlawful and therefore there could be no offence of manslaughter.

Conceptually, this argument is correct. However, I do not think that there has been any miscarriage because the jury were instructed more than once that they could not find the applicant guilty of manslaughter unless the Crown negatived self defence. It is not uncommon for the matter to be put as the judge did in order to make it easier for the jury to consider and to avoid convoluted directions.

In practical terms, the jury were directed to take into account the relevant matters although not in the order which legal theory would demand. I am unable to accept the submission that the jury were not told to judge the facts from
Cheung's view point and that the concept of reasonableness in that context received little attention. The judge made it sufficiently clear that the matter had to be approached from Cheung's point of view as the person who was under attack.

At the trial there was a keen appreciation of the importance of determining whether Cheung had a knife. That bore not only on the question of intent but also on the matter of self defence because the production and use of a knife transformed the nature of the fight between Leung and Cheung. This was not so much a case of the use of excessive physical force as one involving the use of a knife while Cheung and Leung were struggling over the "club-lock". There was not only a dispute whether Cheung had a knife but the stage at which it was produced and used.

The judge did not specifically tell the jury that the unlawful and dangerous act alleged was the use of a knife by Cheung to stab Leung but that was obvious.

The judge did not develop what constituted an unlawful and dangerous act. In
R v. Jones [(1995) 78 A Crim R 504] at Hunt CJ at CL described an unlawful and dangerous act thus: " ... unlawful, if for example, the act involves the deliberate application of force to another person without that person's consent; and dangerous if it was such that a reasonable person in the position of the accused would have realised that, by that act, the deceased was being exposed to an appreciable (or significant) risk of serious injury: Wilson <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 313] at 335, 336." 
In Wilson, the joint judgment of Mason CJ, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ at , after an extensive review of the authorities, said that it was better to speak of an unlawful and dangerous act, carrying with it an appreciable risk of serious injury. At 335 their Honours pointed out: "In the end the jury had to determine whether the appellant's act in punching the deceased was, from the standpoint of a reasonable person, an act carrying with it an appreciable risk of serious injury to the deceased. They were not so directed; they were told to consider whether it was a dangerous act. The distinction is not merely semantic. An act may be dangerous without carrying with it an appreciable risk of serious injury and unless the two elements are brought to the mind of the jury, there is a real danger that they may wrongly convict of manslaughter." 
In Wilson there was one punch which was described as being neither very hard nor soft. The blow was to the deceased's face, causing him to fall to the ground where his head landed on the dirt. Another man then "smashed" the deceased's head on the concrete twice. There was room for argument as to the cause of death. The majority observed that the jury's answer to the question, whether a reasonable person in the appellant's position would have realised that in punching the deceased he was exposing him to an appreciable risk of serious injury, could not be assumed.

In her summing up the judge made no reference to "the reasonable person in the position of the accused." 
The judge's directions were defective. However, the present case differs significantly factually from Wilson. No one would doubt that the production and use of a knife in and around the torso of the deceased in the circumstances of the present case was unlawful and dangerous and that it carried an appreciable risk if not a certainty, of serious injury and a reasonable person in Cheung's position would have taken that view.

Unlike Wilson, in the present case the jury's affirmative answer to the question whether a reasonable person in the appellant's position would have realised that in stabbing the deceased he was exposing the deceased to an appreciable risk of serious injury can be safely assumed.

The judge reviewed the evidence and arguments at some length as to whether
Cheung had a knife and whether he carried out stabbing motions towards and on
Cheung and whether Cheung stabbed Leung. Those were the critical issues. While fuller directions on what constituted an unlawful and dangerous act and a closer adherence to Wilson were desirable there has been no miscarriage.

I am unable to accept that it was not reasonably open to a jury to reject self defence and yet find provocation. It was well open to the jury to conclude that there were no reasonable grounds for the use of a knife; on the other hand the jury could take the view that the attack by Leung with the "club- lock" resulted in provocation or, at the least, that the Crown had not negatived provocation.

The speed with which the fracas occurred and its short duration would have led a jury to conclude that there was little point in trying to work out exactly when the knife was produced. Even if it was near the end of the fight when
Cheung appeared to be getting the better of Leung, Cheung would still have been worked up and may well have lost his self control. It had been an intense struggle and he had been struck with a "club-lock" perhaps 30 to 60 seconds previously.

The totality of the judge's directions were not confusing although they demanded much concentration and hard work by the jury. The judge and jury had a difficult task. There were many directions and much to comprehend. However, after working through the evidence, the oral summing up and the judge's written directions, I am of the view that a jury who had heard the evidence and accompanied the judge on the summing up and through the written directions would have been able to deal with Cheung's case adequately.

Juries make great use of the written directions encapsulating the various situations which my arise and the relevant legal directions. The judge covered the facts in sufficient detail to make the various directions meaningful. I would reject grounds 1, 2, and 4.

Malicious Wounding with Intent 
The judge told the jury in her written directions "Malicious wounding is committed where one person maliciously wounds another with intent to cause really serious injury." She added orally "It is committed when one person wounds another with intent to cause really serious injury." She reminded the jury that there was no dispute in each case that the injuries received were sufficient within the law to be a wound.

Later in her summing up (pp 111, 113-114 of 21/6/96) she handed the jury some written directions and explained them. The directions read in part: "3. Malicious Wounding 
Before you can convict Cheung of any of the malicious wounding charges, you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt; 
A (i) That Cheung had a knife, and he used it to inflict the wound suffered by
Ben Chan (James Chow) (Eddie Tam) with the intention of causing really serious injury: and that he did not believe that it was necessary for him to take the action he did in self defence, or in defence of Luu: or that he had no reasonable grounds for any such belief." 
I have not set out those based upon joint enterprise, joint attack or principal/accessory liability. The judge said as to her directions: "And then, the malicious wounding charges, before you can convict Cheung of any of the malicious wounding charges you have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the matters that are there set out. That is firstly that
Mr Cheung had the knife and he used it to inflict the wound suffered by Chan,
Chow or Tam.

Can I just say to you here members of the jury that it will be necessary for you to look at the malicious wounding charge separately in relation to each of the men alleged to have been wounded and for that reason all of the names are included in the single document, but let me take as an example the malicious wounding of Ben Chan. You cannot convict Cheung of the malicious wounding of
Ben Chan unless you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he had a knife, that he used it to inflict the wound suffered by Chan with the intention of causing really serious injury and that he did not believe it was necessary for him to take that action in self defence or in defence of Luu and that he had no reasonable grounds for any such belief." 
Again I leave out the further directions given to cover the joint enterprise attack and principal/accessory situations.

A little later the judge handed the jury what she described as a check list.
That covered the various bases on which the jury could find Cheung guilty and what had to be proved as to each. I set out the one which is now relevant and which reads: "Malicious Wounding
If you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt:- that Cheung stabbed Ben Chow (Eddie Tam) (James Chow) with the intention of causing really serious injury 
AND (i) that Cheung did not believe that it was necessary to act as he did in his own defence or in defence of Luu; or any such belief was not based on reasonable grounds: then Cheung is guilty of malicious wounding of Ben Chan (Eddie Tam) (James
Chow)." (Cheung was acquitted of the malicious wounding of Eddie Tam and James Chow).

The judge instructed the jury that they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of one of the bases before a verdict of guilty could be returned on any of the charges.

Cheung complained that the directions as to malicious wounding were inadequate and that "in discussing `maliciously', lawful cause or excuse in the context of Cheung's reasonable belief should have been explained adequately." By her written directions the judge instructed the jury that they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Cheung had a knife and used it to inflict the wound suffered by Ben Chan with the intention of causing really serious injury, that Cheung did not believe that it was necessary for him to take the action which he did in self defence or in defence of Luu or that Cheung had no reasonable grounds for any such belief. The judge had earlier sufficiently explained self defence.

The judge's directions as to malicious wounding were adequate. Generally, so far as the judge's directions were concerned, my study of the extensive materials has led me to the conclusion that the criticisms of the appellant do not sufficiently allow for the combined effect of the judge's extensive written directions and her lengthy oral summing up. The judge and the jury had a laborious task as they considered a mass of evidence and the many possible alternative scenarios. They applied themselves to the task assiduously and the judge's summing up and written directions provided a path through the forest.

Ground 5 - Inconsistent Verdicts 
This reads: "The verdicts of guilty on the malicious wounding counts are practically inconsistent with the acquittal of murder, verdict of guilty of manslaughter and the acquittals on the two malicious woundings." 
The jury were entitled to, and did take the view that they were not satisfied that there was a joint enterprise to kill or seriously injure Leung or a joint attack or the relationship of principal and accessory. The judge thought that
Luu's action in arming himself with a screwdriver was taken at the last moment before he left the car, almost as an afterthought, and prompted by his observations of the group of men on the corner. The jury was entitled to take the same view.

There is no difficulty in understanding why the jury acquitted Cheung of murder and convicted him of manslaughter having regard to the provocation he suffered. Nor is there any difficulty in understanding why the jury acquitted
Luu of murder and manslaughter. He was not involved in inflicting any fatal wounds on Leung and the jury was entitled to take the view that there was no joint enterprise, joint attack or, principal/accessory relationship. There was evidence of 2 separate fights or struggles at one stage.

There was a strong body of evidence that Cheung was very angry with Chan and was intent on returning with reinforcements as he left the restaurant.
Further, the evidence supported that Cheung attacked and wounded Chan.

Chow did not give evidence of being injured by Cheung. Chow said that his injuries were inflicted by Luu. Similarly, Tam attributed his injuries to Luu.
Once it is accepted that the jury only held Cheung responsible for the acts which he personally committed, the acquittal of Cheung on the malicious wounding counts as to Chow and Tam is explicable.

As to the counts on which Cheung was found guilty and acquitted no element of inconsistency arises. Even if one took the view that it was difficult to reconcile the conviction of Luu for maliciously wounding Chan and Chow with
Luu's acquittal on the same count as to Tam, that does not affect the convictions of Cheung. I do not regard these convictions and the acquittal as inconsistent verdicts.

Unsafe and Unsatisfactory Verdict 
Cheung contended that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory on 2 grounds. First, the judge's directions were inadequate, confusing and not sufficiently related to the facts.

I am unable to agree with the criticisms of the summing up. It was not necessary for the judge to discuss further than she did how the principles related to the facts and to further analyse the factual material. Her oral summing up was lengthy and she canvassed the main factual disputes. Nor do I see any force in the inconsistent verdicts arguments as to Cheung.

Secondly, it was contended that on the evidence this court and the jury ought to entertain a reasonable doubt. Cheung attacked the quality of the evidence and its sufficiency. Particular attention was paid to some of the Crown witnesses being untruthful on major points, such as Leung having or wielding the "club-lock". Reliance was also placed on Chow being mistaken as to Cheung wearing a jacket and producing a knife from a pocket. There were also discrepancies as to the length of the knife used by Cheung. Chow said that Luu had a knife. Other evidence suggests that Luu was holding the Phillip's screwdriver apparently removed from the glove box of Cheung's car. Chow also had a conviction for a serious offence. Caution must be exercised in accepting his evidence and it is prudent to look for supporting evidence.

There were also discrepancies as to the order of events and exactly what happened. This is to be expected having regard to the speed with which the melee occurred, its short duration, the number of people milling around, some of the witnesses being participants at some stage and some of them being observers and observing from different points and at slightly different times.

Some of the Crown witnesses endeavoured to minimise the acts and aggression of
Leung and those of themselves. They did not want to provide the appellants with any justification or excuse for their conduct. In the end the aggression and conduct of Leung and the other participants in the events and fights were exposed.

The picture which emerged was of Cheung angry and willing to confront Ben
Chan, by driving his car towards and stopping near the "Chan" group, a tense confrontation in which Cheung pushed, struck and wounded Chan. Leung then intervened, wielding the "club-lock" and endeavouring to strike Cheung, there was a struggle over the "club-lock", Leung struck Cheung on the head, Cheung overpowered Leung, forcing him to the ground, Cheung struck Leung on the head with the "club-lock" and used a knife to stab Leung a number of times, resulting in Leung's death. Cheung was on top of Leung. It was Cheung's use of a knife which so transformed the situation. Cheung was keen to deny that he had or used a knife. He realised the importance of him having and using a knife. The stab wounds upon Leung were powerful evidence in the light of
Cheung's close encounter especially when the marks left by the screwdriver used by Luu could be identified. On the facts as they emerged the Crown had little difficulty in negativing self defence.

Despite the discrepancies and the incidents of untruthfulness on the part of some Crown witnesses, the core position was sufficiently clear. I entertain no doubt about Cheung's guilt nor should the jury have entertained a reasonable doubt. See M v. The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] and Jones v. The Queen, High Court, unreported 2 December 1997. Cheung's appeals against his convictions should be dismissed.

The Wounding of Ben Chan and James Chow - Luu 
It is necessary to review briefly the evidence including that relating to the wounding of Eddie Tam. Josephine Cheng spoke of Cheung and Luu getting out of
Cheung's car and rushing hurriedly to a group of men (including James Chow) standing on the corner next to Dixon House. Cheung pushed one of the men and a fight erupted amongst all the men. Cheung and Leung, who became detached from the main group, were fighting. Cheung "had his hand in a stabbing motion down towards" Leung who was "almost half kneeling on the ground." She said that
Cheung did this many times. The whole group moved over to Leung, including
Chow. She saw Chow move away with his hand under his left arm pit. There was blood on his hand. Eddie Tam was with the group who came over to help. She saw
Luu come from the back and deploy his hand in a stabbing motion, hitting down towards Eddie Tam on his right chest. Eddie Tam was trying to pull Cheung and
Leung apart. After the stabbing Eddie Tam slouched and just moved away from the group. He had blood on his hand.

Miss Cheng also observed Ben Chan fighting with Luu. She said that they came within 3 metres of her. She did not see whether Luu had anything in his hand.
As Cheung and Luu ran off she saw Ben had his hand over the left side of his chest. She agreed, in cross examination, that when she saw Cheung run away,
Luu had already gone.

Miss Cheng did not see anyone other than Cheung and Luu engaging in a stabbing action. The only weapon that she saw was the "club-lock".

Miss Cheng assisted with the arrangements to take James Chow to hospital.
Ultimately, an ambulance took him to St Vincent's Hospital. Miss Cheng also went there.

In cross examination she agreed that while Cheung was fighting with Leung, Luu was fighting with the others. Counsel for Luu did not suggest in cross examination that she did not see Luu engage in a stabbing motion as to Chow or
Tam. Counsel dealt with other matters.

Tammy Han confirmed in cross examination that there was a fight amongst everybody before they split up into two groups. She had a detailed recollection of what Cheung did and the fight between Cheung and Leung. She did not see Luu fighting. She saw James Chow was hurt and that there was a lot of blood from him. She saw another boy sitting on the ground injured. She did not know where he was hurt. She described him as being about 5 feet 7 inches tall, short hair and thin. She did not further identify him. Ms Han helped take Chow to St Vincent's Hospital. She picked him up when he left the hospital.

Ms Han said that she did not know Eddie Tam and could not remember whether she saw him on the ground. She spoke of there being confusion about and amongst the group of five. Cheung and Leung came within about 2 metres of her while they were struggling over the "club-lock".

Counsel for Luu elicited that she had said, in one of her statements of 27
December 1993, that (T 562): 
Leung tried to hit Cheung by raising the "club-lock" above his (Leung's) head but Cheung grabbed hold of the lock; 
Cheung hit Leung in the body but she could not see what with. Cheung hit
Leung many times for about 5 to 10 minutes. (The time estimate is erroneous.)
After the fight Leung had no power and fell to the ground and was lying on his back.

The other Asian man from the car (Luu), who had been fighting with the other men, ran off down Dixon Street; 
The other men with whom Luu had been fighting ran over to Leung who was still fighting with the large man with glasses (Cheung). Cheung was still hitting Leung in the chest. The other men pulled Cheung off who ran away.

The effect of this evidence was to distance Luu from the fight between Cheung and Leung at the moment when Leung appeared to lose power. The loss of power was probably due to Cheung inflicting a serious if not fatal stabbing wound.
This evidence could well have led the jury to take the view that Luu was not involved in the killing of Leung.

There was no evidence from Miss Tammy Han of Luu attacking Eddie Tam. She would have been primarily interested in what was happening to her friend,
Chow. She had not previously known Ben Chan by sight nor Eddy Tam except for seeing them at a restaurant prior to the fight. She became aware of the names of David (Leung) Ben (Chan) and Eddie (Tam) after the fight.

At the committal proceedings she had said that when they went downstairs (from the restaurant), she was certain that Ben and Eddie were among about six persons. At the trial she remembered that Ben was among them but she could not be certain about Eddie Tam.

She said that after the fight was stopped she saw Eddie (Tam) but could not remember if she saw him on the ground. She did not know where he went. Her evidence does not link up the boy she saw injured on the ground and Eddie Tam.

While the evidence of Tammy Han was of value in the Crown case against Luu in respect of the wounding of Ben Chan and James Chow, it was of little to no value in the Crown case against Luu in respect of the wounding of Eddie Tam.
This is of importance in view of the trial judge's observations that the evidence of Josephine Cheng and Tammy Han could be regarded as reasonably reliable.

Ben Chan said that both he and Eddie Tam fought with Luu and that he saw Luu stab Eddie Tam. Ben Chan said that as he went to help Leung he pushed Luu who was stabbing Leung. Luu stabbed him (Chan) on the left side of his chest and his left hand between his middle and ring finger. Then Cheung said "Let's go" and Cheung and Luu ran away. Chan went to hospital. Chan said that the silver object which Luu was holding in his hand was short - shorter than 10-15 cm long.

Chan agreed that he did not tell the police in his first statement about Eddie
Tam. This was because Chan was aware that Eddie Tam did not have a valid visa.
Chan mentioned Tam in his later statement of 31 December 1993. Chan knew then that Leung was dead. If Chan had noticed the heading of his statements he may have been aware that Leung had died when he made them. However, Chan could have been correct in his recollection that he became aware of Leung's death after he made his statements on 28 December and before he left the police station. His evidence on this point was not convincing. Ms Wong said that she told Ben Chan while he was in hospital that Leung was dead.

Chan said that he was with his girlfriend (Tiffany Wong) while a fight progressed between Eddie Tam and Luu. This seems to have occurred after Cheung and Leung became detached from the main group. Chan said that the silver object which Luu was holding was shorter than Cheung's knife. Chan denied that he or Eddie Tam had a knife and that he (Chan) managed to cut Luu on his fingers. Eddie Tam was a friend.

Chan said that Chow was present and helping to stop the fight. Chow had arrived about a minute after Cheung and Luu came up to him and Eddie Tam with
Leung standing just behind them. Ben Chan gave no evidence of Luu striking
Chow.

Miss Tiffany Wong saw Luu stab Leung in the back many times with something silver but she was not sure what it was. She saw Eddie Tam go to Leung's assistance and Luu stab Eddie Tam around the area of his stomach. She gave a demonstration. The blade protruded from nearest Luu's little finger. She saw
Luu stab Chan in the stomach. After this, Luu called Cheung and they left. Ms
Wong went to Chan who was holding his stomach. She saw blood coming out. Her attention was concentrated on Chan. She saw Chow at the scene but did not see what happened to him and could not remember his movements except that at one stage during the fight he got out of his car. She did not see Chow join either of the 2 groups which were fighting. Chow was not there after Cheung and Luu ran off.

Ms Wong did not tell the police anything about Eddie Tam in her first statement. She said that she was too scared at the time to tell the police that Eddie Tam was stabbed in the fight. At a later point in her evidence she said that she just forgot when she was making her first statement. Neither statement was readily credible. It is hard to accept that she was unaware that
Eddie Tam did not have a visa. She denied that she was trying to protect
Eddie.

She also denied that either Ben Chan or Eddie Tam had a knife. She agreed that at an early stage Luu was fighting them while Cheung and Leung were fighting.

Eddie Tam gave evidence of Cheung and Luu approaching Chan and them arguing and finger pointing. Cheung and Luu began fighting with Chan. Leung and Tam approached. Tam said that he tried to keep them apart. He felt a pain in his right side, put his hand there and then saw blood on his palm. He saw in the hand of the slimmer person (Luu), some sort of weapon and realised that he had been stabbed by that person. He moved away. When he was a car length away he turned around and saw Leung lying on the ground. The two accused "looked like they were on top of him." Eddie Tam said that Luu had in his hand an object similar to a pair of scissors. Tam ran away, leaving Leung on the ground, and caught a taxi home. There Tam used some antiseptic to clean up the area which had been hurt. He did not go to the police immediately. He made a statement on new-year's eve. He then went to hospital with the police.

In cross examination he said that he removed his glasses, which had clear glass and not lenses, in the Mercedes. He also wore contact lenses to assist with his vision. He denied that he removed his glasses so he could take part in a fight.

He said that he saw and spoke to James Chow leaving the restaurant before the fight but did not see him during or after the fight. As Tam moved up to support Ben Chan he saw Luu moving up behind Cheung. Tam said that at about the start of the fight he did not see any of Leung, Chan, Cheung or Luu with any weapons in their hands. Tam said that he tried to separate Chan and Leung from Cheung and Luu and that Leung and Cheung moved about 10 feet away as they struggled with each other. There were difficulties with the interpreting so Mr
Tam was stood down for a day.

When his cross examination continued he recalled that when he was running away he had turned around and saw Cheung and Leung fighting over "this thing" (a "club-lock"). Tam's attempts to explain his earlier denials of having seen a "club-lock" by reference to having been asked whether he saw it at an earlier stage of the fight were not convincing and did not sit well with the evidence which he had previously given.

He stated that he was an illegal resident and on bail and had been warned by the Immigration Department that he should not cause any trouble or his bail would be stopped. He was very frightened and went home.

He had told the police that after Leung (or Leung and Cheung) had fallen to the ground and he had taken three or four steps, the thin guy (Luu) rushed at him. He knew that he was injured. He said that as he was about to walk to
Cheung and Leung he felt a pain, used his hand to press down on his right chest, looked and saw a lot of blood. He turned around and ran.

Tam said that he had nothing in his hand and neither did Chow. Tam denied that he, Chan and Chow fought with Luu. It was not a case of three persons against one person. Tam denied that he, Chan or Chow had a weapon and cut Luu on his hands.

James Chow described Cheung as pushing Chan and Leung. Luu was next to Cheung but Chow did not see him do anything and he was not sure whether Luu did anything at that stage or in the early stages of the developing fight. Chow said that Ben was knifed by someone at Dixon House. Chow tried to break up the fight. He pushed Luu, who knifed him in the left side near the lung. Chow saw
Luu with a very small knife in his hand. It was about 6 inches in length including the handle. It was very painful and he felt as if gas was coming out. Chow walked back to his car.

Chow stated that he then saw Eddie Tam walk away up the road towards Haymarket with his hand holding his stomach. Tam had been stabbed. Chow could not see what caused the injury to Tam. Chow said that he did not have a weapon nor did he see Chan, Tam or Leung with a weapon.

Chow said that the first time he saw Luu's knife was when Luu stabbed him.
Chow said that he had not grabbed hold of Luu before Luu stabbed him but he had intended to grab Luu. Chow conceded that in his statement to the police he had said: "I took hold of the skinny guy and tried to restrain him. I took hold of his arms from behind." 
Chow said that this was close enough as he had intended to grab Luu.

Chow said that he was stabbed once by Luu and after being stabbed kept his distance from him. Chow stated that he did not fight with Luu as he was stabbed immediately. Chow denied that Chan, Tam and he were endeavouring to attack Luu. Chow said that he did not know, if, when he was injured, Tam took over from him. Chow did not remember what he said in his statement to the police, namely, that Tam came forward and pushed him aside and started to fight with Luu.

After Chow retreated to his car he observed Cheung stabbing Leung. Luu was behind them and Chow could not see clearly what he was doing.

I have earlier referred to the injuries suffered by Chan and the evidence of
Dr Morgan. Tam was examined by Dr G J Hollis at Sydney Hospital on 31 December
The doctor found a laceration 2 1/2 cm long over the right sixth rib on the right of the chest. The wound was 1 1/2 cm deep. Under local anaesthetic the wound was cleaned and three stitches were inserted. The wound was consistent with an injury about four days before.

Dr R S Kooner examined Chow about 4 am, or a little later, on 27 December
He had a small laceration in the arm pit region on the left side. Chow was short of breath and had surgical emphysema, that is, air in the lining of the chest wall. The wound extended through the chest wall into the inner lung.
A chest drain was inserted, principally to remove the air so that pressure did not build and adversely affect the respiratory system and cause cardiac failure. The drain also removed some fluid and blood. Emergency treatment was required as the condition can become life-threatening. Chow was transferred to the cardio thoracic ward and discharged on 30 December 1993. Dr Kooner stated that the wound was consistent with a stabbing.

At 6.50 am on 27 December 1993, a telephone booking was made with Qantas by a male for the 4.15 pm flight from Sydney to Bangkok that day in the name of C Q and N Luu. The tickets were to be collected at the airport. About 10.50 am two
Asian men attended at the airport and collected 2 tickets for that flight. At that time one ticket was changed from the name of Mrs N Luu to Mr C D Luu.
There was a return booking for 28 January 1994.

Luu left Australia on that flight. He was arrested when his plane landed at
Singapore. At Singapore airport Luu told Det Staff Sgt Lin that he was visiting his sick uncle in Vietnam and that his brother booked the flight for him a few days back. That explanation was false.

Det Sgt Lin noticed that Luu had some injuries on his hands and enquired how
Luu sustained these. Luu replied "I had a fall and sprained my arm. When I was slicing an apple with my injured arm accidentally cut myself." This was a false answer.

The photographs taken on the following day revealed a laceration on the outside of the joint of the left middle finger of Luu and bruises on the right hand centre knuckles and some tape on the back of the hand.

Dr Ting Ming Yih examined Luu in the early hours of 28 December 1993 at the
Alexandra hospital, Singapore. He saw linear lacerations over the right little finger, ring finger and middle finger of 1 cm, 1.5 cm and 1.5 cm respectively, and bruising over Luu's left hand and right hand knuckles where the fingers connect to the hand. There was a 5 cm bruise over the right wrist and a 1 cm abrasion over the back of the middle left finger, a 0.5 cm abrasion over the right wrist, 1 cm abrasion over the back of the left middle finger, an abrasion over the left knee, a bruise on the left shoulder and a bruise over the left elbow.

Dr Yih thought the lacerations would have been caused by a sharp instrument, such as a knife. It was possible that the lacerations were caused by a knife being gripped and there being slippage through the hand. It was equally possible for the lacerations to be caused by Luu trying to repel the use of a knife by another. The bruises could be sustained if the knuckles were involved in punching an object. The laceration to one of the knuckles could have been caused by a tooth. That would be consistent with Luu punching somebody in the mouth. Some of the injuries were consistent with Luu being struck by a blunt object.

On being shown the photographs of Luu's hands, Dr L Schwartz said that all of the wounds had some healing and were most likely defensive wounds received as
Luu raised his hands to protect himself. The wounds on the front of the hands were very suggestive of knife wounds and were defensive. She accepted that there were a number of ways in which the various wounds could have been caused. She said that while it was preferable to see the wounds, in the present case, it was the location and type of wound which explained how the wound was likely to have been inflicted.

After describing what had occurred earlier in the evening, Luu stated that
Cheung emerged from a private room in the Shanghai Village Restaurant and was very angry. They left the restaurant and walked to Cheung's car. Cheung drove the car a little distance and stopped the car. Cheung said something about the group of people standing on the corner near the restaurant and got out of the car immediately. Luu said: "I didn't see anything at that stage and I didn't even know that he had a knife." Cheung walked towards this group of at least 4 to 5 men. Luu became alarmed as he thought that it was five against one. When he saw weapons in the hands of the group, he looked around the car for something to help Cheung. Luu opened the glovebox and took a star shaped screwdriver and followed Cheung who had already reached the corner. Cheung and another man were shouting at each other and pushing each other. Luu said that he saw one of the men with a "club-lock" swinging at Cheung. Luu feared it could have killed Cheung. Leung raised it up in his hands as if aiming for
Cheung's head. It was only then that Luu became involved. Luu jabbed at Leung and that enabled Cheung to grab hold of the "club-lock". The others rushed
Luu; one of them had the other half of the "club-lock" and one of them had a knife. All three tried to attack Luu. He tried to grab hold of the knife and was cut on the fingers. Luu was scared and punched at the three men. Luu said that when the three men came at him he jabbed out at them and that he must have connected with them because they just kept their distance after that. It was three against one and they had a knife and the "club-lock", so as soon as he broke free he just ran away. If he had not used a screwdriver to defend himself he would have been stabbed and bashed.

Luu ultimately went home. His elder brother woke him with the news that the police were looking for him (Luu) because Cheung had killed someone. He took his brother's advice and they flew out of Australia that afternoon. He claimed that he intended to return to Australia. Luu knew that Cheung had killed someone in the fight and wanted to distance himself from the whole event.

Luu said that he told his "stupid story" to the Singapore police because he panicked. Luu said that he did not cut his fingers slicing an apple but when he tried to grab hold of the knife when the men tried to attack him.

During her remarks upon sentence, the judge, after analysing the evidence, expressed the view (p.11) that she was at a loss to understand how the jury arrived at different verdicts in relation, on the one hand, to the wounding of
Ben Chan and James Chow, and, on the other hand, the wounding of Eddie Tam.

Luu, in his written submissions, abandoned any reliance upon the ground that the verdicts were compromise verdicts.

If the jury took the view that the evidence of Josephine Cheng and Tammy Han was generally reliable and could be acted upon they would have noted that Miss
Cheng gave evidence of seeing only Cheung and Luu engaging in a stabbing action and of Chow moving away from the group with his hand under his left arm pit and with blood on his hand, Luu engaging in a stabbing motion towards
Eddie Tam on his right chest and Eddie Tam moving away with blood on his hand and Chan and Luu in a fight with Chan then moving away with his hand over the left side of his chest. At one point Ms Cheng had Cheung and Leung engaged in one fight and Luu and the others engaged in another fight close-by.

Ms Tammy Han saw the fighting but did not see Luu fighting Eddie Tam. She saw that James Chow was hurt and that there was a lot of blood coming from him.
She and Ms Cheng caused Chow to be taken to hospital and generally assisted him. She saw Luu fighting with the men other than Leung. She gave no evidence of Luu attacking Eddie Tam. She believed that she saw Eddie Tam after the fight was stopped. She gave no evidence of seeing Eddie Tam injured. She saw
Ben Chan amongst the men but gave no evidence as to what Luu did to him.

Ben Chan and Tiffany Wong avoided mentioning the involvement of Eddie Tam in their early statements and did not mention his involvement until 31 December
Eddie Tam did not see the police until 31 December 1993 and did not seek or receive medical treatment until that date.

Although there were substantial reservations as to the evidence of Ben Chan and Tiffany Wong, their evidence was to the effect that Luu stabbed Ben Chan and Eddie Tam. Eddie Tam's evidence was that Luu stabbed him. Eddie Tam deposed to Cheung and Luu fighting Ben Chan. Tam's evidence was suspect in some areas. James Chow whose evidence was shown to be wrong in some respects gave evidence, inter alia, of Ben Chan being knifed by someone at Dixon House and Eddie Tam walking, away holding his stomach, from the area where Luu was.

Chow's wound was serious and was treated early on 27 December 1993. The wound to Tam was not. It was only 2 1/2 cm long and 1 1/2 cm deep. It required cleaning and stitching. It was treated on 31 December 1993. Ben Chan was treated on 27 December 1993 and kept in hospital, under observation, until 28
December 1993. The wound just above the bottom of the rib cage, with a depth of at least 2 cm, was discharging blood. Intravenous access was obtained and
Chan was given some fluids.

The wounds inflicted by Luu on Ben Chan and Chow by Luu were far more serious than the minor wound inflicted on Tam.

The evidence against Luu on the charge of maliciously wounding Tam was capable of being regarded as less cogent than that against Luu on the charges of wounding Chan and Chow.

Of the two less-involved witnesses, Josephine Cheng and Tammy Han, the latter gave no evidence of consequence against Luu in respect of the charge involving
Tam; however Ms Cheng's evidence was cogent in respect of the charges against
Luu involving Ben Chan and Eddie Tam and of value as to the charge against Luu involving Chow. The failure of Ben Chan and Tiffany Wong to mention Tam's involvement in their early statements and Tam's failure to come forward until December 1993 could have been regarded as significant. Chow and Chan received medical treatment on the morning of 27 December 1993 and were hospitalised. The injuries inflicted upon them by Luu could not be classed as minor. That inflicted on Tam could be so described. I have not overlooked the conviction of Cheung on the charge of maliciously wounding Ben Chan where there was a minor laceration but there was ample evidence of Cheung being angry and intending to and mounting a vigorous attack on Ben Chan.

This was a case where the jury looked carefully at the evidence supporting each charge. A prudent approach would have been to see how much supporting evidence there was in respect of each charge. The onus of proof may well have played an important role. In his dock statement Luu did not distinguish between Chan, Chow and Tam. He said that all three just rushed at him and tried to attack him and that he just jabbed out at them and must have connected. There was a lack of detail. The jury obviously did not accept an undiscriminating approach.

The jury may have taken the view that the evidence adduced by the Crown did not negative that Luu had reasonable grounds for believing as to Tam that it was necessary in self defence to do what he did. The concession by Luu that the injury found on Tam on 31 December 1993 amounted to a wound, while helpful in narrowing the issues does not assist the Crown to negative self defence. It is also possible, but not so likely, that the jury had a reasonable doubt whether Luu intended to inflict grievous bodily harm upon Tam.

The only ground of appeal pressed was that the verdicts are unsafe and unsatisfactory in that they were inconsistent with the evidence.

Luu relied on the fight between him and the other three or four men taking place over an extremely short space of time. Luu stabbed Chan, Tam and Chow either in succession at brief intervals or perhaps almost together.

Luu submitted that the injuries received by Chan, Tam and Chow were superficial and/or of a minor nature and entirely consistent with minimum force being used. Luu further submitted that, the jury having acquitted him of maliciously wounding Eddie Tam in "honestly and instinctively defending himself", it was impossible to reconcile the verdicts of guilty in relation to the other two charges arising out of the same incident. The jury could not "weigh to a nicety" the wounds which Luu inflicted on this man but not on the others. Luu relied upon the judge's remarks on sentence that she did not conclude, as she was invited on behalf of Luu, that the verdicts demonstrate that the Crown failed to negative self defence in relation to the injury to
Tam but not in relation to the other two charges and that proportionality is the key to the different verdicts and that she was at a loss to understand how the jury arrived at the different verdicts.

I agree that the injury received by Tam was minor and superficial. I do not agree that the injuries to Chow (chest wall and inner lung) and Chan (injury to the chest wall and abdomen) could be so categorised. That to Chow required reasonably urgent treatment. Both Chow and Chan had to be, and were, hospitalised. I am far from persuaded that the injuries to Chan and Chow were consistent with minimum force, especially if the injuries were inflicted with a Phillip's screwdriver.

I have earlier given reasons for my view that the verdicts are not inconsistent and that the different verdicts are reasonably explicable. I am unable to share the view of the trial judge, expressed in her remarks on sentence.

Reliance was also placed on this passage from the judge's remarks on sentence: "Self-defence was rejected so far as it was raised as a defence to the charges on which the prisoner was convicted. It would seem logical that the jury also rejected self-defence so far as it was raised as a defence to the charge of wounding Eddie Tam, but for reasons which will appear, it is difficult to reconcile that verdict with the admitted facts and the convictions, and difficult to explain it on any basis other than an acceptance of self- defence." 
There is a difference of some importance between the jury accepting self defence and not being satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the Crown has negatived self defence. As earlier mentioned, this was a case where onus was important.

Luu submitted that the jury's verdict indicated that they had not given proper weight to the situation in which he found himself and that the jury had not considered the whole of the circumstances.

Luu referred to this passage in the judge's remarks on sentence: "I am therefore satisfied that he believed, at the time he used the screwdriver, that it was necessary to take some action on his own, or in
Cheung's defence. I am also satisfied that, at that time he had reasonable grounds for that belief. Such a conclusion is in no way inconsistent which the jury's verdict. I think it is most likely that the jury concluded that the very presence of such a weapon in such circumstances and its subsequent use, was disproportionate to what was called for in the circumstances." 
Luu submitted that these observations were incorrect and that, to the contrary, the mere presence of a screwdriver and its use on Eddie Tam as a weapon to defend himself, together with the medical evidence was entirely consistent with proportionality as the jury found in relation to that charge,
Luu having admitted that he jabbed out at all three attackers. It was argued, that if the use of the screwdriver was not considered disproportionate in relation to the charge of malicious wounding involving Eddie Tam, then having regard to the acquittal of the accused in relation to that charge, it is difficult to reconcile how the "very presence of such a weapon in such circumstances, and its subsequent use, was disproportionate to what was called for in the circumstances" involving the other two men at the same times.

While it is valuable to have the trial judge's views as to the facts in her remarks upon sentence, they are not definitive when this court is considering a challenge to verdicts on the ground that they are unsafe and unsatisfactory.
This court undertakes for itself a detailed examination and consideration of the evidence.

The mere presence of a screwdriver is not necessarily disproportionate. By presence I take the judge to mean its production in such a manner that it can be used in a fight. If the screwdriver is wielded so as to keep an attacker at a distance that, too, is not necessarily disproportionate. If it is used to strike and wound that is a different matter. Luu's account of the circumstances and what he did, which was untested by cross examination, was not accepted. When Luu's account is compared with the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution his account could be described as somewhat tepid, so far as his actions are concerned. I have earlier referred to some of the evidential differences touching the charges involving Chan, Chow and Tam.
The jury were not satisfied that the Crown had discharged the onus of proof as to the charge involving Tam. There is no sound basis for contending that the use of the screwdriver was not considered disproportionate as to the charge involving Tam when the onus lies on the Crown to negative self defence beyond reasonable doubt.

I accept Luu's submission that, by acquitting Cheung of the charges of malicious wounding of Eddie Tam and James Chow, the jury rejected the Crown case of common purpose. Thus, Luu contended it followed that the jury found as to the charge involving Eddie Tam that Luu was entitled to arm himself with the screwdriver. This is a variation of the preceding submissions and should be rejected for the reasons earlier given. The jury may have thought that Luu was entitled to arm himself with the screwdriver but no firm conclusion can be safely drawn. Even if the jury so thought, the use of the screwdriver to stab and wound is a different matter.

Luu submitted that each of Chan, Chow and Tam were demonstrably lying when they denied seeing a "club-lock" in the hands of the deceased. Tam admitted on a later day seeing a "club-lock". I agree that the denials were not credible.
Chan, Chow and Tam minimised the aggressive conduct of Leung. This was important on the issues of self defence and provocation. Chan, Chow and Tam each denied possessing any weapon. Jospehine Cheng identified what she believed were "mobile phones" in the hands of at least two of the men. Luu submitted that, having regard to their denials, the inescapable inference was that what she observed were in fact weapons and that the three men were lying on a material matter.

The trial judge, in her remarks on sentence, said: "I was urged to find as a fact, also, that other members of the opposing group besides David Leung carried weapons. Luu said in his statement that one of the men had the other half of the Club lock. Of course, what he said in his statement must be treated with caution, it having been largely rejected by the jury. But this was, at least, consistent with the objective evidence. The lock was of a type that separates into two complementary components, only one of which was ever found, notwithstanding a search of the motor vehicle. It had been in working order prior to these events. The clear inference is that the second half, like the first, was present at the scene. Luu also claimed to have seen a knife in the hand of one of the others. This, too, was consistent with medical evidence that Luu had injuries of a defensive nature to his hands. Further, Josephine Cheng gave evidence that she had observed mobile phones in the hands of one of the men in the group. (She agreed that, in the committal proceedings, she said that at least two of the men carried mobile phones.) She was emphatic that she had not mistaken the other half of the Club lock for a phone. Each of the men concerned denied having a mobile phone at the time. From this, it was argued, I should infer that what Ms Cheng observed in the hands of the men was some kind of weapon (another fact which each denied).

I think it is likely that one or more of the group was or were equipped with some kind of object that might be used as a weapon but the evidence does not permit any inference as to the nature of the weapon (other than that the other half of the Club lock must have been there) or the identity of the participant who carried it; nor does the evidence permit any valid inference of the use to which such a weapon was put, was threatened to be put, or was feared by Luu to be put. It is not without significance that, while Luu and Cheung were outnumbered, there was little evidence of the use of a knife or knives on them, and what there was was limited to the comparatively minor injuries to
Luu's hand." 
It is difficult to draw the inference that the other half of the "club-lock" must have been at the scene. There was no sworn evidence as to its presence there - just the unsworn statement of Luu. The highest position which can be supported is that the other half of the "club-lock" may have been at the scene. Its presence and use cannot be excluded.

If Chan or Chow or Tam used a weapon, especially a knife as Luu suggested, I would have expected more significant injuries to have been inflicted on Luu.
Even if one of the men carried a weapon, and this is a possibility which cannot be excluded, it does not seem to have been used to inflict other than minor injuries. The lacerations on Luu's hands and the bruising may have been defensive wounds but they could also have been caused in other ways.

Luu submitted that the evidence contained discrepancies, was tainted and otherwise lacked probative force. Luu contended that the evidence of Chan,
Chow and Tam was not capable of belief and was therefore irrevocably tainted.

By contrast, Luu pointed to his assertions in his dock statement that he had previously armed himself with a Phillip's screwdriver to go to Cheung's assistance and that he jabbed out at all three, one of whom had a knife and one the other part of the "club-lock", as they rushed at him. Luu submitted that his statement was supported by medical evidence called on behalf of the
Crown that the lacerations and bruises were consistent with wounds received while defending himself from attack by a knife and a blunt instrument. Luu contended that as his version of defending himself was consistent with the objective evidence the jury ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt.

I do not regard the whole of the evidence of Chan, Chow and Tam as incredible and tainted. Much of it was credible and supported. The incredible part related to their not seeing Leung with a "club-lock" and his endeavouring to use it. I do not regard their denials of having weapons as incredible. They may be incorrect. I have not overlooked the other problems with Chow's evidence. The accounts of Chan and Chow as to how they were injured by Luu and the injuries which they received were substantially correct.

There was the supporting evidence of Tiffany Wong although she claimed that she did not see the "club-lock" or Leung using it. However, the evidence of
Josephine Cheng and Tammy Han supported the Crown case and was generally credible. They saw the "club-lock" and Leung using it. On the whole of the evidence there was no doubt that Cheung stopped his car, alighted and went up to Chan and the other men in an angry mood and behaved aggressively. Luu went over very shortly thereafter with at least a screwdriver in his hand. There is no doubt that Luu engaged Chan and Chow and stabbed them. Luu said he jabbed at them. That understates the position. They needed and received medical treatment early on 27 December 1993. On the Crown case there was no justification or sufficient reason for Luu to attack Chan and Chow with a weapon and stab them. The jury rejected at least those parts of Luu's statements which were exculpatory. In the Crown case there was ample evidence on which the jury could rely to convict Luu and reject self defence. Too much emphasis should not be placed on the alleged defensive wounds. Luu did not give evidence.

There was also the evidence of Luu's flight and of the lies which he told the
Singapore police. It was difficult to give any credence to the explanations for these matters which Luu offered. It was clear that he was trying to run away to avoid being called to account for his actions.

An examination of all the evidentiary material leads to the conclusion that there is no significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. Neither the jury nor this court should entertain a reasonable doubt.

Luu's appeals against his convictions should be dismissed.

Appeal by Cheung against Sentence 
Cheung contends that his sentence comprising a minimum term of 6 years and an additional term of 2 years for manslaughter and the concurrent fixed term of months on the charge of malicious wounding was excessive.

The attack on the severity of the sentences had two bases. First, it was submitted that the judge made erroneous findings as to the degree of Cheung's culpability and, secondly, that the sentences were, in any event, manifestly excessive.

It was submitted that the judge erred in finding that Cheung had anticipated that violence might ensue and armed himself with a knife and in failing to find that she could not be satisfied that his only anticipation was that he might be the subject of violence. It was further submitted that the judge erred in failing to find that the deceased's use of the "club-lock" did not precede any act causing death done by Cheung or Luu.

It was submitted that although it was open to the judge to find that Cheung had armed himself with a knife to meet the eventuality of violence directed at him, this was not an aggravation of the manslaughter nor of the malicious wounding in the light of his reasonable belief, since his so doing was directed towards self defence. The evidence was that he was struck with the "club-lock" before using the knife. It was further submitted that a finding of excessive self defence absent an intention to kill or cause grievous bodily harm or reckless indifference to causing death was reasonably open and that
Cheung should have been given the benefit of such a finding. This would have left manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act with mitigation arising from provocation. Cheung submitted that insufficient allowance had been made for the high degree of provocation. I am unable to accept this submission. I agree with the judge that the jury was not satisfied that the Crown had negatived provocation and on that account reduced the verdict from murder to manslaughter.

In her remarks on sentence the judge noted that the jury had rejected Cheung's defence that he was unarmed. Cheung accepted that he was present and involved in the events. The Crown had negatived self defence. She said that she was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that, at the time of the gathering at the intersection, Cheung returned in a motor vehicle, with Luu, and both alighted from that vehicle.

Notwithstanding Cheung's denials the jury and the judge were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Cheung had and used a knife. The deceased suffered seven knife wounds, one wound inflicted by Luu with a screwdriver and some abrasions made with a blunt object. The judge was also satisfied that at some point, the deceased produced a heavy club-lock which he used as a weapon. She was unable to say whether the deceased did so aggressively or defensively. She was satisfied that the deceased struck Cheung with the club-lock with some force and that such action constituted the provocation found by the jury.

As to the injury inflicted upon Chan, the judge was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Cheung used the knife during the course of an altercation with Chan at the outset of the more general confrontation, but she did not find herself able to be satisfied that he was the aggressor, or, at least, the only aggressor. The judge sentenced on the basis that the wound to
Chan's left upper arm was minor. She said: "I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner was present at the scene with, at least, some degree of anticipation that violence might ensue.
This is the only inference that can be drawn from the fact of his being armed the knife ... I am not able to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he went there with the intention of initiating violence. So to find would sit uncomfortably with the jury's acceptance of provocation." 
The complaints mentioned as to the judge's findings and lack of findings have not been made good. The judge was dealing with events which occurred in a very short space of time. She was entitled to take the view that there was some confusion as to the precise sequence of events. There was the general fight, the separate fights and the return of the group to assist the deceased. The judge correctly found that at some point the deceased produced a club-lock. I do not think that the judge was bound to or should have made a finding that the deceased's use of the club-lock did not precede any act causing death.
There were seven wounds. The evidence did not enable the judge to say at what point each was received or precisely when the wound causing death was inflicted. She dealt with the matter sufficiently.

The judge's conclusion that Cheung anticipated that violence might ensue and armed himself with a knife was correct. A stronger finding would have been justified. Cheung was angry and about to explode. He precipitated a confrontation by stopping his car and going up to the group when he could have continued in his car and driven off. The evidence does not disclose how far
Cheung intended to go in his use of his knife as he approached the group at the intersection.

The judge did not err in failing to find that she could not be satisfied that his only anticipation was that he might be the subject of violence. The judge made the finding that Cheung anticipated violence might ensue during the confrontation. There was no need to take the matter further. On the materials available that finding was favourable to the accused. Cheung would not have taken the knife with him if he had not envisaged that he might use the knife.

The administration of seven stab wounds and the stabbing with the knife was merciless. The occasion did not, on any view, call for the use of a knife.

The judge took into account the subjective circumstances of Cheung. He was born on 19 September 1971 and had no previous criminal history. He came to
Australia in November 1989 with his mother and four younger siblings to join his father. The family appeared to be close knit. He was employed in the family business since the middle of 1992.

The offence was a very serious one. A human life has been lost. There was at least an intention to inflict grievous bodily harm. I agree with the judge, for the reasons given by her, that there were no special circumstances.

The use of knives in fights must be discouraged. The circumstances called for a stern sentence. The sentences which the judge imposed for manslaughter and maliciously wounding Chan were not excessive.

I would grant leave to appeal against the sentences but dismiss the appeals against them.

Crown appeal against Luu's sentence 
The Crown contended that the sentence imposed upon Luu was manifestly inadequate. He was sentenced on each charge to 2 1/2 years periodic detention commencing on 19 July 1996. In imposing that sentence the judge took into account that Luu had already spent 5 months 25 days in custody directly as a result of the offences. Five months was spent in custody in Singapore. As a result of evidence that the conditions of incarceration there were more onerous than in New South Wales the judge treated this as equivalent to 9 months in prison in New South Wales.

The judge summarised the facts on which she sentenced Luu as follows: "1. he was uninvolved in the dispute at the restaurant which precipitated the later tragedy; he acted without any pre-arranged criminal enterprise; he was present, almost accidentally or incidentally; he equipped himself with a weapon at the last minute, having observed the group with which he was confronted; he had no motive, other than the support of his friend, to become involved in any violence; he, with only one other, was confronted with a group of four or five hostile men; at least two, and probably more, of the other men were equipped with weapons of some kind; the injuries inflicted, while serious enough to be wounds, were relatively limited in number and seriousness, indicating a modicum of restraint in the use of his weapon (not sufficient however, to prevent the Crown rebutting self-defence.)
The injuries were inflicted with intent to do grievous bodily harm." 
I have earlier referred to the evidence as to the wounds suffered by Chan and
Chow and their hospitalisation.

Luu was born on 1 November 1973. At the time of the offence he had no relevant convictions. The judge disregarded some driving offences. Since 27 December he had been sentenced to imprisonment for 1 year for the supply of heroin. This deprived him of the benefit of the court dealing with him as a person who had not previously been to prison. Prior to his arrest he was employed in the family company, a clothing manufacturer, and worked in the evenings as a waiter. His employment in the family business remained open to him on his release and he had strong family support. Correctly, the judge took the view that periodic detention would be an unusual and very lenient sentence for an offence of malicious wounding with intent but that when it was coupled with the time previously spent in custody it was sufficient punishment.

Counsel for the Crown submitted that the judge failed to recognise that the gravamen of the offences was the intention to inflict grievous bodily harm, rather than the nature and extent of the wounds. I do not think that this is a fair reading of the judge's remarks.

It was submitted that the judge gave insufficient weight to the issues of punishment and deterrence and that the sentences were insufficient to reflect the criminality involved. The Crown accepted that the relevant principles were those established in Griffiths v. The Queen (1997) 137 CLR 293 and Everett v. The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295.] 
Luu submitted that: this court was bound by the facts found by the judge; the judge recognised the seriousness of the offences and that they required full- time custodial sentences; the sentence imposed fell within the permissible range; the criminality involved was at the lowest end of the scale and the wounds inflicted only just came within the definition of a wound; there were extenuating circumstances, the wounds being inflicted in response to an attack upon a friend. He had no motive other than to support his friend.
 the subjective features warranted leniency, especially his young age; the judge failed to take into account 9 days which he had spent in custody between 3 and 12 July 1996; the judge had made no relevant error of principle; she had not erred in the exercise of her discretion nor made any material mistake of fact; considerable weight should be attached to Luu being placed in jeopardy twice as a result of the appeal; even if the court thought that the sentences were manifestly inadequate it should nevertheless dismiss the Crown appeal in the exercise of its discretion. It would be hard for a young man such as the appellant to accept that he now had to go to gaol on a full-time basis.

As the judge acknowledged, there is much variation in gravity in the cases which fall within the classification of "malicious wounding with intent." It is an offence for which there is no standard or usual tariff. It is important to analyse the facts of each case and only some assistance is to be derived from previous cases.

The wounds to Chan and Chow could not be regarded as trifling, especially as hospitalisation was required. A punctured lung, if not promptly treated, can become quite serious. In both cases Luu intended to inflict grievous bodily harm. I proceed on the basis of the judge's finding that Luu acted without any pre-arranged criminal enterprise and that he was present "almost accidentally or incidentally" and her other findings. Despite my reservations as to the finding that at least two and probably more of the men other than Cheung and
Luu had weapons I have accepted that finding for sentencing purposes. It was a reasonable possibility. I have also considered the matters on which Luu has relied. I do not agree that the criminality involved was at the lowest end of the scale.

It must be emphasised that there was not one offence of malicious wounding but two offences and two victims and that they were stabbed with a Phillip's head screwdriver. I regard the sentences imposed as manifestly inadequate. They do not sufficiently reflect the objective gravity of the two offences.

The difficult issue is whether this Court should re-sentence Luu. He has spent the equivalent of ten months in custody and he was required to serve additionally, 2 1/2 years periodic detention. He has now served a substantial portion of that sentence and fashioned his life based on that sentence. While the punishment imposed was inadequate it was not minimal and the family support augurs well for the rehabilitation of this young man. He was aged 20 at the time of the offence in 1993. The aspect of double jeopardy is also important.

Upon reflection I have come to the conclusion that Luu should not be re- sentenced and that this Court in the exercise of its discretion should dismiss the Crown Appeal against Sentence.
Appeal by Cheung against convictions dismissed;
Grant leave to appeal against sentences to Cheung. Appeal against sentences dismissed;
Appeal by Luu against convictions dismissed;
Crown Appeal against the sentences imposed on Luu dismissed; 
REGINA versus Chan Quan LUU 
REGINA versus Chun Tung CHEUNG 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of Smart J and I agree with his reasons in both cases and the orders he proposes. 
In relation to the matter of Cheung I wish to make the following observation.
I agree with Smart J that her Honour's directions on manslaughter were defective in dealing with the matter of unlawful and dangerous act. Firstly, because her Honour did not direct the jury that if they found that the death of the deceased was caused by an unlawful and dangerous act of the appellant, to find manslaughter they would have to further find that the subject act carried with it an appreciable risk of serious injury. In R versus Wilson <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 313] at 335
Mason CJ, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ pointed out: "An act may be dangerous without carrying with it an appreciable risk of serious injury and unless the two elements are brought to the mind of the jury, there is a real danger that they may wrongfully convict of manslaughter." 
In the instant case the jury's finding that the appellant was guilty of manslaughter necessarily involved the jury finding that Cheung stabbed the deceased. From the stand point of a reasonable person in the position of the accused, the act of stabbing another person in the torso with a knife must be categorised as a dangerous act carrying with it an appreciable risk of serious injury. In my view no other alternative finding is rationally available.

In this regard, as Smart J rightly points out, in Wilson's case itself the act of the accused which led to his conviction for manslaughter was the delivery of one punch. Plainly enough such an act may not carry with it an appreciable risk of serious injury - a situation which is quite distinct from the facts in this matter.

Again, the facts of the matter affect the way in which this Court should approach the absence in her Honour's reasons of a specific direction to the jury to examine the appellant's actions from a stand point of a reasonable person in the position of the appellant.

In the light of the jury's undoubted finding that it was the appellant Cheung who stabbed the deceased it is my view that no other finding would be open to the jury other than that a reasonable person in the appellant's position would have appreciated that the action of the stabbing must necessarily carry with it an appreciable risk of serious injury to the person upon whom the stab wound is inflicted. Accordingly I agree with Smart J that in this case these mis-directions have not led to any miscarriage of justice. I should add that there would be many cases where a failure to direct a jury in accordance with the test adumbrated in Wilson would lead to a conviction being set aside by this Court.

REGINA versus Chan Quan LUU 
REGINA versus Chun Tung CHEUNG 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: I agree that the appeals against conviction should be dismissed for the reasons given by Smart and Newman JJ. I also agree that Cheung's appeal against sentence should be dismissed for the reasons given by Smart J and in the light of the fact that the effective sentence had to reflect the criminality of both the manslaughter and the malicious wounding with intent.

I also agree that the Crown appeal against sentence in respect of Luu should be dismissed. In the unusual circumstances of the case set out in the careful remarks on sentence of the trial judge and summarised in the judgment of Smart J, I am not satisfied that that sentence is manifestly inadequate. Nevertheless, even if it were, the proper exercise of this Court's discretion requires that the appeal be dismissed.
 * * * 
