

Tsatsoulis and Anor versus Westpac Banking Corporation and Ors Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 465 (27 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 November 1998 
TSATSOULIS & ANOR versus WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION & ORS /97 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: TSATSOULIS & ANOR versus WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION & ORS 
Proceedings: 50033/1997 
Date of Hearing of Motion: 22 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 27 May 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr A S Howen 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Vouroudis Photios & Co 
Counsel for First Defendant: Mr P J Dowdy 
Solicitors for First Defendant: Minter Ellison 
Counsel for Third, Fourth and Seventh Defendants: Mr M Meek 
Solicitors for Third, Fourth and Seventh Defendants: Hickson Wisewoulds 
Application to dismiss Amended Summons granted.

Application to dismiss proceedings refused, with leave to replead.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Applications 3 
The Strike Out Application 4 
Should The Proceedings Be Dismissed? 8 
Leave to Re-plead 10 
Costs 11 
Orders 11 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
In a judgment I gave on Friday, 22 May 1998, I set forth the history of this matter, the various issues which had been raised and my reasons for refusing an application for an adjournment by the plaintiffs of the defendants' Notices of Motion, filed on 8 May 1998, seeking to have the Amended Summons, filed on March 1997, and the proceedings dismissed. I do not propose to repeat what
I said in those reasons, although they should be read with these reasons.
However, I think it appropriate to note:- 
These proceedings were commenced by a Summons filed on 19 February 1997; 
That Summons sought relief on the ground that the signatures of Mr Sam
Tsatsoulis on various security documents were forgeries; 
A report from Mr Anderson, dated 25 September 1997, although qualified, expressed the view that, in all probability, the disputed signatures were not forgeries; 
Thereafter the plaintiffs sought to amend the Amended Summons by abandoning the allegations of forgery and relying upon an allegation of bribery, which had barely been touched on previously; 
On 12 December 1997 I refused the plaintiffs leave to file that Further
Amended Summons, because of the form in which it appeared, and I granted them leave to file a Further Amended Summons in proper form by 6 February 1998; 
The plaintiffs failed to comply with that order; 
Thereafter, the plaintiffs ceased to retain their former solicitors and, to date, no amended pleading has been filed.

The detailed history shows that so far the plaintiffs have been guilty of substantial and unexplained delay in pursuing these proceedings and, in so far as they have prosecuted them, they have done so either on an untenable basis, namely by alleging forgery, or pursuant to a totally unacceptable Summons, namely that which I refused them leave to file on 12 December 1997. The plaintiffs had, prior to 12 December 1997, ample opportunity to properly plead and particularise their case. The evidence of Mr Anderson has demonstrated that that case cannot succeed. The plaintiffs have had some six months since December 1997 to put whatever case they may wish to pursue into an acceptable pleading form. They have failed to do so. In these circumstances the applications made by the various defendants are hardly surprising.

The Applications 
By a Notice of Motion filed on 8 May 1998 the first defendant, Westpac Banking
Corporation, ("Westpac"), sought an order pursuant to Part 15 rule 26 that the
Amended Summons dated 20 March 1997 be struck out, and/or that the proceedings be dismissed pursuant to Part 5 rule 12 and alternative relief.

Part 15 rule 26 provides:- "(1) Where a pleading - discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence or other case appropriate to the nature of the pleading; has a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment or delay in the proceedings; or is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court, the Court may at any stage of the proceedings, on terms, order that the whole or any part of the pleading be struck out." 
Sub-section (2) permits evidence to be received on the application.

Part 5 rule 12 provides for a stay or dismissal of proceedings for want of prosecution.

Westpac's Notice of Motion was supported by evidence of what had transpired and by the report of Mr Anderson.

The third, fourth and seventh defendants sought similar orders, but also relied upon Part 13 rule 5, which provides:- "(1) Where in any proceedings it appears to the Court that in relation to the proceedings generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceedings:- no reasonable cause of action is disclosed; the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious; or the proceedings are an abuse of the process of the Court, the Court may order that the proceedings be stayed or dismissed generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceedings." 
Sub-section (2) provides for the taking of evidence on such an application.

Reliance was also placed upon Part 33 rule 6, which deals with want of prosecution in particular circumstances, which, in my respectful opinion, are not presently relevant. That application was also supported by evidence of the same type as Westpac's.

The Strike Out Application 
The Amended Summons filed on 20 March 1997 is based, on any fair reading of it, on the allegations of forgery. They are critical to the allegations which are made and fundamental to the relief which is sought. An attempt was made on behalf of the plaintiffs to assert that there was a wider range of fraud and unconscionability alleged, than fraud and unconscionability arising out of the alleged forgeries. In my opinion that submission must be rejected for several reasons. Firstly, on a fair reading of the document it is dependent upon the allegation of forgery. Secondly, it is not permissible to seek to dredge out of some general words, although used in the particular context to which I have referred, some greater meaning. Practice Note 89 makes quite clear in paragrpah 4(b) that the plaintiff's contentions should avoid formality, but:- ".. state the facts on which the plaintiff relies together with adequate particulars and identify the legal grounds for the relief claimed." 
The present Summons does not particularise any case other than one based on the forgeries.

Thirdly, by letter dated 1 April 1997 the solicitors for the third, fourth and seventh defendants sought particulars as to how it was alleged that the second defendant engaged in unconscionable conduct in contravention of s.51AA of the
Trade Practices Act. The response, by letter dated 24 April 1997, was:- "The unconscionable conduct consisted in the second defendant taking an assignment of the mortgages (knowing that the plaintiff's signature on the October 1992 mortgage had been forged) with the intention of preventing or defeating the plaintiff from being able to have the mortgages set aside as against the plaintiff's interest in the properties, the subject of the mortgages and in entering into the Deed of 17 May 1995." 
Further particulars asserted that the defendants had been told of the forgeries and of the fact that the assignment would prevent or defeat the plaintiff from being able to have the mortgages set aside. Accordingly, not only does the Amended Summons, on a proper reading of it, indicate that reliance was being placed on a case based on the very serious allegation of forgery, but the additional particulars in the letters to which I have referred, which became Exhibit 1, confirm this. In these circumstances I reject the submission that the Amended Summons would have permitted the plaintiffs to have ranged beyond the forgery allegations, and the consequences of the documents having been allegedly forged, and of the possible effects of the assignments as a consequence thereof. However, when one reads the Amended
Summons there are several references to bribery. In paragraph 11 under the heading "Nature of Dispute" it was pleaded that Mr Harry Sialepis paid for Mr
Kay, the relevant officer of Westpac, and his family to go to Bali on holidays for a week in July 1992, and:- "This payment was a bribe to Gregory Kay to facilitate the loan notwithstanding that Gregory Kay knew that Tsatsoulis had not signed the loan documents and was not aware of the loan." 
I shall explain the significance of the reference to a bribe in this pleading in a moment.

In paragraph 1(g) of the "Summary of Plaintiff's Contentions" it was pleaded:- "1. The first defendant was guilty of fraud in advancing further moneys to Sialepis knowing that Tsatsoulis' signature on the loan documentation and the mortgage documentation had been forged. The fraud is constituted by: ....
 accepting a secret commission to facilitate the loan notwithstanding Tsatsoulis' ignorance of it." 
Similar, but not so pointed allegations, were made in the original Summons.

The reason why, in my opinion, these references are significant is that once the "forgery" case had become either very difficult to pursue or untenable, the plaintiffs sought to mount a case based on bribes. One would have been entitled to be highly sceptical of this change in position were it not for the references in the Summons and the Amended Summons of 20 March 1997 to which I have referred. Of course, the fact that the "bribery" case was not more fully ventilated at that time may not eradicate completely that scepticism, but there is at least enough in the earlier pleadings to show that the "bribery" case was not simply thought of after the "forgery" case became untenable. To the extent that my judgment of 22 May 1998 on the adjournment application said to the contrary it was not correct.

The submissions on behalf of the plaintiffs proceeded on the basis that I should not strike out the Amended Summons of 20 March 1997 because, arguably, it would be possible to allege unconscionability and fraud other than based on the forgery allegation. As I have said I do not consider that the pleading permits of such a construction, either on its fair reading or when viewed in the light of the particulars furnished. No application was made to amend it.

In the light of the report of Mr Anderson and the letter from Mr Levitt stating that no further report was to be obtained from Mr Anderson I consider that the Amended Summons falls foul of each of the provisions of Part 15 rule and Part 13 rule 5 and, in my opinion, it must be struck out.

Should The Proceedings Be Dismissed? 
My initial reaction was that the dilatory way in which the plaintiffs have approached this matter and their failure to comply with the directions of the
Court were so gross as to demand that the somewhat extreme step of dismissing the proceedings be taken. That would not have prevented the plaintiffs, subject to one matter to which I shall refer, from instituting fresh proceedings albeit, perhaps, only after paying the costs of the present proceedings. However, the dismissal of proceedings for want of prosecution is an extreme step, which requires the Court to balance questions of justice as between the plaintiffs, on the one hand, and the defendants, on the other, and the possible Draconian effects of not allowing the plaintiffs to bring forward their proceedings. Further, the Court must have regard to the prejudice to the defendants, which arises from delay in having the proceedings heard, the costs of having to prepare for proceedings in circumstances where there is a strong possibility that any costs order will not be recoverable from the plaintiffs, and the general wear and tear of litigation.

In the present case, whilst acknowledging the gross failures and delays of the plaintiffs and their inability, thus far, to plead an acceptable case, it seems to me that they have shown the germ of a case based on the bribery allegations. But for the one direct and one indirect reference to that case in the Amended Summons of 20 March 1997, and the general reference to it in the
Summons, I may have taken a different view about it. But it has been there since then and, in my opinion, the plaintiffs should have the opportunity to plead that case in proper form.

In saying that I am fully appreciative of the fact that I gave them that opportunity on 12 December 1997 and that they have not availed themselves of it. I am acutely aware of the strong submission made on behalf of the defendants that I have already allowed the plaintiffs sufficient time. That submission may have won the day were it not for the facts that the defendants led no evidence to show that they have been prejudiced, in the sense of witnesses no longer being available or, indeed, in any other real sense, and were it not for the fact that at least arguably to dismiss the proceedings now would shut out whatever case the plaintiffs may have under the Trade Practices
Act, having regard to the time limitations imposed by it. In saying the defendants have not suffered any discernible prejudice I am not to be taken as overlooking the prejudice, which cannot be articulated, which arises from the fact that the proceedings remain on foot and that if an acceptable pleading is forthcoming the defendants will have to take steps to defend that case.
However, that is part and parcel of litigation. The prejudice to which I was more recently referring is actual prejudice by loss of witnesses or other evidence, which would preclude the defendants from adequately and properly defending these very serious allegations.

In the result I have come to the conclusion that it would not be a proper exercise of my discretion, at this stage, to dismiss the proceedings. I was reminded that I had indicated previously that further failure by the plaintiffs to comply with the Court's directions should be visited with that consequence. On reflection, and in the light of the submissions which have been made, I have now come to a different conclusion. However, as I said at the end of the submissions when I announced the orders I proposed to make, the plaintiffs should be made fully aware, and I was advised Mrs Tsatsoulis was in
Court when I made this statement, that any further failure to comply with the orders of the Court may well mean that the proceedings will be dismissed.

Leave To Re-plead 
Counsel for the plaintiffs stated that he considered that he would require a further four weeks, at the most, to prepare a Further Amended Summons. I am prepared to allow that time and, once again, it should be noted that I am allowing the plaintiffs the maximum time they have sought. I adopted this attitude on 12 February 1998. By doing so it must become the harder, although it will also always be a matter for the exercise of discretion, for the plaintiffs to obtain any further indulgences should they seek them.

I also think it appropriate to grant leave to file and serve the Further
Amended Summons, although, of course, that will not preclude the defendants from arguing that it does not disclose a cause of action.

Costs 
The plaintiffs made the very serious allegation of forgery apparently without any expert evidence to suggest that the disputed signatures were, in truth, forgeries. It is not in issue that the plaintiffs will have to pay some costs in respect of the amendment and the proceedings thus far. However, the extent of the costs and whether they should be paid on a party and party or indemnity basis is a matter on which, in due course, I will hear argument.

Orders 
I order that:- 
The Amended Summons filed on 20 March 1997 be dismissed.

The plaintiffs file and serve a Further Amended Summons, if so advised, by pm on Friday, 19 June 1998.

I stand over the Notice of Motion to dismiss the proceedings and the proceedings until 3 July 1998.

Submissions as to costs be made in due course.
 * * * 
