

Regina versus Tilemahos Krallidis [1996] NSWSC 541 (13 November 1996) 
REGINA versus TILEMAHOS KRALLIDIS /96 
WEDNESDAY 13 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, JAMES J, IRELAND J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask James J to deliver the first judgment.

JAMES J: Tilemahos Krallidis has appealed against his conviction, after a trial before Judge Garling and a jury in the Nowra District Court, on one count of indecent assault, an offence under s.61L of the Crimes Act, and one count of sexual intercourse without consent, an offence under s.61I of the Crimes Act. The Crown case was that both offences had been committed on the night of the fifth and sixth May 1995 against the same victim, who I will refer to as "the complainant". On the count of indecent assault Judge Garling imposed a fixed term of imprisonment of one year commencing 21 March 1996, the date on which the jury returned its verdicts of guilty, and on the count of sexual intercourse without consent his Honour imposed a sentence of three years also commencing on 21 March 1996, consisting of a minimum term of two years three months and an additional term of nine months. In the event of his appeal against conviction being unsuccessful the appellant seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed by Judge Garling.

At the trial the appellant was represented by an experienced counsel. However, he was refused legal aid for an appeal and he has acted for himself on the appeal.

At the trial the complainant, a man named Kyriakos (or Curtis) Dimou who was a nephew of the appellant, a man named Daniel Muller who was a workmate of the complainant to whom the complainant made a complaint and a police officer who conducted an electronically recorded interview of the appellant gave evidence for the Crown. The appellant gave sworn evidence in his own case.

The complainant's evidence in-chief can be briefly summarised as follows. The complainant knew the appellant and his nephew Kyriakos Dimou and had once had consensual sexual intercourse with the appellant about four years before May
On Friday 5 May 1995 the complainant worked at her usual place of work, a fast food shop. After work she said that she drank one beer. She then visited the appellant and his nephew at their shop, which was known as the
Cuppa Cafe. She took with her a can of Southern Comfort and Coca Cola which she drank while at the Cuppa Cafe. Just after nine o'clock the complainant left the Cuppa Cafe and travelled with the appellant and his nephew to their home. She left her car at the cafe. The appellant's nephew went to bed at about eleven o'clock. The appellant and the complainant remained sitting in the lounge room of the appellant's house, listening to music. The appellant was drinking bourbon and Coca Cola. The complainant said that she did not drink any alcohol at all at the appellant's house.

About an hour and a half after Mr Dimou had gone to bed the appellant suddenly put his hands on the complainant's waist and tried to pull her down on to the lounge. At first the complainant was not concerned. Then the appellant grabbed her again "really hard" and pulled the complainant down on to the lounge. The appellant held both the complainant's hands with one of his hands and exposed his penis. The complainant screamed at the appellant to stop and succeeded in pushing him away. The appellant grabbed the complainant's hands again, pulled her to her feet and walked the complainant backwards out of the lounge room into his bedroom. The complainant fell backwards on to the bed in the appellant's bedroom. The complainant continued to struggle, however, the appellant pulled down the plaintiff's pants and underpants to her ankles. The complainant then gave the evidence which was the basis of the first count "...Q. What is the next thing you remember happening? 
A. After he pulled my jumper up, he pulled my bra up just on one side, over my breast and was biting on my nipple really hard.

Q. Do you remember which breast it was? 
A. I think it was the right one..." 
After further struggling the appellant put his penis in the complainant's vagina and this was the basis of the charge of sexual intercourse.

The complainant finally pushed the appellant off her, ran out to the lounge room and telephoned a taxi, waited for the taxi outside the front of the appellant's house and travelled in the taxi to her home. She arrived home at about two o'clock in the morning.

The complainant gave further evidence that she went to work that morning, that is the morning of Saturday 6 May 1995, at seven o'clock. At her place of work she told Daniel Muller that the previous night she had gone to the appellant's house and that after Kyriakos Dimou had gone to bed the appellant had raped her. In his evidence at the trial Daniel Muller confirmed that the complainant had spoken to him that morning and had said that the appellant had raped her.
Later the same day the appellant telephoned the complainant at her place of work and asked "Are you okay?" and the complainant said "No I am not".

On Monday 8 May the complainant reported the matter to the police.

In cross-examination the complainant said that a couple of days afterwards she telephoned Kyriakos Dimou, asking for the return to her of a set of keys to her house. Some time earlier both the appellant and Kyriakos Dimou had lived at the complainant's house and had received a set of keys from her. The complainant was given the keys by Kyriakos Dimou outside the appellant's place of work.

About eight weeks after the incident the complainant went to see the appellant at the appellant's shop to tell him to stop telephoning her parents. By that time the appellant had been arrested and charged but had been released on bail. The complainant denied that on this occasion she had told the appellant that she wanted to drop the charges. She said that the appellant asked her to drop the charges.

The complainant agreed that at a meeting with Kyriakos Dimou a few weeks later she had not told Kyriakos Dimou that the appellant had raped her. In re- examination she said this was because Kyriakos Dimou was the appellant's nephew.

The complainant accepted in cross-examination that she had not said anything about the alleged offences to the taxi driver who picked her up outside the appellant's house in the early hours of 6 May 1995. She offered the explanation "I was in shock. I don't remember what I was thinking". The complainant accepted that she would have looked dishevelled when she was picked up by the taxi driver. The police officer who gave evidence in the trial said that the taxi driver had been traced but had not been prepared to give a statement to the police. The taxi driver was not called as a witness at the trial by either the appellant or the Crown. In his summing-up the trial judge gave a Jones versus Dunkel direction in favour of the appellant to the effect that the jury could infer that the taxi driver's evidence would not have assisted the Crown case.

As I have already stated, the appellant gave sworn evidence at the trial. He said that he had had sexual intercourse with the complainant on two previous occasions. The complainant had visited him a number of times at various places where he had lived. He had regarded her as a good friend. He suggested that the complainant was jealous of another young woman with whom the appellant had had a relationship.

The appellant said in his evidence that on the night of 5 May 1995 both he and the complainant had been drinking alcohol at his house. He said that his house was a small house and that any loud noise in the house could be heard throughout the house, so that any screaming by the complainant should have been heard by Kyriakos Dimou. The appellant said that on the night of 5 May the complainant had sat on the lounge in a provocative position with her legs apart. The appellant asked the complainant to give him oral sex and the complainant complied. The appellant said that he played with the complainant's breasts but he denied that he bit her. He then said "All of a sudden she stood and said 'I am not going to let you take advantage of me again'", whereupon the complainant ceased giving the appellant oral sex.

The appellant said that a little while later the appellant had said "Let's go to bed". The appellant took the complainant by the hand and the two of them walked into the appellant's bedroom. The appellant took his clothes off.
According to the appellant "we were just mucking around" in the bedroom. The complainant still had her clothes on. The appellant suggested the complainant take her clothes off, so that she could sleep more comfortably. The complainant then said "I am not going to let you take advantage of me again" and walked out of the bedroom. The appellant thought that the complainant was going to sleep in the lounge room. The next morning he was surprised when he looked in the lounge room and saw that the complainant was not there. The appellant had telephoned the complainant the next day, simply to find out whether the complainant had got home all right the previous night.

As I have already stated, the appellant has not been legally represented on this appeal. In the notice of appeal the grounds of appeal are stated to be "I am not guilty of this charge. Main witness in this case was not at the trial".

The court has before it a letter written by the appellant in which he sets out arguments in support of his appeal. The arguments advanced by the appellant in his letter are, adopting the appellant's numbering, (1) that the complainant made a complaint to Daniel Muller and not to her mother or sister, who lived near her; that the complainant went to work at seven o'clock in the morning on May 1995, after allegedly being raped only about six hours previously (2) that the taxi driver had not given evidence at the trial (3) that in her evidence at the trial the complainant had been unsure which of her breasts the appellant had bitten (4) that Kyriakos Dimou who was in a bedroom nearby in the house had heard nothing and had not been told about the alleged rape when the complainant later spoke to him (5) that the complainant's employer had come to the appellant's place of work and had said that if the appellant left town the complainant would drop the charges (6) that it was three days before the complainant reported the incident to the police and about one month before the appellant was charged (7) that, contrary to the complainant's evidence, she had been drunk on the night of 5 May and that was why she had left her car at the appellant's place of work (8) that the complainant came to the appellant's place of work and asked the appellant to stop telephoning her family, whereas, it was suggested, she should have made any complaint about the telephoning to the police (9) that after being allegedly raped the complainant had gone home, instead of immediately going to the police or a hospital and (10) that a woman named Tracy Wills had not been called as a witness at the trial. Tracy Wills, it was said, worked at the Cuppa Cafe and could have given evidence that the complainant was drunk on the night of 5
May.

In the Crown's written submissions the Crown took the first ground stated in the notice of appeal as amounting to a ground of appeal that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory and this seems to me a proper way of interpreting the ground. As regards the other ground of appeal, the appellant has explained to the court that the "main witness" who should have been called at the trial was the taxi driver.

The principles to be applied by a Court of Criminal Appeal in deciding whether a verdict of guilty is unsafe and unsatisfactory have been stated by the High
Court in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] especially at 493-5 and by this court in Regina versus McKnoulty [(1994) 77 A Crim R ] at 338-9 and it is unnecessary to repeat these principles in this judgment. These principles include that this court is required to make its own independent examination of the evidence to determine whether on the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant's guilt.

I have already summarised the evidence of the complainant. In my opinion the written arguments of the appellant include the principal criticisms which could be levelled at the complainant's evidence and I will consider those arguments seriatim adopting the same numbering, while bearing in mind it is the combined weight of the criticisms which is important.

I do not consider it a weakness in the complainant's evidence that she went to work on the morning of 6 May or that she made a complaint to a fellow worker at her place of work. There was no evidence at the trial about where the complainant's mother or sister lived and it was not suggested to the complainant at the trial that she could have made a complaint to either of them. Daniel Muller gave evidence that on the morning of 6 May 1995 at the shop the complainant "looked upset, wasn't herself". Muller asked her what was the matter but at first the complainant did not tell him. Later when the complainant still did not look well and was crying he asked her again what was wrong and the complainant said "Tom (that is the appellant) raped me". Muller also gave evidence that after the telephone call from the appellant that morning the complainant started crying again.

It was a weakness in the Crown case that the taxi driver did not give evidence at the trial. The complainant conceded that she did not tell the taxi driver anything about the incident. Her explanation was that she was in shock.
The taxi driver might still have been able to give evidence about the complainant's appearance and demeanour. The police officer who gave evidence explained that the taxi driver had not been called, because he had not been prepared to make a statement to the police. The trial judge in the summing-up gave a Jones versus Dunkel direction in favour of the appellant, in relation to the taxi driver not being called by the Crown.

It is correct that the complainant, when giving evidence, was not certain which of her breasts the appellant had bitten. She thought it was the right one.

It is correct that Kyriakos Dimou, who was called by the Crown, gave evidence that his bedroom was next to the lounge room, that he did not go to sleep immediately after he went to bed, that after he went to bed he could hear the appellant and the complainant talking in the lounge room and that he heard them move into the appellant's bedroom. Kyriakos Dimou said he did not hear any screaming. This evidence is contrary to the complainant's evidence that she was screaming. The jury, of course, had the advantage, denied to this court, of hearing and seeing Kyriakos Dimou give his evidence. The jury could also take into account the relationship between the appellant and his nephew, who were living together. The appellant said in evidence that Kyriakos Dimou was his only nephew, that he was very close to him and that he loved him.

There was no evidence at the trial that the complainant's employer had said anything about the charges in relation to the appellant being dropped.

The evidence at the trial was that the complainant had reported the incident to the police on Monday 8 May and the appellant had been arrested on May. I would not regard these time intervals as significant.

The extent to which the complainant was affected by alcohol was an issue in the trial and depended on the jury's assessment of the evidence given by the witnesses, who the jury saw and heard. The complainant said that she had drunk a beer at her place of work and had drunk Southern Comfort and Coca Cola at the appellant's shop. She said that she left her car at the appellant's shop, not because she was well affected by alcohol but as a matter of prudence because having had two drinks she did not want to drive. She denied she had drunk any alcohol at the appellant's house.

In my opinion it is no way a weakness in the complainant's evidence that some weeks later she personally called on the appellant, asking him to stop telephoning her family.

It would have been a possible course for the complainant to have gone to the police immediately but I do not find it surprising that she decided that she wanted to go home.

Tracy Wills did not give evidence at the trial. The court received an affidavit by the solicitor who had acted as the appellant's solicitor at the trial, to the effect that in July 1995 the appellant had suggested that Tracy
Wills could give evidence about the complainant's state of intoxication when she arrived at the appellant's shop on the evening of 5 May but that the appellant did not subsequently pursue the matter. There is no evidence before us of what evidence Tracy Wills could actually have given.

The appellant was interviewed in an electronically recorded interview on 27
May 1995 and a tape recording of the interview and a transcript of the interview were admitted into evidence. In my opinion the jury could have regarded the answers given by the appellant in the interview as seriously weakening his credibility. In answer to question 50 in the interview, when the appellant was asked whether he had pulled the complainant down on to the lounge in the lounge room, the appellant said:- "...She was just splattered all over my lounge with her legs open and what happened was at the time I - I thought I could have intercourse with her but I - she started sucking my dick and then I changed my mind and I said 'I'm going to sleep' and she started going off and she took off out the door." 
This answer was inconsistent with the evidence given by the appellant at the trial, in that it conveys that in the lounge room it was the appellant, and not the complainant, who had a change of mind about engaging in sexual activity and that after the appellant changed his mind the complainant "took off out the door", thereby terminating the whole episode.

In his answer to question 60 the appellant repeated that it was he who had put a stop to the sexual activity in the lounge room and that the complainant "took off out the door". In his answer to question 61 he explained that the complainant "doesn't turn me on". When in question 67 the allegation by the complainant that the appellant had walked her backwards out of the lounge room into the bedroom was put to the appellant, he said, inconsistently with his earlier answer: "...she came into my bedroom but I didn't - I wasn't holding her".

In his evidence at the trial, repeated before this court today, the appellant said that he was holding the complainant's hand as they walked into the bedroom.

The appellant's evidence at the trial that in the lounge room the complainant said "I am not going to let you take advantage of me again" is difficult to reconcile with the complainant then voluntarily accompanying the appellant into the appellant's bedroom and lying down on his bed with him.

When the allegation that he had bitten the complainant on the breast was put to the appellant at the interview he said: "I didn't - I didn't get that far - I didn't want to get that far". However, he said "I had my hands on her breasts anyway".

The appellant said in the interview that when the two of them were on the bed in his bedroom "we were just still mucking around", which he said including putting his arms around the complainant and touching her on the breasts, which he said the complainant did not consent to. Among other things, the jury could have regarded this admitted conduct as strange conduct on the part of someone who a little earlier had said he was not "turned on" by the complainant and had decided to terminate the sexual activity with her in the lounge room.

In his answer to question 102 the appellant said he had told the complainant to ring a cab, which was inconsistent with earlier answers and inconsistent with his evidence at the trial that he was surprised when he looked in his lounge room the next morning and saw that the complainant was not there.

This was a case in which the benefit to the jury of seeing and hearing the witnesses was considerable. Having made my own independent assessment of the nature and quality of the evidence and allowing for the jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the witnesses I consider it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty on both counts and I do not consider that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. I also consider that the second ground of appeal based on the non-calling of the taxi driver, should be rejected. I have already dealt with that ground earlier in this judgment. I would propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed.

The appellant seeks leave to appeal against sentence. The maximum penalty for indecent assault is imprisonment for five years and the maximum penalty for sexual assault is penal servitude for fourteen years.

In his remarks on sentence the trial judge, after summarising the facts of the offences, noted some of the subjective circumstances of the appellant. At the time of sentencing the appellant was thirty-seven years old. He had an extensive criminal record extending for more than twenty years. As at 6 May he was on a recognizance to be of good behaviour and these offences were breaches of the recognizance. The judge did not consider that the appellant felt any remorse. The appellant had, of course, pleaded not guilty to the charges and hence was not entitled to any leniency on the basis of having pleaded guilty.

In favour of the appellant the judge accepted that he was immature for his years and that he had important family support.

I do not consider the sentencing judge made any error of fact or principle and the sentences imposed by him were well within a sound exercise of his Honour's sentencing discretion. I would propose that leave to appeal against the sentence be granted but that the appeal against sentence be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

IRELAND J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the court will be as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
