

Duggan versus Parrett Matter No 10864/97 [1997] NSWSC 412 (18 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Duggan versus Parrett /97 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Duggan versus Parrett 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 26 August 1996, Burdett LCM delivered judgment on a claim brought by Callis Parrett (the defendant) against Claire Duggan (the plaintiff). The defendant had brought a claim for damages against the plaintiff founded on negligence. The defendant was the successful party in the proceedings before the Magistrate. 
The Magistrate has been asked to State a Case. It was signed on 19 March 1997.

The plaintiff has brought these proceedings by way of Summons. She brings an appeal from the decision of the Learned Magistrate.

I shall briefly refer to the contents of the Stated Case. Paragraph 1 sets out the Determination. Paragraph 2 sets out the facts found by the Learned
Magistrate. Paragraph 3 sets out the Grounds of Determination. Paragraph 4 sets out the Appellant's contention.

The plaintiff does not press the contentions set forth in (a), (b), (c), (d), , (i) and (j). The contentions that remain are as follows:- the failure to consider the proposition advanced by the defendant that such conduct of the defendant in leaving the candles of that construction unattended was not negligent pursuant to the decision of Lord Goddard in
Sochacki versus SAS & Anor [[1947] 1 All ER 344.] there was no evidence before the Court that the candles could of themselves, cause an unintended fire.
 there was no evidence before the Court to explain how the plaintiff alleged the naked flame of the candles came in contact with the curtains.
 ...
 the finding that the `defendant's conduct in leaving the candles burning in the unit in close proximity to curtains while the unit is unattended is conduct involving a foreseeable risk of injury to the plaintiff's property' (judgment page 8), is erroneous in law.
 the reliance on the principle that the magnitude of the risk should be determined with reference to the likely magnitude of harm should the risk eventuate, to the exclusion of objective consideration of the construction of the candles, an objective assessment of their proximity to the curtains, and an objective assessment of the foreseeability that they would set the curtains alight (judgment page 8), is erroneous in law." 
The plaintiff has sought to rely on a further contention. It is in the following terms:- "(m) His Worship erred in law in that the negligent act of leaving the premises was not found to have caused or contributed to the damage." 
This application was opposed. I reserved the determination of that application to the delivering of judgment on the Summons.

The Court has had certain other material placed before it. There is Exhibit A (which comprises a bundle of exhibits which the Magistrate had before him).
There is Exhibit B (which is the Transcript of the proceedings). There is
Exhibit C (which is the Judgment of the Learned Magistrate). There is Exhibit
D (which is a copy of the relevant pleadings before the Magistrate).

The authorities make it clear that the remedy of case stated provides a limited avenue of appeal. The Court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law and only such questions of law as are submitted to it (Allen v Kerr & Anor [(1995) Aust Torts Reports 81-354] and The Australian Gas Light Company versus The Valuer-General <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 126).]
The matter of what is a question of law (as opposed to a question of fact) was considered, inter alia, in Allen and Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] at 155-156. The facts stated are to be taken as the ultimate facts for whatever purpose the case is stated (Press versus Mathers <case>; [(1927) VLR 326] at p 330).

I shall briefly refer to certain of the relevant matters of fact. A relationship of landlord and tenant existed between the defendant and the plaintiff. The plaintiff was the occupant of premises known as Unit 8, 1
Jardine Street, Kingston in the Australian Capital Territory (the premises).
The premises were damaged by fire on the afternoon of 12 July 1991. The plaintiff had earlier departed from the unoccupied premises to play racquetball, leaving eight candles alight. She knew that they were alight and in close proximity to curtains. The probable cause of the fire was found to be the candles rather than arson or other causes (including electrical fault).

Counsel for the plaintiff drew the attention of the Court to certain other circumstances. These were matters not referred to in the Stated Case. I shall mention certain of them (including circumstances relating to the candles themselves). There was evidence as to dimensions. Six of the candles were in metal jars and two of them were in glass jars. They had been used at various places and the plaintiff had not had any problems with them in the past.

In making his determination, the Learned Magistrate addressed the questions of the existence of a duty of care, breach of the duty of care and causation. The breach of duty found by the Learned Magistrate related, inter alia, to the leaving of the candles burning in the premises whilst they were unattended. He found that the damage to the premises resulted from that breach.

The Court has been referred to certain of the matters pleaded. The defendant's pleading identified the Particulars of Negligence as "Leaving candles alight in the premises while the premises were left unattended". A finding was made as to the plaintiff's knowledge of the proximity of the curtains to the candles. In the circumstances of this case, on one view, the reference to that matter by the Learned Magistrate may be regarded as surplusage. It is a view which is open to the Court. In any event, in the light of the material before the Court, it is unclear as to whether or not there was a departure from the pleadings in the issues agitated and put before the Learned Magistrate. It is not said that the finding was not open on the evidence before the Court. I have been informed that the submissions were made in writing after the conclusion of the evidence.

Counsel for the plaintiff has said that two broad lines of attack were made against the Determination. One concerns a question of foreseeability (it involved a contention of failure to take into account the special circumstances of this particular case). The other concerns a question of causation (it is the matter sought to be raised by the further contention).

The case has been argued at some length. The parties have referred to a number of authorities (including Allen, Robert versus Czycyerskyj [(1961) WAR ] and
Sochacki versus SAS & Anor [[1947] 1 All ER 344).] 
It has been said that Sochacki proceeded on the basis that the lighting of a fire for warming a room constitutes an ordinary and natural use (Robert at p ). If that was the proper approach to take, I am not satisfied that leaving a number of candles lit in premises that were unattended (whether or not that was done so that the premises would smell nice on the return of the occupant) meets the test. For present purposes, the judgment of Lord Goddard reflects little more than the view of the Chief Justice that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur did not apply in the facts of that case. The approach to be taken is set forth in The Council of the Shire of Wyong versus Shirt & Ors <case>; [146 CLR 40.] Each case is going to turn on its own particular circumstances.

Whilst some minds might cavil with certain of the language used by the Learned
Magistrate, the Court has regard to the substance of the Determination. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has demonstrated any error of law. Even if a different view was to be taken, I do not consider that the determination should be disturbed.

In my view, the Determination made by the Magistrate was open to him having regard to the material that was placed before the Court. It was open to him to find that, in the circumstances of this case, the plaintiff owed a duty of care to the defendant. It was open to him to find that the plaintiff had been in breach of that duty. It was open to him to find that there was a causal connection between the breach of duty and the damage to the premises. In my view, these were the issues addressed by him and were, in substance, the findings that were made by him.

I have dealt with the matters argued before me on the basis that leave had been given to rely on the further contention. The application for leave was founded on rules 7(1)(c) and 14(a), Part 32 of the Supreme Court Rules and the general power of the Court to amend process. The application was not fully argued. On what has been said, I doubt that any of the provisions contained in
Part 32 would assist the plaintiff. Part 20 allows the amendment of "any document in the proceedings". In the light of the conclusion that I have reached, it is unnecessary to further pursue this matter.

I affirm the determination in respect of which the case was stated. I dismiss the Summons. The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
