

Regina versus Downey Matter No 60005/97 [1997] NSWSC 457 (3 October 1997) 
Last Modified: 27 February 1998 
Regina versus Steven John Downey /97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Newman J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence in the District
Court (Shillington DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60005/97 
DELIVERED: Friday 3 October 1997 
HEARING DATE: Friday 11 July 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Steven John DOWNEY 
JUDGMENT OF: Gleeson CJ, Newman J, Hidden J 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: P M Strickland * Respondent: M C Marien 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: T A Murphy * Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCING - whether appellant's sentence should be reduced on basis of assistance to authorities - consideration of matters set out in s442B [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) - HELD (by majority) - court should decline to reduce sentence in circumstances of this case - appeal dismissed.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 20 
REGINA versus Steven John DOWNEY 
SENTENCING - [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) s442B - appellant seeks reduction of sentence on basis of assistance to authorities - appellant and brother were co-offenders - subsequently appellant, for motives of revenge, informed police of brother's offence but lied about his own role -
HELD - (by majority) - in the exercise of its discretion, and having regard to the matters set out in s442B the Court should, in the particular circumstances of the case decline to reduce the sentence.

O R D E R S Leave to appeal against sentence granted.
 Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus Steven John DOWNEY 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Hidden J.

This appeal originally came before the court as an appeal against conviction and sentence. However, the appeal against conviction was not pursued, and the application for leave to appeal against sentence was pressed on a narrow basis, related to the provisions of s442B of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

As Hidden J has observed, it appears doubtful whether any argument based on s442B was seriously advanced before Shillington DCJ, and the subject received only a brief, and dismissive, reference in the learned judge's remarks on sentence. I agree with Hidden J that this court ought to approach the matter upon the basis that the appellant is entitled to have his s442B argument considered, or reconsidered, on its merits, and that this court should exercise its own discretion in the matter. For reasons that will appear, however, I have come to a different conclusion from Hidden J as to the manner in which that discretion should be exercised.

The facts are set out in the reasons for judgment of Hidden J. I shall refer to only two aspects of the facts, one of which deserves emphasis, and the other of which requires some little elaboration.

The first matter relates to the severity of the attack upon the victim by the two men involved in the offence, and the seriousness of the consequences of that attack. This is a case involving an extremely brutal assault which left the victim permanently and seriously injured.

The second matter relates to the circumstances of what is said to be the appellant's assistance to the authorities.

The attack on the victim, Mr Barratt, occurred on the night of 30 May 1992.
According to his evidence, he was set upon by two men, one of whom held him whilst the other kicked him in the head and testicles and beat him with a weapon.

Both the appellant and his brother, Rodney Downey, had long criminal histories, including convictions for offences of violence. On a date in March , the appellant and his brother had a violent altercation, in the course of which the brother head-butted the appellant. The appellant told his brother he was going to pay him back. He went to the police, told them that he had been head-butted by his brother, and said that he was talking to them for the purpose of revenge.

At that stage, before an electronically recorded interview was conducted, the appellant told the police that on 30 May 1992 he and his brother Rodney were with a third person whom he refused to name. The subject of obtaining a chainsaw was raised between the three men. Rodney evidently knew that Mr
Barratt had a chainsaw at his farm. He decided to steal it. Rodney and the appellant went to the victim's farm for that purpose. At that stage, according to what a police officer recorded in his notebook, the appellant said: "Rodney said he knows where to get a chainsaw from so we went out ......there, went out, and the shit hit the fan and the cunt recognised us so we beat the shit out of him".

When the police conducted an electronically recorded interview with the appellant he acknowledged having said that.

As the electronically recorded interview progressed the appellant gave an account of events which attributed the entire blame for the attack to Rodney.
Ultimately, the appellant said that, whilst he was present and had observed what happened, he personally took no part in it and, indeed, he suggested that he had attempted to restrain his brother.

The victim, however, was always adamant that he had been attacked by two men acting jointly, and the police charged both the appellant and his brother. At a very late stage, the brother pleaded guilty. The appellant was tried separately.

At the appellant's trial he made a brief unsworn statement in which he placed the blame on his brother. He said: "I was out there that night. I did not harm Mr Barratt. Rodney done all the damage. I should have stepped in and helped but when Rodney goes off, well I was shit scared. I didn't know what he was going to do or what he'd do to me ......".

In a pre-sentence report tendered in the course of the sentencing proceedings it was said that the appellant claimed that it was his brother Rodney and another named man who assaulted the victim. That, however, was not a version of events that was advanced by the appellant at the trial.

It is against that background that the appellant now claims to be entitled to leniency, pursuant to s442B, on the basis of his assistance to the authorities. The argument is that, although he lied to the authorities in a number of important respects, he led them to his brother, and the information he gave the police was of significant assistance in obtaining a conviction of the brother.

Counsel for the appellant rightly points out that the policy of the law, reflected in s442B, and considered in a number of authorities dealing with the common law principles, does not require that a person who seeks leniency on the ground of assistance to the authorities must have given such assistance for honourable reasons. Considerations of pragmatism are at work here.

However, importance has always been attached to the fullness and frankness of any disclosure to authorities. It is a matter specifically referred to in s422B(3)(c).

In R versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] at -253 the court stated: "It is clearly in the public interest that offenders should be encouraged to supply information to the authorities which will assist them to bring any offenders to justice, and to give evidence against those other offenders in relation to whom they have given such information.

In order to ensure that such encouragement is given, the appropriate reward for providing assistance should be granted whatever the offender's motive may have been in giving it, be it genuine remorse (or contrition) or simply self interest. What is to be encouraged is a full and frank co-operation on the part of the offender whatever be his motive.
 .............................................

The information which he gives must be such as could significantly assist the authorities. The information must, of course, be true; a false disclosure attracts no discount at all." 
In R versus Hayes [(1981) 3 A Crim R 286]
Burt CJ, speaking for the Western Australian Court of Criminal Appeal, said, at 287-288: "Informers, of course, come in all shapes and sizes and are motivated by many considerations. About such things the sentencing judge must make his own judgment. But should it appear that the information given has been of substantial assistance in the detection of crime and in the conviction of informers and that the disclosures made have been full and frank, then when he comes to be sentenced some allowance should be made on that account." 
The present is a case where one of two accomplices, moved by a desire for revenge against the other, gave information to the police. The experience of the law shows that accomplices frequently give an account of crimes which exculpates themselves, or minimises their responsibility, and exaggerates the role of a co-offender. That is the reason for the traditional accomplice warning given to juries. That was exactly the behaviour of the appellant in the present case. After what seems to have been an initial admission to the police, he gave the police, and later the jury, an account of the events which falsely understated his own part in them and overstated the role of his co- offender. Accomplices do that sort of thing all the time, but not many of them, following conviction, claim to be rewarded for it.

As will appear from the above, in considering the various matters set out in s442B(3), I give substantially more weight than Hidden J has given to the matters referred to in pars (a) and (c). That, I think, is the point of departure between us. I do not have any disagreement in principle with the approach taken by Hidden J, but as a matter of discretion I give somewhat greater weight to those two aspects of the case.

In the result, I would not reduce the appellant's sentence pursuant to s442B.

I would dismiss the appeal against conviction, which has not been pressed. I would grant leave to appeal against the sentence but dismiss the appeal.

REGINA versus Steven John DOWNEY 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of the Chief Justice. I agree with both the reasons he gives and the orders he proposes.
 
REGINA versus Steven John DOWNEY 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: After a trial in the District Court at Wagga, the applicant was found guilty by a jury of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm and larceny of a motor vehicle. He had also been charged with break enter and steal, with an alternative charge of larceny, but he was acquitted of those.
He was sentenced on the charge of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm to penal servitude for six years, comprising a minimum term of four years to date from 21 November 1996 and an additional term of two years. On the charge of larceny of a motor vehicle he was sentenced to a concurrent fixed term of penal servitude for one year.

An appeal against conviction on the charge of larceny of a motor vehicle was abandoned, but an application for leave to appeal against sentence was pursued. Written submissions filed on behalf of the applicant contained an argument that the effective sentence was manifestly excessive, but this was not pursued in oral argument. The only submission pressed was that the learned sentencing judge erred in failing to reduce the sentence otherwise appropriate, in the light of what was said to be assistance afforded by the applicant to the authorities in the investigation of the crimes of which he was convicted. Given the narrow focus of the argument, a relatively brief recital of the facts and the subjective material will suffice.

Facts: 
On the night of 30 May 1992 the victim of the offences, Mr David Barrett, was working in a shed on his farm on the outskirts of Young. A man came into the shed and asked him for petrol, but he said that he had none. The man left.
Shortly afterwards two men ran into the shed and one grabbed Mr Barrett around the throat while the other hit, kicked and kneed him. He appears to have lost consciousness briefly and, when he came to, he was vomiting blood. He managed to stagger out of the shed to his utility, but found that he was in too much pain to drive. As he tried to make his way back to the shed he was again intercepted by the two men. One of them put the butt of a rifle to his cheek.
He was then tied up with some rope out of his utility, and was struck about the head with the rifle and kicked in the stomach and the head. The men then made off in his utility which was recovered two days later in Young in a damaged condition.

Mr Barrett managed to get to a neighbour's to raise the alarm. He was taken to
Young District Hospital but his injuries required his transfer to a hospital in Canberra. He had suffered substantial facial and head injuries and his
Honour found that he would have significant continuing disabilities, both physical and psychological.

At some stage money and some items of property were taken from the caravan in which Mr Barrett lived, giving rise to the alternative charges of break enter and steal and larceny of which the applicant was acquitted.

Mr Barrett could not identify either of his attackers and no-one was apprehended in relation to the matter until almost two years later. On 27
March 1994 the applicant approached police at Young and told them that it was he and his brother, Rodney, who had gone to Mr Barrett's property on the night in question. The effect of his account to police was that all the violence was inflicted by Rodney, who was drunk and "went off his head", and that he himself took no part in it and, indeed, attempted to dissuade his brother from it. He went on to say that he left the property on foot and that it was Rodney who took the utility.

The applicant told police that he was volunteering this information by way of vengeance against Rodney, who had recently inflicted violence on him. In a later interview he denied any knowledge of money or property being taken from the caravan.

Police interviewed Rodney Downey and it seems that he made admissions of his involvement. Both men were charged and initially were to be tried together. In the event, Rodney Downey pleaded guilty before another judge to the charge of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm, with the theft of the utility and the property from the caravan being taken into account on a Form 2, and he was sentenced to the same minimum term as the applicant, but a slightly shorter additional term. By their verdict, the jury clearly rejected the applicant's account insofar as it was exculpatory of himself, and his Honour sentenced him on the basis that his culpability could not be distinguished from that of his brother.

Subjective Case: 
The applicant is now 34 years old. He has a long record for offences of dishonesty, driving offences, and some offences of violence. He had previously served prison terms, but none for longer than six months and most of them for driving offences. He had a disturbed family background and a long standing problem with alcohol. However, he had a creditable work record until March , when he sustained a serious injury at work requiring a spinal fusion and leaving him with some permanent disability. He had been in a long standing defacto relationship with a woman who remained supportive of him and they had two little children.

His Honour had regard to all these matters in passing sentence and considered that the applicant's state of health amounted to special circumstances, warranting a departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms.

The Application: 
As observed, all that was contended before us was that the applicant was entitled to a reduction of sentence because it was the information which he supplied to police which led to the successful prosecution of his brother and himself. In his remarks on sentence the learned sentencing Judge dealt with that matter in this way: "It is perhaps suggested that you are entitled to some credit by reason of the fact that you went to the police in March of 1994 when you gave information which of course referred to the conduct of your brother and exculpated yourself. It seems to me that it is not really possible to give you any credit on that basis." 
This somewhat dismissive reference to the matter suggests that it was but lightly touched upon by counsel then appearing for the applicant (who did not appear before us). Nevertheless, the issue does arise and merits proper consideration.

The submission before us was based upon <case> of the [Crimes Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which was inserted in 1992. For present purposes it is sufficient to set out the first three sub-sections: "442B (1) In determining the sentence to be passed on a person convicted of an offence, a court may reduce the sentence it would otherwise impose, having regard to the degree to which the person has assisted, or undertaken to assist, law enforcement authorities in the prevention, detection or investigation of, or in proceedings relating to, the offence or other offences.

A court must not reduce a sentence so that the sentence becomes unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and circumstances of the offence." 
In deciding whether to reduce a sentence and the extent of any reduction, the court is required to consider the following matters: the effect of the offence for which the offender is being sentenced on the victim or victims of the offence and the family or families of the victim or victims; the significance and usefulness of the offender's assistance to the authority or authorities concerned, taking into consideration any evaluation by the authority or authorities of the assistance rendered or undertaken to be rendered; the truthfulness, completeness and reliability of any information or evidence provided by the offender; the nature and extent of the offender's assistance or promised assistance; the timeliness of the assistance or undertaking to assist; any benefits that the offender has gained or may gain by reason of the assistance or undertaking to assist; whether the offender will suffer harsher custodial conditions; any injury suffered by the offender or the offender's family, or any danger or risk of injury to the offender or the offender's family, resulting from the assistance or the undertaking to assist; whether the assistance or promised assistance concerns the offence for which the offender is being sentenced or an unrelated offence; the likelihood that the offender will commit further offences after release." 
The section restates well established common law principles enunciated in a number of decisions of this court, including R versus Perez-Vargas [(1986) 8
NSWLR 559], R versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243], and R v
Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220.] The extent to which it may have modified the common law by requiring a court to have regard to the usefulness to the authorities of the offender's assistance was considered by Hunt CJ at CL in R versus Yenice [(1994) 72 A Crim R 234] at and 239. In R versus Davies (CCA, unreported, 1 December 1995), Sully J had this to say about the section (at pp 9-10): "Section 442B appears to me to be intended to achieve two concurrent objectives. The first is to codify, at least in a broad and practical sense, the law as it stood in the wake of the decision in Cartwright. The second is to graft onto that developed common law an overriding principle which is expressed in sub-s (2) in the following terms: `A court must not reduce a sentence so that the sentence becomes unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and circumstances of the offence.'" 
No doubt the section was a response to the matters raised by Gleeson CJ in the course of his judgment in Gallagher (at 227-8): "The authorities which discuss the relevant principles demonstrate that, where an offender is entitled to have assistance to authorities taken into account in his favour, that will usually be upon a number of grounds, at least some of which may overlap with other subjective matters to be taken into account in his favour ... There is what might be called the utilitarian consideration involved in encouraging persons to provide information which will permit the apprehension and successful prosecution of other offenders. Public opinion seems to accept this as reasonable enough in a case where, for example, a middle level dealer in a drug operation provides information enabling the apprehension and prosecution of more senior persons in the organisation. The approach seems to be less readily accepted in some other circumstances, especially in cases where there is an identifiable victim of violent crime, or where imprisoned informers, sometimes of extremely doubtful reliability, are seen to be taken cynical advantage of a system which may lend itself to exploitation by the unscrupulous. ... Other considerations that enter into the matter include the remorse or contrition which may be demonstrated in a given case by co-operation with the authorities, and the more difficult time which an informer is likely to have during the period of incarceration as a result of having co-operated. Those last-mentioned matters may, depending upon the circumstances, be very difficult to separate from other considerations which might arise quite apart from the matter of assistance to the authorities." 
Sub-section 3(c) requires the court to have regard to the truthfulness and completeness of the information provided by an offender. Counsel for the applicant acknowledged that the information he supplied to police was false in significant respects, in that it exaggerated his brother's role in the episode and conveyed that he himself had played no part in it. On the other hand, counsel contended, it was true insofar as it conveyed that the brother had inflicted violence on the victim and the applicant was present at the relevant time. More importantly, it was submitted, the information was significant and useful within the meaning of sub-s 3(b) because it led to the successful prosecution of the brother and, indeed, the applicant himself (although that might not have been a consequence which he had intended).

It is not to the point, the argument continued, that the applicant's motive in disclosing what he did was born of malice towards his brother, rather than a selfless desire to enable the police to clear up an unsolved crime. Reference was made to a number of statements in the authorities to the effect that the purpose of the reduction of sentence is to encourage offenders to give information, regardless of their motive for doing so. In the passage from
Gallagher set out above, Gleeson CJ referred to "the utilitarian consideration involved in encouraging persons to provide information which will permit the apprehension and successful prosecution of other offenders."
In Cartwright (supra), Hunt and Badgery-Parker JJ said (at p 252): "It is clearly in the public interest that offenders should be encouraged to supply information to the authorities which will assist them to bring other offenders to justice, and to give evidence against those other offenders in relation to whom they have given such information.

In order to ensure that such encouragement is given, the appropriate reward for providing assistance should be granted whatever the offender's motive may have been in giving it, be it genuine remorse (or contrition) or simply self interest. What is to be encouraged is a full and frank co-operation on the part of the offender, whatever be his motive." 
In Perez-Vargas (supra), Street CJ cited the observation of Darling J in R v James & Sharman [(1913) 9 Cr App R 142], that "it is expedient ... that there should not be honour among thieves." The former Chief Justice went on to refer to the observations of Burt CJ in R v
Hayes [(1981) 3 A Crim R 286] at :
 "Informers, of course, come in all shapes and sizes and are motivated by many considerations. About such things the sentencing judge must make his own judgment. But should it appear that the information given has been of substantial assistance in the detection of crime and in the conviction of offenders and that the disclosures made have been full and frank, then when he comes to be sentenced some allowance should be made on that account." 
Counsel for the Crown accepted that an offender who assisted the authorities might be entitled to leniency, even though he or she had been motivated by self interest. However, relying also on the passages cited above, he submitted that there ought to be no reduction of sentence unless the offender's disclosures to the authorities had been "full and frank". It would be an affront to community standards, he argued, if the perpetrator of a serious criminal offence were to be rewarded by leniency in sentence for having provided false information to the police which happened to result in a successful prosecution.

The issue is one of no little difficulty. One can readily understand the pragmatic view that the provision of information to the authorities by offenders ought to be rewarded by leniency in sentence, whatever might have been the offender's motivation in providing it. On the other hand, judicial pronouncements to that effect appear to be founded upon the assumption that the information is true. How should a court deal with an offender whose disclosures have not been full and frank, but who has supplied sufficient reliable information to enable the successful investigation of a crime and prosecution of the perpetrator(s)? 
One of the matters set out in <case> which a court is required to consider "in deciding whether to reduce a sentence and the extent of any reduction" is "the truthfulness, completeness and reliability" of the information provided by the offender: sub-para (c). If that information were completely false, a court would be justified in declining the reduce the sentence at all. As Hunt and Badgery-Parker JJ observed in Cartwright (at p 253): "The information which (the offender) gives must be such as could significantly assist the authorities. The information must, of course, be true; a false disclosure attracts no discount at all." 
However, I consider there is force in the submission of counsel for the applicant that, where the information is partly true and does in fact assist the authorities, the fact that it was partly false does not of itself disentitle the offender from a reduction of sentence.

For these reasons, I have concluded that the learned sentencing Judge was in error when he decided that it was "not really possible" to give the applicant "any credit" for the information he provided to police. That conclusion does not appear to be founded upon any consideration of the matters set out in s
B and, in particular, the issue to which argument in this application has been directed. As observed, it does not appear that the matter was the subject of full argument before his Honour.

It is true that the applicant exaggerated the involvement of his brother and minimised his own, and I have no doubt that he did not realise that the effect of his disclosure would be to implicate himself. The fact remains that that information led to the successful prosecution of the applicant and his brother for a most serious episode of criminality which had remained unsolved for two years. On the face of it, this should entitle the applicant to some reduction of sentence, but whether it does and, if so, to what extent, must be determined in the light of the factors set out <case>.

By sub-para (a), regard must be had to the effect of the offences upon the victim. For this purpose the theft of his motor vehicle might be disregarded, but there can be no gainsaying the serious nature of the attack upon him and its enduring effects. I have already considered the nature and extent of the applicant's assistance to the authorities: sub-para (d), its truthfulness and completeness: sub-para (c), and its significance and usefulness: sub-para (b).
Such assistance as he provided related only to the offence for which he stood for sentence: sub-para (i), and it certainly could not be described as timely: sub-para (e). There is no suggestion that he has suffered, or will suffer, harsher custodial conditions as a result: sub-para (g).

There is no suggestion of any benefit to the applicant as a result of his assistance: sub-para (f), nor of any injury to him or his family: sub-para . From the subjective material, briefly summarised above, one could have some confidence that he would not commit further offences upon his release: sub-para (j).

These various factors point in different directions, as is commonly the case with any sentencing exercise. The principal matter weighing against the extension of leniency is the gravity of the assault, and its effect upon the unfortunate victim. On the other hand, the sentence of six years penal servitude imposed by his Honour is substantial (even allowing for the criminality involved in the theft of the motor vehicle), given that the maximum sentence prescribed for maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm is seven years. On balance, I believe that justice dictates that the applicant's assistance be reflected by a measure of leniency, but in all the circumstances
I consider that only a relatively small reduction is appropriate. Quite apart from the countervailing factors emerging from <case>, to which I have already referred, the assistance is not demonstrative of his remorse.

In my view, the minimum term should be reduced by nine months. To do so would not result in a sentence which is unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and circumstances of the offence: <case>. I agree with the learned sentencing Judge that there are special circumstances.

I would propose that leave to appeal be granted and the appeal be allowed. I would confirm the fixed term of 1 year's penal servitude on the charge of larceny of a motor vehicle. However, on the charge of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm, I would quash the sentence imposed in the District Court and substitute a sentence of penal servitude for 5 years and 3 months, comprising a minimum term of 3 years and 3 months to date from 21 November and to expire on 20 February 2000; and an additional term of 2 years to date from 21 February 2000 and to expire on 20 February 2002. The applicant would then be eligible for release on parole on 21 February 2000.
 * * * 
