

Regina versus H Souleyman [1996] NSWSC 167 (29 May 1996) 
REGINA V HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 
Tuesday 2 April 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT - (On application for a Basha type inquiry -see p 62 of the transcript.) 
HIS HONOUR: Hakki Souleyman has renewed his application for a Basha type inquiry as to the evidence of Alexander Souravia. Counsel wishes to cross-examine him. I will not repeat the brief outline in my judgment of 5 October 1995 nor the matters narrated in my judgment of 27 October 1995.

The history is as follows: the Crown as provided in ss 48AA 48A and 48B of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/), served the statement of Alexander Souravia, the deceased's son, on the accused or his solicitors. The accused did not serve the notice that he desired the attendance of Alexander Souravia at the committal proceedings. That was a deliberate decision. At page 5, lines 57 to 58, of the committal proceedings, the solicitor for the accused confirmed that Mr A Souravia had not been required to give evidence. The solicitor added: "He doesn't affect our case at all and I haven't served him to give evidence." That must have been on the basis of the instructions the solicitor held. I interpolate that there is material suggesting that the accused Souleyman knew that Zammit had killed the deceased.

At page 7 of the committal proceedings the solicitor confirmed that she did not want the son called. The solicitor was well aware that Zammit wanted the son called.

On 1 September 1995, Zammit filed a motion seeking a separate trial and Basha examinations of Louis Yagki, Edward Ronald Parry and Alexander Souravia. On 20
September 1995 that motion came on for hearing. During the hearing a draft indictment was handed up charging Zammit and Souleyman. There was considerable argument on <case> of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/).

On 20 September 1995 leave was given to Souleyman to file in court a motion returnable instanter seeking a separate trial and a Basha examination of Yagki and Parry. Counsel for Souleyman gave reasons in support of the orders sought.
Counsel stated that no Basha examination was sought in respect of the son. The
Crown did not oppose Basha examinations as to Yagki and Parry.

On 5 October 1995 I delivered judgment ordering separate trials. By 17 October the Crown had indicated that it proposed to proceed with Souleyman's trial first. On that day I stated that any decision as to a Basha examination should await the conclusion of Souleyman's trial in which the son was expected to be called. About 8 or 9 October 1995, Souleyman withdrew the retainer of his counsel and his solicitor. The solicitor who appeared for Souleyman at the committal proceedings was retained and other counsel was briefed.

On 24 October 1995 Souleyman filed a motion seeking Basha examinations of the son, Yagki and Parry and that a voir dire be held as to the admissibility of verbal admissions and a record of interview made by Souleyman on 28 April
Substantial argument was heard on 25 October 1995. The supporting affidavit alleged that the admissions and record of interview had been obtained as a result of oppressive conduct on the part of the police. This was further developed by counsel and an outline of what he said is contained in my judgment of 27 October 1995. I deferred ruling on the request for a Basha examination of the son until I had heard the challenge to the admissions.

Counsel who then appeared was unable to appear further because of a re-trial in another serious criminal matter. Counsel now appearing for Souleyman stated yesterday that there would be no challenge to the admissibility of the alleged admissions and interview. Counsel submitted that I should bear in mind the point which was being argued at the committal proceedings by Zammit, namely, that he was entitled to cross-examine Alexander Souravia as he was not a victim within <case> of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/). However, as mentioned, a study of the transcript of the committal proceedings indicates the approach taken by Souleyman.

There was a further point that the Magistrate should exercise his discretion to permit cross-examination in any event.

A Basha examination is not designed to accommodate a change in approach by an accused. There may be exceptions where there have been significant changes in the known materials.

Counsel for Souleyman submitted that Alexander Souravia was an important, if not crucial, witness and that it was important to Souleyman that he have an opportunity to test that evidence. With such serious charges a technical approach should not be taken and wider considerations should prevail. He should not be bound by his earlier approach.

Part of the current approach appears to involve the proposition that there is a reasonable doubt whether Zammit was the killer. It is necessary to say a little more about the factual matrix.

At the time of the incident giving rise to the charges of murder and armed robbery with wounding, Mr Alexander Souravia, then aged seventeen, was sitting beside his mother, now deceased, in the front seat of the car. It is the Crown case that on the vehicle stopping outside the bank Zammit leant over into the car, produced a firearm and held it very near the son. In his first statement of 27 April 1994, the son said that he felt something hit him on the left side of the head and in a natural reaction brushed the object away from his head towards the front of the car. It was then that he saw a young man leaning over into the car holding a gun in his right hand. He demanded the money. His mother resisted. The son said that the man leant across him, the man's face almost level with that of the son inside the car. The man forced the gun against the left cheekbone of his mother's face. The son thought that about this time he hit the man's arm to get it away from his mother's face. The man yelled at his mother and threatened her. It was then that the son saw the man shoot his mother. The car was full of smoke.

The son described the man as a young Australian, about mid to late twenties, thin build, pale to medium complexion, dark straight to wavy short hair. The son did not see how long it was at the back. The man had a few days growth on his face. A description of the gun used was given.

In his statement of 6 June 1994 the son spoke of viewing a police video containing photographs of a number of men. There were about twenty photographs. He identified the man in photograph eleven as the man who killed his mother. It was a photograph of Zammit. The son added that he would never forget the man's face. The son was only ten centimetres away from the man's face when the man killed his mother. The son stated that it was when the man first came to the window and put the gun to the son's face that the son saw the man best.

The viewing of the video took place in the company of Det Breton. He was cross-examined at some length at the committal proceedings on what was said and the procedure adopted before, during and after the viewing.

Lucas Van Engelen in par 6 of his statement said this about the offender: "As he was leaning into the car I saw him holding the gun in his right hand, he was pointing the gun at each person, that is to and from him." 
In par 7 this appears: "The man with the gun kept repeating himself to the two persons in the car, he was saying, 'Where's the money, where's the money?'" 
In par 9 this appears: "As he was moving with the gun from person to person he shot the woman into the side of her head and then he ran off." 
The son's second statement details that he attended at Flemington police station with his family and spoke with Det Sgt Gilbert and Det Senior Const
Wylie and that he went with Det Breton to another room containing a television set and a video recorder. He says that he had a conversation with Det Breton and then watched that video several times. He watched the video and recognised one face. He watched the video again and saw this face again. It was the picture marked number 11. This was the killer. The son went through the video once more to check the number in the left hand corner of the screen. He confirmed his earlier identification.

More details are given in Det Breton's evidence. The detective said that he told the son that he was going to show him a video tape of photos of a number of men. The son should look very carefully at the video tape and the person who committed the crime against his mother may or may not be in the tape. The son was to take his time. The tape would be shown several times. The detective told the son not to say anything the first time but watch all the photos. On the second time the son should indicate by saying something if he saw the person who shot his mother. The tape would be shown a third time and he could make his comments if he saw the person who shot his mother.

I have referred briefly to some of the details to indicate that there is already much material available in considerable detail to the accused. I turn briefly to the authorities.

In Moss v. Brown [(1979) 1 NSWLR 114], the Court of Appeal held that the mere fact that an accused has not had an opportunity to test material by cross-examination at an inquiry does not render its use at a trial unfair.

These matters were further discussed in Barron v. Attorney-General [(1987) 10 NSWLR 215.] 
From R v. Basha 39 A Crim R 337 at 341 it appears that if the prosecution does not call a witness at the committal proceedings the prejudice may be cured by the Crown furnishing full statements.

In R v. Palmer [64 A Crim R 1] the complainant did not give evidence at the committal and her statement was not tendered. The accused and his counsel had had the statement for some weeks before the trial. It was not suggested that any of the evidence of the complainant came as a surprise nor that it was otherwise than in accordance with her statement. The court held that there was no unfairness or risk of miscarriage resulting from the Judge's refusal by way of discretion to allow a pre-trial examination.

In R v.Sandford [(1994) 33 NSWLR 172] at 181
Hunt CJ at CL reaffirmed his belief in the value of a pre-trial inquiry where a witness has not been called by the Crown at the committal to enable the witness to be cross-examined. His Honour emphasised that that was subject to important qualifications, including that the accused has demonstrated in advance the particular issue to be pursued, that there is at least a serious risk of an unfair trial if the accused is not given the opportunity to do what would otherwise have been done at the committal and the procedure is not used inappropriately to try out risky questions. He also held that the onus lies upon the accused in such cases to demonstrate that the prejudice he would suffer would render the trial unfair. The other members of the Court of
Criminal Appeal agreed.

In all the circumstances it would not be unfair to refuse a Basha examination.
There is no serious risk of an unfair trial if Souleyman is not given the opportunity to conduct a Basha examination of Alexander Souravia. I have concluded that a Basha examination as to Alexander Souravia should not be held. I have found it unnecessary to consider the Crown's submission that
Alexander Souravia was a victim. The Crown put the further submission that even assuming Alexander Souravia was not a victim it was undesirable that the
Crown should lay, or have to lay, additional charges arising out of the same incident naming him as a victim. I have not taken this matter into account in exercising my discretion as I doubt whether it is correct to do so.

REGINA versus HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 
MONDAY 6 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J (And a Jury of 12) 
JUDGMENT (On admissibility of evidence see p 860 of transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: Objection has been taken to evidence being adduced from Brett William Hedley along the lines of that contained in paragraphs 3 and 4 on p 2 of his statement of 11 May 1994. The evidence given by Mr Hedley at the committal hearing, while generally along the lines of his statement, is not quite in the same terms.

The objection as to paragraph 4 is to Mr Souleyman saying, "I should get someone to knock me on the head when I've got the takings". That was further elaborated in the committal proceedings, and it appears that it took place approximately four to six months before Mr Hedley left the Soravia employment on the 28th of February 1994.

Even if the best position is taken for the Crown, it occurred some 6 months, in practical terms, before the killing on 26 April 1994.

In his evidence at the committal proceedings Mr Hedley confirmed that statements were made along those lines. That appears from pages 16 to 17 of the depositions of 19 January 1995.

Mr Greenwood, for Mr Souleyman, submitted that there was a great danger of this evidence being misused and further that it had either no probative value or minimal probative value. He submitted that it was the sort of remark which may be made without a serious intent to implement it. He described it as a wild statement.

As to paragraph 3 Mr Greenwood distinguished between statements complaining about being ripped off by Mr Soravia and a statement that he was going to get
Mr Soravia one day. Mr Hedley, in his statement, said that he regarded it as "mouthing off". The Crown relies on all the material in paragraphs 3 and 4 on p 2 of the statement as indicating an attitude on the part of Mr Souleyman towards Mr Soravia and his employment. It is submitted on behalf of the Crown that the statements were not too remote in point of time and that all the statements taken together were capable of indicating the degree of resentment being harboured by Mr Souleyman.

On the Crown's approach, it would not be appropriate to separate out the various statements. This is because of the manner in which they seek to use them. It was put by the Crown that the probative value was quite strong. The
Crown also wishes to rely on the material to indicate that while Mr Souleyman may have appeared to be a friendly likable chap, there was another side.

In my opinion, the statements attributed, comprising complaints and actions proposed, are capable of indicating the degree of resentment of Mr Souleyman.
Alternatively, view could be taken that they were 'blowing off steam', or 'mouthing off', to use colloquial speech. It would be for the jury to decide whether they indicate a deep resentment gradually building up over a period of time which finally resulted in action, or were merely 'blowing off steam' in extravagant terms, bearing in mind that exaggerated language is often used in conversations.

Most people in the community have been in employment, had relations with employers and will recall times when they have 'blown off steam' about their employer. There is no danger of the jury misusing any of the material and depending on the view which the jury takes, the probative value may be either substantial or minimal. The two alternatives can certainly be put to the jury for decision.

I understood that the Crown did not propose to press the material in paragraph on p 2 of the statement. It is important, in view of the way the evidence emerged at the committal proceedings, that Mr Hedley be permitted to recall the matters with as little leading as possible.

REGINA v. HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 
TWENTYFIRST DAY: THURSDAY 9 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J (And a Jury of 12) 
JUDGMENT (On the Crown Prosecutor's application to cross-examine Tunger Souleyman.
See pg 1020 of transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: Late yesterday Mr Crown applied for leave to cross-examine the witness Tunger Souleyman, pursuant to [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). In support of his application, Mr Crown tendered the statement of Tunger Souleyman made on 30 April 1994.

In reply, Mr Greenwood placed before me the evidence given by Tunger Souleyman at the committal proceedings. He drew attention particularly to the circumstances under which Mr Tunger Souleyman claimed that the interview with his brother took place. In the course of his evidence Mr Tunger Souleyman said that he did not read the statement he made to the police on 30 April 1994.

The Crown submitted that leave should be given under [s.38(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) because evidence had been given by the witness that is unfavourable to the
Crown and under (1)(c), which provides for cross-examination, subject to the
Court's leave, where the witness has at any time made a prior inconsistent statement.

The Crown identified these passages in the statement of Tunger Souleyman on which it was to cross-examine. In par 3 the words, "I am aware that Hakki sees
Steve Anas once or twice a week." In par 5 the words, "He's been putting the pressure on me saying things like, 'We'll do the service station job.' all the time. Steve was saying, 'its all organised, all planned Hak's. You've got nothing to worry about. Just tell us what time they do the banking.'" Later, "Steve came into the service station one day and showed me the gun." 
The Crown's submission is that when par 5 is read as a whole, it is a reasonable inference, to put it at its lowest, that what was being talked about was a robbery of the service station at which Hakki Souleyman worked.

In par 6 the Crown wishes to cross-examine upon the statements, "Is the gun supposed to be loaded? I don't know." And, "Steve was putting it on Hakki
Souleyman for a long time and Hakki Souleyman had nothing to worry about. They were not supposed to shoot the people, just take the money, just to scare them and all Steve wanted was the time when they go to the bank. That's all they wanted from me.".

In par 7 the words, "Steve called me on Tuesday morning at home, just to make sure what time they go to the bank." And the words, "Steve then called me at night at work and said, 'What's going on, a lady got shot?'. I said, "I don't know. You should know." 
The essence of the Crown's submissions is that in a number of respects including those that I have mentioned, Mr Tunger Souleyman has not come up to the statement which he made on 30 April. It is apparent from Mr Tunger
Souleyman's evidence, that he has recounted in substance, some parts of the contents of the statement which he made on 30 April. These were for example, matters like showing the gun, and Steve planning a robbery. There were other matters. I do not purport to be exhaustive; the matters appear particularly at transcript 1014 lines 15 to 17, line 21, lines 39 to 40 and lines 47 to 48.

Ultimately, what the Crown seeks to get as a result of its cross-examination, is whether the accused made the statements that pressure was applied, that information was sought as to the time they banked, that there were references to a service station robbery and in the context of the service station in which Hakki Souleyman was working. The Crown also seeks the terms of the conversation on the morning of 26 April, including time of banking and the terms of the conversation on the evening of 26 April as outlined in the statement of Tunger Souleyman.

Mr Greenwood made these submissions. (1) That the test in [s.38(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of "unfavourable" had not been met; (2) That there was no inconsistency, and
That the conditions surrounding the making of the statement at the cells at the Burwood Court were such as to make its use unfair.

He submitted that the police prevailed upon Tunger Souleyman to endeavour to elicit from his brother, the accused, circumstances and material which would implicate Steve Anas, in whom the police were particularly interested. The brother stated at the committal that the police indicated that it would help the accused if he helped the police by supplying information about Anas' role and that the accused's release, whether on bail or generally, would be much facilitated by the supply of information in relation to Anas. Mr Greenwood also pointed out, that from the committal depositions it appeared that both
Tunger and the accused, were in a confused and distressed state and in no position to make sensible judgments.

Mr Greenwood's submissions ultimately came to this, that the police held out improper inducements, particularly in relation to his release to the accused via his brother, intending the brother to relay what they had said. Mr
Greenwood submitted that in those circumstances the Court should not exercise its discretion under [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Mr Crown indicted that the police would refute that the matter was put in the way that appears from the depositions of Mr Tunger Souleyman at the committal proceedings.

It is useful to indicate my view as to the meaning of "unfavourable" in [s.38(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) was enacted after a thorough review of the law by the Australian Law Reform
Commission. The Act does not define what "unfavourable" means. In the
Macquarie Dictionary unfavourable is defined as meaning "not favourable, not propitious, disadvantageous, adverse." It is a word of variable meaning.

The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary defines "unfavourable" as (1) not favourable in various senses, (2) ill-favoured, unprepossessing, rare." More help is obtained from the Macquarie Dictionary.

Shortly after s.22 of the UK Common Law Procedure Act 1854 was enacted, a question arose as to the meaning of the word "adverse". The section required the judge to form an opinion that the witness was adverse before an attempt to contradict or prove that he had made inconsistent statements could be made. In
Greenough versus Eccles <case>; [(1859) 5 C.B.N.S. 786] at 803-804 Williams J had to consider whether the word "adverse" meant hostile or unfavourable.

In the context of that section, the meaning of "hostile' was preferred. It appears from various editions of Archbold that s.22 of the 1854 Act was re- enacted in s.3 of the Criminal Procedure Act 1865. Archbold notes that the word "adverse" in the section means "hostile", and not merely "unfavourable".

When the word "unfavourable" was used in s.38 the draftsman probably had as a background the history of the English legislation and selected the alternate word of "unfavourable" used by Williams J in Greenough versus Eccles.

The word "unfavourable" in s.38(1)(a) does not mean "adverse". It means "not favourable". That construction could have wide ranging ramifications but the
Court is given a discretion and would carefully examine the circumstances to see how the discretion should be exercised. A far fetched example, would be, if a witness said he could not remember something that happened three years ago. The discretion is important and designed to prevent any form of abuse in the administration of the more liberal test of "unfavourable".

The Law Reform Commission, noted that the previous rule had excluded a lot of useful testimony. Where, as here, there is a prior statement and the witness in significant respects does not come up to that statement, his evidence is "not favourable" in that respect. The question of discretion then arises.

There are, in this particular case some instances of inconsistency. That applies to the awareness of Hakki's association with Anas and also that part of paragraph 5 of the statement as to the service station.

Before I grant leave to cross-examine, some further questions should be put to
Mr Tunger Souleyman. In their discussions did Hakki Souleyman refer to a service station? Did Steve Anas refer to a service station? 
I think that can be covered by asking whether there was mention of the type of premises at which the robbery was to take place. For example, a bank, a TAB, a service station and perhaps one or two others by way of illustration.

There is the further question whether anything was said about banking during the conversations.

The Crown at T 1018 sought to elicit the contents of the telephone call on the morning of the 26th of April and the Crown seeks to cross-examine on it. Mr
Tunger Souleyman's attention should also be specifically directed to the conversation on the evening of 26 April 1994.

There remains the last matter of the conditions surrounding the making of the statement. As at present advised bearing in mind what has already been elicited in evidence in the trial I would have some reservations about this matter, but, I don't think I should rule on it finally until I have heard evidence on the voir dire, if that be desired, from Mr Tunger Souleyman and the police officers involved.
 
REGINA V HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 
THURSDAY 9 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL LAW DIVISION 
SMART J (And a Jury of 12) 
JUDGMENT 
On application by the Crown to cross-examine Tunger Souleyman. See page 1029.

HIS HONOUR: Subsequent to my earlier judgment, Mr Greenwood developed submissions based on both [ss.90](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s90.html) and [192](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s192.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) on the ground of unfairness.

He emphasised that what was important was unfairness to the accused, and that is correct.

I took the view as indicated during argument that on the present materials I could not reach a conclusion that it would be unfair to the accused to grant the Crown leave to cross-examine Tunger Souleyman and that if the matter was to be taken further, evidence would have to be given on the matter by the police, Tunger Souleyman and possibly the accused.

Further, a good deal of Mr Tunger Souleyman's evidence had already been led.
The Crown was seeking to do was to place the evidence in the context of what had earlier been said in the statement so as to present a full picture.

I omitted earlier to mention that I had not overlooked the notice provision in [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). I did not regard the absence of notice in the circumstances as a reason for refusing leave.

One had to see how matters developed when the witness gave evidence in this
Court.

Subject to Mr Crown taking the matter further, as earlier mentioned, in those limited aspects, I grant leave to cross-examine.

REGINA versus HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 
TWENTY-THIRD DAY: MONDAY 13 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT (On the application by the Accused to the exclude the evidence of Mr A at the trial. See pg 1078 of the transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: Application has been made by the accused to exclude the evidence of Mr A at the trial. This is the pseudonym by which he is by order of the Court known.

Reliance was primarily placed on [s.137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) which provides that in a criminal proceeding the Court must refuse to admit evidence adduced by the Prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused. Reliance was also placed on [s.135.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) 
Mr A and the accused were inmates at Long Bay Gaol. At one stage they worked together in the visiting section and shared a cell. They spent much of the day in each other's company. According to Mr A, the accused got the job helping Mr
A as a result of Mr A's recommendation.

The accused has been described by a senior prison officer as a worrier and a man who gets upset. According to Mr A the accused seemed upset. The accused was worried about his family and that the Soravia family for whom he worked might do something to his family, because of what had happened to his boss. Mr
A said that the accused stated that before the job he had met with David
Zammit and Steve Anas and supplied details about the job. A man called Julio 'or something' was there. Mr A asserted that the accused stated that he knew for sure that David Zammit shot his boss and that Steve Anas was driving and had hated what had happened to his boss.

Mr A said that the accused did not say how much he had got but explained that he had done it because he needed the money. He was behind on his car and house payments and was not being paid enough by his boss. On Mr A telling the accused he should tell the police, he replied that if he told the police he would go down himself. Mr A said that individual conversations blended into each other and that there would have been at least a dozen conversations.

Mr A said that the accused would see Zammit at a visit and the subject would come up again. Mr A said that the accused stated that he was not supposed to know Zammit. Mr A said that on a number of occasions the accused and Zammit talked to each other after Zammit finished his visit. Mr A said that the accused wanted to subpoena Mr A to say that he was the person who pointed out
Zammit to the accused.

Mr A said that on one occasion after the accused had been visited by his family he was pretty upset and said that it was all his fault and that his boss would have been alive if it hadn't been for him.

According to Mr A, the accused became concerned about all that he had told Mr
A and that Mr A would become a prosecution witness and give evidence against the accused. Mr A said that the accused put it around the gaol that Mr A was a dog and had given up some of the inmates. Mr A was worried that the accused was trying to have Mr A injured, or dealt with.

Mr A related that he and the accused had a meeting with a senior prison officer in which the accused told the officer of his belief that because of what he had told Mr A, he was going to go Crown against the accused.

In cross-examination Mr A stated that he spoke to one more senior officer about the matter on his rounds and he asked another more senior officer to contact the police. Mr A stated that he had in fact stated to the accused and others, that he was not going to go Crown when he had resolved to do so.

Mr A stated that he had made some brief notes of his conversations, later condensed them and destroyed the original notes. He thought that he had probably destroyed the condensed notes. He could not afford to be found with them. There is little privacy and much petty thieving in gaol.

As to his motives, Mr A said that he regarded what had happened as pretty shocking and that it was about time he did something good. He also stated that he had some outstanding matters at Court. He realised that if he did assist the police he might be dealt with leniently.

Mr A had a poor record. For example he was dealt with by Nader ADCJ on 2
December 1993 and sentenced to a minimum term of three and a half years and an additional term of four months. There were 23 offences covering the period 4
April 1990 to 12 November 1992. They included stealing motor vehicles, possession of implements, break enter and steal, dishonestly obtaining cash benefits by deception and making a false instrument. There was sustained dishonesty.

On 4 September 1995 Mr A was dealt with by Judge Blanch on four charges of larceny of a motor vehicle, (3 August 1989 to 20 July 1991), receiving (19
February 1992), attempt break enter and steal (31 March 1992) and escape lawful custody. His Honour imposed the same terms of imprisonment as Nader
ADCJ and directed that the sentences be served concurrently. The credibility of any person with a record such as this is likely to be suspect.

The senior prison officer gave evidence of a conversation in February 1995 he had with Mr A and the accused. Both were agitated with each other. The accused said that Mr A was going Crown against him. The accused stated that everyone was saying so. The officer asked the accused why he thought Mr A was going
Crown against him and he replied in words to the effect, that it was because of what he had told Mr A. The officer agreed that it could have been "because of what Mr A said that the accused had told him". The officer thought that after the meeting Mr A and the accused continued to share the same cell.

Over objection from the Crown, Counsel led evidence from Dr Y. Lucire, a psychiatrist at the gaol, who treated Mr A in the prison hospital between 14
December 1992 and late January 1993. She probably last saw Mr A about the end of February 1993. She estimated that she had seen him between six and twelve times. She said that he suffered from severe dependant personality disorder.
She believed that he was not capable of telling the truth and that he embellished and distorted every communication. She did not think that he was likely to have changed. She described Mr A as dependant and histrionic and prone to pathological lying. She thought that he would cling to anyone who promised him anything. He also clung to his mother. He had made up his mind to be an informer. Dr Lucire was concerned about this.

The traits to which Dr Lucire referred did not seem to emerge in the nearly three hours which he spent in the witness box before me. I am conscious that I saw him for a comparatively short period and that Dr Lucire saw him over an extended period albeit when he was apparently somewhat ill.

The history recorded and accepted by Nader ADCJ indicates that Mr A has been subject to some extraordinary and brutal experiences. Some of the history came from his father's treating psychiatrist and some from his mother. There was a pre-sentence report. There were also other matters of an exceptional nature referred to by Nader ADCJ.

Counsel for the accused emphasized, correctly, that the evidence of Mr A was very important, in that it was the only evidence capable of linking the accused directly with Zammit. Counsel reminded the Court of [s.165(1)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) and the observations of Deane J in Politt versus The Queen [174 CLR 558-586] that the evidence of a police informant of a confession by a defendant was likely to be unreliable. The reasons for unreliability given by Deane J included the risk of concoction, the absence of corroboration of any denial by the accused, the bad character of the informant and the likelihood of his personal benefit.
These require careful consideration. To this counsel for the accused added that this informant sufferered from the severe dependant personality disorder earlier mentioned.

Mr A is of bad character and he did hope to receive a benefit. There is a risk of concoction and there was no-one else present during the various conversations. I have to look at Mr A in late 1994, when he decided in his mind that he would become an informant. By that stage it was nearly a year since he had been dealt with on the bulk of the charges and about 21 months since he had been under Dr Lucire's care. He still had a number of outstanding charges, some of which were relatively old.

I also have to look at him in about late February 1995, when he spoke to the police and when he made his statement to the police in April 1995.

I come forward to April/May 1996. As a result of the proceedings before Judge
Blanch in September 1995, Mr A now knows and knew in April 1996, that his assistance made relatively little difference to the sentence which he received. He has not eased off but on being pressed has supplied further detail, as earlier mentioned.

For some months the accused and Mr A worked together and shared a cell. Given that the accused was a worrier and became upset and Mr A recommended the accused for the job, it was natural for the accused to talk to Mr A.

The accused seems to have been dismayed at what ultimately happened to Mrs
Soravia on 26 April 1994. The accused became concerned that Mr A would give evidence against him. The accused communicated that to the prison officer. It is a reasonable inference that this was because of what the accused had said to Mr A.

Viewed objectively and having regard to the personal danger he would face, it is not easy to envisage Mr A stating that the accused made incriminating comments and repeating them. At the February interview the accused would have needed reassurance. Zammit did have visits and there was opportunity for the accused and Zammit to meet and speak. They were facing closely related charges.

While the Jury will have to be warned about Mr A's evidence, there are reasonable grounds on which it could be accepted. Its probative value is not outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused. I have reached this conclusion on the basis that Dr Lucire's evidence is admissible. I have therefore found it unnecessary to rule and discuss at length its admissibility.

REGINA versus HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 
WEDNESDAY 15 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J (And a Jury of 12) 
JUDGMENT (On application to discharge the jury) 
HIS HONOUR: The accused has applied for a discharge of the jury upon the ground that through no fault of his, his case has been conducted by his counsel in a very material particular on an erroneous assumption of fact. That assumption of fact was that there was no council cleanup in the Kensington area which includes Todman Avenue in the week commencing 26 April 1994. The 26 April 1994 is a Tuesday and it was put that way because the previous day was Anzac Day and a public holiday.

Martin Sanchez commenced his evidence-in-chief on Friday 19 April 1996 and it appeared from that evidence that he was relying on there being a council cleanup on 26 April 1994 or perhaps more accurately, that he was assisting
Maria Kieley in what he believed to be was a council cleanup. This was one reason why he could not be involved in the murder of Toula Soravia. He detailed the time at which he rose, the time at which he left the tint shop, driving to Maria's place, running out of petrol on the way, filling up, arriving at Maria Kieley's home at Todman Avenue and breakfasting at
McDonald's. He spoke of being recalled to the tint shop by Quinteros, with the van, a telephone call by Maria to Quinteros, her coming to the tint shop in her car and leaving it there, the taking of the van, their removal of the rubbish from the Todman Avenue flat and from the Rainbow Street garage (including whitegoods from the latter) and depositing some clothes in a St
Vincent De Paul bin and returning to the tint shop.

As a result of the evidence that was given, counsel caused inquiries to be made by his clerk of the Randwick Council. The clerk made three telephone conversations on the morning of Monday 22 April 1996. On two occasions she spoke to a gentleman who is now the Acting Supervisor of the Cleansing
Department. On the other occasion she spoke to another man, whose name she does not know. The effect of the information which was communicated to her was that there was no cleanup in Todman Avenue on Tuesday 26 April, 1994, the officer believing that the last cleanup in the Kensington area was about 19
April 1994. There was a council clean up in the La Perouse area on 26 April .

As a result of that information counsel for the accused cross-examined Sanchez on the basis that there was no cleanup on 26 April 1994, that any cleanup had occurred a week earlier and that Sanchez had transposed the dates. Sanchez did not agree with that proposition. The managing clerk from the accused's instructing solicitor contacted the Acting Supervisor on 26 April 1996 confirming, again, that the council cleanup on 26 April 1994 was at La
Perouse. Subsequently, arrangements were made to serve a subpoena and a subpoena was served. The Acting Supervisor of the Cleansing Department has explained his understanding of events. While he did not remember the name of the first clerk, he did remember the name of the managing clerk and he remembered, more importantly, the substance of what was said. The Acting
Supervisor confirmed that he did state that there was no cleanup in the
Kensington area including Todman Avenue on 26 April 1994. He explained that he did not have the map for the previous days but the map he had showed that the cleanup on 26 April 1994 was at La Perouse. It was unusual, in his opinion, for there to be a cleanup in more than one area on the same day and he drew the inference, from the map he had, that there was no cleanup in the
Kensington area on 26 April 1994. Further searches were made of the council records and an earlier map, albeit somewhat tattered, was discovered. That revealed that there was a cleanup in a small section of the La Perouse area on April and in the Kensington area, including Todman Avenue, on that day.
Thus it has been explained how incorrect information came to be conveyed.

I do not doubt that the Acting Supervisor did his best and was trying to be helpful. He was frank as to the information he had communicated and the basis on which he had communicated it.

I also received evidence from Mr Schilt, who was the Assistant Manager Health
Services. It is not necessary to state the effect of his evidence. It seems to have been under his direction that the earlier tattered map was found. It was probably on a wall somewhere in the office. The maps show various sections of the Randwick municipality and the dates on which cleanups took place.

No one is able to say in what order or at what times the rubbish was removed in the various streets of Kensington. There was evidence from the Acting
Supervisor that the council truck moves through the area and on the fourth or last day of the clean up in the selected area goes back over the area to pick up any rubbish that might have been missed or put out late.

Mr Schilt spoke of people telephoning the council in relation to rubbish that had not been removed and the truck collecting it.

I am satisfied that reasonable inquiries were made on 22 April 1996, there being some three telephone calls, and that reasonable prudence was exercised.
I am further satisfied that it was appropriate for counsel, having caused those inquiries to be made, and in effect verified by further telephone calls, to cross-examine upon the information which had been received.

In the course of the conduct of a trial counsel not only relies upon instructions from his client but also upon information obtained from third parties, and that is especially so when the information appears to come from a reputable and responsible source. I accept in this case that the information did come from a reputable and responsible source, but human error can still intrude.

Counsel submitted that Mr Souleyman had been placed in an invidious, if not an impossible, situation. Counsel was concerned, in a case where there was going to be a great deal of argument and considerable time spent in address, that the jury might look at what he said and what was put on behalf of the accused with less than complete neutrality, in view of what had happened. I indicated during argument that I was prepared to tell the jury how counsel operated and that what had been done was appropriate and to explain to the jury that counsel has to act by having inquiries made and acting on the information which he receives and that neither counsel nor the accused can be held responsible for a mistake made by an apparently reputable and responsible source.

I feel confident that that problem can be overcome. The Crown in submissions accepted, in substance, the findings that I have outlined and the bona fides of what was done and, indeed, made the further point that counsel for the accused's standing would be enhanced by the expeditious way in which the matter was investigated and corrected. I think that this is so.

The major concern of counsel for the accused was that he had constructed his cross-examination of Sanchez around a fulcrum. That fulcrum was that there was no cleanup on 26 April 1994 in the Kensington area. Counsel thought that he was on very strong ground on that point. It also has an overflow effect in relation to both Quinteros and Kiely. Overnight I have revisited the evidence of Sanchez, Kiely and Quinteros. The absence of a cleanup on 26 April 1994 was an important point, but many other matters were covered in cross examination.
There were other areas in which a substantial attack was made on the witnesses' credibility. Sanchez and Quinteros, were put to the test and the inference was that their evidence was at the least unsatisfactory, if not incredible, or difficult to believe. Amongst other things, Quinteros had a heroin habit, Sanchez smoked marijuana and both followed an unusual lifestyle.

Counsel for the accused stressed that the important question was whether the accused could still receive a fair trial and that questions of expense and inconvenience were of secondary importance. I think that the correct approach is to take the view that the fundamental question is whether the accused can still receive a fair trial, but I do not leave out of account the interests of the community and the fact that there has been a long trial with a great many witnesses being called.

While it is natural for counsel to feel acutely a forensic mishap, it is my view that cases such as the present are decided on the substantive merits, and not on forensic advantages and mishaps. I will encourage the jury to concentrate on the substance of the case.

I have come to the view that the accused can still have a fair trial. I am prepared to allow counsel for the accused to recall or to have recalled
Quinteros, Sanchez and Kiely for further cross-examination, if required.

I am prepared to explain the matter to the jury, and I hand down an explanation which I would be prepared to give to the jury. I am not wedded to this. I realise that counsel for the accused may wish to explain the matter himself and that he may wish evidence to be called. The explanation is in the nature of a preliminary draft and there is one copy for each counsel.

It follows that I refuse the application to discharge the jury.

REGINA versus HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 - 
THIRTY-FIRST DAY: THURSDAY 23 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J (And a Jury of 12) 
JUDGMENT (On Mr Greenwood seeking to tender MFI39 under [s.65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) see Pg 1546 of transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: Shortly before the luncheon adjournment Mr Greenwood sought to tender a record of interview between Det Snr Const Simpson and Steve Anas at the Newtown Police Station on Friday, 29 April 1994. Det Sgt Gilbert was also present at that interview.

The tender was made under [s.65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) of the is not [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) provides: "(1) This section applies in a criminal proceeding if a person who made a previous representation available to give evidence about an asserted fact.

The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous representation that is given by a person who saw heard or otherwise perceived the representation being made if the representation was: ...
 against the interests of the person who made it at the time it was made." [S65(7)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) provides: "Without limiting ss(2)(d) a representation is taken for the purposes of that subsection to be against the interests of the person who made it if it tends, to damage the person's reputation, or to show that the person has committed an offence for which the person has not been convicted, or to show that the person is liable in an action for damages." 
It was not suggested that subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of ss(2) were relevant.

There is an important question of approach. The section does not seek to make documents or general discussion as a whole admissible. Rather it focuses on a previous representation. Of course, there may be one or more representations.
What has to be looked at in the present context, is the particular representations which can be said to be against the interests of Mr Anas.

While it is not a complete analogy, it will be recalled that under the business records provisions of the earlier [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), the authorities pointed out that what one was looking at was a particular statement in a document and that the document as a whole was not necessarily admissible. The strict administration of the section was often not insisted upon.

I have to go through the terms of the 368 questions and answers and determine whether particular statements are against interest or not. It is not permissible to take a global approach. The section does not render admissible material which is irrelevant, or of a general nature, or which is favourable to the person making it. What it makes admissible are representations which are against interest.

In the hour which I have had to read through the lengthy interview, I can only give some general indications and there may be particular questions and answers to which specific attention will subsequently be directed. I take the view for example, that questions and answers 42 to 49, 58 to 61 are admissible as being against interest, because they place Anas at the workshop of
Quinteros.

Question and answer 68 is not against interest but exculpatory. Questions and answers 75 to 79 are capable of being against interest, as are questions and answers 90 to 98. There is then a great mass of material from question and answer 99, which with one exception, would not seem to me to be admissible.
The exception is in relation to those questions and answers that relate to drug offences or the commission of drug offences, for which Anas has not been convicted: see [s.65(7)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) 
As particular attention was not directed to this in argument, that is a matter that may need to be further canvassed by Counsel and I appreciate that they have not had a full opportunity to look at the matter in that light. Questions to 197 are capable of being against interest as are questions 207, 208, , 217, 219 to 227, 247, 256, and 282 and 283. In broad terms I do not think that Anas' denials in relation to firearms and the commission of the offence are admissible under the section. They are not representations against interest.

I reject the tender of the record of interview as a whole but I give leave to
Counsel to raise any particular representation which they might seek to adduce as being a representation against interest.

REGINA versus HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 
FRIDAY 24 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Yesterday when debate took place about the admissibility of the record of interview on 29 April 1994 between Detective Simpson and Anas, attention was directed to [s.65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) (1), (2)(d) and (7) of the [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). 
Counsel for the accused was anxious to rely on the answers of Mr Anas as evidence of the truth of the facts asserted in those answers.

In giving judgment I indicated why I thought some answers were admissible and some were not. I was prepared to admit answers on relevant matters which were against the interests of Anas. Consequent upon that ruling counsel for the accused then sought the admission of the record of interview as evidence of what was stated as distinct from evidence of the truth of the facts therein stated.

I have, overnight, revisited the terms of [s.65.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html)
It was wrong to have concentrated on [s.65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) (d) and (7). As it was a tender by the accused, attention should have been focussed on [s.65(8).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) 
The statutory provisions include: "59(1) Evidence of a previous representation made by a person is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact that the person intended to assert by the representation" 
This is subject to a number of exceptions.
 [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s62.html) and (2) provide: "(1) A reference in this Division (other than in subsection (2)) to a previous representation is a reference to a previous representation that was made by a person who had personal knowledge of an asserted fact.

A person has personal knowledge of the asserted fact if his or her knowledge of the fact was, or might reasonably be supposed to have been, based on something that the person saw, heard or otherwise perceived, other than a previous representation made by another person about the fact." 
Anas would have personal knowledge of most of the facts in the record of interview. [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) and (8) provide: "(1) This section applies in a criminal proceeding if a person who made a previous representation is not available to give evidence about an asserted fact.

The hearsay rule does not apply to: oral evidence of a previous representation adduced by a defendant if the evidence is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being made, or a document tendered as evidence by a defendant so far as it contains a previous representation, or another representation to which it is reasonably necessary to refer in order to understand the representation." [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) excludes the operation of the hearsay rule and thereby renders admissible within the limits there specified what would normally be caught by the hearsay rule.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) (2) applies to the tender by the Crown of hearsay evidence whereas [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) (8) applies to the tender of hearsay evidence by the defendant. The conditions for the tender in relation to an accused are less onerous than those that apply to the Crown and the defendant is not subjected to provisions such as [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s90.html) The reason for the legislative differences is explained in the Australian Law
Reform Commission proposal:- "As to evidence called by the accused, he is not required to satisfy the conditions which the prosecution must satisfy. This reflects the propositions contained above in the discussion of the principles that should guide the formulation of the proposal. The distinction is warranted primarily by the concern to minimise the conviction of the innocent. The proposal would enable the exonerating statements of the alleged victim to be received, the confessions of third parties and statements of deceased persons who could have given evidence." 
There is handy explanation of how [s.65(8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) and [65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html)(9) operate at p.47 in the paper of Mr J D Heydon: [Section (8)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) permits oral evidence of a previous representation to be adduced by a defendant if the evidence is given by a person who heard, saw or otherwise perceived the representation being made. [Section (8)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) permits documentary evidence of the previous representation, and of another representation to which it is reasonably necessary to refer in order to understand the representation. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s67.html) notice requirements apply to [s.65(8).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html)
Though [s.65(8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) gives the defence an opportunity to tender hearsay not open to the prosecution, once that opportunity is taken, the prosecution is afforded by [s.65(9)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) a facility for investigating and meeting the evidence. [Section (9)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) provides that if evidence of a previous representation about a matter has been adduced by a defendant and admitted, evidence of another representation about the matter may be admitted on the tender of another party provided it is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the other representation being made. See ALRC 26, para 692, Bill clause 59(5)-(6); ALRC 38 para 143(d),
Bill clause 58(5)-(6).

The phrase "previous representation" is explained in the dictionary to the
Act.

It was not in issue that Mr Anas was in Greece and is not available. At previous mentions of this matter late last year it was revealed that the Greek
Government would not allow him to be extradited.

Much of the material in the record of interview is admissible under <case> (8), upon the tender by the defendant. The definition of 'document' in the dictionary would embrace the videotape. It is a very wide definition. I adhere to the view that I earlier expressed, that is, only particular representations are admissible. If a strict view is taken the record of interview may require some deletions.

The matters in the record of interview which seem to be admissible are the introduction lines 1-4, question and answer 5, questions and answers 7-18, 24, , 29-102, 104, 126-130, 147, 148 and 151-153.

I have some doubt about questions 154-177. It would seem that 178-196 are admissible, also 200, 201, 206-228, 233-236, 244-320 and 345-348.

It may be that some of the ones that I have not talked about were technically admissible but are of such a formal nature that they do not matter much. I invite counsel to consider what I have said. I am more than happy to hear from counsel as to particular questions and answers.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: What I would like to do is have a look at what your Honour has set out and then consider my position and just see what is in those areas that your Honour has not said were admissible and I may well withdraw my objection to the tender, so that it does not present the interview in a false manner.
 (Short adjournment for counsel to consider the position) 
REGINA versus HAKKI SOULEYMAN /95 
WEDNESDAY 29 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT (On Mr Greenwood's application for a verdict by direction. See Pg 1623 of the transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: Application has been made on behalf of the accused for a verdict by direction, or alternatively, for a direction to the jury that they would be entitled to acquit at the close of the Crown case. It was submitted that the jury could not convict, without accepting the evidence of Mr A, and that the quality of his evidence was such that a jury could not safely act upon it.

I do not agree that the jury could not convict without accepting the evidence of A. So far as the evidence of A was concerned, I do not think that his evidence, as given in this trial, lacked credibility to the extent that a jury could not safely act upon it. Whether in fact a jury does act upon it is another matter.

As I understand the law, it is not for a judge at first instance to direct a verdict on the basis that any verdict would be unsafe or unsatisfactory. If there is evidence to go to the jury that could be accepted, then the judge should let it go to the jury. That of course does not inhibit a Court of
Criminal Appeal on a subsequent review. I decline to grant the application of the accused.
 * * * 
