

Regina versus James Douglas Dodd [1997] NSWSC 257 (13 July 1997) 
REGINA versus James Douglas DODD /96 
Monday, 16 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, NEWMAN J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: James Douglas Dodd has appealed against the severity of a sentence imposed upon him in the District Court. He pleaded guilty to a charge of cultivating prohibited plants - that is, cannabis plants - which were not less than the commercial quantity. The sentencing judge imposed, in substance, a sentence of four years comprising a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of two years and six months. The actual sentence imposed was adjusted further because of two months that Mr Dodd had spent in custody so that the sentence became a minimum term of sixteen months and an additional term of two years six months.

The applicant was stopped by the police on or about 9 May 1995. Upon searching him the police located a plastic resealable bag containing cannabis seeds which had been secreted in the applicant's left-hand chest jacket pocket. The applicant was placed under arrest and conveyed to Forster Police Station where he informed the police that he was cultivating cannabis at Wallinghat State Forest off Thomas
Road at Coomba Park. The police escorted the applicant to a picnic area on the
Thomas Road. He then led the police by torchlight through dense bush to an enclosed area approximately one kilometre off the road. The area was approximately twenty metres square and was enclosed by netting wire and fishing net with palm leaves camouflaging the area.

Police located 320 cannabis plants in the enclosure varying from thirty centimetres in height to one metre. The plants were uprooted and transported to Forster Police Station. The applicant told the police that he had grown the cannabis to repay a $20,000 debt. He further told the police that he had grown the plants over the past seven months and had watered and fertilised them. He stated that he had sold $100 worth of cannabis to a friend in Forster but had not as yet received the money. The cannabis seeds in his possession belonged to him.

The applicant, at the time he was arrested on 9 May 1995, was on two recognizances; the first had been imposed on 22 November 1993 and there was a $500 good behaviour bond for a period of eighteen months which was due to expire on 21 May 1995. It was in relation to possession of prohibited drugs.

The second recognizance, which was imposed on 28 April 1995, was for $300 to be of good behaviour for twelve months. The sentencing judge found that there were special circumstances and that finding was correct and supported by some extensive reports. The applicant was suffering from schizophrenia. However this is usually able to be controlled by appropriate medication. He had a history of cocaine and marijuana use.

The first question is whether the overall sentence of four years was excessive in all the circumstances bearing in mind that the offence carries a maximum of fifteen years. We were referred to some sentences that had been imposed for the cultivation of a commercial quantity of cannabis plants. It is unnecessary to travel through all those sentences.

Of assistance is the unreported decision of this Court in Regina v.
MacPhail, 18 November 1994. That case involved the cultivation of 385 cannabis plants being not less than the commercial quantity. Five related matters were taken into account - namely, one count of supply cannabis leaf, one count of possess cannabis leaf, one count of possess LSD, one count of possess equipment for administration of a drug (a water pipe) and possession of $110 suspected of having been stolen.

In the present case there were, by coincidence, five offences to be taken into account. They included possession of a prohibited drug; possession of a prohibited drug - namely, a gram of cannabis leaf; possession of equipment for use in the administration of cannabis leaf; administering a prohibited drug to himself (cannabis leaf) and possessing prohibited drug - namely, cannabis leaf that related to a small bag of seeds.

In MacPhail the sentencing judge had imposed an overall sentence of four years comprising a minimum term of two years with an additional term of two years. The differences between MacPhail and the present case may be summarised thus: MacPhail was caught at a very much earlier stage and when the bulk of the plants were still very small. They were being developed in a backyard for subsequent transfer to an unknown location in the country where they were to be grown for future supply. The initial nursery operation in the backyard was described by the court as 'very amateurish'.

In the present case, the plants were in the forest and considerable steps had been taken to secrete them and also to protect them from animals and the like.
The plantation was quite well developed and it was not going to be too long before they were harvested. Whether that stage would ever have been reached in
MacPhail is unknown. In MacPhail the applicant was on a recognizance; in the present case the applicant was on two recognizances. In both cases, however, the plants were being cultivated with the ultimate object of supply for sale in order to liquidate outstanding debts. In MacPhail this Court reduced the overall sentence of 4 years to one of 21/2 years.

I have reached the conclusion that the starting point of four years for the overall sentence was excessive and that the appropriate starting point was three years. As there were special circumstances, the appropriate minimum term was one of fifteen months and the appropriate additional term one of one year nine months.

The minimum term of fifteen months needs to be adjusted for the two months previously served. I propose that leave to appeal be granted; that the appeal be allowed and that, in lieu of the sentences imposed, there be imposed a minimum term of thirteen months commencing on 14 June 1996 and expiring on July 1997 and an additional term of twenty-one months commencing on 14 July .

NEWMAN J: The facts of the matter have been stated by the learned presiding Judge and there is no need for me to repeat them. Indeed, as the learned presiding Judge has said, the essential question for determination here is whether or not the learned sentencing Judge was in error in imposing a head sentence of four years. Again, as has been stated, for an offence under <case>(a) of the Drug Misuse and 
Trafficking Act 1985, the maximum penalty prescribed by the legislature is penal servitude for fifteen years.

In the case of Laurence John MacPhail (unreported) 18 November 1994 whereas, and indeed again as the learned presiding Judge has pointed out, similarity of factual material occurred and, where there were differences in the factual material between the instant case and that case, Smart J has, in my view, accurately summarised those differences. As has been said the Court has, in upholding an appeal, reduced a head sentence from four years to one of two years and six months. The most essential differences I would see in the factual account between this case and MacPhail's case was that the finding of the Court in
MacPhail's case was that the project as carried out by Mr MacPhail was one carried out in an amateurish way, whereas here the cultivation took place in the forest in a situation of camouflage and indeed had, as the findings of fact indicate, been carried out with some success having regard to the maturity of certain of the plants which were discovered.

The Crown has referred us to a number of cases arising under <case> ranging from the higher range offence to the lower range offence. This offence issue which
I can shorthandedly refer to as being in the middle. In my view his Honour, in imposing a head sentence of four years, while at the top of the range available to him having regard to matters such as Ellis, (in relation to his plea of guilty) and assistance to the police does not seem to me to have gone outside his discretion.

That being so, I have the misfortune to dissent from the judgment delivered by the presiding Judge and, for myself, I would not disturb the sentence passed by his Honour.

HIDDEN J: I agree with Smart J that the sentence should be reduced. I do so particularly in view of the high level of the applicant's co-operation with the police. I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J and the reasons given.

SMART J: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed. At the expiration of the minimum term the applicant is to be released.
 * * * 
