

Action A1 Pty Ltd versus Chin Matter No 3179/97 [1997] NSWSC 421 (22 September )

Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
Action A1 Pty Ltd versus Chin` ` 3179/97` `22 September 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `  /97 - ACTION A1 PTY LTD versus CHIN` `  `
 `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a company to set aside a statutory demand. 
The present mess comes about through businessmen trying to rearrange their affairs with inadequate documentation and so the court must look at their legal relations in a scenario where they do not seem actually to have directed their minds to their legal, as opposed to their commercial, rights.

The parties were associated in a company which is now called Ex-Action A1 Pty
Ltd, which I will call the old company. It is ACN 059 060 525.

On about 26 February 1996 Action A1 Pty Ltd, the present plaintiff, which I will call the new company and is ACN 070 055 846, purchased the old company's business. A consequence of the purchase was that moneys owed to Mr Chin, the defendant, who was a director of the old company, were paid out. This resulted in a payment to Mr Chin of $21,187.00. Mr Chin then lent that amount back to the new company by endorsing the cheque to the new company.

Mr Chin demanded repayment of that debt by serving on the new company a statutory demand on 19 June 1997. There is only one defence as to whether that debt is due and payable and that is what I will call the Head versus Kelk defence, which I will come to shortly.

The allegations made by the plaintiff are that there are offsetting claims pursuant to which Mr Chin owes the new company some $16,000, which would reduce the debt that the new company owes to him under the minimum amount which can be claimed under a statutory demand. The claims are (a) $13,860.41, being an alleged overpayment by the old company to Mr Chin of his loan account; (b) a sum of $1,000, being the costs of equity proceedings awarded to the new company in an action involving Mr Chin for which Mr Chin is liable; $475.80 for payment of a telephone bill on behalf of Mr Chin by the new company; (d) damages for conversion of a mobile phone of $480; and (e) an unspecified amount for conversion of a car.

The background to the plaintiff's claim for an offsetting amount does not inspire one. The present summons was filed on the very last day. The summons was supported by an affidavit of Mr Tan, one of its directors, who said initially that he would supplement that affidavit when people in the organisation who knew more than he did were available, they then being overseas, but no one ever did swear any further affidavits apart from Mr Tan.
Furthermore, the balance sheet of the old company, which is exhibit DX02 does not really seem to be compatible with the present claims. However, one can really put those matters aside because, even if one accepts the material put by the plaintiff, there would not seem to be a defence or an offsetting claim except for the $1,000 which is conceded.

In Head versus Kelk [(1961) 63 SR 340], and in earlier cases, including Muir versus City of Glasgow Bank <case>; [(1922) 22 SR 242], it was said that it is a defence to a claim for debt where there is clear evidence that the parties have agreed that the debt is only to be repaid out of a certain fund. So in Head versus Kelk, if the parties had agreed that the debt was only to be repaid if the defendant could afford to do so, then the defendant could show that he could not afford to repay the debt and so was under no liability. The matter was decided by the Full Court on demurrer so the actual facts did not have to trouble the court. However, the line of territory shows that such agreement must be very clear because it is not the normal commercial relation between people.

In the present case what is really alleged, as I understand it, is that the former company is entitled to recover the overpayments and these other amounts from Mr Chin, the former company would then be obliged to account for what it recovered from Mr Chin to the new company and there is an implied term that Mr
Chin would not seek to recover from the new company the amount he lent it until he had paid the moneys he owed to the old company.

The only evidentiary material as to that is in Mr Tan's affidavit and the highest it goes is that there was an agreement (which must have been oral and of which Mr Chin has no recall) that if on further analysis the loan accounts were higher or lower than the parties thought on 26 February 1996 when they wrote their cheques, adjustments would be made and that "Implicit in the said agreement was the requirement that ..... " which then brings in the Head v
Kelk defence. Those words seem to indicate that what is relied on is some implied term, but the term is a very nebulous one and not sufficiently strong to bring in the Head versus Kelk defence.

There being no defence, one must look at the offsetting claim. The offsetting claim as a matter of law is not an offsetting claim against the new company, but the old company. Indeed, this is borne out itself by the fact that the old company, which retained the same solicitors as are retained by the new company, has only two weeks ago issued a statement of liquidated claim out of the Local Court at Waverley for the $13,860.41 overpayment. It cannot be that both moneys are owed to the old company and to the new company. If the debt exists at all, and I do not go into that because that is a matter for the
Waverley Local Court to decide, then, on the material before this Court, it is owed to the old company and not to the new company. Accordingly, I do not really need to go into the further question and that is if a controller of two companies deliberately commences proceedings in the name of company A, he is then estopped from alleging that the obligation is payable to some other company in his group. See Barakot Ltd. V Epiette Ltd [[1997] 1 BCLC ]
noted in [(1997) 71 ALJ 600.] 
Accordingly, the present summons to set aside the statutory demand fails. I should make an order under s459H of the Corporations Law that the amount be reduced by $1,000 and that the demand for the reduced amount is valid and deemed to have been served on 19 June 1997.

Mr Boskovitz for the plaintiff company asks for an order extending the time for complying with the demand to 21 days. I think I should do that because this Court much prefers the debt to be paid than a company be wound up, if that is at all possible. There is some doubt as to whether the Court can make such an order and so I will direct that the defendant not file any winding-up petition based on the statutory demand until 11 October 1997. Of course, the company is still at risk if some other creditor bases a petition on the failure to comply with a statutory demand after seven days from today.

Mr Boskovitz argued that s459N of the Corporations Law meant that there was no power to award costs against an unsuccessful plaintiff. However, this submission flies in the face of the decision of the Federal Court in Hornet
Aviation Pty Ltd versus Ansett International Air Freight [(1994) 16 ACSR ], and the other cases referred to in the footnotes to S459N in Robson's
Annotated Corporations Law (LBC, Sydney, 1997) and I reject it.

I would ask Mr Grant, for the defendant, to bring in short minutes of order to implement these reasons later today.
 * * * 
