

Critchton and Anor versus Shaw and Anor [1996] NSWSC 483 (11 October 1996) 
CRICHTON & ANOR. V. SHAW & ANOR.
 /94 
Friday 11th October 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Ramza Eugenie Crichton died on 8th July 1992, aged 75 years, leaving an estate estimated to be worth about $2.3 million, excluding the subject matter of these proceedings. Probate of her last will was granted to the plaintiffs, John Crichton and Neil Crichton, pursuant to an order of Bryson, J. made on 22nd July 1994. In the present proceedings, the plaintiffs, as executors of the deceased's estate, seek recovery of amounts allegedly paid by the deceased to the defendants, Mr. and Mrs. Shaw, between 1990 and 1992. 
OUTLINE OF FACTS 
The deceased had no children. Her husband died in about 1978. By her will dated 24th August 1988, apart from specific gifts of little value, she left one piece of real estate to each of three persons, her nephew-in-law John
Crichton, her brother-in-law Neil Crichton, and another relative Michael
Galieh. The residue was divided into twenty-one parts, twelve going to charities and nine going to family members and others.

It appears that the deceased first met Mr. Shaw in about 1987, when he was an agent for Manchester Unity Friendly Society. By about March 1989, the deceased had invested $140,000.00 in Manchester Unity, through Mr. Shaw.

At about the beginning of 1990, the deceased lent Mr. Shaw $10,000.00, to be repaid in June 1990.

The deceased's brother, Alfred Galieh, died on 22nd July 1990. He left the bulk of his estate to a real estate agent in Penrith. The deceased gave instructions to Mr. Bushby, the plaintiffs' solicitors in these proceedings, to challenge her brother's will.

In about November 1990, the relationship between the deceased and John
Crichton broke down, with the deceased making accusations against him that he had stolen money and other things from her. At about the same time, the deceased withdrew her instructions from Mr. Bushby concerning her brother's estate, and gave instructions on that matter to Mr. Newman, solicitor, who had previous associations with Mr. Shaw.

On 12th November 1990, the deceased executed a general power of attorney in favour of Mr. Shaw, with the intention that it continue to be effective notwithstanding loss of capacity. The necessary certificate in relation to that matter was given by Mr. Newman.

On 14th November 1990, the deceased executed a will, in the following terms: 
I RAMZA EUGENIE CRICHTON of 83 Dalrymple Avenue, Chatswood in the State of
New South Wales, Widow hereby revoke all former Wills and Codicils made by me and declare this to be my last Will.
I APPOINT my good friend GEORGE THOMAS SHAW of 30 Gregory Street,
South Coogee in the said State to be my Executor.
I DEVISE my freehold house and land situate at 10 Alison Avenue, Lane
Cove to MICHAEL GALIEH the son of my cousin GEORGE GALIEH absolutely.
I DEVISE AND BEQUEATH all the residue of my property both real and personal whatsoever and wheresoever situate to the said GEORGE THOMAS SHAW for his own use and benefit absolutely.
It is my wish that my Executor the said GEORGE THOMAS SHAW makes provision by way of food and accommodation for my dog.
I have made no further provision for my nephew JOHN CRICHTON as I of late have made substantial provision for him by way of gift of monies to him such gift being of an order which I consider to be adequate.

This will was witnessed by Mr. Newman and a medical practitioner.

On 12th December 1990, $150,000.00 was withdrawn from the deceased's account with St. George Building Society. The withdrawal form, bearing the deceased's signature, shows that a cheque was issued in the name of "G. and L. Shaw", that is, the defendants.

On 30th January 1991, $74,590.71 was withdrawn from the deceased's account with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, the withdrawal form bearing the deceased's signature. About $40,000.00 was used to buy a car for Mrs. Shaw.

On 26th March 1991, the deceased executed a further will. This will appointed
Mr. and Mrs. Shaw executors, and left the whole of the deceased's estate to them. Mr. Newman was one of the witnesses.

On 24th July 1991, the deceased executed a further general power of attorney to both defendants, which expressly authorised the defendants to confer benefits on themselves, and also expressed the intention that it continue to be effective notwithstanding loss of capacity.

On 30th January 1992, $167,247.00 was withdrawn from the deceased's account with Manchester Unity, the form again bearing the deceased's signature.
$50,000.00 of this was paid to Mr. Newman, on account of legal costs in the proceedings concerning the estate of the deceased's brother. (These proceedings were ultimately settled, and the deceased's estate in fact includes proceeds from this settlement amounting to about $750,000.00.) The balance of $117,247.00 was paid by Mrs. Shaw to an accountant, Mr. Lord, and apparently held by him on behalf of Mr. Shaw or Mr. and Mrs. Shaw. This amount was subsequently disbursed to Mr. Shaw, or on his instructions. About $45,000.00 went towards Mr. and Mrs. Shaw's costs in subsequent probate proceedings concerning the deceased's estate.

The deceased died on 8th July 1992. There ensued probate litigation concerning the estate. Mr. and Mrs. Shaw sought probate of the will of 26th March 1991, or alternatively the will of 14th November 1990. The plaintiffs in these proceedings, John Crichton and Neil Crichton, cross-claimed for probate of the will dated 24th August 1988, alleging lack of testamentary capacity and undue influence in relation to the wills of 1990 and 1991.

This probate case was heard over ten days in October 1993 and February 1994.
On 22nd July 1994, Bryson, J. delivered judgment, in which he found that Mr.
and Mrs. Shaw had not proved testamentary capacity in relation to the wills of and 1991. Bryson, J. did not have to consider the question of undue influence. He granted probate of the 1988 will to John Crichton and Neil
Crichton. Mr. and Mrs. Shaw appealed to the Court of Appeal, and this appeal was dismissed on 23rd August 1995. A subsequent application for special leave to appeal to the High Court was dismissed.

John Crichton and Neil Crichton commenced these proceedings on 1st September
They seek orders to the effect that Mr. and Mrs. Shaw pay to the plaintiffs, as executors of the deceased's estate, $150,000.00 plus interest thereon from 12th December 1990, $74,590.00 plus interest thereon from 30th
January 1991, and $117,247.00 plus interest thereon from 30th January 1992.
The basis of the claim is undue influence.

EVIDENCE 
In addition to the evidence proving the basic facts outlined above, the plaintiffs have tendered evidence in the following categories: affidavits concerning the mental and physical capacity of the deceased and her circumstances during 1990 to 1992; evidence given by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw in the probate proceedings; and 
Bryson, J.'s judgment in the Probate proceedings.

I will first outline some of the affidavit evidence.

Affidavit Evidence 
Mr. Bushby, the plaintiff's solicitor in these proceedings, gave evidence of his dealings with the deceased in relation to her claim concerning her brother's estate. He expressed the opinion that the deceased was then (in the latter half of 1990) incapable of understanding that it was necessary for her to take her case to a hearing in Court and obtain an order in her favour.

Mr. Joiner, the assistant manager of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia,
Chatswood, gave evidence of dealings with the deceased between about July 1989 to about 1991. He said that until about August 1990, he saw the deceased once a week, in relation to investment and banking matters. He said that in that period, she often forgot what had been decided at meetings, and returned within a day or two seeking re-assurance and confirmation. In about April , the deceased showed him a document stating that she had lent $10,000.00 to Mr. Shaw. When her brother died in July 1990, the deceased was under great stress, frightened and vulnerable. Before that time, according to Mr. Joiner, although she was often confused, the deceased had an idea of what she was doing. After that, she did not: she lost interest in her financial affairs, her memory was far worse, she seemed to lose her ability to order her thoughts about her financial affairs. During the second half of 1990, she would say words to the effect "John Crichton has stolen my money". About early November , she telephoned to say "George Shaw will be looking after my affairs". In
January 1991, Mr. Shaw came to the bank, produced a power of attorney and a signed withdrawal form. Mr. Joiner telephoned Mrs. Crichton who said "He needs the money for an operation". Mr. Joiner asked her "Do you understand what you have signed" to which she replied "Yes, he can have access to my bank accounts". After February 1991, Mr. Joiner only saw Mrs. Crichton two or three times. However, she telephoned on a number of occasions asking to the effect "What is happening with my accounts".

Evidence was given by Dr. Russell, a specialist in psycho-geriatrics. He said that he attended Mrs. Crichton in February 1991. She was suspicious and hostile. She said that John Crichton had stolen from her. She refused to co- operate in formal tests. She was oriented as to day, date, and whereabouts, and her memory was essentially intact. He was unable to conclude whether she had mental capacity to deal with her own affairs, but had considerable doubt as to whether she had. He considered her a dogmatic and opinionated lady, erratic in her judgment and attitudes.

There was an affidavit from Elaine Rich, secretary of Chatswood Legacy. In her dealings with the deceased after July 1990, the deceased became increasingly dependent on others for almost all her needs. She began to make allegations that John Crichton had stolen from her. In about October or November 1990, the deceased asked her "Would you take over my affairs?". In a telephone conversation with the deceased in March 1991, the deceased seemed confused, saying that her brother had died the previous month.

There was an affidavit from Margaret Thomason, a welfare officer with Sydney
Legacy. She visited the deceased in October 1990, and observed that the house was in poor condition, the deceased exhibited bizarre behaviour, she spent most of the day in bed, she was unhappy, and she appeared dependent on outside help.

There was an affidavit from John Crichton, to the effect that he had assisted the deceased with her affairs in various ways between 1988 and 1990. During the first half of 1990, the deceased made complaints to him about Mr. Shaw borrowing $10,000.00. The deceased complained about paying $2,000.00 to Mr.
Bushby on account of the costs of contesting her brother's will. In about
October or November 1990, she began making accusations of stealing against him, which were untrue.

Evidence in Probate Proceedings 
The plaintiffs relied on evidence given by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw in the Probate proceedings, as admissions by them. Ultimately, I accepted into evidence in these proceedings the whole of the evidence given by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw, and I in fact permitted reference to be made, on behalf of the defendants in these proceedings, to other parts of the Appeal Books in the Probate proceedings. I will refer further to that matter when I come to deal with submissions. The actual admissions relied on by the plaintiffs were briefly as follows.

Mr. Shaw gave evidence in the Probate proceedings that the deceased had not told Mr. Newman about an account with St. George Building Society (containing about $160,000.00) when she gave instructions for her 1990 will in November
Between then and 12th December 1990, Mr. Shaw found out about this account. The $150,000.00 withdrawn from it was a gift from the deceased, which had been initiated by a conversation between the deceased and Mrs. Shaw. This gift relieved Mr. Shaw of serious financial embarrassment at the time. Mr.
Shaw admitted that he had done nothing to merit that generosity.

Mr. Shaw also gave evidence, in relation to the withdrawal of about $74,000.00, that this was a withdrawal in favour of himself and his wife. The deceased had spoken to Mrs. Shaw about the week before, to the effect that she wanted to purchase a motor vehicle for Mrs. Shaw. A large part of the proceeds were used to buy a Honda motor vehicle for in excess of $40,000.00. As regards the withdrawal of $117,247.00, Mr. Shaw said that the deceased wanted the sum to go to Mrs. Shaw to be used to purchase a house close to the deceased's house.

In general, in relation to these withdrawals, Mr. Shaw said it was the deceased's way of repaying them for the services they rendered to her.

Mrs. Shaw's evidence substantially agreed with Mr. Shaw's evidence in relation to the second two payments, although she said that she did not know the amount withdrawn in the second transaction was about $74,000.00. In relation to the first transaction, she also said that the deceased first spoke to her about it, but said that she did not know the amount involved in this withdrawal. She understood that it was used to pay her husband's bills, including mortgages on the house and other debts.

Bryson, J.'s Judgment 
It is necessary first to consider if this is in fact admissible in these proceedings. It appears that it would not be admissible, except to prove the grant of probate, unless it gives rise to issue estoppels binding the parties to these proceedings; and it would give rise to such issue estoppels only if it was a judgment between the same parties in the same interests, or the privies of such parties: see Halsbury's, Laws of England, 4th Ed., Vol.16, pars.1543-6; Leggott v. Great Northern Railway Co. [(1876) 1 QBD 599]; Marginson v. Blackburn Burrough Council [(1939) 2 KB 426.] 
There could be a question whether these proceedings are between the same parties in the same interests as the Probate proceedings. In these proceedings, the plaintiffs sue as executors of the deceased's will, while the defendants are sued in their personal capacity. In the previous proceedings, both sought to be executors of a will of the deceased, but, until probate was actually granted, neither set of parties actually represented the estate.
Under the Wills Probate & Administration Act s.61, a deceased's estate vests on death in the Public Trustee, until such time as there is a grant of administration. Under s.44 of that Act, upon the grant being made, the estate vests in the legal personal representative as from the death of the deceased.

There are statements to the effect that the executor's title derives from the will: see, for example, Ryan v. Davies Brothers <case>; [(1921) 29 CLR 527.] However, it appears from the submission of Counsel on the basis of which that statement was made that this was in reliance on the Privy
Council decision in Meyappa Chetty v. Supramanian Chetty [(1916) 1 AC ] at
The statement by the Privy Council in that case appears to be based on the common law position, that the personal property of the deceased vests in the executor on death, rather than the position which exists under the New
South Wales Wills Probate & Administration Act, ss.44 and 61, noted above.

However, I do not believe that a narrow and technical view should be taken as to the capacity in which proceedings are taken or defended: see Black v.
Yates [(1992) 1 QB 526.] In that case, despite differences between Spanish law and
English law, the Court held that there was substantial identity between the interest on the basis of which a widow sought damages for loss of her husband's support in England, and the interest pursuant to which she obtained some compensation in earlier Spanish proceedings.

In my opinion, where there is a contest for a grant of administration of an estate between persons appointed as executors by different wills, and the
Court decides that one will is valid and the other is not, this means that the successful party always had an entitlement to represent the estate, which they enforced by that very action; while the unsuccessful party never did, so that the involvement of the unsuccessful party was always in a personal capacity.
On that view, in my opinion, the interests of the parties are substantially the same in these proceedings as in the Probate proceedings.

The next question in relation to Bryson, J.'s judgment concerns the matters on which there is an issue estoppel. It seems clear that, for there to be an issue estoppel, the matter in question must have been in issue in the previous proceedings directly, not collaterally or incidentally, and actually decided in the previous proceedings: see Halsbury, 4th Ed., Vol.16, par.1530.

In the previous proceedings, the ultimate matter decided by Bryson, J. was that Mr. and Mrs. Shaw did not prove that the deceased had testamentary capacity at the time of the executing the 1990 and 1991 wills. The basis of that finding was a finding that it was clearly established that the deceased could not appreciate the claims to which she should have given effect by her will, because of her delusional beliefs about John Crichton and his behaviour.
That in turn was based on a finding of fact that the ideas expressed by the deceased, to the effect that John Crichton had stolen from her, were groundless and irrationally so.

In my opinion, all those matters are facts which were directly in issue in the previous proceedings, and actually decided.

There were other facts found in the judgment, which might possibly be considered as not having been directly in issue, but rather to be collateral and incidental to the main issue in the case. They are the following. (1)
Bryson, J. found that the deceased was an eccentric person, apparently afflicted by age, and erratic and eccentric in the manner in which she extended confidence to people, and withdrew that confidence. (2) He found that from 12th November 1990, she placed herself, her assets and her person in the entire control of Mr. and Mrs. Shaw, and abdicated management of her own life in their favour. (3) He also found that Mr. and Mrs. Shaw had made unconscionable use of the opportunities offered by the deceased asking them to take over her affairs.

On balance,I think items (1) and (2) are sufficiently close to the matters directly in issue in the Probate case to give rise to an issue estoppel; but I do not think item (3) is sufficiently close, and I will not treat item (3) as giving rise to an issue estoppel.

SUBMISSIONS 
Mr. Sexton for the plaintiffs referred me to Meagher, Gummow & Lehane,
Equity, 3rd.Ed., pars.1501-1527. He submitted that, in this case, Mr. and
Mrs. Shaw had a position of ascendancy, power and domination as regards the deceased, who was in a position of dependence and subjection. Accordingly, there was an onus on Mr. and Mrs. Shaw to prove that the three transactions were the independent and well-understood acts of the deceased, the deceased being in a position to exercise free judgment on the basis of information as full as that available to Mr. and Mrs. Shaw. Mr. Sexton submitted that such onus had not been discharged. He referred me to Johnson v. Buttress <case>; [(1936) 56 CLR 113] at 134, and Stivactas v. Michaletos [(1993) NSWConv.R.
-683.] 
Mr. and Mrs. Shaw did not appear at the hearing before me, but their son attended at the hearing, and I permitted him to take part in the proceedings and to make submissions on behalf of his parents.

Mr. Shaw (that is, the son of the defendants Mr. and Mrs. Shaw) submitted that there was no ascendancy or superiority in the position of Mr. and Mrs. Shaw, but it was an equal relationship. The deceased had said, in effect, "If you relieve my burdens, I'll relieve yours". The finding of lack of testamentary capacity was with the wisdom of hindsight: at the time of the events, medical practitioners expressed the view that the deceased had full capacity and there was no suggestion that the acts of the deceased were other than free and voluntary. Whenever there is friendship, there is a certain amount of setting aside of formality. Mr. and Mrs. Shaw had been dedicated to the care and the maintenance of the deceased, and it did not occur to them that they needed to be cautious or to justify their position.

Mr. Shaw submitted that positions of trust should not automatically attract suspicion, that dependence and trust can be a good thing. The deceased's bed had to be changed every day, she was reluctant to go into a nursing home, this meant she required care in the home, and there were no others willing to care.
The deceased had initially been suspicious of Mr. and Mrs. Shaw, and her trust had to be earned. The friendship of Mr. and Mrs. Shaw did wonders for the deceased, and she experienced new well-being through her generosity.

I permitted Mr. Shaw to provide me with references to portions of the Appeal
Book which related to the care given to the deceased by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw and the money expended by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw in relation to that care. Mr. Shaw provided written submissions on this which I will leave with the papers.

In those submissions, Mr. Shaw referred to the following evidence. First, there was evidence from Dr. Ross-Smith to the effect that the Shaws often brought cooked food and provisions, and were usually there when Dr. Ross-Smith visited. Next, there were some contemporary notes made by Mrs. Rich, Legacy
Officer, recording that the Shaws were bringing meals and doing housework in
November and December 1990; that in March 1991, Mrs. Shaw was calling most days, and that the deceased said that Mr. and Mrs. Shaw looked after her very well; and notes of September 1991 that Mrs. Shaw was calling daily to see to the deceased's needs. Next, there was a statement from Dr. Faulder, geriatrician, that the deceased firmly wished to stay at home, and that her carers Mr. and Mrs. Shaw prepared her meals. Next, there was oral evidence from Mark Lewis to the effect that Mr. and Mrs. Shaw looked after the deceased with care, that Mrs. Shaw kept the house clean etc., and that the deceased was totally dependent. Finally, there was evidence from Mrs. Shaw that she looked after the deceased, cared for the deceased's dog, and worked in the garden; that the gifts were initiated by the deceased; that she had had the house fumigated; and that she looked after the deceased when the deceased was in a coma in August 1991.

In this document, Mr. Shaw also set out estimates of expenses incurred by Mr.
and Mrs. Shaw in looking after the deceased. However, as pointed out by Mr.
Sexton in reply, apart from the evidence to which I have referred, the evidence in this case did not establish any of the matters relied on in this part of the submission. Mr. Sexton also pointed to material in the Appeal
Books indicating that funds for the deceased's living expenses were withdrawn from her own accounts.

DECISION 
I accept that the law should not be, and indeed is not, unduly suspicious of gifts and generosity, when this occurs between people in substantially equal positions, that is, where there is no relationship of influence and dependency. But, as shown by the authorities referred to by Mr. Sexton, where a donee is in a position of ascendancy, power and domination, and the donor is in a position of dependence and subjection, there is an onus placed on the donee to prove that the gift was a well-understood act of the donor, who was in a position to exercise free judgment and had information as full as that of the donee.

In this case, the plaintiffs can rely on an issue estoppel which shows in substance that such a relationship existed. In any event, there is evidence before me which would justify the same inference. This is evidence concerning the physical and mental state of the deceased; the execution of a will which would have had the effect of giving something like $2 million to Mr. Shaw, before a time when services rendered by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw might have made that generosity understandable; the execution at about the same time of a general power of attorney in favour of Mr. Shaw; the exclusion, at around this time, of John Crichton from the deceased's affairs on the basis of groundless ideas that he was stealing from her; the gift of $150,000.00 only one month later; and the later gifts, will, and power of attorney.

No evidence was put on by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw to suggest that the inference that first Mr. Shaw, and subsequently both Mr. and Mrs. Shaw, were in a position of ascendancy and influence over the deceased, should not be drawn. Throughout the period of preparation of this case, they had ample opportunity to put on evidence. When this matter was mentioned before me on the Friday before the hearing, and Mr. Shaw applied for an adjournment, I indicated to Mr. Shaw that he could attend at the hearing and apply to give oral evidence (although I did indicate that I may or may not accede to that application). The defendant Mr.
Shaw did not attend at the hearing, and obviously no application was made by him to give oral evidence.

Even giving full weight to the material referred to by Mr. Shaw Jnr. (to the effect that, from about November 1990, his parents cared for the deceased until her death, and that for a long period of time, Mrs. Shaw was making daily, or almost daily, visits bringing meals), in my view the proper inference is that Mr. Shaw was in a position of influence by the time of the
December 1990 gift, and that both Mr. and Mrs. Shaw were in a position of influence by the time of the later gifts. Accordingly, there is an onus on them to prove that the gifts were well-understood acts by the deceased, who was then in a position to exercise free judgment on the basis of full information.

Insofar as the issue estoppel on the question of influence, to which I have referred, might suggest that Mrs. Shaw, as well as Mr. Shaw, was in a position of influence by December 1990, on the whole I take the view that the finding by Bryson, J. was not sufficiently specific to require me to find that Mrs.
Shaw was in a position of influence by December 1990.

I am not satisfied that the defendants have discharged the onus that thereby fell on them. There was participation in at least the wills and the powers of attorney by a solicitor; but this was not a solicitor who could be regarded as independent: cf. Thompson v. Mikkelsen, 3/10/74, Wotton, J., unreported,
Pates v. Craig, 28/8/95, Santow, J., unreported. In any event, the evidence does not show that the solicitor gave any advice to the deceased in relation to the transactions the subject of these proceedings.

As regards the suggestion that not all the money received in these gifts was used for the benefit of Mr. and/or Mrs. Shaw, I note that, as submitted by Mr.
Sexton, there is evidence that the deceased's bank accounts were used for her living expenses. There is no evidence which indicates that the Shaws spent any of the gifts or any of their own money for the benefit of the deceased. There is no evidence from which I can make any finding as to the actual value of the services provided by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw to the deceased.

Had I been able to come to a conclusion as to the value of services actually provided by Mr. and Mrs. Shaw to the deceased, without reward apart from these gifts, I may have been prepared to treat that value as something like a "just allowance", which is sometimes credited to fiduciaries against their liability to make good to a beneficiary property which has been acquired or enhanced by the fiduciary in breach of fiduciary duty. However, in the absence of evidence which enables me to quantify the value of those services, I do not believe I can make any such credit against the capital of the gifts. However, the awarding of interest is a discretionary matter; and I think there is enough evidence before me to suggest that it is appropriate that no interest be charged on the gifts during the lifetime of the deceased and for a short period after that, and I will in fact award interest only from 1st September .

In my opinion, because of his position of influence and the benefit which he received from all the gifts, Mr. Shaw is liable to repay to the estate the capital of all three gifts plus interest from 1st September 1992 to the date of judgment. In my opinion, Mrs. Shaw, by reason of the influence which she had acquired by the time of the second and third gifts, and by reason of her participation in those gifts and in the benefits from those gifts, is liable to repay the second and third gifts, in both cases with interest from 1st
September 1992.

The amounts due in respect of the three transactions are as follows: 
Transaction 12th December 1990 $150,000.00 /9/92-2/9/93 (367 days at 11.25%) 16,967.47 /9/93-20/2/95 (536 days at 10.5%) 23,123.04 /3/95-10/10/96 (590 days at 12%) 29,089.95 $219,180.46 
Transaction 30th January 1991 $ 74,590.00 /9/92-2/9/93 (367 days at 11.25%) 8,437.36 /9/93-20/2/95 (536 days at 10.5%) 11,498.32 /3/95-10/10/96 (590 days at 12%) 14,465.46 $108,991.14 
Transaction 30th January 1992 $117,247.00 /9/92-2/9/93 (367 days at 11.25%) 13,262.56 /9/93-20/2/95 (536 days at 10.5%) 18,074.05 /3/95-10/10/96 (590 days at 12%) 22,738.06 $171,321.67 
I make the following orders.
Order that the first defendant pay the plaintiffs $219,180.46.
Order that the first and second defendants pay the plaintiffs $280,312.81.
Order that the defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings.
The exhibits may be returned after 28 days if there is no appeal.
 * * * 
