

Regina versus Luke Joseph Jossey [1997] NSWSC 95 (26 March 1997) 
REGINA versus LUKE JOSEPH JOSSEY /96 
WEDNESDAY 22 JANUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT - On application for bail 
HIS HONOUR: Luke Jossey has applied for bail in respect of a number of charges. They include take and drive a conveyance on 15 December 1996, drive whilst unlicensed and drive under the influence of a drug. There were further charges of self-administer a prohibited drug and unlicensed driver.

Early on the morning of 15 December Mr Jossey was driving a vehicle at an excessive speed and was stopped by the police. The police discovered in his jacket pocket a vinyl, zippered case which contained a number of syringes, a bent spoon and other articles used in the self-administration of prohibited drugs. An inspection of his arms revealed two fresh and bleeding puncture marks on the inside of his right arm. According to the police the applicant admitted to self-administering two caps of heroin earlier in the evening in the Kings Cross area.

There are a further series of charges in relation to events which occurred on March 1996 and probably extending into the following day. They include being carried in a conveyance, take or be carried in a conveyance without consent, possess implements capable of entering conveyance and carry cutting weapon. It is not entirely clear whether the applicant has bail on these charges but I think the probability is that he does.

There are two failure to appear charges and they relate to a failure to appear on 9 September 1996.

There are a further series of charges relating to events of about 29 January
They include take and drive conveyance, possession of implements, possession of prohibited drug heroin, self-administer prohibited drug and carry cutting weapon. I understand that on the major charges relating to that day the applicant has been committed for trial to the Sydney District Court and that trial is due to start on 26 March 1997.

There were a series of offences arising out of events on 26 April 1996 of the same order, namely stealing a conveyance, possessing implements and driving whilst disqualified. These were dealt with by the magistrate probably in early
October 1996 and the magistrate dismissed the charges under section 32 of the
Mental Health Criminal Proceedings Act.

The Court has had the benefit of the report of Dr Clarke of 25 September .

The applicant's wife has said that the applicant is not a drug addict but according to the police he has been found with drugs on several occasions and most recently there was evidence of recent self-administration. The applicant's wife has given evidence of her desire to assist her husband and to watch over him as well as she can. She does work and she cannot be expected to maintain a 24-hour vigil.

A family friend, Mr McDonald, has also given in evidence of his willingness to assist. The applicant's wife has indicated that she feels that part of the problem has been that the applicant has not been seeing the psychiatrist with sufficient regularity and taking the medication with sufficient regularity. Dr
Clarke has indicated that there is hospital treatment available but it is voluntary, not compulsive.

The real difficulty that I have with the applicant's history is not so much the failures to appear, which I think have been explained by the applicant's condition and some confusion as to when he had to go to court, but the repetition of car taking offences and some self-administration of drugs.

Despite the dismissal of proceedings under section 32 as mentioned in early
October 1996 the applicant again came to police attention on 15 December 1996 and the charges I have earlier narrated have followed. The major concern is to avoid repetition of offences if the applicant were released on bail.

I do not think that the present proposed arrangements, despite the best will of those endeavouring to assist, are likely to avoid the repetition of offences. I very much doubt whether gaol is the solution.

I would be prepared to consider the grant of bail if the applicant were to attend hospital for a period for treatment of the disorder from which he suffers and in refusing this application I do so without prejudice to the bringing of another application if appropriate hospital arrangements are made so that there can be a period of sustained treatment and then release.

Bail is refused without prejudice to a further application.
 * * * 
