

Garcia versus Lam and Anor [1996] NSWSC 245 (2 July 1996) 
Garcia v. Lam & Anor /93; ED 3371/93 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Sheller JA, Powell JA, Cole JA 
CATCHWORDS: Gifts - Inter vivos - Imperfect gifts - When enforceable - General principles 
Milroy v. Lord <case>; [(1862) 4 DeG F & J 264] 
Anning v. Anning <case>; <case>; [(1989-1990) 169 CLR 540] 
Ex Tempore/Reserved: Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: I agree with Powell JA.
 
POWELL JA: This is an appeal by leave from an interlocutory Judgment delivered by Hulme J on 17th August 1993 when sitting in the Equity Division of the Court, pursuant to which Judgment his Honour ordered that the operation of a Caveat which had earlier been lodged by the Appellant in respect of certain strata units of which the First Respondent was the Registered Proprietor should cease as from 23 August 1993. Although an application for a stay of the operation of that Order was later made to this Court, that application was dismissed in the light of certain undertakings (see Appeal Book pp. 123-4) which were given to the Court by the Second Respondent which, by that time, had become beneficially entitled to the strata units in question, and which, by reason of that fact, was joined as an addition Party/Respondent to the appeal.

Although the written submissions which were lodged by Mr. D.A. Smallbone who appeared on the hearing of the appeal for the Appellant ranged more widely, and although the question for the Court which was formulated by Mr. Smallbone in the course of his opening the appeal (see Transcript p.1) was framed in a slightly different way, the questions for determination by the Court appear to me to be: - whether the terms of a document entitled "Deed of Assignment" dated 26
November 1991 made between the First Respondent as Assignor and the Appellant as Assignee operated as a present assignment of a chose in action which was enforceable at the suit of the Appellant:- the effect of the enforcement of which chose in action would be a declaration that the First Respondent either held an identified parcel of the strata units for the Appellant or that the First Respondent held the whole of the strata units upon trust for himself and the Appellant in the proportions :3; and by reason of which fact the Appellant had a sufficient interest in the strata units to sustain the caveat pending the making of a declaration as to her rights and a consequential order or orders for the execution of a
Memorandum of Memoranda of Transfer to her of the appropriate strata units or the appropriate interest in the strata units; or whether, for any one of a variety of reasons, the "Deed of Assignment" constituted no more than an attempt on the part of the First Respondent voluntarily to confer upon the Appellant some interest in the strata units if and when he became entitled to be registered as the proprietor of the same, which attempt, not being supported by consideration given by the Appellant, would not be enforced by a court of equity at the suit of the Appellant.
 (See also Appeal Book pp. 6-7, 99-100, where Hulme J recorded the bases upon which the hearing which led to the making of the Order the subject of this appeal proceeded before him on 15 July 1993, and the issues which were to be debated on that hearing.) 
In order that one might understand how it is that the issues which have been debated on this appeal arise, it is necessary, first, to turn to the facts, which are, in some respects, complex. Although the material which was placed before Hulme J was not entirely clear, the hearing before his Honour appears to have proceeded, as also did the hearing of this appeal, upon the basis that the relevant facts were as follows: - the First Respondent is one of the three sons of the marriage of one Chen-
Shen Ling ("Mr. Ling Snr.") and his wife Ling Chan Sok Kum, the other sons being Jack Tin-Keung Ling ("Jack Ling") and Peter Tin-Kin Lam ("Peter Lam"); although it is not clear that this was so, it would seem that, at all relevant times, Mr. Ling Snr. lived in Hong Kong, as also did Peter Lam, while the First Respondent and Jack Ling lived in Sydney; although the ultimate detail is not revealed by the evidence, it would appear that Mr. Ling Snr. was a man of some substance. In his Will to which I will later refer, he claims to have been the beneficial owner of all the shares in a company known as United Overseas Investment Co. NV ("United"), a company incorporated in Curacao in the Netherlands Antilles, which company was the holding company for a number of other companies of which, for present purposes, one need note only Ling Bros. Pty. Limited ("Ling Bros.") and
Waterfront Investments Pty. Limited ("Waterfront"), each of which companies appears to have been incorporated and registered in this State and to have had had a variety of investments in this State.
at all relevant times, the assets of Ling Bros. comprised the whole of the units comprised in Strata Plan 14897, which plan appears to have been registered in February 1980. Erected on the land comprised in Certificate of
Title Registered Volume 2518 Folio 157 - which was the land to which Strata
Plan 14897 related - appear to have been two separate buildings, one - seemingly known as Block B - consisting of 20 residential "terraced units", and the other - seemingly known as Block A - consisting of 48 residential "tower units", the address given to each of the buildings being 100 Elizabeth
Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay; although, at the time of the making of Mr. Ling Snr's Will, Waterfront's assets included a property known as 44-50 Harbour Street, Darling Harbour, and a residential property known as 27 Napier Street, Dover Heights, which property seems to have been Jack Ling's home, it would seem that, by the time of the making of the Deed of Family Arrangement to which I shall later refer, the property at 44-50 Harbour Street, Darling Harbour, had been compulsorily acquired by the Darling Harbour Authority, in respect of which compulsory acquisition, Waterfront had received the sum of approximately $A2,000,000.00 by way of compensation; on 14 March 1984, Mr. Ling Snr. executed in Hong Kong a form of Will, by which Will, after revoking all former testamentary instruments, and after appointing Peter Lam to be the sole executor of his Will and Trustee of his
Estate, he provided (inter alia), as follow: - "6. I AUTHORIZE my trustee to dissolve United Overseas Investment Co. N.V. and to distribute the assets in the following manner: - a) To transfer to my son, Jack Ling absolutely all shares in Waterfront Investments Pty. Ltd.; b) To transfer to my sons, Jack Ling and Wilson Lam absolutely as tenants-in-common in equal shares all shares in Ling Bros. Pty. Ltd.; c) I give to Jack Ling and Wilson Lam absolutely all sums of money now owing to United Overseas investment Co. N.V. by Ling Bros. Pty. Ltd. and all interest due and to become due in respect thereof.
 d) I give all other assets of United Overseas Investment Co. N.V. to my son, Peter Lam absolutely.
 . I GIVE to my son, Peter Lam absolutely all my real and personal property whatever and wheresoever not hereby or by any Codicil hereto specifically disposed of (including any property over which I may have a general power of appoint or disposition by Will) including all personal chattels as defined by Section 2 of the Intestates' Estates Ordinance." . on 8 May 1984, Mr. Ling Snr. executed in Hong Kong what was described as a First Codicil to his Will of 14 March 1984, which First Codicil, so far as is relevant, was in the following terms: - "WHEREAS I am the Governing Director of Ling Bros. Pty. Limited, a company with limited liability incorporated in Australia. In accordance with Article 12 of the memorandum and Articles of Association of Ling Bros. Pty. Limited, I would now like to appoint a Governing Director to act in my place after my demise.
 
PURSUANT to the provisions of Article 12 of the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Ling Bros. Pty. Limited, I hereby appoint my son PETER LAM TIN KIN of 33, Cameron Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong, to be the Governing Director of Ling Bros. Pty. Limited in my place after my demise on the same terms and with the same authorities and powers as myself whilst holding the office of Governing Director.
 
In all other respects I confirm my said Will." . on 11 October 1984, Mr. Ling Snr. executed in Hong Kong what was described as a Second Codicil to his Will of 14 March 1984, which Second Codicil, so far as is relevant, was in the following terms: - "1. I hereby revoke Clauses 6(a) and (b) of my said Will and in place of the said Clauses I direct my sole executor to dissolve Ling Bros. Pty Ltd., International Lodge Pty. Ltd. and Waterfront Investments Pty. Ltd and make in specie distribution of the assets of the companies in the following manner: - 
Block A consisting of 48 residential units of 100, Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay, Sydney, Australia to my son Wilson Lam; 
Block B consisting of 20 residential units of 100, Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay, Sydney, Australia, 44-50, Harbour Street and 27, Napier Street, Dover Heights to my son Jack Ling.
 . Any loans owed by Ling Bros. Pty. Ltd. to United Overseas Investment Co. N.V. at the time of the dissolution will be repaid by utilizing my off-shore deposits.
 . In all other respects I confirm my said Will." . Mr. Ling Snr. died in Hong Kong on 29 November 1986, seemingly without having revoked or further varied his Will of 14 March 1984 or either of the First and Second Codicils to that Will; although the evidence does not clearly demonstrate that this was so, such evidence as there is, coupled with the events which have since occurred, would suggest that, at some time after the death of Mr. Ling Snr., Peter Lam obtained in Hong Kong a Grant of Probate of Mr. Ling Snr's Will of 14 March and First and Second Codicils thereto and, either, obtained a Grant by this Court of Probate of that Will and those Codicils, or, had this Court re- seal the Grant of Probate which had been made in Hong Kong (see Wills Probate & Administration Act 1898 s.107); although, again, the evidence does not clearly demonstrate that this was so, such evidence as there is, coupled with the events which thereafter occurred, would seem to make it tolerably plain that, notwithstanding the passage of almost 5 years since the death of Mr. Ling Snr., by September 1991,
Mr. Ling Snr's estate - particularly so much of it was represented by assets in this State - was far from being in a position in which the provisions of cll. 6 and 7 of the Will of 14 March 1984, as modified by the First and Second
Codicils to that Will, could then be put into effect. In particular, it should be noted that Ling Bros. remained registered as the proprietor of the whole of the units in Strata Plan No. 14897; that Waterfront, while no longer owning the property at 44-50 Harbour Street, Darling Harbour - for which it had received compensation - remained registered as the proprietor of the property at 27 Napier Street, Dover Heights; that Waterfront owed a significant sum of money to Ling Bros. which was its holding company; that Ling Bros. in its turn, owed a substantial sum of money to United; and that no steps had been taken towards having Ling Bros. or Waterfront wound-up, and still less had any steps been taken which would have placed Peter Lam as the Executor of Mr. Ling
Snr's Will in a position to make an in specie distribution to the First
Respondent or Jack Ling in accordance with the provisions of cl. 1 of the
Second Codicil to Mr. Ling Snr's Will of 14 March 1984; on 12 September 1991, Peter Lam, Jack Ling and the First Respondent, entered into the Deed of Family Arrangement to which I have earlier referred.
That Deed of Family Arrangement, after reciting (inter alia): "E. Whilst the Will and Codicils of the Deceased satisfactorily divide all the real and personal property of the Deceased to which the before recited beneficiaries are absolutely entitled the implementation of the dispositions is complex.
 
F. The parties are desirous of entering into this Deed to Vest the Deceased's Estate in a way which whilst minimising the commercial complexities is fair and equitable to each of them and which corresponds with the oft expressed paternal wishes of the Deceased." and after providing: - "2 Subject to the implementation of each of the agreements covenants and undertakings herein the parties hereto as the beneficiaries of all the property of the Deceased's Estate have agreed that the arrangement constituted by this Deed is a mutually satisfactory division of all the property of the Deceased's Estate both real and personal and that hereafter each party shall own, free of any claim by the other, all items of property of every kind which are now owned or which may be transferred to him pursuant hereto and each party shall be free to dispose of the same fully and effectively.
 . To the extent that the implementation of this arrangement might constitute a variation of the powers vested in Mr. Peter Lam as sole executor and trustee of the Deceased's Estate, the parties hereto, being solely entitled to the Deceased's Estate, hereby release and forever discharge Mr. Peter Lam of and from all causes of action, claims, rights or demands whatsoever in law or in equity, which any of the parties ever had or now has or may have in the future against Mr. Peter Lam as sole executor and trustee as aforesaid but nothing herein shall derogate from the obligations of each of the parties to implement this arrangement herein set forth." then proceeded to make quite detailed provisions for the purpose of giving effect to the detailed arrangements which had been made between the parties. Since those arrangements are quite complex, and it is not necessary for the purposes of this Judgment to enter into the complexities of those arrangements, it is sufficient to record that[cedilla] for present purposes, what was involved was that Peter Lam, in his capacity as the holder of all the shares in United, the ultimate holding company, would cause Ling Bros. to enter into a contract for the sale to the First Respondent of the units comprised in Block A, and to enter into a contract for the sale to Jack Ling of the units comprised in Block B, and, further, that Peter Lam would cause Ling Bros., which was the holding company of Waterfront, to cause that company to enter into a contract to sell 27 Napier Street, Dover Heights to Jack Ling and, further still, that Peter Lam in his several capacities would procure the winding-up of each of Ling Bros. and Waterfront, and would procure the payment to the First Respondent and to Jack Ling from the resources of United or Ling Bros. or Waterfront of sums sufficient to enable the First Respondent and Jack Ling to complete the several contracts for purchase which were contemplated by the Deed of Family Arrangement, those sums, in each case, to be made available to the First Respondent and Jack Ling by way of gift; whether or not the various contracts which were contemplated by the Deed of Family Arrangement had been entered into by 26 November 1991, the relevance of which date will shortly appear, it would seem tolerably plain that they had not been completed - far from that having been so, it would seem that the contract for the sale to the First Respondent of the units in Block A was not completed until about November 1992, while the passing of the appropriate resolutions required to commence the wind-up of Ling Bros. appears not to have occurred until September 1992; meantime, on 26 November 1991, the First Respondent (therein referred to as the "Assignor") and the Appellant (therein referred to as the "Assignee") entered into the Deed upon which the Appellant relies to support her claim in these proceedings, which Deed, so far as is relevant, was in the following terms: - "WHEREAS 
A. The ASSIGNOR is the beneficial owner of certain (sic) number of share of Ling Brothers Pty Ltd entitling him to hold and possess property known as Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay, New South Wales, consisting of eight (8) floors or levels; 
B. The company Ling Brothers Pty Ltd is now in the process of liquidation and the title over the said property known as Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay, New South Wales, will be transferred to the ASSIGNOR's name absolutely; 
C. The ASSIGNOR has agreed to transfer and to assign the ASSIGNOR'S RIGHT over certain floors or levels of the property known as Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay, or the one-third (1/3) of his right and ownership of the property when the title is transferred to his name absolutely.
 
NOW THIS DEED WITNESSES that in consideration of these premises and of these presents, the parties hereby covenant and agree with each other as follows: - . The ASSIGNOR as beneficial owner of the shares of Ling Brothers Pty Ltd entitling him to hold Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay, or as absolute owner of the said property when title is converted or transferred to ASSIGNOR's name absolutely, hereby assigns, transfers and conveys, in a manner absolute and irrevocable, his rights, interest and ownerships of Levels or Floors 3, 4 and 5 or one-third of his ownership of the property known as Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay.
 . The ASSIGNEE hereby accepts the assignment and transfer of the said property.
 . The parties hereby agree that the provisions of this deed shall bind their executors, assigns and administration; and the ASSIGNEE's rights over said property may be notated on its title; . The parties further undertake and/or direct their executors, assigns or administrators to execute any transfer, paper or documents to carry out the effects of this Deed or bring the title of the ASSIGNEE under any Act or regulations." . for reasons upon which it is not necessary to enter, it had, by early September 1992, become clear that the First Respondent did not accept that the terms of the Deed of November 1991 placed him under any obligation to the Appellant; on about 28 September 1992, there was filed on behalf of the Appellant, a
Caveat, given dealing No. E793281, by which Caveat, the Appellant claimed in respect of Units Nos. 1-60 inclusive in Strata Plan 14897 - of which Units, as the Appellant was well aware, Ling Bros. was still registered as proprietor - an "equitable interest as Assignee in the subject land" - the instrument relied on being the Deed of Assignment of 26 November 1991 - and by virtue of the facts: "1. The Assignor is the beneficial owner of a certain number of shares in Ling Bros. Pty. Ltd. entitling him to hold and possess the property known as Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay, existing (sic) of eight (8) floors or levels.
 . The company Ling Bros. Pty. Ltd. is to be wound-up pursuant to the terms of the Last Will and Testament of Chen-Sheh Ling who died on 29 November 1986 and the property at 100 Elizabeth Bay Rd., Elizabeth Bay is to be transferred in specie to the Assignor.
 . By the Deed of Assignment dated 26 November 1991, the Assignor agreed to transfer and to assign to the Assignee three (3) floors or levels of the property or a one-third interest therein." 
Quite apart from any other defects which the Caveat may reveal, it is apparent that the Caveat was excessive, since it claimed an interest in the lots comprising Block B, in respect of which, by no stretch of the imagination, could the Appellant claim to have had any relevant interest; as I have earlier foreshadowed, completion of the contract for the sale to the First Respondent of the units comprised in Block A appears to have taken place in late November 1992. To enable the registration of the relevant transfer or transfers, the Appellant, either, filed at the Land Titles Office, or, provided to the solicitors then acting for Ling Bros. and the First
Respondent a withdrawal of the Caveat insofar as it related to Units 1-20, and a letter addressed to the Registrar-General indicating consent to the registration of the transfer or transfers to the First Respondent of Units -60 in Strata Plan No. 14897. Although the evidence does not record when it was that that transfer was, or those transfers were, registered, it is clear that, at some stage thereafter, the First Respondent became registered as the proprietor of the relevant units; although the evidence does not disclose the circumstances in which this came to be done, it would appear that, at some time prior to 29 April 1993, the First Respondent entered into some form of contract, or agreement, to transfer to the Second Respondent, Elizabeth Bay Properties Pty. Limited, the units comprised in Block A in the Strata Plan, and that, in pursuance of that contract, or agreement, on 29 April 1993 the First Respondent executed three forms of Memorandum of Transfer to the Second Respondent of those units - of those forms of Memorandum of Transfer, two, given dealing Nos. I382725 and
I382726 related to Units 21-40 and 41-60 inclusive, while the third Transfer related to Units 61-68 inclusive, which units, it will earlier have been noted, were not the subject of the Caveat which had been lodged on behalf of the Appellant; after the Memoranda of Transfer had been lodged at the Land Titles
Office, there was made - but whether at the behest of the First, or of the
Second, Respondent is not clear - a request for the issue of a Notice pursuant to the provisions of [s.74I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74i.html) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), which
Notice was served upon the Appellant's solicitors on 29 June 1993; the material on the court file would seem to indicate that, on 6 July , application was made to Hulme J, who seems then to have been the Duty
Judge in the Equity Division, for leave to file, and to give short notice of, the Summons herein and a Notice of Motion seeking an order pursuant to the provisions of [s.74K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74k.html) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), extending the operation of the Caveat until the further order of the Court, to which application Hulme J acceded, both the Summons and Notice of Motion being made returnable on 15 July 1993. In her Summons, the Appellant claimed (inter alia): - "1. A declaration that the Defendant holds all his right and title to the land comprised in Folio Identifiers 33 to 56 inclusive in Strata Plan 14897 on trust for the Plaintiff.
 ..........
 . In the alternative to the declaration and orders sought in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 hereof a declaration that the Defendant holds one-third shares in the land comprised in each of Folio Identifiers 21-68 inclusive in Strata Plan 14897 on trust for the Plaintiff.
 together with consequential orders for the execution and delivery to the Appellant a Memorandum of Transfer or of Memoranda of Transfer in registerable form to give effect to the form of relief prayed in those two prayers; 
When the Summons and Notice of Motion came before Hulme J on 15 July 1993, Mr.
D.E. Grieve QC, who then appeared - as he did on the hearing of the appeal before us - with Ms. D. M. Coulton for the First Respondent, provided to his
Honour an outline of the various matters upon which, so he indicated, the
First Respondent proposed to rely in opposition to the Appellant's claim.
Those matters were some five in number, of which, for present purposes, it is sufficient to record that they included: - "(1) The rule with Milroy v. Lord <case>; [(1862) 4 DeGF & J 264] is authority; ..........
 
A claim that the Deed is void for uncertainty." 
In a Judgment which he delivered at the time, Hulme J after recording that if the other three matters were to be argued it would be necessary for further evidence to be filed, continued: - "Be that as it may, I have decided to deal today with the issues raised by Milroy versus Lord and the question of uncertainty; to give directions for filing by the plaintiff of any affidavit in reply and standing over the matter, assuming the plaintiff succeeds on the two issues that I will consider this afternoon, to some date next week.
 
The case will, accordingly, proceed this afternoon on the topics of Milroy versus Lord and uncertainty. The parties agree that all of the evidence relevant to those two issues for the purposes of this application is before me.
 
In addition to the two matters which I indicated would be argued this afternoon, there will also be debated the form of the caveat and the justification for that form, having reard to the terms of the Deed of Assignment relied on." 
The hearing proceeded on that basis and at the conclusion of counsels' submissions, his Honour reserved Judgment. On the following day, on the Appellant giving the usual undertaking as to damages, his Honour extended the operation of the Caveat until further order. 
When he came to deliver his Judgment, Hulme J, for reasons which he recorded (Appeal Book pp. 103-104), rejected the submissions made on behalf of the
First Respondent based on the ground of uncertainty. Although the First
Respondent has filed a Notice of Contention seeking to maintain the argument that the Deed of Assignment was void for uncertainty (Appeal Book p.121), I do not consider it necessary to enter upon that argument.

At the commencement of his consideration of the submissions based upon "the voluntary nature of the document" Hulme J recorded the following (Appeal Book p.104): - "I turn then to the defence based upon the voluntary nature of the document. For present purposes it is not necessary for me to explore any motives behind the beneficence on the part of the Defendant. It is sufficient to say that it was common ground that the Plaintiff gave no consideration for the benefits conferred on her under the Deed. It is also agreed that neither at the time of execution of the Deed of Assignment or subsequently has the Plaintiff received a Certificate of Title or executed Memorandum of Transfer or any Share Certificates and Executed Transfer of Shares. The Defendant submits that the rule in Milroy v. Lord <case>; [4 De G.F. & J. 264] to the effect that Equity will not perfect an imperfect gift leads to the conclusion that the Deed conferred no enforceable equity on the Plaintiff.
 
The Plaintiff's answer to the Defendant's argument on this aspect of the case may be summarised as follows: - though Equity will not assist a volunteer to complete a gift, it will assist a donee of a completed gift, volunteer though she may be.
 precise identification is required of what was being dealt with by the Deed of Assignment; that what the Defendant had at the relevant time was a right to due administration of his father's estate or, if the Deed of Family Arrangement hereafter mentioned governed the matter, contractual rights; the first was an equitable chose in action, the second a legal chose in action; the subject of the assignment was part of these; all that is needed for an effective and complete assignment of such an interest is a manifestation of an immediate and irrevocable intention to so assign; what the Deed of Assignment dealt with was not shares or land but the Defendants `rights, interest and ownership' over certain property - terms appropriate to cover such Choses in action; the Deed of Assignment was therefore effective." 
Despite the emphasis which, during the course of argument before Hulme J, appears to have been placed upon the "rule in Milroy v. Lord" - and also upon the Judgments in the High Court in Anning v. Anning 1 and Corin v. Patton 2, in the event, Hulme J did not, in terms to determine the application on that basis. On the contrary, the expressed bases of his Honour's decision that the Appellant had failed to make out a sufficient interest in the units which would support her Caveat appear to have been: - whatever may have been the First Respondent's rights in relation to the units in Block A had the Will and Codicils of Mr. Ling Snr. ultimately been given effect to, the First Respondent's rights to have his father's estate duly administered terminated as on and from the date of execution of the Deed of Family Arrangement; as from the date of execution of the Deed of Family Arrangement, the First
Respondent's rights, interests and ownerships over Block A amounted to: a contractual right against Peter Lam to cause Ling Bros. to enter into a contract for the sale of that property to the Defendant; and a contractual right against Peter Lam to require Peter Lam to cause United to make gifts to the First Respondent - which gifts would enable the First
Respondent to complete the contemplated contract for sale - and to take whatever steps were necessary to enable that to occur; the terms of the Deed of Assignment were not appropriate to effect an assignment to the Appellant of any rights or interests under the Deed of
Family Arrangement.
Clause 4 of the Deed of Assignment tended to indicate that the subject matter of the intended gift was the legal title to either a number of the units in Block A or to an aliquot share in the title to all of those units.

However, what is not stated in his Honour's Judgment, but which appears to have been a necessary consequence of what he had held, was that, as the intended gift related to the legal title to some of the units or an interest in all of them, the intended gift, being voluntary on the part of the First
Respondent, was not enforceable at the suit of the Appellant, first, since, at the relevant time the First Respondent had no such title, and, second, since in consequence it was not possible for the First Respondent, at the relevant time, to do all that was necessary on his part to be done in order to vest that title in the Appellant.

Despite the bases upon which upon the hearing before Hulme J the Appellant had sought to support her Caveat, and despite the bases upon which, on the hearing of the appeal, the Appellant sought to support the appeal, it would appear tolerably plain that, at least in the first instance, the Appellant did not seek to challenge Hulme J's conclusion that, as from the date of execution of the Deed of Family Arrangement, the First Respondent's rights to have his father's estate administered in pursuance of the terms of the Will and
Codicils terminated, and that, thereafter, his rights in relation to the units in Block A were contractual rights against Peter Lam to have the latter take the steps to which I have earlier referred. That this was so is reflected in the fact that the relevant grounds of appeal contained in an Amended Notice of
Appeal filed on behalf of the Appellant on 3 March 1995 (Appeal Book p.118) were limited to: - "1. His honour erred in concluding that the terms of clause 1 of the Deed of Assignment dated 26 November, 1991 are not terms apt to convey to the Appellant part of the chose in action which the Respondent had against one Peter Lam entitling the Respondent to have conveyed to him certain property.
 . His honour erred in: concluding that the Respondent's chose in action was a mere expectancy; and concluding that it was therefore not assignable; and failing to conclude that, as between the parties, it should be treated as assignable." and that no application was made thereafter for leave to amend the grounds of appeal to permit the Appellant to submit - as was in fact submitted in her written submissions - that, notwithstanding the execution of the Deed of Family Arrangement, the First Respondent retained his right to have his father's estate administered in accordance with the terms of the Will and Codicils and retained the rights to the units in Block A to which that right entitled him.

The fate of the present appeal depends upon the determination of two questions, they being: - what was the property the subject of the intended gift referred to in the
Deed of Assignment? did the First Respondent do everything which, according to the nature of that property, was necessary to be done in order to transfer that property to the Appellant and make the gift binding upon himself? 
The task of determining what was the subject matter of the intended gift is less easy than it might otherwise have been since: - it is clear enough that the form which the Deed takes is based on a complete misapprehension as to the true facts and as to the First Respondent's "rights, interests and ownerships" in respect of Block A; and far from being a shining example of the draftsman's art, the Deed of
Assignment evidences a level of draftsmanship which is abysmally low.

As far as the first of these matters is concerned, it is sufficient to record that: - the First Respondent was not, at the time of the execution of the Deed of
Assignment, the beneficial, and still less the legal, owner of any shares in
Ling Bros; even if he had been, the fact that he was the owner of any shares in Ling
Bros. would not have entitled him either to occupy, or otherwise to deal with, any of the units in Block A;
Ling Bros. was not at the time of the execution of the Deed of Assignment in the process of being wound-up; even if Ling Bros. had been in the process of being wound-up, the completion of the winding-up would not have led to Block A or any of the units in it, being transferred to the First Respondent even if, as part of the process of winding-up, there were to be a distribution in specie of either
Block A, or the units in it. In the event supposed, distribution could be made only to the shareholders - who did not include the First Respondent - who held the shares on behalf of United, and any transfer by United to the First
Respondent could have been effected only by Peter Lam in his capacity of executor of Mr. Ling Snr's Will and Codicils and as the holder of any relevant shares in United causing that company then to transfer Block A to the First
Respondent.

So far as the second of these matters is concerned, it is sufficient to point to the fact that, whereas recital C clearly contemplates that any transfer was to take place "when the title (was) transferred to (the First Respondent's) name absolutely" - as also does clause 1, which uses the language "as absolute owner of the said property when the title is converted or transferred to (his) name absolutely" - both clauses 1 and 2 also use the language of a present assignment and transfer of, in the first case, "(the First Respondent's) rights, interests and ownerships ..." and, in the second case "of the said property".

Notwithstanding the difficulties to which I have earlier referred, it is, in my view, tolerably plain that the subject matter of the intended gift reflected in the Deed of Assignment was the title to, either, the units on
Levels 3, 4 and 5 of Block A, or, to a one-third interest as tenant-in-common with the First Respondent in all of the units in Block A (I leave to one side the question whether, so construed, the Deed is void for uncertainty) rather than any right which the First Respondent would have had against Peter Lam to have his late father's estate administered in accordance with the terms of the
Will and Codicils, or against Peter Lam and Jack Ling to have the terms of the
Deed of Family Arrangement carried into effect.

As will be apparent from what I have written at the commencement of this
Judgment, the Appellant accepted that if this Court were so to conclude the appeal must fail. Although I am of the view that this concession was properly made, it is as well to record why that should be so.

Until comparatively recently, there was room for doubt as to the meaning to be given to so much of the first of the principles stated by Turner LJ in
Milroy v. Lord 3 as required that, if a voluntary settlement were to be valid and effectual, "the settlor must have done everything which according to the nature of the property comprised in the settlement was necessary to be done in order to transfer the property and render the settlement binding upon him." However, the decision of the High Court in Corin v. Patton would seem now to have resolved that doubt in favour of the view expressed by
Griffith CJ in Anning v. Anning 4.

The relevant passage in the Judgment of Griffith CJ in Anning v. Anning was as follows [5]: - "The whole law on the subject is contained in the judgment of Turner LJ in Milroy v. Lord: `I take the law of this Court to be well settled, that, in order to render a voluntary settlement valid and effectual, the settlor must have done everything which, according to the nature of the property comprised in the settlement, was necessary to be done in order to transfer the property and render the settlement binding upon him. He may of course do this by actually transferring the property to the persons for whom he intends to provide, and the provision will then be effectual, and it will be equally effectual if he transfers the property to a trustee for the purposes of the settlement, or declares that he himself holds it in trust for those purposes; and if the property be personal, the trust may, as I apprehend, be declared either in writing or by parol; but, in order to render the settlement binding, one or other of these modes must, as I understand the law of this Court, be resorted to, for there is no equity in this Court to perfect an imperfect gift. The cases I think go further to this extent, that if the settlement is intended to be effectuated by one of the modes to which I have referred, the Court will not give effect to it by applying another of those modes. If it is intended to take effect by transfer, the Court will not hold the intended transfer to operate as a declaration of trust, for then every imperfect instrument would be made effectual by being converted into a perfect trust.' 
The learned Chief Justice thought that in the present case the donor intended to constitute himself a trustee of the property, and that the deed was therefore effectual as to all the property described in it. I am unable to agree in this conclusion. It seems clear to me that the testator intended to divest himself of his legal ownership. The question therefore arises, and must be answered with respect to each class of property described in the deed, whether the donor did everything which, according to the nature of the property, was necessary to be done in order to transfer the property and make the gift binding upon himself. I think that the words `necessary to be done' as used by Turner LJ in Milroy v. Lord, mean necessary to be done by the donor. Thus, in the case of shares in a company which are only transferable by an instrument of transfer lodged with the company, I think that the donor has done all that is necessary on his part as soon as he has executed the transfer. So, in the case of a gift of land held under the Acts regulating the transfer of land by registration, I think that a gift would be complete on execution of the instrument of transfer and delivery of it to the donee. If, however, anything remains to be done by the donor, in the absence of which the donee cannot establish his title to the property as against a third person, the gift is imperfect, and in the absence of consideration the Court will not aid the donee as against the donor. But, if all that remains to be done can be done by the donee himself, so that he does not need the assistance of the Court, the gift is, I think, complete." 
It follows that if, as is my view, the subject matter of the intended gift was, either, the legal title to some of the units in Block A, or, the title to a one-third interest as tenant-in-common with the First Respondent of the units in Block A, and if, as is clear enough, the First Respondent did not, at the time of execution of the Deed of Assignment or at any time since, do all that was necessary for him to have done to effect a transfer of the legal title to those units or to that interest, the intended gift was, and remains, incomplete and is not one to the enforcement of which a court of equity will lend its aid.

It follows, in my view, that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

COLE JA: The material factual circumstances are set forth in the judgment of Powell JA. 
Critical to this appeal is the construction of cl.1 of the Deed of Assignment.
It reads: "1. The asisgnor (sic) as beneficial owner of the shares of Ling Brothers Pty
Limited entitling him to hold Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay or as absolute owner of the said property when title is converted or transferred to Assignor's name absolutely, hereby assigns, transfers and conveys, in a manner absolute and irrevocable, his rights, interests and ownerships over Levels or Floors 3, 4 and 5 or one third of his ownership of the property known as Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay." 
That assignment was an assignment by way of gift, there being no consideration. An assignment without consideration, even though by deed, is a voluntary assignment.[6] Equity will not assist a volunteer, such as Miss
Garcia to enforce the gift.[7] In this suit Miss Garcia seeks the assistance of equity to enforce the gift. As this is impermissible, the suit must fail.

Second, the subject matter purportedly conveyed by cl.1 of the Deed of
Assignment may be: a present assignment of an interest in land being the property at 100
Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay, or a present assignment of a future interest in land, or a present assignment of a chose in action, being either Mr Lam's right to have the Deed of the Family Arrangement performed, or his right to enforce administration of his father's will and codicil.

If it be (a), Mr Lam had nothing to convey for he did not own 100 Elizabeth
Bay Road on 26 November 1991, the date of the Deed. The assignment would thus be ineffective. It would also infringe the principles in Milroy versus Lord.

If it be (b), as I think it is, it is an assignment of an interest in land. In accordance with the principles enunciated in Milroy versus Lord, Miss Garcia must fail, as was conceded, for the gift is imperfect and equity will not assist a voluntary donee.

In my opinion the assignment cannot be construed as the assignment of either chose in action referred to in (c). That is because it did not purport to be an assignment of the right to have the Deed of Family Arrangement performed, nor of the right to have Mr Lam's father's estate administered. There is no basis upon which the words in cl.1 can be tortured to construe them to be an assignment of such a chose in action.

Accordingly this is a second basis upon which Miss Garcia's suit must fail.

Thirdly, if the correct construction of cl.1 is that it is a present assignment of future rights to property, that constitutes an assignment of an expectancy only. Such an assignment can only be an equitable assignment and must be for value.[8] Being voluntary, it is unenforceable.

It follows, in my opinion that the defences raise in the action by Mr Lam, and addressed by Hulme J were properly upheld and Miss Garcia's claim must fail.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
  <case>; <case>; [(1989-1990) 169 CLR 540] supra (see Corin v. Patton (supra) at 558-559 per Mason CJ and McHugh J; 582 per Deane J; CP 564-565 per Brennan J (as he then was) [5] supra at 1056-1057 <case>; [45
ER 1185]; Anning v
Anning <case>; [(1907) 4 CLR 1049.] [7] Corin & Anor versus Patton <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 540] at 551, 556-557.
 <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 9] at 22.
 * * * 
