

Foxman and Sons (Australia) Pty Limited (in liq) and Ors versus Kubpower 
Pty Limited Matter No Ca 40506/96 [1998] NSWSC 631 (23 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 December 1998 
FOXMAN & SONS (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED (in liq) & ORS versus KUBPOWER PTY LIMITED 
CA 40506/96; DC 2686/93 October 1998 
Priestley JA, Meagher JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM WILLIAMS DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40506/96; DC 2686/93 
DELIVERED: 23 OCTOBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 20 AUGUST 1998 
PARTIES: FOXMAN & SONS (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED (in liq) & ORS versus KUBPOWER PTY LIMITED 
CORAM: PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA; BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL: 
Second, third, sixth Appellants: R ANGYAL 
Respondent: D THORLEY 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellants: WHITTENS 
Respondent: COODE & CORRY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 12 
CATCHWORDS: Fraudulent misrepresentation - possessory lien - res judicata. 
FOXMAN & SONS (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED (IN LIQUIDATION) (ACN 052 515 974) AND ORS versus KUBPOWER (NEW SOUTH WALES) PTY LIMITED (ACN 059 583 265) 
FACTS 
The seven appellants consist of six companies (of which four are in liquidation at the date of the appeal), all controlled by the second appellant, Mr Foxman. One of these companies contracted with the respondent for the repair of an industrial hammer, a tool required for the business of the group of companies, excavation. Upon repair of the hammer, the respondent attempted to deliver the hammer to the appellant as directed contingent upon receipt of a bank cheque in payment of the repair. The appellant effected delivery without the consent of the respondent, who claims a lien over the hammer. The respondent, the successful plaintiff below, initially sought relief in the Federal Court, for inter alia fraudulent misrepresentation, which proceedings were remitted to the District Court.

The plaintiff's case was made out on misrepresentation, which the appellant argues was a promise to pay, not a representation that he could pay. The appellant argues extinguishment of the possessory lien by wrongful delivery and res judicata based on the judgment of Whitlam J in proceedings for interlocutory relief in the Federal Court.

HELD 
By Meagher JA; Priestley, Beazley JJA agreeing:
A mere promise is not a representation, but it may be intertwined with a representation, which in this case was a representation that the appellant/defendant was in a position to pay the plaintiff/respondent because it had promised to do so.
There is no established principle in our law that loss by trickery extinguishes a lien.
Res judicata in relation to extinguishment of the possessory lien could not have arisen in the interlocutory judgment in the Federal Court as estoppel does not arise out of proceedings for interlocutory relief.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs 
FOXMAN & SONS (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED (IN LIQUIDATION) (ACN 052 515 974) AND ORS versus KUBPOWER (NEW SOUTH WALES) PTY LIMITED (ACN 059 583 265) 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Meagher JA. 
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal from a number of orders made by acting District Court Judge Williams in favour of the plaintiff/respondent Kubpower Pty Limited, and in particular from a verdict of nearly $20,000 for the appellant against Mr Phillip Foxman, one of the appellants. 
There are seven appellants, namely Foxman & Sons (Australia) Pty Limited (In Liquidation) (ACN 052 515 974), Phillip Foxman, Foxman Holdings Pty
Limited (ACN 003 189 366), Foxman Excavation and Plant Hire Pty Limited (In
Liquidation)(ACN 002 875 890), Foxman Hire Pty Limited (In Liquidation)(ACN 515 081), Botany Building Recyclers Pty Limited (ACN 003 760 183), Foxman
Contracting Pty Limited (In Liquidation) (ACN 050 110 033). It will be observed that, of the six corporate appellants there are now four in liquidation. The evidence discloses that none of the corporate appellants had a paid-up share capital of more than $2 and that the human being behind the corporate facade of each of them was the second appellant, Mr Phillip Foxman.
Indeed, he was the sole shareholder and sole director of each company. When he wished to enter into a contract in the course of his business, it seems to have been a sheer matter of luck in the name of which company he would enter it. The business of each corporation seems to have been excavation. The head office (if I may use so grandiloquent a term) of each company was situate at
Botany, a suburb of Sydney. Excavations were done at various places, particularly (so far as the present case is concerned) in North Sydney, another and different suburb of Sydney.

At all material times, the third appellant, Foxman Holdings Pty Limited, was the owner of a piece of machinery called an "industrial hammer". The plaintiff (the respondent in the appeal) asserted that at all times it had a lien over this hammer.

On or about 13-15 June 1993 the plaintiff undertook to repair the appellants' hammer (which weighs about four tonnes) at a cost of $55,000 plus $11,000 sales tax. That was a contract between the respondent and Foxman & Sons
Pty Limited, then not in liquidation. The parties who negotiated that contract were the second appellant, Mr Phillip Foxman, on behalf of the first appellant and a Mr Angelo di Cesare on behalf of the respondent. The contract consisted in part of an offer by a fax sent on 13 May 1993 by Mr di
Cesare to the first appellant. Its relevant parts are as follows: "It is our understanding that HM2200-F1 parts are no longer available because of the age of the F1 model - we believe over 10 years.

Therefore we must use F11 parts.
 (Phil this is the same as trying to buy Holder-F.J. parts from G.M.H. - they become unavailable after so many years).

Kubpower will undertake to fix your hammer for $55,000.00 under following conditions: 
We receive your order (written) to proceed with repairs.

Warranty on repairs will be for 3-months; - Krupp standard.

Repairs will be completed within 21 days, always subject to parts availability and and(sic) airfreight delays; - sooner if possible.

Payment for repairs must be by bank guarantee or irrevocable letter of credit, opened on date of your order an payable 90-days after date of opening.

Phil, we always wish to supply service, but we must be paid, and we as
Kubpower do not wish to enter into any historic disputes you may have with
Krupp.

You will need to reserve your rights to settle any outstanding problems you may have with Krupp and/or previous managements.

Regards 
Angelo." 
The acceptance by the first appellant also consisted of a fax, which, so far as it is relevant, said "I feel it is very expensive but I don't have any alternative, and therefore request you to proceed with the repair's ASAP." The hammer was repaired by the respondent and was ready for re-delivery to the first appellant by 7 June. What happened on 7 June is summarized by his Honour in the following terms: "vii) On Monday 7 June Mr Di Cesare was advised that the hammer was to be delivered to the North Sydney excavation site, an hour, he says, beforehand.
He arranged for Agius to deliver the hammer on the proviso that a bank cheque was exchanged on delivery. I accept that it was always part of the agreement that the plaintiff would commission the hammer on site. However, as stated above, I also accept that on delivery and prior to commissioning, the second defendant had promised to provide the plaintiff with a bank cheque for $55,000. When Agius arrived at the North Sydney site there was no means of unloading the hammer. He rang the first defendants premises at Botany and was asked to deliver it there. Di Cesare told Agius that would be alright provided he got the cheque. Agius then drove to Botany with the hammer and on arrival spoke with Shipell. He told Shipell that he had to have a bank cheque before he handed over the hammer. Shipell then rang Di Cesare and said that he did not have a bank cheque and would Di Cesare accept a personal cheque. Di Cesare refused this offer and indicted the hammer should be returned to the plaintiff and it would be returned to the site on Wednesday giving them time to arrange a bank cheque. Shipell then transferred him to Mr Foxman and again Di Cesare reiterated that the hammer was not to be unloaded until there was a bank cheque. Foxman is alleged to have said "I'll get a bank cheque." viii) At Botany Agius was then told to see Mr Foxman in the office which he did. He again asked for a bank cheque and was told there wasn't one. Mr Foxman then left the office a proposition he agreed to in evidence. He returned about -10 minutes later and said to Agius that he would have a bank cheque tomorrow. Agius then told Foxman that he would have to take the hammer back to the workshop and the funds could either be telegraphically transferred ready for deliver on Wednesday. Mr Foxman said he had to go and Agius was ushered out of the office. On returning to his vehicle he found the hammer had been removed. He asked Shipell to put the hammer back on the truck but this was refused. He arranged for his office to phone the police and left the premises and waited outside. When the police arrived Mr Churnan, another employee of Mr
Foxman told the police the matter was under litigation. The police declined to intervene and Agius eventually left on instruction from Di Cesare. This is essentially the version of events given by Mr Di Cesare and Mr Agius.

Of course the second defendant, Shipell and Churnan give a differing version.
However, what both Shipell and Churnan agree on is that when Agius came back from Foxman's office and found the hammer unloaded he became extremely angry and eventually the police were called." 
As can be inferred, Shipell was an employee of the first appellant, or, perhaps of one of the other Foxman companies.

Immediately after 7 June, therefore, the plaintiff was in the position where it had neither the money nor the hammer, when it should have had one or the other. Moreover, it had been deprived of possession of the hammer by a trick.

The plaintiff sought relief in the Federal Court, where its claim was based on fraudulent misrepresentation, (ii) breach of contract, and (iii) breach of s.52 of the Trade Practices Act. There was an interlocutory hearing before
Whitlam J, who refused relief and remitted the matter to the District Court of
New South Wales, where it came on for hearing before Williams ADCJ. His Honour found on almost every issue for the plaintiff, and in almost every case believed the plaintiff's witnesses, rather than the defendant's witnesses.

The defendants case was hardly bristling with merit, but that, as Mr Angyal, learned counsel for the defendants, pointed out, was not really relevant. All matters of appeal were questions of law.

The appellant's first, and most telling, ground of appeal concerns his
Honour's finding that the defendant's assurance that there would be payment by bank cheque was a fraudulent misrepresentation. The contention with which his
Honour was dealing was that which arose from paragraphs 32 and 33 of the
Statement of Claim. These were expressed thus: "32. In order to induce the Plaintiff to deliver the hammer to the First
Defendant, the Second Defendant represented to the Plaintiff that the first defendant would pay to the plaintiff by bank cheque the sum of $66,000 prior to taking possession off (sic) the hammer at 38 McPherson Street, Botany in the State of New South Wales.
In reliance on the said representation the Plaintiff transported the hammer to the premises at 38 McPherson Street, Botany." 
But, it was said, the facts do not permit a finding for the plaintiff on these paragraphs. There were two sets of conversations between the parties: one on /14 May, one on 7 June, nothing in between. There was no representation on /14 May, merely a contractual promise to pay by bank cheque (or its equivalent). A promise is not a representation. Then, there might have been a representation on 7 June, but not one on which the plaintiff acted to its detriment. The lorry containing the hammer was already at Botany. But, in my view, the matter is not as simple as that. One must look at the position of the first defendant on 13/14 May. It was hardly overcapitalised. It had outstanding two winding up petitions against it. It could not have provided a bank cheque at that date. It had been unable or unwilling to pay its previous repairers (the "historic disputes" referred to in Mr di Cesare's fax). The situation was thus summarized in evidence before Whitlam J by Mr Foxman (the second defendant) himself: "I didn't know when it was going to be delivered, you know. We got a fax on - late Friday afternoon to say that, "The hammer is ready. Where do you want it delivered", any my manager, Stewart Chernan, advised me of it and I said, "Well, we've got a crane going to be on the site early in the morning on
Monday morning. Get it delivered then and have the thing commissioned, and make sure that the hammer is running correctly.
 "But you knew they expected to be paid 55,000 on delivery, did not you? ---I knew their request for $55,000, but I believe that I was placed in a very difficult position where I was desperate for the hammer and I had no other alternatives. I was over a barrel and I needed the thing fixed and once it was fixed I considered that, well, then we would look at any disputes that we may have, and/or any warranty that Krupp might have." 
Thus, whilst it is true that a mere promise is not itself a representation, it is also true that it may be intertwined with a representation. In the present case the representation, made in the conversation of 13/14 May, was a representation by the second defendant that the first defendant was then in a position where it could procure payment by bank cheque if delivery were made of the repaired hammer within 21 days. That promise was either false to its knowledge, or else reckless in the relevant sense. The unfortunate plaintiff acted in reliance on it, with the result I have set out.

Mr Angyal's next ground of appeal concerned the plaintiff's allegation of s.52 of the Trade Practices Act. For this purpose I will assume that the representation relied upon was that which I have just outlined. The submission is that the first appellant "adduced evidence that it had reasonable grounds for making the representation." This ground must fail, and for a variety of reasons. In the first place, its obligation was to adduce evidence, i.e matters accepted by the Court, not simply wild assertions not believed by the
Court. In the second place, if my analysis of the factual position be correct, it could not have had such reasonable grounds. In the third place, it was not a party to the litigation and thus could hardly be said to have "adduced" any evidence of anything.

The appellant's next submission was one which I must confess I found nearly impossible to understand. I shall quote Mr Angyal's exact words: "The same conduct cannot both be conduct of the company and of a person involved in the contravention." Authority for that proposition was said to be a passage in the joint judgment of Mason ACJ, Wilson, Dean and Dawson JJ in Yorke versus Lucas <case>; [(1984) 158 CLR 661] at 671.
However, that passage does not support the proposition; and, whatever their
Honours meant, they repudiated it in Hamilton versus Whitehead <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 121.] 
Another submission of the appellants was that after the plaintiff had been deprived of its possession of the hammer at Botany any possessory lien it had was extinguished. In my view, this is not so. There is no established principle in our law that loss by trickery extinguishes a lien. Cohen J was quite right so to hold in Frontmond Pty Limited versus Rodgers (1993) 6 BPR para
Kay J had previously decided the matter in the same way in Re Carter [(1885) 55 Ch. 230]; see also Caldwell versus Sumpters [[1972] Ch. 478.] 
Finally, it was urged upon us that an estoppel by way of res judicata prevented the plaintiff from asserting the lien. That estoppel was said to arise from the judgement of Whitlam J in the Federal Court, when his Honour expressed a view that loss of possession destroyed the plaintiff's lien. It is true that his Honour, in an ill-considered dictum, did say that. But he was deciding questions of interlocutory relief, and estoppels do not arise out of such proceedings. Moreover, his Honour could not have considered the matter to have been concluded against the plaintiff, as he expressed the view that the plaintiff could pursue any rights he had in detinue in the District Court.

For these reasons, I think the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Meagher JA. * * * 
