

Howell versus Fine Real Estate Pty Limited Matter No Ca 40565/96 [1998] NSWSC (2 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 December 1998 
HOWELL versus FINE REAL ESTATE PTY LIMITED 
CA 40565/96 October 1998 
Mason P, Handley JA, Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: This is a most unsatisfactory situation. An appeal that commenced in 1996 and was ultimately expedited on the application of the appellant is fixed for hearing next Tuesday. Notwithstanding the Rules and directions from the Court, the three copies of the appeal books required to enable the Court to hear the appeal have not been lodged. Nor has the appellant filed and served the outline of submissions that are required under the Rules to have been filed four clear days prior to the fixed hearing date. 
At about 3 o'clock yesterday, counsel for the respondent who is also a cross- appellant, contacted my chambers and informed the Court about this situation.
I directed that the matter be listed this morning and that the solicitor for the respondent be notified by fax that the Court would entertain today an application to strike out the appeal.

Mr Dennis, the solicitor for the appellant, has attended the Court and has informed the Court as both a matter of courtesy and obligation of the difficult position in which he is placed. What has happened is that he has not been put in funds to enable him to brief counsel to prepare the submissions and argue this appeal. It is an appeal of some complexity. The reason why, on his instructions from his client, the funds have not been available is that a council has delayed in releasing the formalities concerning approval of a development application. Mr Dennis has informed the Court that that formality is, in effect, the only remaining matter that precludes his client from borrowing or otherwise obtaining the funds necessary to enable the appeal to be prosecuted.

It is most regrettable that this situation (which must have been apparent to the appellant and his advisers for some considerable time) was not addressed before now and before, in effect, the Court has forced the matter to be addressed by today's application.

Rules are intended to facilitate litigation in the interests of the parties and in the interests of the many litigants who are waiting to have their matters heard. The default on the appellant's part barely lacks justification given that any problem with funds should have been seen before; and if it was a problem that was going to mean that the appeal was not able to be heard on the fixed date, then the Court should have been informed well in advanced. It would have enabled the Court to have taken alternative steps to fill the time.
It would also have avoided some of the wasted expenditure.

The Court is in fact divided on what response to make to the situation which presents itself. My own view is that the appeal should be dismissed because of the non-compliance with the Rules and the inability of the appellant to be in a position to argue the case, thereby (if it is adjourned) causing prejudice to the respondent. That however, is a minority view and the majority position is that this is a situation where the default should be indulgently regarded as a miscarriage and the position of the respondent/cross-appellant can and should appropriately be met by orders for costs and peremptory directions that will ensure that there is no repeat of the inconvenience to all concerned that the adjournment will bring about.

There has been some discussion about terms, and subject to anything the parties or my brethren wish to say, the terms that I would propose are as follows.

The hearing of the appeal and cross-appeal fixed for next Tuesday is adjourned. That adjournment is subject to the following peremptory conditions.
The first is that the appellant file and serve by 4pm today any further copies of the appeal books that are required either to be served or filed in accordance with the Rules and the existing directions.

Secondly, the appellant is to pay the respondent's costs thrown away by reason of the adjournment including the costs of today on an indemnity basis.

The second order I would make is that the appellant is directed to file submissions in relation to the appeal on or before Friday 13 November. The matter is to be listed before me for directions on Monday 16 November at .30am. The appeal and cross-appeal are fixed for hearing on 2 Dec-ember.

Those are the orders which I propose.

HANDLEY JA: I agree. 
SHELLER JA: I also agree. 
MASON P: The orders in relation to the filing and service of the appeal books and the filing and service of the appellant's outline of submission are peremptory orders. 
Does counsel wish to say anything about the proposed orders? 
DRUMMOND: I think your Honour when you made - first your Honour ordered that there only be filing of the submissions but I think when you referred to the peremptory order, you made file and serve. 
MASON P: Filing and service. Yes. 
DRUMMOND: The second thing. Your Honour has made an order for the paper costs thrown away by today, we would seek an order for costs thrown away by the vacation of next Tuesday. 
MASON P: Well I have made that order I believe, because I said they're to pay the costs thrown away by reason of the adjournment. That will include next week's costs. * * * 
