

Polymedia Presentations P/L versus S E Weaver [1996] NSWSC 616 (13 December )

POLYMEDIA PRESENTATIONS P/L versus SUSAN ELIZABETH WEAVER /95 
Friday 13 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a Case Stated by Kevin Waller Esq., an acting magistrate sitting in the Civil Claims division of the Local Court Sydney. My jurisdiction is prescribed by [s 69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s69.html) of the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/) and this Court can intervene only on the ground of lack of jurisdiction or denial of natural justice.

Polymedia Presentations Pty Limited (the Appellant) was the employer of Susan
Elizabeth Weaver (the Respondent) under a contract of employment which was evidenced in a letter dated 1 November 1990. The litigation in the Local Court commenced by Statement of Liquidated Claim issued on behalf of the Respondent in which she claimed that the Appellant was indebted to her for salary, commissions and the like payable pursuant to that agreement which extended from its date to her resignation on 25 September 1992. The central issue of dispute was the calculation of an incentive payment available to the
Respondent pursuant to that part of the letter which stated that her remuneration package would include: "an incentive component of 10% of gross profit generated from premiums revenue after allowing for product costs, overheads, incl salaries etc. to be paid monthly from revenue recieved.
 (also includes revenues from other Polymedia services)" 
The punctuation and spelling is quoted as in the original.

The extent of any indebtedness of the Appellant towards the Respondent was dependent upon the construction of this clause and, in essence, what components should be included in the expression "overheads" in order to make deductions for determining the nett figure upon which commission was payable.
No discussion between the parties was directed to specifying what was comprehended by "overheads".

The learned magistrate found that, despite the condition for monthly payment, the Appellant paid the Respondent various amounts on account of the incentive component on 25 January, 4 April and 20 May 1991 and 3 March and 30 October
There was no documentation provided by the Appellant to the Respondent showing how the various amounts paid to her were calculated with the exception of 3 March 1992. Accompanying her payment was a typed document which was admitted into evidence and showed that the deductions from revenue (so far as items other than product costs were concerned) consisted solely of the amounts paid to the Respondent by way of salary and superannuation and the expenses incurred in providing her with a leased car and mobile telephone.

The argument before the magistrate on behalf of the Respondent was that the true construction of the agreement and, significantly, the expression "overheads, incl salaries etc." was consistent with what was evidenced by that document whereas the Appellant argued that the true construction of the expression "overheads" meant the expenditure incurred by the Appellant as a result of the employment of the plaintiff and would include not only her salary but the salaries of persons employed to assist her.

It is common ground between the parties that the contest was presented to the
Court in the context of those arguments which were coordinate with the pleading and particularization of their respective cases.

The learned magistrate has stated that he did not accede to either of their submissions and he has stated: "3.4 I held that, under the Agreement as varied verbally and by conduct, the defendant agreed to pay the plaintiff an incentive component of 10% of gross profit generated from premiums revenue after allowing for product costs, the plaintiff's salary and the expenses incurred by the defendant in leasing a car for the plaintiff and providing a mobile telephone to the plaintiff." 
Neither party had contended that the written contract evidenced by the letter dated 1 November 1990 (I have assumed that the reference to 2 November in the pleading was a mistake) had been varied either orally or by conduct.

The finding appears somewhat confusing when it is observed that what has been found to be the agreement "as varied verbally and by conduct" is identical to the construction contended for by the Respondent as the meaning of the words as they stood. It is perceptible that the Respondent's position is fortified by the document accompanying the payment of 3 March 1992 but no issue such as estoppel was canvassed.

As the "verbal" and "conduct" variations were not specified - the reasons given in the Local Court are not before the Court in the Stated Case - and there is an express negativing of the occurrence of relevant discussion, it is tempting to speculate that what was intended was to find that the construction contended for by the Respondent was affirmed by the conduct of the Appellant in making the calculations and presenting them with the March 1992 payment.
This speculation cannot crystallize not only because of its nature but because of the express rejection of both opposing submissions. The Appellant, sought to rely upon what it contended were the ordinary and natural meanings of the words used, that is to say the comprehensive implications carried by the word "overheads" and the plural expression of "salaries". In response the
Respondent pointed to the circumstance that insofar as the expressions inhered ambiguity, they appeared in the document for the authorship of which the
Appellant was responsible and thus in relation to the dispute the word should be construed contra proferentem and therefore in her favour.

My jurisdiction is not, as I observed initially, directly to resolve the issues between the parties and I must deal with the question raised in the
Case Stated. The Appellant's contention is essentially straightforward and that is that the learned magistrate elected to determine the matter on a basis which was not litigated before him.

Counsel for the Appellant referred to a series of authorities demonstrating that it is a mistrial to give judgment for a party upon the determination of an unlitigated issue. See Merewether versus The Scottish Australian Mining Co
Limited [1906 23 WN 106]; Cox v Snowball & Anor <case>; [1930 VLR 325.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=1930%20VLR%20325 "View LawCiteRecord" )

The argument was developed to contend that there has necessarily been a denial of natural justice when the tribunal has not dealt with an essential issue raised by the parties. See Stevens versus The London Assurance Corporation 1899
XX NSWR 153; Commercial Bank of Australia Limited versus Boyd 1890 QLJ 14; Union
Bank of Australia Limited versus Raine 1894 QLJ 58; Storie versus Storie <case>; [1945 80 CLR 597.] 
To these contentions the Respondent has argued that there has been no miscarriage nor denial of natural justice because, as I understood the argument, the learned magistrate was correct in finding that the Respondent should have judgment for debt. On the material before me that conclusion seems attractive. I would have been inclined to regard the expression in the Stated
Case "as varied verbally and by conduct" as mere surplusage were it not for the fact that the case carefully states that the construction arguments contended for by both sides were explicitly rejected. No attempt was made to distinguish or demonstrate the inapplicability of the principles adumbrated in the authorities cited on behalf of the Appellant. It seems to me therefore that there is no alternative other than to uphold the contention of the
Appellant and this will result in the matter being remitted to the Local Court for redetermination.

I emphasize that my conclusion is based solely upon denial of natural justice arising out of the procedural miscarriage in the matter being determined on the basis not litigated between the parties. I am conscious that it may very well be that determination of the issue as litigated between the parties will again produce success for the Respondent but my jurisdiction does not extend to deciding that.

The question asked in the Case Stated whether the determination of the learned magistrate was erroneous in point of law should be answered in the affirmative and the appeal allowed and the judgment for the Respondent set aside accordingly. The matter is remitted to the Local Court for further determination.

The Respondent is ordered to pay the Appellant's costs of the Stated Case but is to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.
 * * * 
