

Sellers Fabrics Pty Limited versus Hapag-Lloyd Ag Matter No 12/96 [1998] NSWSC (13 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
RE - THE SHIP "ENCOUNTER BAY" /96 October 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Admiralty List 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The history of these proceedings has been set forth in two judgments I gave yesterday and it is unnecessary for me to repeat what I then said. The question which immediately arises relates to Captain Read's opinion as to the lashing of the relevant Bay at the time the vessel, "Encounter Bay", left Melbourne on 24 March 1995. 
In a statement which Captain Read prepared in September 1998 and signed on 13
October 1998, he dealt with this matter in par 8. He adhered to that statement and he also adhered to the converse of that statement. Dr White has ascertained that between making his first statement on 6 April 1995 and his second statement on 23 May 1995, but prior to making his third statement in
September 1998, additional pieces of information came into his possession; namely, the vessel's trim and stability book, the vessel's lashing manual, and certain diagrams prepared by Mr Lewis showing the lashing as the vessel left
Melbourne on 24 March 1995.

It is on the basis of that information that Captain Read has given the evidence which appears in par 8 of his statement of 13 October 1998, and I do not consider that it is permissible at this stage for that matter to be further revisited.

Dr White has also indicated that he now wishes to ask Captain Read about the
GM and torsion and various other such matters. These matters are dealt with in detail by Captain Read, commencing at par 10. He was not cross-examined concerning those matters, and prima facie his evidence, as I read it, is favourable to the case being put forward by the defendant on those particular matters. In those circumstances, it seems to me that the matter has been dealt with and I see no reason to allow it to be further explored. I must assume that the statement of Captain Read sets out his view about these particular matters.

In so far as there is an application to reopen to deal with either of those matters, I refuse the application.
 * * * 
