

Saloma Pty Ltd versus Big Country Developments Pty Ltd Matter No 4121/97 [1997]
NSWSC 649 (15 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 `

Saloma Pty Ltd versus Big Country Developments Pty Ltd` ` 4121/97` `15 December 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `
 `
 /97 SALOMA PTY LTD versus BIG COUNTRY DEVELOPMENTS PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between a landlord and a tenant of licensed premises known as the Ruse Tavern, which the plaintiff holds, pursuant to lease 650438B for 10 years from 15 July 1994. 
The lease is one of those documents which has been prepared by a firm of solicitors who put more store on convenience of their word processor than clarity for the reader. It is necessary to read what is on page 54 of the first schedule as to rent with the reference schedule some 50 pages earlier and cross refer to other parts of the document. Doing the best I can, the rent was $218,400 when the lease commenced on 15 July 1994. There was to be a CPI rent adjustment in every odd year and a review of the rent related to current market rental in every even year.

For the even years, the provision is set out under Part B to the first schedule, that is: "The Lessor shall be entitled to serve a written notice upon the Lessee advising the amount which the Lessor considers to be the current annual open market rental value for the Demised Premises (hereinafter called 'current market rent') taking into account the criteria specified in paragraph B.7 of the first schedule." 
B.7 sets out 10 criteria, which are to be taken into account.

The general view of the parties seems to have been that it was commercially impracticable to make a demand for increased rent based on 15 July 1996 because at that stage the hotel trade was in the doldrums. However, the introduction of poker machines into hotels, which seems to have occurred in respect of this hotel about 1 May 1997 changed the position dramatically.

The landlord forecasted a rental increase in May 1997 and on 4 July 1997 wrote a letter to "Mrs M Rossi & Mr M Tilbrook", a copy of which is annexed as the appendix to these reasons.

The plaintiff tenant says that such a letter would not constitute a notice under Part B of the first schedule to the lease; the defendant lessor says the reverse and that rental became due according to the notice.

Two main points were made by Mr Fagan SC for the plaintiff. First, that the document did not indicate an increase of market rent. Rather it indicated the increase of the monthly amount of rent and outgoings. Mr Tobias QC, who appeared with Mr Costigan for the defendant, said that when one read the letter sensibly and commercially and with the background of previous correspondence, it was abundantly clear that the increase of rent was $5,000 per month. The second point made by Mr Fagan SC was that it was clear that the $5,000 per month was not being specified as the current annual open market rental value of the demised premises taking into account the criteria as at 15
July 1996. It is clear that the rent that is to be adjusted in every even year is the rent as at the review date. Thus, even though time is not of the essence for the landlord to give a notice (indeed, there is a special provision B.6 in the first schedule making sure that this is so), the rent still has to be reviewed at the relevant date.

There is also a third problem with the notice in that it is not addressed to the tenant, but rather to the two persons who are the directors of the tenant.
I thought there might be some problem about that, but Mr Fagan SC did not take that point.

The lease, in my view, does require a fairly explicit notice to be issued by the landlord because of the consequences that flow from the fact that a notice is given. Under Part B of the schedule, unless the lessee responds within a period of 14 days after receipt of the landlord's notice, and clause B.2 makes it clear that in this respect time is of the essence, then the landlord's notice prevails and the rent specified there as the current market rent becomes the rent. In my view, that requires the document which the landlord proffers as a notice to be explicit as to the statement of the current rent so that the tenant can work out whether to accept it or alternatively to go through the process referred to in the succeeding clauses of all Part B to the schedule.

The document of 4 July, to my mind, is extremely deficient in this area. All it really seems to say is that since 1 April 1997 there has been increased turnover and profitability of the hotel because of the poker machines and other gaming activities that can take place in hotels; that the landlord did not give a notice in June 1996 because, at that stage, the hotel business was in the doldrums and that somehow or other it flows from that that there should be an extra $5,000 a month rent from 26 June 1997, which was later adjusted to July 1997.

I do not consider that this was an adequate notice. It did not adequately spell out the increase of the market rent taking into account all the criteria. It does not appear to relate back to the market rent as at 15 July and, indeed, seems to bring in all manner of irrelevant criteria such as what had happened nine months later in April 1997.

The inadequacy of the notice is probably of little moment in the ultimate, in the relationship between these parties as it would still be open, it would seem, for the landlord to give a fresh notice in proper form if it felt like doing so. However, the plaintiff is entitled to declaration 4 in the amended summons.

The next point that was raised is a discrete issue as to whether there should be rectification of the lease by adding a proviso to clause 6.12.14.

That clause provides that an additional rent will be paid by the tenant equal to 2.8% on what was paid or payable on behalf of the licensee for all low alcohol beer and 5.2% for all other liquor.

It would seem that this additional rent clause is a common clause inserted in leases by solicitors who are familiar with the hotel industry and the operation of the [Liquor
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la107/). Section 154 of the [Liquor Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la107/) provides that a licensee may deduct a proportion of the licence fee from his or her rent and that the section operates notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary. Accordingly, the practice has grown up of charging an additional rent to cover the landlord's liability under s.154. The section does not, however, apply where the lessee is a corporation as in this case.

On the lease transaction, Mr Ebner, solicitor, acted for the defendant and Mr
Colquhoun, solicitor, acted for the plaintiff. Mr Colquhoun was instructed by
Mr Rossi, who is now deceased. He asked Mr Ebner to have the clause deleted as it was not applicable to the present situation. In Mr Colquhoun's letter to Mr
Ebner, someone has written in the margin: "Only intended not to have a deduction under s.154." Mr Ebner replied that it was a standard clause and the landlord would have it retained. Mr Colquhoun replied that it would appear to be irrelevant because the lessee was a corporation and so could not take the benefit from s.154. Mr Ebner and Mr Colquhoun then had a telephone conversation in which Mr Ebner said he would not delete clause 6.12.14 but he also said: "It is clear that the additional rent is to compensate for the liability of the lessor to pay licence fees." 
Mr Colquhoun then said that because this response was consistent with his client's instructions and clause 6.12.14 had no practical effect, he completed the transaction.

Mr Tobias QC says it is significant that Mr Colquhoun does not go further and give more definite evidence as to the lessee's intention. That comment can fairly be made but it does not seem to me that it is the be all and end all of the matter.

The evidence suggests that both parties were of the view that the clause was to operate to compensate in the only way legally possible - the landlord, if the landlord had to pay or suffer a deduction because of s.154 of the [Liquor
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la107/). The document, as exchanged, does not on its true construction carry out that intention and, accordingly, in my opinion, the lease should be rectified in accordance with paragraph 7 of the amended summons.

The third point involved in the case is whether the tenant has complied with the lease in other respects, in particular as to whether there is the insurance which it is required to have under clause 7 of the lease. This matter was raised with the tenant as early as 8 September 1997. Mr Hesky, the controlling director of the defendant says that no details of any public risk insurance have ever been furnished to it. The case was delayed today for about two hours because the tenant was asserting that there was proper public risk insurance, and it was only at about 2 o'clock today that the relevant policy was produced. There seems little argument that the policy does not strictly comply with clause 7 of the lease.

However, that matter is of relatively little current moment. Either the tenant will straight away attend to it or alternatively the landlord will issue a notice under s.129 of the Conveyancing Act or, alternatively, the landlord will sue for any damages it may have suffered, though it is hard to see how it could have suffered any.

It is not the court's custom to make declarations as to steps of this nature.
It is clear enough between the parties what the present situation is but I trust it will be assisted by these reasons.

Accordingly, all I do is make declarations 4 and 7 in the amended summons. I order that the defendant pay two-thirds of the plaintiff's costs. The cross claim must be dismissed. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
