

Regina versus Shantell Angela Pearl Dargan [1997] NSWSC 109 (4 April 1997) 
REGINA versus Shantell Angela Pearl DARGAN /96 
Friday, 4 April 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Shantell Angela Pearl Dargan has sought leave to appeal out of time against the order of 17 November 1995 of Grogan DCJ cancelling the order for two years periodic detention made on 27 April 1995 by Karpin DCJ. The applicant no longer seeks leave to appeal out of time against the order of
Karpin DCJ. After a sentence indication hearing the applicant pleaded guilty to a charge of robbery in company. It is unnecessary to rehearse the facts in detail. It was a bad case. On 5 October 1994 a tourist was walking in the main street in Kings Cross. He met the applicant and her companion and inquired if they were working. A price was negotiated. After the applicant and the other lady promised to give the tourist their attentions for the night he was lured into a less prominent part of Kings Cross, knocked to the ground, attacked and robbed. The applicant and the three other offenders left hastily in a waiting car. This enterprise was obviously planned. The applicant ended up with most of the money which she placed in her brassiere.

Earlier in 1994 the applicant had been placed on a recognisance to be of good behaviour for three years in respect of the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. The applicant was aged twenty at the time of the offence. The pre-sentence report indicated that she had a supportive mother who was looking after the applicant's two year old child. The report revealed that since the age of sixteen when she left home the applicant had lived an unstable life with several unsatisfactory features. Nevertheless there were significant subjective features in her case.

Moved by the applicant's age and circumstances Karpin DCJ gave the applicant her last chance and made this abundantly clear to the applicant. The sentence of two years periodic detention for so serious an offence was extremely lenient. The Judge explained the position to the applicant and emphasised the need for her to report and serve her periodic detention. I note that the applicant had spent twelve days in custody after her arrest and prior to her release on bail.

The evidence before Grogan DCJ established that the applicant had not attended on three occasions to serve her periodic detention and that she had been sent notices under s21(5) of the Periodic Detention of Prisoners Act by post regarding her non-attendance and advising her of the additional period to be served and of her right to seek leave of absence. She last reported on 21 July
In all she attended on seven occasions. Upon the calculations before the Judge she had to serve 100 weeks, making the adjustments required for her non-attendance.

Grogan DCJ also had before him an affidavit of postage of the notice of listing to the applicant at her last known address and the warrant of commitment in respect of the two year periodic detention sentence. There was no appearance by the applicant before Grogan DCJ and we are told that she did not receive the documents; she had shifted her address from her mother's home.

At the conclusion of the evidence the Judge made orders in accordance with short minutes of order submitted by the Department which were in these terms: "1. Periodic detention order is cancelled.
Detainee to serve the unexpired period of periodic detention order by way of full time prison for a period of 100 weeks.
Section 26A warrant to issue for apprehension and detention.
Notice under regulation 48 be sent by Clerk of the Court.
I decline to fix the minimum and additional term under [s25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s25.html) of the [Periodic Detention of Prisoners Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/)." 
The Judge gave no reasons. It is obvious that he made the orders because of the applicant's proved non-attendance to serve her periodic detention. The difficulty lies in relation to the fifth order. The transcript shows that
Grogan DCJ did not have a copy of the reasons of Karpin DCJ nor any of the material placed before her. The Judge had no material before him which would enable him to decide whether to set a minimum and an additional term or to decline to do so.

In Wilson versus Department of Corrective Services CCA (unreported) 12 February , with the concurrence of the other members of the Court, I pointed out the difficulty of proceeding when the applicant is not present and of the high desirability of the detainee being arrested and brought before the Court before the periodic detention order is cancelled and a decision is made whether to fix a minimum and additional term.

I am of the opinion that Grogan DCJ erred in declining to fix a minimum and an additional term when he had no material before him which would enable him to decide whether or not to fix a minimum and an additional term or to decline to do so. Accordingly, it falls to this Court to decide what should happen in the circumstances of this case, that is, whether this Court should fix a minimum and an additional term.

We have been furnished with a copy of the record of the applicant which indicates that she has been further dealt with and in particular was dealt with by the Local Court in February 1997 and received fixed terms of six months. I should also record that the applicant was not arrested pursuant to the warrant of commitment issued consequent upon Grogan DCJ's order until 30
August 1996. She remained in custody until 2 October 1996 when she was granted bail pending the hearing of this appeal.

The applicant has urged that we should set a minimum and an additional term and has pointed to the existence of special circumstances. I do not cavil with the proposition that there are special circumstances. The applicant further submitted that at the very least the applicant should be given the benefit of the usual three to one ratio resulting in an additional term of not less than six months.

On the materials before the Court, the initial sentence by Karpin DCJ was extremely lenient. If we were to fix an additional term it would not be appropriate to impose a minimum term of less than two years because of the gravity of the offence. That would mean in effect extending the term of the sentence overall and that is not a course which I would pursue.

The applicant's solicitor Mr Jauncey made the point that the interests of the community would be served by an additional term in which the applicant was closely supervised but in this case that can only realistically be done by extending the overall term of imprisonment which is not a course which is fairly open.

The effect of the orders which will be made is that the applicant will in fact be serving the six months sentence imposed in the Local Court in February 1997 concurrently with the balance of the term of 100 weeks which she now has to serve. The Department has indicated that it would, of course, allow credit for the period spent in custody from 30 August 1996 to 2 October 1996.

In all the circumstances of this case I am of the opinion that the appeal against the order of Grogan DCJ should be dismissed.

The formal orders which I would make are: grant any necessary extension of time for leave to appeal, grant leave to appeal but dismiss the appeal; liberty to apply if there is any difficulty in the working out of the order.

HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J, for the reasons which he has given.

SULLY J: So also do I agree.

HUNT CJ at CL: The orders of the Court are as proposed by Smart J.
 * * * 
