

Regina versus Sandnes Matter No 72109/98 [1998] NSWSC 757 (25 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus TONY SANDNES /98 June 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: Tony Sandnes applies for bail in respect of a charge of murder said to have been committed on 30 December 1997. 
The facts as to the Crown case disclose that Mr. Donald Foster, aged 80, was in his home at 16 Vera Street, Earlwood, found with severe head injuries, lying in the vicinity of a bloodstained half brick on his bedroom floor.
Neighbours saw two persons running from the vicinity of 16 Vera Street to a blue coloured Ford Meteor sedan bearing number plates MMC 971 which was parked in a small car park about 150 metres from the victim's house. Those persons were seen to wipe the windows of the car, change their clothes and drive away.

The applicant was spoken to the following day at his boarding house in the presence of the victim's granddaughter, Sue-Anne Foster. I have been informed by the Crown that Miss Foster is to be charged with an offence of harbouring, an offence of -- 
PHEILS: Conceal serious offence.

HIS HONOUR: Conceal serious offence.

PHEILS: Accessory after feloniously inflict GBH.

HIS HONOUR: Accessory after the fact.

PHEILS: To maliciously inflict GBH.

HIS HONOUR: To malicious inflict grievous bodily harm and she is expected -- 
PHEILS: It is listed for arraignment on 17 July.

HIS HONOUR: -- to be arraigned on 17 July and thereafter to be willing to give evidence for the Crown. Both persons were arrested that day at the boarding house.

It is the Crown case that Mr. Sandnes took police to an area around the side of the boarding house where the registration plates MMC 971 were located under some car parts and that both he and Miss Foster were interviewed.

At her interview Miss Foster informed the police that she had gone with the applicant to her grandfather's house, that the applicant had gone in and came out a short time later running, saying words to the effect of that "he thought he'd killed" or that "he was dead", apparently with reference to the grandfather, that they left the house driving away in the blue Ford sedan with the number plates MMC 971, that the applicant called 000 from a phone box and his voice was recorded.

Further, she says that the applicant had stolen an amount of cash from the wallet of the victim and dumped the car at Minto. A car of that nature was found in that location later and when that car was found it was noted that the number plate retaining screws had recently been disturbed and a fingerprint belonging to the applicant was located on the inside driver's door window of that vehicle.

Part of the Crown case includes the evidence of the witness who saw the applicant remove registration plates LWK 297 from a small blue sedan and fit registration plates MMC 971 to that vehicle in the rear yard of that boarding house some time prior to the day of the victim's death.

On the morning following the victim's death, the applicant paid a private vendor the sum of $500 cash being the balance payable for a motor vehicle that he was purchasing. The vendor's address was some three blocks away from where the blue Ford Meteor sedan was dumped.

In his account to the police the applicant said various things which it is contended amount to lies, including a false alibi, a false statement as to how he had obtained the cash, and a denial of his habit of wearing thongs. A pair of thongs believed to belong to the applicant were found at the crime scene.

The applicant has denied involvement in the offence and any knowledge of the small blue sedan. It is said that the address the applicant had been living at was a temporary address, that he is a self-confessed drug addict, there are concerns that he has no community ties in New South Wales, that there are apprehensions in respect of Miss Foster should she be on bail.

It is apparent from what I have set out that the Crown's case at present on the material before me is a most powerful circumstantial case and particularly strong if it includes the evidence of Miss Foster. As the Crown case appears before me, her account, whether she be an accomplice or not, is plainly in material respects capable of being corroborated by the other evidence in the case.

Mr. Hovan, who has appeared for the applicant and in his customary fashion has said all that could be put, has urged upon me that there are explanations no doubt for individual items in the Crown case but that is not the test. The strength of the case is found in the cumulation of all the items and that cumulation gives strength to each item.

Having regard to the matters under [s.32](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/s32.html) of the [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/) and having regard particularly to the seriousness of the offence and the strength of the
Crown case, I am of the view that bail should not be granted as there is an unacceptable risk that the applicant will not attend his trial and as his need for liberty is outweighed by the seriousness of the offence charged and the strength of the Crown case.

The expected penalty, of course, is a penalty that can be a maximum of imprisonment for the term of his natural life. Whatever may be the situation for the future in relation to the Crown case, if, for instance, the evidence of Miss Foster were to be excluded or in some other respect some defect of a seriousness nature in the Crown case be revealed, as the case is put to me now
I am of the view that it is most powerful.

HOVAN: Sorry, if I can, taken from your Honour's comment in that regard, if there is some material change -- 
HIS HONOUR: That would have to be considered at that time when and if it occurred.

HOVAN: Thank you, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: Bail is refused.
 * * * 
