

Regina versus Stephen Sokvari [1996] NSWSC 491 (16 October 1996) 
REGINA versus Stephen SOKVARI /95 
Monday 13 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, LEVINE J, DOWD J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The appellant, who has a somewhat complex custodial history, was tried before Justice Blanch, the Chief Judge of the District Court, sitting without a jury, on a charge that he, on 17 October 1992, at Newtown, supplied a prohibited drug, namely cannabis leaf. He was convicted and sentenced to imprisonment involving a minimum term of nine months, to date from 16 October 1996, and an additional term of nine months. He appeals against his conviction, and seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence.

The charge arose out of a search conducted by police on 17 October 1992 at the appellant's house at 18 Raper Street, Newtown.

When the police officers arrived at the premises they found the appellant, who, according to the police, told them that he lived there alone. The police found cannabis leaf in a bowl on a coffee table in the loungeroom. According to the police the appellant said that he had bought it at a hotel the night before. He also allegedly admitted that a bong in the loungeroom belonged to him. There was found on the coffee table a diary which contained references to "kiff", (said to be a common word for cannabis), and other writing and names and numbers which appeared to be about drug sales. There was found, inside a linen cupboard, one large plastic bag, four clear plastic bags, and one resealable plastic bag, all containing cannabis leaf. The police also found, under the kitchen sink, a plastic bag containing cannabis and paper bag containing seeds.

The appellant, who gave sworn evidence, did not deny that the police found cannabis in the premises, although he said he was surprised at the quantity found. His case was that the drugs were not in his possession. He said that, on the evening before he was arrested, there was a number of people at the house having a party in his absence. He denied that he lived at the premises alone, and said that he had merely told the police that he was alone at the time of their arrival. He said that in the week before his arrest, he was not at the house very frequently. He said that "kiff" was the name of a friend's dog, and he gave an innocent explanation of the various entries in his diary.

The first ground of appeal raises a matter that was not mentioned in the reasons for judgment of the learned trial judge. It appears that the matter was not raised during the evidence or cross-examination of any of the witnesses, but was at least mentioned in the course of argument by trial counsel.

So that I will not fail to do justice to the ground of appeal, I will set it out verbatim. The ground of appeal is that the learned trial judge failed to deal with the appellant's submission that there was a break in the chain of possession between the alleged finding of the cannabis and the making of the
Certificate of Analysis, that the alleged drug was not analysed by the analyst to whom it was submitted, and that the drug was proven not to have been weighed, nor was it shown who placed the drug in security bag 041344. It is also contended, as part of the ground, that the trial judge failed to make the finding that breaking the chain of possession was fatal to the prosecution case in that the Crown could not prove that the drug analysed was the same as, and the same quantity, exceeding one kilogram, as the cannabis in the indictment.

The Crown case was based upon what is sometimes referred to as "deemed supply". [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) (as amended) provides that a person who has in his or her possession an amount of a prohibited drug which is not less than the traffickable quantity shall be deemed to have the prohibited drug in his or her possession for supply unless certain exculpatory circumstances appear.

There was tendered in evidence at the trial, without objection, what was said by the police to have been found at the appellant's premises. Constable Owen, one of the police officers involved in the search, gave the following evidence, which was not objected to, and which was not the subject of any cross-examination: "Q Can you identify the items that were found in Mr Sokvari's house for me? 
A Yes, I can.
 
Q First of all the scales that were found, just point out those.

A A set of scales (indicating).
 
Q And the box of scales you describe in your statement? 
A It's actually a box of weights (indicating).
 
Q And the other items? 
A Three bowls and a tin (indicating).
 
Q The three bowls, the scales and the box of weights, where were they found? 
A The scales, the three bowls and the box of weights and the tin were found in the kitchen.
 
Q Please continue.

A I can't tell you where that was found (indicating) and I can't tell you where that was found (indicating). There is a knife here.
 
Q The knife is not relevant, thank you.

A Glass? 
Q No, they are not relevant either.

A A brown paper bag containing seeds.
 
Q Where was that found? 
A That was found in the kitchen area. A number of these items here have been separated by an analyst. This black plastic bag here contained green vegetable matter and that was found in the linen cupboard in the house.
 
Q Is that in the hallway? 
A That's correct.
 
Q Also within that linen cupboard were four of these bags containing green vegetable matter? 
A I can't tell you exactly which items are which from these bags. Some of them have been separated by the analysts and the bags have been emptied.
 
Q Has one plastic bag now been labelled with a Sydney Police Centre exhibit number on it? 
A Yes, it has.
 
Q Does that contain samples of various parts of the green vegetable matter after the analyst had finished her examination? 
A Yes.
 
Q Does the large plastic bag contain the cannabis? 
A Yes, it does. The bulk of the cannabis here was removed from the linen cupboard.
 
Q Both the black plastic bag and the other plastic bags to which you refer? 
A That's correct." 
The female analyst referred to in the third last answer above was Susan
Margaret Laird, an analyst employed by the New South Wales Department of
Health.

At the commencement of the trial, and before Constable Owen was called to give evidence, there was tendered, without objection, a certificate of Ms Laird in the following terms: "I, Susan Margaret Laird an Analyst employed by the New South Wales
Government, hereby certify that: 
On 19 October, 1992 Constable S. Owen of the Major Crime Squad, South, Drug
Unit, submitted the items described below, and they have been analysed with the following results.
 
The items labelled `86/C100575 SOKVARI', consisted of the following: 
A security bag, No. 041344, in which were: A plastic bag containing a quantity of vegetable matter.
 
The vegetable matter weighing 378.6g was examined and found to contain cannabis leaf.
 4 plastic bags, each containing a quantity of vegetable matter.

The total weight of vegetable matter was found to be 802.3g. The contents of the bags were examined and the vegetable matter was found to contain cannabis leaf.
 4 plastic bags, each containing a quantity of vegetable matter.

The total weight of vegetable matter was found to be 49.0g. The contents of the bags were examined and the vegetable matter was found to contain cannabis leaf.

The items are now sealed and labelled, `D923522'." [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s43.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) provides: "43(1) Any analyst analysing any plant or substance submitted to the analyst or under whose supervision the analysis of any plant or substance submitted to the analyst is carried out may give a certificate of the result of the analysis.
 
In any legal proceedings under this Act, the production of a certificate, purporting to be signed by an analyst, shall be prima facie evidence of the identity of the plant or substance analysed, the quantity or mass of the plant or substance analysed and of the result of the analysis, without proof of the signature, employment or appointment of the person appearing to have signed the certificate." 
Ms Laird was not called as a witness at the trial, and there was no investigation in the course of the evidence as to the precise circumstances in which she came to conduct her analysis.

There was also tendered in the Crown case, without objection, a written statement of Constable Owen which included the following information: "17 On the 19 October 1992 I attended the Sydney Police Centre exhibits room where I took possession of one large black plastic bag containing green vegetable matter, four clear plastic bags containing green vegetable matter ... brown paper bag containing seeds, and four plastic bags containing green vegetable matter. I also took possession of a mirror. All these items forming part of Exhibit No 86 C100575.
 I then attended Lidcombe Analytical laboratories and handed the exhibit to Mr Del Villar. I observed Mr Del Villar empty the black plastic bag and the four clear plastic bags and take samples of the green vegetable matter which they contained. Mr Del Villar then placed the remainder of the green vegetable matter in an exhibit bag and resealed the bag and handed it back to me along with the plastic bags which had originally held the green vegetable matter. I also retrieved the brown paper bag containing seeds.
 ...........................................................
 ...........................................................
 I then attended the Sydney Police Centre exhibit room and returned the remainder of exhibit 86 C100575." 
It will be noted that Ms Laird's analysis was conducted on 19 October 1992, and related to a bag marked C100575.

Although there was no investigation, in the course of the evidence of the
Crown witnesses, of any issue relating to the identity of the cannabis referred to by Constable Owen, and by Ms Laird, with the cannabis found at the appellant's premises, in final address, counsel for the appellant advanced the argument or arguments referred to in the ground of appeal set out above.

As explained in the course of the hearing of the present appeal, the first aspect of counsel's argument turns upon the circumstance that Ms Laird only received the cannabis for analysis via Mr Del Villar, and not direct from
Constable Owen. This, it is argued, in some way disqualified her from giving a certificate under [s43.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s43.html)
I confess to having a good deal of difficulty in following this argument. The best I can do is to repeat what is set out in the written submissions of the appellant. There it is said that there was "a fatal non-compliance with [s43".](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s43.html)
The nature of that non-compliance was said to be as follows: "The person to whom the sample was submitted was Del Villar. Susan Margaret
Laid is not, therefore, the person to whom the drug was submitted on the prosecution's own evidence .... she doesn't say that she is the person to whom the drugs were submitted, Del Villar was in fact that person." 
There is no substance in this argument. I see no reason why, when Constable
Owen handed the cannabis to Mr Del Villar, and Mr Del Villar then handed it to
Ms Laird, compliance with the requirements of [s43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s43.html) was thereby rendered impossible.

If there had been a serious issue in the case about the quantity of cannabis found at the appellant's premises, and if, for example, there had been some suggestion that less than the traffickable quantity was found, and that the police had supplemented the cannabis before it was taken to the analytical laboratories for weighing and other testing, then it may well have been material to explore in more detail exactly what went on between Constable
Owen, Mr Del Villar and Ms Laird. That, however, is not the way the trial was conducted. The evidence relied upon by the Crown was led without objection, and the trial judge was entitled to take it at face value.

The certificate signed by Ms Laird on its face complied with [s43(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s43.html) and was prima facie evidence of the matters stated in it. Indeed, the certificate having been tendered, without objection, in circumstances where it was obvious to everybody concerned (including trial counsel for the appellant) that this was the Crown's method of proving the nature and quantity of the vegetable matter found at the appellant's premises, (various police officers also having described the substance as cannabis without objection), it was too late for counsel, in final address, to mount an argument which, if correct, would have meant that the certificate was inadmissible. The point has neither technical nor substantial merit.

It was also argued, as a matter of fact, that on the evidence there had been some kind of break in the chain of possession which rendered at least doubtful the Crown case as to the quantity of cannabis found allegedly in the possession of the appellant. In truth, however, all that happened, was that, no objection having been taken to the certificate when it was tendered, no-one sought to explore matters of detail that might have been relevant if no such certificate had been available, or if objection had been taken to it.

It is quite likely that the learned trial judge did not specifically refer to this issue in his reasons for judgment because it had not been made clear to him what the issue was. In any event, I am satisfied that, having regard to the way the trial was conducted at first instance, there was nothing in the point. This ground of appeal must fail.

The next ground of appeal contends that the learned trial judge misdirected himself in relation to the proper approach to circumstantial evidence and the onus of proof, alleged admissions by the appellant, and alleged lies by the appellant.

The principal matter in question here concerns an assertion made by the appellant, in his record of interview, concerning entries in the diary, to the effect that he knew nothing about them. When the appellant came to give evidence he gave detailed answers concerning the contents of the diary. What he said in his record of interview was clearly untrue.

The learned trial judge said: "When dealing with the question of lies it is important to bear in mind that they can only be taken into account if they reveal a knowledge of the offence and that a lie was told because the accused knew that the truth of the matter about which he lied would implicate him in the offence. It should be borne in mind that there may be reasons for the telling of a lie apart from the realisation of guilt. For example a lie may be told out of panic, to escape an unjust accusation, to protect some other person or to avoid a consequence extraneous to the offence, and if there is any other such explanation the lie cannot be regarded as an admission." 
I see no error in relation to the approach which his Honour took in the matter and the ground must fail.

Next it is argued that his Honour should have held that the appellant was denied natural justice in that the police officers who allegedly found cannabis did not take photographs of it, or show it to the appellant in situ.

The police gave evidence that the drugs were not photographed because, the operation having been conducted on a Saturday, there was no camera available.
The equipment room was said to be locked on the weekends because, on earlier occasions, equipment had disappeared. The judge was entitled to accept that evidence. The appellant did not claim that he asked to check all the cannabis found by police. There was no denial of natural justice as alleged.

The next ground is that the cross-examination of the appellant did not fairly put the Crown case against him, and there was a failure to comply with the rule in Browne versus Dunn (1893) 6 R 67.

The appellant gave evidence after the close of the Crown's case. It was clear from the Crown case that the Crown was contesting the appellant's assertion that he did not have possession of the drugs that were found in his premises.
That was the central issue in the case. There was no breach of any relevant requirement of fairness. It was put to the appellant in cross-examination that he admitted to the police officers that he had been living alone at the house.
He was strongly challenged about his case concerning the contents of the diary. This ground of appeal must fail.

Finally it was submitted that the finding of the learned trial judge was "against the evidence". In oral argument this became a submission that the conviction was unsafe.

There was ample evidence upon which his Honour could base his conclusion adverse to the appellant, and that evidence is considered in his reasons for judgment. The main issue, as the case was fought, concerned possession. His
Honour accepted the evidence of the police witnesses as to what was said to then when they searched the house, and to what they found there. He also accepted their evidence as to observations of the premises. It was well open to him to believe that evidence. A witness, Mr Sangdis, said the appellant lived alone. Reference has already been made to the lies told by the appellant concerning the contents of his diary. A number of entries in the diary appeared to relate to cannabis supply. I see no error in the way in which his
Honour reasoned in connection with the evidence in the case, and the evidence which he accepted, and was entitled to accept, established the Crown case against the appellant. The appellant relied on the evidence of some friends to support his case that he spent little time at the premises, but some of that evidence conflicted with what he said. The trial judge's evaluation of the whole of the evidence has not been shown to be in error.

The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

The sentence that was imposed was by no means excessive, and his Honour gave the appellant the benefit of a finding of special circumstances. He did that because the sentence imposed was cumulative upon sentences which the appellant was serving at the time of sentencing.

It is submitted that is made is that the appellant is in strict protective custody and, in those circumstances, a sentence of a minimum term of nine months to follow upon a sentence that had previously been imposed by Judge
Grogan (see R versus Sokvari, CCA, unreported, 20 November 1995) was excessive.
Judge Grogan was sentencing the appellant for an offence committed after the offence the subject of the present appeal. However, he had been dealt with in respect of that matter first.

At the time of sentencing in relation to the present matter the appellant was serving a minimum term of eighteen months with an additional term of twelve months. His conviction had been in respect of a similar offence. Subsequently he pleaded guilty to a charge of escape from lawful custody and was sentenced to a further term of two months. A report from a psychiatrist referred to his anxiety at being in prison and there was evidence that he had been assaulted in prison. The reason for his being in protective custody is explained in the remarks on sentence and it is unnecessary to go into any detail in relation to that matter.

These were matters that were taken into account by the learned sentencing judge and no error has been revealed in the way in which his Honour approached them.

It was also submitted that the appellant had been given insufficient discount in relation to a particular matter, but that was something that was dealt with by Judge Grogan.

I can see no error of fact or principle in the remarks on sentence by the learned Chief Judge, and the sentence that was imposed does not appear to me to have been excessive.

The application for leave to appeal against sentence should be granted, but the appeal should be dismissed.
 
LEVINE J: I have read in draft the judgment of the Chief Justice. I agree with the proposed orders and his Honour's reasons therefor.
 
DOWD J: I have read the judgment in draft form of Gleeson CJ. I agree with the proposed orders and reasons stated.
 
CRIMINAL LAW - [DRUG MISUSE AND TRAFFICKING
ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) 
The appellant was convicted of supplying cannabis. The Crown case was one of deemed supply, based on the quantity said to have been found in his possession. The main issue at the trial was whether the appellant possessed the cannabis found in certain premises. A certificate under [s43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s43.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/), proving, amongst other things, the quantity of cannabis was tendered without objection. It was argued on appeal that the person who had signed the certificate was not qualified to do so because the cannabis had not been submitted directly to her by the police - HELD - The certificate proved the necessary facts and its author was qualified to sign it.

O R D E R S Appeal against conviction dismissed.
 Leave to appeal against sentences granted; appeal dismissed.
 
REGINA versus Stephen SOKVARI /95 
Wednesday 22 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an application for an extension of time for filing an application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence and for leave to appeal if the time is extended.

The application was filed on 13 March this year. The grounds of the application were that his Honour had erred in failing to take into account information given by the accused to the police at the time of his arrest which led to the conviction of a drug dealer. The second ground was that since approximately one week after the appellant commenced his sentence on 22
February 1995 it became necessary, due to an assault upon him, to place him in strict protective custody and that this more onerous form of imprisonment had continued and that this warranted some reduction in the minimum term.

The offence with which the applicant was convicted occurred on 18 March 1993 and it related to the supply, including deemed supply, of a substantial quantity of cannabis leaf. He elected trial by judge alone, pleaded not guilty and following a trial before Judge Grogan he was convicted on 17 February
The applicant was remanded in custody to appear for sentence on 22
February.

On that day the sentence proceedings were concluded and his Honour imposed a sentence comprising a minimum term of 18 months and, having found special circumstances, an additional term of 12 months. There was no immediate challenge by the applicant to either the conviction or the sentence.

Subsequently on 7 August 1995 the applicant filed a notice to appeal out of time against conviction. The appeal was heard urgently by this Court on 24
August but was dismissed on 20 November 1995 with an order that time served was to count.

Further time elapsed before the present application was made on 13 March 1996.
The minimum term of course is due to expire on 16 August this year which is now less than three months away.

After the applicant was sentenced by Judge Grogan he informed the solicitor who had appeared for him at the trial and the sentence hearing who appears before this Court today that he wished to serve his sentence in ordinary protective custody because he had given information to the police about other offenders. His solicitor says in his affidavit that he did not envisage at that time that the applicant would remain in protective custody indefinitely.
His Honour was asked to make an appropriate order and he ordered that the prisoner be held in protective custody unless he requested otherwise.

There was evidence before this Court in the form of affidavits by the applicant's solicitor sworn 9 April and 29 April attempting to explain the delay and giving hearsay evidence of what has happened to the applicant since he was sentenced. It appears that the applicant was assaulted some days after he began to serve his sentence and suffered the loss of several teeth. He then applied to be placed in strict protective custody, where he has remained up to the present time. The Court was furnished with a letter from the Department of
Corrective Services indicating that this has been the situation up to 21 May.

Mr Knaggs for the applicant submitted that strict protective custody is a far more rigorous form of custody than that experienced by prisoners for whom no special arrangements have been made and that the Court would take judicial notice of this. The submission has not been contested by the Crown and was treated as self-evident by the English Court of Criminal Appeal in the case of
Davies (1978) 68 CAR 319 at 322.

The difficulty which the applicant faces however is that he is unable to establish any error in the sentencing process undertaken by Judge Grogan. The judge made the only special order that he was asked to make and there can be no question of error in that regard. Although the applicant relies on the fact that he gave information to the police in relation to other drug offenders, which was of material assistance to the police in securing convictions, no evidence to that effect was placed before the learned sentencing judge and indeed there is strictly no evidence that that took place before this Court.

In my opinion the application has failed to make out an arguable case of error on the part of the learned sentencing judge.

Where some error on the part of the sentencing judge is established and this
Court is called upon to re-sentence the prisoner evidence of matters occurring between the date of sentence and the date of re-sentencing by this Court is regularly received and taken into account by this Court. However, there being no error on the part of the learned sentencing judge, this course is not available to the applicant.

The additional material upon which the applicant seeks to rely is not strictly fresh evidence. It was known to the applicant prior to the sentence and unfortunately, and for whatever reasons, was not brought to the attention of the learned sentencing judge. The Court therefore is in the position where the additional evidence relied upon, even if it was strictly proved, is neither fresh evidence and receivable as of right on behalf of the applicant, nor does it become relevant and admissible because this Court has to embark upon a re- sentencing of the prisoner.

In these circumstances I have reached the conclusion that the proposed appeal against sentence has no prospects of success and accordingly the application for an extension of time in which to make an application for leave to appeal against the sentence should be refused. The order that I would propose is application for extension of time to file an application for leave to appeal refused.

ABADEE J: I agree with the orders proposed by Mr Justice Handley and his reasons for such orders.

HANDLEY JA: There is no need at this stage to make an order that time served is to count as a result of some legislative changes. They are the orders of the Court.
 * * * 
