

Sellers Fabrics Pty Limited and Anor versus Hapag-Lloyd Ag Matter No 12/96 [1998] NSWSC 639 (12 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG /96 October 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Admiralty List 
Name of Case: SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
Proceedings: 12/1996 
Dates of Hearing: 12 October 1998 
Date of Interlocutory Judgment: 12 October 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr P E King 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Withnell & Hetherington 
Counsel for Defendant: Dr M White QC/Ms A J Silink 
Solicitors for Defendant: Norton Smith & Co 
Application to rely on statements filed late and in circumstances where an adjournment would be needed such as to disrupt the proceedings refused.

SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED V HAPAG-LLOYD AG 
RE THE SHIP "ENCOUNTER BAY" 
JUDGMENT - On application to read statement of Mr Neale of 8 October 1998. See page 12 of transcript. 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced by a statement of claim in personam filed on 21 June 1996, by which the plaintiffs have sought to recover from the defendant $209,808.46 in respect of damage undoubtedly sustained to textile weaving machines in a certain container, which was shipped from a port in France, on or about the 25 February 1995, on board the vessel "Encounter Bay", and which container was damaged on board that vessel thereby causing the damage to the plaintiffs' goods in it. 
On 24 March 1995, when the vessel was proceeding from the port of Melbourne to the port of Botany Bay, the damage occurred. I do not think it is in dispute that this happened when a stack of other containers fell knocking various stacks on to the container in which the plaintiff's goods were packed.

The defendant filed its defence on 19 September 1996 in which it did not admit paragraph 3 of the Statement of Claim, which asserted the plaintiffs' right to sue. Damages were also put in issue. However, the essential defences raised by the defendant are positive defences appearing in paragraphs 13 to 18 of the defence, on which I do not think there is any issue that the defendant carries the onus of proof.

On 27 September 1996, now over two years ago, a reply was filed by the plaintiff putting in issue the matters raised in the defence and also relying upon various positive matters which, so it will be submitted, I assume, preclude the defendant's reliance upon the matters it has pleaded.

The further consideration of the matter was prolonged by an argument as to whether certain documents subpoenaed by the plaintiff from P & O
Containers Pty Ltd, the owner of the vessel, should be produced to the plaintiff. This issue was determined by Giles J favourably to the plaintiffs, and his Honour's orders were upheld by the Court of Appeal.

On 6 February 1998 the matter came before me, when I was presented with typed short minutes of order and by consent I was asked to make orders whereby the plaintiffs were to serve statements of evidence upon which they proposed to rely, including experts' reports, on or before 13 March 1998. The defendant was to serve such statements of evidence on or before 24 April 1998 and the plaintiffs were to serve any statements in reply, including any expert's reports, on or before 22 May 1998.

On 22 May 1998, those dates were extended, so far as the defendant's statements of evidence and the plaintiffs' statements in reply, to 19 June and 10 July 1998 respectively. Once again, the orders were made by consent and on that day I referred the matter to the Chief Judge at 2pm with a view to obtaining a date for hearing, the parties obviously having advised me that the matter would be ready for hearing once the time for the furnishing of witness statements had expired.

On 22 May 1998 Giles J specially fixed the matter for hearing to commence today with an estimate of three days. The parties have had, accordingly, almost five months to conclude the preparation of the case which, so far as statements were concerned, was to be concluded, in any event, by 10 July 1998.

The plaintiffs filed their statements and when the case was called on this morning, Dr White of Queen's Counsel, who appears on behalf of the defendant, indicated that there were certain difficulties which arose from the fact that there had been a failure by the defendant to comply with the orders of the
Court which, I repeat, were orders made by consent. The failures have been gross. He further said that the case now proposed by the defendant was entirely different from that which the legal representatives for the plaintiffs and this Court would expect was the case from the material furnished.

My Associate has been furnished with various statements on behalf of the defendants, the earliest of which seems to have been prepared in September
A number of statements have been furnished and prepared in October 1998.
The statement with which I am presently concerned is a statement of David Rex
Lewis, the Chief Officer of the vessel, dated 11 October 1998. Mr Lewis had previously made a statement of some eight pages and 23 paragraphs on 23
September 1998. He is still a member of the crew of the vessel, as I understand it, or, if not of this particular vessel of another vessel within the relevant fleet. I appreciate that there are obvious difficulties in obtaining statements from sea going officers, but these are difficulties which should be addressed by the legal representatives for the parties before consent is given to the making of orders which require statements to be filed.
Further, where it becomes apparent that it is not going to be possible to comply with the orders of the Court, there is a positive obligation on solicitors who find themselves in that position to take immediate steps to bring the matter to the attention both of the Court and of the other side. The reasons for this are obvious. The other side is entitled to proceed on the basis that there will be at least basic compliance with the directions and the
Court is entitled to fix its schedule of cases on the basis that there will be compliance with directions. On the other hand, a party should not be penalised simply because there has been delay in providing a statement if in truth there is no real prejudice.

The touchstone upon which the Court must operate is to determine whether there is prejudice and the way in which that prejudice can be overcome. A further matter, which is relevant in the consideration of an application to read a late statement where there is an allegation of prejudice and where the only real solution is to grant an adjournment to enable that prejudice to be overcome, is the position of the Court and of other litigants who have a legitimate claim upon its time.

The remarks I have just made must also be read in the context that the parties before the Court have the benefit of the advice of experienced commercial solicitors and they are parties well able to conduct their affairs in a manner which is appropriate to the orderly running of the Commercial List. I use the words "Commercial List" as a generic term to cover matters in the Admiralty
List. I am not confronted here with parties represented by solicitors who do not have a familiarity with the procedures of this List, nor with parties who do not have the financial wherewithal to prepare cases conformably with the orders to which they consented and upon the basis of which all parties and the
Court have acted.

Mr King has informed me that he is prejudiced by the further statement of Mr
Lewis of 11 October 1998. It is a lengthy statement and far more detailed than that which he previously gave of 23 September 1998. It is not in issue that it was not furnished to Mr King until this morning and at Court. What is suggested is that if Mr King is given sufficient time, he, with the assistance of his experts, will be in a position to consider the matter and then to cross-examine Mr Lewis.

However, that distracts from the orderly presentation of the case and it in no way has regard to when Mr King will be in that position. I must also have regard to the fact that in this further statement there are references to a number of matters, which raise in my view issues quite different from those raised in Mr Lewis' or, for that matter, anyone else's previous statement. By way of example, commencing at par 16 Mr Lewis deals with maximum stack weight.
In par 17 he refers to the fact that the copy of the 'Lashing Manual' on board was not corrected, but that he is aware from his experience sailing on board other vessels that in fact a certain table, which contained an inaccuracy, had been corrected in other lashing manuals. An investigation of this assertion and the circumstances in which the lashing manual on "Encounter Bay" was not corrected could take some time and necessitate further discovery. He then goes on to deal with discussions he alleges he had with various people in ports in
Europe concerning the loading of the vessel and with concerns he had about the loading of various containers at another port in Europe. He further deals at some length with problems he perceived with the Stevedores in the port of
Melbourne. These matters are completely new and in my view it cannot be said that a short adjournment will necessarily bring about a situation where the plaintiff is in a position to deal with them or to deal with them adequately.

I should say one other thing about prejudice. In all cases the Court quite correctly, in my respectful view, calls for an explanation as to the prejudice which will accrue. However, there must be a realisation, and there is in the decided cases, that it is not always possible to articulate with precision the prejudice which will accrue by the bringing forward of late evidence. I have pointed to various matters in the statement of Mr Lewis which have the potential not only for raising a new case, but also for causing prejudice, and it is unacceptable in my opinion to require a party confronted with a statement so late and so far beyond the time realms for the furnishing of statements to which the party agreed, to then have to set out with precision what the prejudice is, and to try to work out in all respects the difficulties in which that party finds itself. Therefore, there will be a number of cases of unexpressed but, nonetheless, real prejudice.

When the case commenced today Mr King presented the plaintiffs' case and in truth, as it now emerges, the plaintiffs' case in-chief is not in issue. The plaintiff's title to sue is now conceded, although certain evidence has been given and Dr White frankly conceded at the commencement that provided I was satisfied of the damages, the amount of damages was not in issue. The situation therefore was, and must have been known by the defendant to be, that the real issues in this case revolved around whether the defendant could satisfy the Court that the damage to the plaintiffs' goods, which occurred in the way to which I have referred, occurred in circumstances which exculpated the defendant from liability. That this matter has only been addressed in the way it is now sought to be presented as late 11 October 1998 is totally unsatisfactory. There is no suggestion that Mr Lewis has not been available, if not in person through the ordinary means of overseas communication, to make his statement far earlier than he has done, and there was no suggestion when there was consent to the Court's making the directions that there would be any such difficulty.

I am acutely aware that if I reject the tender of Mr Lewis' statement that will leave the defendant's case in some degree of disarray. I have to weigh that particular consideration with the obvious prejudice which will accrue to the plaintiff of its being kept out of money to which it is at least prima facie entitled, and I have to do that in the context of all the circumstances to which I have referred.

Dr White has placed reliance on the decision of the High Court in the State of Queensland & Anor versus J L Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 146.] That was a case in which the High Court was concerned with the way in which the Judge at first instance exercised her discretion not to allow an amendment where the application to amend was made before the hearing date was fixed, and in any event arguably only to cover a matter which was already pleaded. Her Honour's decision was upheld by a majority of the Full
Court of the Federal Court, but the decision of that Court was overruled by the High Court. The facts and circumstances of that case are, in my respectful submission, far removed from the facts of the present case. In the present case it is sought to bring forward evidence on the day of the hearing for the first time and to support a new case in circumstances where the only result can be that the plaintiff must seek an adjournment, at least for some period, to seek to deal with that case. That occurs in the circumstances to which I have referred and, at the risk of unnecessary repetition, in circumstances where the time for the filing of the defendant's statements was by consent initially fixed and then by consent extended no doubt to meet the requirements of the defendant.

In all these circumstances when I look to what I consider to be the essential question, namely, where the justice of the case resides, and when I have regard to the fact that the plaintiffs have established a prima facie right to the amount which they claim, which can only be defeated by the defendants establishing its case, I am left in no doubt that the justice of the case demands that I should reject the tender of Mr Lewis statement of 11 October
The document will be MFI #1.

Dr White nextly reads to statement of Captain Neil Aiton made on 12 October
Captain Aiton is a principal and director of Marine Surveyors, and I do not think his expertise in these matters is seriously in issue. His statement proceeds on a number of assumptions, including assumptions arising from the statement of Mr Lewis. Captain Aiton had nothing to do with investigating the matter at the relevant time, that being left to another marine surveyor in his company, Captain Read. Statements of Captain Read, albeit late, have been filed, but I have been informed that it is not proposed to seek to read or to rely upon them. Captain Aiton introduces a somewhat different approach to the matter to that which appealed to Captain Read, and it seems to me that essentially for the reasons to which I have referred in dealing with the statement of Mr Lewis, and in circumstances where Mr King has asserted prejudice if Captain Aiton's statement is read, that I should also reject that statement. That statement will be MFI #2.

Dr White nextly seeks to rely upon the affidavit of Lawrence David Lawrie sworn on 8 October 1998. Essentially, for the reasons to which I have already referred, and in circumstances in which Mr King has asserted that his client would be prejudiced by reliance upon this statement, I propose to reject the tender of the affidavit. That affidavit will be MFI #3.

Dr White nextly tenders the statement of Richard John Charles Neale dated 8
October 1998. In addition to the various matters to which I have referred, which alone in my view would be sufficient to justify the rejection of that statement, there is a further problem so far as it is concerned, namely, that
Mr Neale is not within the country and thus not available for cross- examination. I have sought assistance as to the circumstances in which I should admit a statement where the witness is not available. Prima facie the position in relation to witness statements is dealt with in Pt 36 rule 4A and, pursuant to sub-rule (2A), a witness statement may not be put in evidence without the leave of the Court if the witness does not give evidence. In the course of some preliminary submissions it was suggested to me that the Court had a discretion to allow a statement to be relied upon if the witness was not available to give evidence, and I think that must be beyond the realm of the dispute because of the concluding words of sub-rule (2A). The question, however, which arises is whether where the other party wishes to cross- examine, that party should be precluded from cross-examining by virtue of the absence of the witness. This is a particularly relevant consideration where the statement is filed late in support of a different case. Prima facie, I see no reason why that should occur at all. I appreciate that there are difficulties in bringing witnesses from overseas and that it is expensive, however, no thought seems to have been given to the fairly simple expedient of taking evidence by way of video link transmission, which is frequently used in cases of this sort. If it has been, I have not been told about it. For all those reasons I reject the tender of the statement of Mr Neale. That statement will be MFI #4.

Dr White nextly seeks to tender and rely upon the report of Mr Nigel B J Offer dated October 1998. Mr King objects on the ground of prejudice. Essentially for the reasons I have given and particularly having regard to the fact that orders were made in respect of experts' reports I reject the tender of that report.

I should add to the observations I have made that I have been furnished with an affidavit of Miss Danella Wilmshurst, a solicitor in the employ of the solicitors for the defendant, sworn 12 October 1998. That affidavit is one I have taken into account in coming to the conclusions I have expressed in my various rulings. To some extent it confirms the views to which I have come.
For example, Miss Wilmshurst deposes to the fact that she conferred with
Captain Read on 20 August 1998. The next paragraph states that Captain Read departed for overseas on 17 September 1998 and was not due to return to Sydney until 11 October 1998. There is absolutely no explanation as to when Miss
Wilmshurst became aware of Captain Read's impending departure or when she became aware that he would not be returning until 11 October 1998. However, it is sufficient to say that by 20 August 1998 the defendant was grossly in breach of the directions to which it had consented in respect of the filing of reports. Once the possibility that Captain Read would not be available was highlighted, then the matter should have been either brought back to the Court or dealt with by the solicitors for the parties.

In par 4 Miss Wilmshurst refers to the fact that on 22 September 1998 "Encounter Bay" arrived at Port Botany and she attended at the ship and spoke with Mr Lewis. She then deposes to the fact that in conference with Senior and
Junior Counsel on 28 September 1998 she advised them "of significant new information" provided by Mr Lewis "as to the circumstances of the incident".
However, she continues that as Captain Read was overseas she was unable to discuss this further information with him and that a consequence of all that it became necessary "to retain an alternative expert to assist the defendant and if necessary provide a further expert's report". Thereupon Captain Aiton was retained.

All of this material has to be viewed in the light of the fact, and I say this not critically of Miss Wilmshurst, that by 28 September 1998 the defendant was hopelessly in default and a date had been reached in which the course which was followed could really only have led to the situation which has now arisen.
Therefore, whilst Miss Wilmshurst has been helpful to the Court in setting out frankly and correctly what occurred, it seems to me that it merely points up the failure by the defendant to attend to matters to which it had agreed to attend in a proper manner. The statement of Mr Offer will be MFI #5.
 * * * 
