

Fintron Pty Limited versus The Registrar, Consumer Claims Tribunal and Ors
Matter No 30111/96 [1997] NSWSC 652 (16 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 `Fintron Pty Limited versus The Registrar, Consumer Claims Tribunal & Ors` ` 30111/96` `16 December 1997` `Graham AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division` `30111/96 - FINTRON PTY LIMITED versus THE REGISTRAR, CONSUMER CLAIMS TRIBUNAL &
ORS` `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: In 1996 the jurisdiction of the Consumer Claims Tribunal was to determine consumer claims which were up to $25,000 in amount or value. 
The Tribunal is not constrained by the rigour of the court room. In a sense, its function is to mete out rough justice or at least a less than perfect form of justice in an economical way appropriate for disputes within the limits of its jurisdiction. Evidence before the Tribunal must be relevant to the determination of a claim (section 23(1) of the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act as amended) and must be given on oath or statutory declaration (section (2)-(3)) but the Tribunal is not bound by the rules or practice of evidence and the Tribunal may inform itself on any matter in such manner as it considers appropriate (section 23(4). See also section 29(4)). The Tribunal must conform to the rules of natural justice but, broadly speaking, has control of and responsibility for its own procedures (section 17(1)). Its business is conducted in private (section 22(1)). There is no requirement that referees constituting the Tribunal be legally qualified. The orders of the
Tribunal must, in its opinion, be "fair and equitable" (section 31(1)). The
Tribunal has no power to award costs (section 28) and the reasons required to be given for the Tribunal's determination are to be as brief as is reasonably practicable in the particular case (section 34A(2)).

In Archcom Pty Limited versus Consumer Claims Tribunal (unreported) Simpson J, September 1995, her Honour said at pages 12-14:- "At the outset it is worth recalling that the Act 'has set up a system for the speedy and inexpensive disposal of certain claims, limited in amount, arising out of contracts for the supply of goods or the provision of services by a person carrying on (or holding himself out as carrying on) the business of supplying such goods or providing such services'. (Singer versus Statutory
Offices Remuneration Tribunal [(1985) 5 NSWLR 633] per Hunt
J). Those remarks were made in the context of the predecessor of the Act, a Act by the same title, but they apply equally to the Act. Underpinning the Act is a policy of providing expeditious access to and inexpensive and informal process for the resolution of consumer disputes involving relatively small amounts of money. Speed and economy are to be accompanied, and (it is hoped) often achieved, by informality ...

The intention of the legislature, in creating these tribunals as a forum for the resolution of disputes involving relatively small amounts of money was the achievement of expeditious and inexpensive justice between the parties while maintaining a proper regard for, and protection of, the rights of the parties to the dispute. The difficulty, as I see it, lies in striking the correct balance between those two goals. Speedy and inexpensive solutions may be inimical to the protection of rights. There is no necessary relationship between the factual or legal complexity and the quantum of a claim but legal rights and obligations remain at the heart of the tribunal's jurisdiction.
Although a tribunal is enjoined to make such orders as will, in its opinion, be fair and equitable to all parties to the claim (31(1)), those orders must be grounded in legal liability: Fairey Australia Pty Limited versus Joyce [(1981) 2 NSWLR 314]; White versus Hall [(1983) ASC 55-247], State
Rail Authority of NSW versus Consumer Claims Tribunal [(1988) 14 NSWLR ".](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281988%29%2014%20NSWLR%20473 "View LawCiteRecord" )

A "consumer" is defined to mean, inter alia, a natural person to whom a supplier has supplied or agreed to supply goods or services, whether under a contract or not, or with whom a supplier has entered into a contract that is collateral to a contract for the supply of goods or services (section 3(1)).

A "supplier" is defined to mean a person who, in the course of carrying on or purporting to carry on a business, supplies goods or services (section 3(1)).
 "Consumer claim" is defined to mean, inter alia, a claim by a consumer for the payment of a specified sum of money that arises from a supply of goods or services by a supplier to the consumer, whether under a contract or not, or that arises under a contract that is collateral to a contract for the supply of goods or services (section 3(1)).

Section 13(1) provides for the lodgement of consumer claims in the prescribed form. Sections 17 et seq make provision for the hearing of consumer claims by the Tribunal. A Tribunal is constituted by a Referee sitting alone (section (1)) and at hearings before the Tribunal, parties are to have the carriage of their own cases (section 21(1)). Representation is only permitted in certain limited circumstances (section 21(2)). The Tribunal has an obligation before determining claims to bring about a settlement thereof which is acceptable to all the parties to the claim. Section 29 relevantly provides:- "29. (1) A Tribunal must not make an order in respect of a consumer claim that is before it unless it has brought, or used its best endeavours to bring, the parties to the claim to a settlement acceptable to all of them.

If such a settlement is reached, the Tribunal must make an order under this Division that gives effect to the settlement to the extent permitted by this Division." 
Failing settlement, the Tribunal was obliged to determine the subject claim and empowered to make, inter alia, an order requiring the respondent to pay to the claimant a specified amount of money (section 30(1)(a)). When making orders, the Tribunal must, as I have noted above, make such orders as, in its opinion, would be fair and equitable to all parties to the claim (section (1)).

Under section 34, an order of the Tribunal is final and binding on all the parties to a consumer claim that is heard and determined by the Tribunal and no appeal lies in respect of an order of the Tribunal. The conclusive nature of the Tribunal's determination is further demonstrated by section 12(1) of the Act, but is subject to a very limited exception which is to be found in section 12(2). Relevantly, for the purposes of this case, section 12 provided as follows:- "12. (1) Except as provided by subsection (2), a court of record has no jurisdiction to grant relief or a remedy by way of: a judgment or order in the nature of prohibition, mandamus, certiorari or other prerogative writ, a declaratory judgment or order, or an injunction, in respect of a consumer claim heard and determined or to be heard or determined by a tribunal in accordance with this Act or in respect of any ruling, order or other proceeding relating to such a claim.

A court is not precluded from granting relief or a remedy of a kind referred to in subsection (1) if, in respect of a consumer claim: ...
 a tribunal has made an order under section 30 and the ground on which the relief or remedy is sought is that: the tribunal had no jurisdiction to make the order, or in relation to the hearing or determination of the claim, a party to the claim had been denied natural justice." 
In this case the plaintiff, Fintron Pty Limited, claims that it has an entitlement to the relief sought which is within the terms of the exception which is to be found in section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the Act.

In the present case, no question of bias on the part of the Tribunal arises.
The plaintiff's claim is that it was denied natural justice in the sense that it was not given a proper opportunity to be heard.

The duty to accord natural justice is a duty to act fairly. What the rules of natural justice require in any particular case varies according to the circumstances and is to be determined, inter alia, by reference to the relevant statutory provisions. (Archcom Pty Limited versus Consumer Claims
Tribunal at page 21; Ridge versus Baldwin <case>; [(1964) AC ] and
Kioa versus West [(1985) 151 CLR 550).] 
In dealing with the former Act, Hunt J, as he then was, said in APA Life
Insurance Limited versus Charles [(1981) 2 NSWLR 352] at 360:- "The general prohibition against legal representation...places all the greater obligation upon the referee to ensure that parties are properly aware of the issues to be determined or resolved. The absence of any legal qualification for appointment as a referee may make this task more difficult for him but it does not detract from his obligation to carry it out." 
However, one should not overlook the adage "you can take a horse to water but you can't make him drink". In Bayram versus Benton (t/as Digital Dynatronics
Australia) <case>; [(1994) 98 NTR 1] at 7, Kearney J said, in respect of similar legislation:- "A Local Court exercising jurisdiction under the [Small Claims
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca124/) has a duty to ensure that each party is given a reasonable opportunity, in the particular circumstances, to present his or her case to the court. In my opinion neither that Act nor the common law imposes on the court the 'impossible task of ensuring that a party takes the best advantage of the opportunity to which he [or she] is entitled', as Deane J put it in Sullivan (Sullivan versus Department of Transport [(1978) 20 ALR 323)], supra, at (see at 9), even though the procedure in small claims proceedings is largely and necessarily inquisitorial, particularly when the parties are not legally represented." 
In Australian Broadcasting Tribunal versus Bond (1990) 170 CLR at 321, at 367
Deane J said:- "If a statutory tribunal is required to act judicially, it must act rationally and reasonably. Of its nature, a duty to act judicially (or in accordance with the requirements of procedural fairness or natural justice) excludes the right to decide arbitrarily, irrationally or unreasonably. It requires that regard be paid to material considerations and that immaterial or irrelevant considerations be ignored. It excludes the right to act on preconceived prejudice or suspicion...When the process of decision-making need not be and is not disclosed, there will be a discernible breach of such a duty if a decision of fact is unsupported by probative material. When the process of decision-making is disclosed, there will be a discernible breach of the duty if findings of fact upon which a decision is based are unsupported by probative material and if inferences of fact upon which such a decision is based cannot reasonably be drawn from such findings of fact. Breach of a duty to act judicially constitutes an error of law which will vitiate the decision." 
For reasons which will shortly appear, it is unnecessary for me to address the application of this last-mentioned statement of principle to the facts of this case. I should say that I have some reservations about its application if, as
Mr Braham of counsel who appears for the plaintiff submits, it converts all cases where there has been an error of law into cases where there has been a denial of natural justice.

The second defendants, Peter Grahame Routley and members of his family, carry on business as farmers at "Almond Vale" Yuluma via Urana.

In April 1996 they were anxious to acquire a new bulk spreader with power takeoff spinner drive, dual speed conveyer, seed and trace element dispenser and inspection steps. On 11 April 1996 Mr Peter Routley placed an order for such a spreader with Landaco Spreaders of South Hay. The agreed price was $25,000 of which $8,750 was payable by way of deposit with the balance on completion/delivery. Delivery was sought "ASAP please. Thank you for treating this order as urgent". Mr Peter Routley quoted the firm's sales tax registration number E5270815.

Whilst it is contended by each of Mr Norm Connor and Mr Peter Connor who are directors of the plaintiff Fintron Pty Limited, that "Landaco Spreaders" is a business name of that individual, the business name "Landaco" is registered as a business name of Fintron Pty Limited and for present purposes it has been conceded by the Connors that the order for the supply of the spreader is one which was placed by the second defendants upon the plaintiff.

The spreader, which was ordered for delivery "ASAP", was not delivered promptly, notwithstanding the payment by the Routleys of the required deposit.
Misleading information was provided by Mr Norm Connor to Mr Peter Routley as to the progress which was being achieved with the construction of the spreader for the Routleys. I have no doubt that the misleading information was provided by mistake but the fact remains that no spreader was supplied promptly and the
Routleys were constrained to cancel their order and, quite late in the season, to hire an alternative piece of equipment. They were also denied the opportunity to exploit the spreader by subcontracting out its use to third parties for reward.

The Routleys sought to recover their deposit and after considerable resistance secured the return of part thereof ($5,340). They saw fit to lodge a claim with the Consumer Claims Tribunal, the first defendant, which has filed a submitting appearance. The claim, dated 28 May 1996, would appear to have been received by the Tribunal at Wagga Wagga on 25 June 1996.

The respondent was named as "Landaco Spreaders" and, as I have earlier indicated, Fintron Pty Limited has accepted that, relevantly, it was "Landaco
Spreaders".

On 2 July 1996 the Tribunal wrote to Fintron Pty. Limited attaching a copy of the claim which the Routleys had lodged. The letter included an invitation to pursue a settlement of the matter by direct negotiation with the Routleys. The
Tribunal also contacted the Routleys to inform them of the invitation which had been extended to Fintron Pty Limited. No settlement having been achieved, the Tribunal sent notices of hearing to each of the parties advising them of the listing of the matter for a one hour hearing at the Narrandera courthouse at 2.00 pm on 19 September 1996. The notice to Fintron Pty Limited included the following:- "All parties to this claim, including persons who appear from the claim form to have sufficient interest in the resolution of this dispute, are notified that unless the Tribunal is notified by the Claimant beforehand in writing of a settlement, the proceedings in relation to this claim will take place before a Consumer Claims Tribunal..." at the time and place specified. The notice also bore an endorsement:- "YOU ARE NOTIFIED THAT IN THE ABSENCE OF EITHER PARTY THE CASE MAY BE
DETERMINED BY THE TRIBUNAL AND AN ORDER MADE ON THE EVIDENCE AVAILABLE...".

The Tribunal was constituted by Mr W Guild whom I understand to have been a part-time Referee. The claim was expressed in considerable detail both on the prescribed form and in an accompanying document.

Whilst all of the detail is important and if time permitted I would be disposed to refer to all of it, I will content myself with a reference to the following part of page 4 of the accompanying document which read as follows:- "I HEREBY FURNISH MY LIST OF CLAIMS WHICH MR CONNOR HAS COST ME, BOTH DIRECTLY
AND INDIRECTLY.

COST OF OVERDRAFT INTEREST AT 12 1/2% ON $8750 FROM APRIL 17th TO 29th MAY - DAYS AT $3/DAY (BASED ON OVERDRAFT RATES QUOTED BY BANK)=$126.00 
LOSS OF INTEREST ON BALANCE OF MONEY STILL OWED TO BE CALCULATED AS TIME
PROGRESSES $3,410 STILL OWED.

COST OF HIRING A SPREADER $2,040.00 
COST OF LOSS OF CONTRACTING AT LEAST $8,000 (THIS WORK WAS ORGANISED FOR THIS NEW SPREADER) 
RETURN OF BALANCE OF DEPOSIT $3410.00 
COST OF SOLICITORS LETTERS (TO DATE) $50.00 
LOSS OF CROP YIELD POTENTIAL BY PLANTING BEING DELAYED DUE TO SPREADING NOT
BEING DONE AND FINALLY BEING DONE BY HIRED MACHINE WHEN THE CROP SHOULD HAVE
BEEN GROWING 
AT LEAST $10,000 (N.B. BY THE TIME THE LAST OF THE CANOLA WAS PLANTED THE GROUND HAD DRIED
OUT AND AN ONLY AVERAGE GERMINATION HAS OCCURRED) 
THIS ESTIMATE IS VERY CONSERVATIVE 
TOTAL $23,626".

When the matter came before the Referee, the claimants were represented by
Peter Grahame Routley and his son Paul Routley and Fintron Pty Limited was represented by Peter Connor, the son of Norm Connor. Each of the parties in attendance presented their cases on oath. The Referee made it clear at the outset that he would invite the claimants to have their say and then afford the respondent an opportunity to have its say and he encouraged the parties to present their cases free from interruption by the other parties.

The record of the Tribunal suggests that the hearing commenced at 2.00 pm.
Notes prepared by the Referee indicate that the evidence concluded at 2.50 pm and the record indicates that the matter concluded at 3.16 pm.

In the result, the Referee ordered Fintron Pty Limited to pay the Routleys $23,450. The Referee's "Brief Reasons as required by section 34A were as follows: "BRIEF REASONS AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 34A TWA96/118
The claimants Peter Grahame Routley, Marita Louise Routley, Grahame
Routley, Paul Routley and David Routley engaged the respondent Fintron Pty Ltd trading as Landaco to construct a spreader machine for farm use. The claimants paid a deposit of $8750.00.
I am satisfied that the machine was not built by the due date nor indeed was it built by the additional time allowed by the claimant. The respondent refunded $5340.00 and on the evidence I rule that a further refund of [$8750-$5340]=$3410 is permitted.
Due to the delay by the respondent the claimant had to acquire (by hire) another spreader which cost $2040.00. I allow the claimant this sum owing to the breach of contract by the respondent.
The claimants have claimed two amounts of interest (viz (i) $126 and (ii) $106.47) for their overdraft to obtain the machine. Since the respondents were not told of this overdraft at the time of contracting I reject this claim item.
The claimants, on the available evidence told the respondent of the consequence of the latter's failure to provide the machine on time - and did so at the time of contracting. The consequences referred to were the claimant's loss of profits and crop yield. Accordingly I allow the claimant's claim for $8000.00 as constituting the cost of the loss of contract spreading owing to the failure by the respondent to supply the machine as agreed. I further allow the claimants the sum claimed of $10,000 for loss of crop yield due to the failure by the respondent to supply the machine as agreed.
The claimants also arranged for their solicitor to contact the respondent.
The solicitors fees I reject as a claim item as they relate to the costs of the case.
Overall I allow the claimants: 
A) $3,410 - Balance of Monies Paid 
B) $2,040 - Hire cost of Replacement Spreader 
C) $8,000 - Cost of loss of Contract Spreading 
D) $10,000 - Cost of loss of Crop Yield $23,450" 
The manuscript notes of the Referee which appear to have been made during the course of the hearing, are to be found on two pages, the first of which is headed "Claimant" and the second headed "Respondent". I should indicate that halfway down the page headed "Respondent" there is the heading "Further
Evidence" which is followed by the word "Claimant" once again.

Mr Peter Connor says that he made some notes of certain matters and after the hearing, typed them up. Those notes indicate that Mr Connor considered Mr
Peter Routley's presentation to the Tribunal to be in the nature of a sermon.
Mr Peter Connor who gave evidence before me indicated that the claimants case was presented principally by Mr Peter Routley who spoke for in excess of twenty minutes. I gather that the contribution of Mr Paul Routley was relatively minor.

Unfortunately for Fintron Pty Limited, Mr Peter Connor went to the Tribunal hearing expecting it to be in the nature of a mediation and not a hearing at which he would have to address, once and for all, the detail of the claim made by the Routleys. Nevertheless, it seems clear to me that each of the parties was given a fair go in terms of presenting their cases to the Tribunal. Mr
Peter Routley spoke to notes which he had prepared and along the way "ad- libbed". He also read to the Tribunal the content of two statutory declarations which had been made so as to assist the claimants with their case.

Mr Peter Connor spoke to notes which had been prepared for him by his father
Mr Norm Connor and also had the opportunity to "ad-lib".

Mr Peter Connor's notes to which I have referred which were typed up after the event included the following:- "Two questions that was asked of Mr Routley after he had made his claim .

Q1. Did you at any time inform the contractor that you where (sic) taking out an overdraft to purchase the machine? 
A1. He would have known that, (in my opinion not a direct enough answer) well not really.

Q2. Did you notify the contractor of the consequences of not supplying on time? 
A2. Yes, in fact infactically (sic) (Lie)".

Much of the plaintiff's case before me turns on the alleged unfairness of the
Referee asking the last-mentioned question of Mr Peter Routley without inviting Mr Peter Connor to comment on the answer which was given.

Mr Peter Connor suggested that he had no opportunity to say anything more although both Mr Peter Routley and Mr Paul Routley say that the Referee asked him "do you have anything more to ask?" to which he replied "no sir".

My note of the evidence given in cross-examination is that Mr Connor was unsure as to whether the question was asked of him and was disposed to the view that he did, in fact, give the response suggested.

In any event, the true position seems to me to be clearly revealed by the
Referee's contemporaneous manuscript notes. At the foot of the page under the heading "Claimant" he has recorded the following:- "Did not notify (R) (Respondent) of overdraft at the time of purchase.

Did tell (R) (Respondent) of loss of profits if machine not available in time." 
The presence of these notes where they occur in the Referee's record is consistent with the view that the relevant questions were asked, at least on the first occasion, at the conclusion of the Routleys' presentation of their case or as Mr Peter Connor said, "after he had made his claim (sermon)".

The lie to the suggestion that Mr Connor was denied the opportunity to address the question of potential loss of profits if the machine was not available in time, is to be found in the ultimate note appearing on the Referee's page headed "Respondent" immediately above the words "Further Evidence". His note read:- "(C) (Claimants) did not tell (R) (Respondent) of loss of potential crop yields at time of contracting." 
These notes suggest to me that each side had an opportunity to and did address the question of losses which would flow to the Routleys if the spreader was not available on time. Under the heading "Further Evidence" the word "Claimant" is again recorded as indicated above and under that heading the
Referee has recorded the following:- "Did Tell Norm of loss of profits if machine not available in time - did tell Norm at time of contracting." 
It seems to me that what has occurred is that after each side has presented its case and addressed the issue of losses flowing from untimely delivery of the spreader, the Routleys have, in effect, presented a case in reply and refuted the claim made by Mr Peter Connor that the Connors had not been told of potential losses which would flow from late delivery.

The plaintiff asserts that there has been a denial of natural justice in three respects which I have noted as follows:-
The Tribunal failed to ensure that Mr Peter Connor had the opportunity to see documents which the Referee took into account in making his decision.
The Tribunal did not give Mr Peter Connor an opportunity to respond to answers given by Mr Peter Routley to questions asked of him by the 
Referee.
There was no rational basis for the Tribunal's decision and in particular the quantum ordered to be paid.

In relation to the question of documents, the complaint is made, as I understand it, primarily in respect of the two statutory declarations to which
I have referred, although it may also extend to an invoice from Lockhart Rural
Service which related to the hire equipment for which a charge of $2,040 was imposed. I note that the invoice of Lockhart Rural Service formed part of the claim and accordingly it was quite unnecessary for a further copy of that document to be provided to Mr Peter Connor.

In relation to the statutory declarations, it is clear that these were read in full by Mr Peter Routley to the Tribunal and there is no suggestion that he may, in his reading of the documents, have deceived or attempted to deceive the Tribunal and/or Mr Connor. The documents were not tendered and did not become exhibits in any way.

In the circumstances, it seems to me that the plaintiff's first claim of a denial of natural justice fails.

In relation to the second allegation, I cannot see that, acting fairly, it was incumbent upon the Referee to give Mr Peter Connor an opportunity to deliver a rejoinder. The claimants had already raised the issue of losses of profit arising from untimely delivery in their case and Mr Connor had responded to them.

The suggestion has been advanced that both questions were asked of Mr Peter
Routley for the first time at the heel of the hunt and just before the Referee adjourned to consider his decision. It is said that when the Referee received the answer which he did to the first question asked of Mr Peter Routley, and indicated that in the circumstances the claim for interest would fail, Mr
Peter Routley was encouraged to answer the second question dishonestly. No such suggestion was put to him in cross-examination before me and in any event
I find that both parties had been afforded a fair opportunity to address this aspect of the matter and nothing further was required of the Referee to ensure procedural fairness. Accordingly, the second allegation of a denial of natural justice fails.

In relation to the third allegation, it is exceptionally difficult for the plaintiff to advance a case of "no rational basis" for the Referee's decision in circumstances where the entirety of the evidence before the Tribunal is not before the court. I must say that I do not consider that section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the Act was intended to allow a party in the position of the plaintiff to engage in a full-scale review of the evidence before the Tribunal.

In any event, what I do know about what transpired before the Referee demonstrates that, at the least, the claim of the Routleys was effectively verified by Mr Peter Routley's presentation of their case. The fact that Mr
Peter Connor went to the Tribunal hearing unequipped to address the question of quantum is beside the point. He had ample opportunity to prepare himself for the hearing of which he had due notice in respect of a claim which was comprehensive and clear in its exposition. Accordingly, the third claim of alleged denial of natural justice also fails.

In the circumstances, the further amended summons filed in court today will be dismissed with costs.

It may be noted that the hearing has extended beyond normal court hours to accommodate the fact that all the relevant witnesses have come from the country and in my opinion it has been in the interests of justice for an extempore judgment to be delivered forthwith at the conclusion of the hearing so that the parties may have the benefit of my reasoning. The hearing has concluded or will conclude at 6.20 pm and when costs are assessed the extra hearing time involved should be taken into account.

I note the terms of the order providing for security for costs of 27 March which was entered on 5 June 1997.

The exhibits may remain with the papers, to be dealt with in the normal way.
 * * * 
