

Newmans (Holdings) Pty Ltd versus Edye Matter No 11513/97 [1997] NSWSC 480 (14
October 1997) 
Newmans (Holdings) Pty Limited versus Nicholas Edye /97 October 1997 
Graham AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - NEWMANS (HOLDINGS) PTY LIMITED versus NICHOLAS EDYE 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff/appellant in this matter is the proprietor of a second hand car yard which trades as Newmans of Kogarah. 
In mid-December 1994, one Jennifer Garling agreed to trade in a 1989 Ford
Telstar Ghia motor vehicle registered number PIP-628 for $12,000 with the plaintiff and to acquire a Ford Fairmont sedan for $20,500.

The Ford Telstar was blue in colour and was described erroneously in the
Certificate of Registration as a Ford Capri sedan. The agreement in respect of the trade-in and the purchase was negotiated with one of the plaintiff's salesmen, a Mr Oliver Crowe. The transaction was completed at a time when Mr
Crowe was on vacation. Whilst the reverse of the Certificate of Registration referable to the sale was completed by Miss Garling on 28 December 1994 with a sale date of 28 December 1994 indicated, she did not in fact complete the transaction until Friday, 29 December 1994.

When she arrived at the plaintiff's car sales yard on that occasion, she went to the office and saw a Mr Michael Barton, a sales person, who had been employed by the plaintiff for about six months. Miss Garling had not previously dealt with by Mr Barton but it was he who, with the assistance of another agent, completed her transactions. Miss Garling gave Mr Barton the keys to her Ford Telstar and the registration papers. She received the keys for her new Ford Fairmont sedan and proceeded to leave the premises in that car.

A business manager in the employ of the plaintiff issued a receipt for the difference between the purchase price for the Ford Fairmont and the sale price for the Ford Telstar. The procedure laid down by the plaintiff for salesmen to follow in the circumstances was for the keys to the traded-in vehicle to be put on a board in the used car dealership. The salesman was to complete a booking in sheet and required to place that booking in sheet and the registration papers in a deal folder or jacket which was to go to the sales supervisor for checking prior to its transmission to the administration office. It was the plaintiff's expectation that its sales supervisor would be aware of the receipt by the plaintiff of a vehicle which had been traded-in in circumstances such as prevailed on this day.

It would appear that on 29 December 1994 an audit was carried out of the plaintiff's stock and it was thought at first that the Ford Fairmont which had been sold to Miss Garling was missing. A chain of inquiry was followed which led to contact being had between the plaintiff and the defendant/respondent,
Mr Nicholas Edye, who, as it transpired, took possession of the blue Ford
Telstar which Miss Garling had sold to the plaintiff on the morning of
Saturday, 30 December 1994.

On 10 January 1995, the defendant apparently completed an application for transfer of the registration of the Ford Telstar to himself or some other organisation which he represented. When Miss Garling delivered up possession of the Ford Telstar to the plaintiff she apparently drove the car into one of the plaintiff's driveways. Later in the day the car was apparently placed in the plaintiff's holding yard. When it was located within the plaintiff's holding yard it was apparently inspected by Mr Edye who worked in and was experienced in the motor vehicle trade.

On the morning of Saturday, 30 December, Mr Edye attended at the plaintiff's yard once again and proceeded to pay Mr Michael Barton $8,000 by bank cheque for the Ford Telstar. Mr Barton gave Mr Edye Miss Garling's registration papers and the keys to the car which was then parked outside the yard in an adjacent street. Mr Edye proceeded to drive the Ford Telstar away.

Mr Barton had no title to the Ford Telstar and he was never seen again by his employer, the plaintiff.

Mr Edye's evidence as to the circumstances of his purchase of the car from Mr
Barton was as follows: "Q. What did you say, using the words that you said? 
A. I can't remember whether I introduced myself at the time but I asked him (meaning Mr Barton) whether any motor vehicles were for wholesale.

Q. Was there any reply? 
A. Yes, he said that there weren't any motor vehicles for wholesale, however, he did have a vehicle on his own that he did want to sell.

Q. Did he tell you anything more at that point? 
A. I don't believe so, I enquired what the vehicle was and he has informed me.

Q. Did you then go somewhere else from the point where you were when you had this conversation? 
A. Yes, where I have originally spoken with him was in the used car office just at one end of Newmans premises.

Q. I think your answer is yes, you did go somewhere else. Did you go alone or with another person? 
A. I went with Mr Barton.

Q. And where did you both go to? 
A. To the holding yard.

Q. Now can you describe to us what the holding yard is in your experience? 
A. A holding yard is where the cars are normally kept and any dealership.

Q. Was a certain vehicle identified to you? 
A. Yes, it was a Ford Telstar, a blue Ford Telstar.

Q. Did you proceed to inspect that vehicle? 
A. Yes.

Q. Now, do you remember any more conversation between yourself and this person during the course of the inspection? 
A. Yes, he told me that he'd offered the car to Newmans, that they had workshop tested it and it wasn't good enough for them to purchase. I didn't doubt this because with previous knowledge of how Newmans operated if they had to spend more than $700 on a car, they wouldn't keep it, they would wholesale it.
 ...

I told him that the vehicle was worth approximately $8,000 of my money.

Q. Now, was any deal struck at that point? 
A. No.
 ...

Q. ... Now, can I take you to a later period of time on the same day, did you receive a telephone call? 
A. Yes.

Q. And did the person identify themself? 
A. Yes, yes.

Q. Who was that? 
A. Michael Barton.

Q. Now what did he tell you, if anything? 
A. He told me that he had accepted my offer of $8,000 and asked me when I would like to pick the vehicle up.

Q. And what did you say if anything? 
A. Well I said I would try and pick it up that afternoon or following morning.

Q. And was there any discussion concerning method of payment? 
A. Yes, Michael Barton asked me whether I would pay him cash which I refused to do, I said that I would either pay him by my business cheque or a bank cheque.

Q. And was there an agreement concerning the method of payment finally reached? 
A. Yes, I agreed to pay him by bank cheque.

Q. And did he specify to whom that bank cheque was to be payable? 
A. Yes, to himself Michael Barton.
 ...

Q. You told us about some events that occurred on the 29 December 1994. Did something happen the next day? 
A. Yes, I went down to Newmans the following morning, that would have been in the morning and walked into the office where I originally saw Michael Barton, the day previous.

Q. And when you walked into the office did you recognise anyone? 
A. Yes, Michael Barton.

Q. And did he speak with you? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did he show you something? 
A. Yes, he showed me the registration papers for the car.

Q. Having seen those registration papers did you notice something about them? 
A. Yes, they weren't in his name and they instead of saying a Telstar on the registration papers, it showed up as a Capri.
 ...

Q. Did you say something to Mr Barton when you made the observation concerning the name on the registration papers? 
A. Yes I asked him why the car wasn't in his name.

Q. And what did he say if anything? 
A. He told me that a friend of his who also worked in the motor trade in
Parramatta had bought the car at the door, which means Mrs Garling had offered the car for sale at a dealership in Parramatta and the salesman there had purchased it. He'd, Michael Barton had purchased the car off his friend who worked at Parramatta to sell to Newmans to try to get a profit out of the vehicle.
 ...

Q. Now, did you look at the back of the registration papers? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did you notice there, if anything? 
A. There had been some writing on the disposal section of the registration papers that had been crossed out.

Q. Do you remember what that writing said? 
A. I think it was something along the lines of NEW.

Q. Was there any signature on the reverse of the registration papers? 
A. Yes, the papers had been signed by a Mrs Garling. Or I believe it to be her signature." 
Mr Edye proceeded to hand over the bank cheque to Mr Barton and apparently obtained a receipt from him for his payment. As I have indicated above, on 10
January 1995 Mr Edye sought to secure registration of the transfer of the vehicle from Miss Garling. The form which he completed included the question, "Is the certificate of registration in the seller's name?" which permitted an answer, "No" or an answer, "Yes".

Mr Edye placed a tick against the affirmative alternative. No doubt there were stamp duty implications involved in bypassing the alleged sale to Mr Barton's friend at Parramatta and then the alleged sale from that friend to Mr Barton.

The reverse of Miss Garling's certificate of registration is quite easy to discern in the stated case which has been filed especially where the buyer's name has been inserted and crossed out. It seems reasonably clear to me that the words which were originally included to identify the buyer were "Newman's - Kogarah".

In proceedings in the Local Court constituted by Magistrate W G Pierce, an action for I assume conversion was brought by the plaintiff against Mr Barton and Mr Edye. I assume that Mr Barton was never served and the action proceeded against Mr Edye alone. The learned Magistrate entered a verdict and judgment for Mr Edye and ordered the plaintiff to pay his costs of $4,880.

The basis of his Worship's reasoning is to be found in the following paragraphs of the stated case: "2.2.4. There was a practice ('the Practice') in the motor vehicle trade that traders, such as the plaintiff, would exercise some control over the keys and registration papers for its vehicles.
 ...
 .2.8. The second defendant (meaning Mr Edye) was entitled to infer that the first defendant (meaning Mr Barton) was the owner of the Vehicle because: the first defendant had possession of the registration papers for the
Vehicle, in the name of Jennifer E Garling; the first defendant had possession of the keys for the Vehicle; and the Vehicle was parked in a street at the side of the plaintiff's office at Kogarah.
 .2.9 The plaintiff permitted the first defendant to: have possession of the registration papers for the Vehicle in the name of
Jennifer E Garling; have possession of the keys for the Vehicle; and park the Vehicle in a street at the side of the plaintiffs' office at
Kogarah.
 ...
 .4 I...determined that the keys and registration papers for the vehicle, in the name of Jennifer E Garling were important indicia of title to the vehicle.
 ...
 .6 I...determined that the plaintiff as the owner of the Vehicle, was, in permitting the first defendant to: have possession of the registration papers for the Vehicle, in the name of
Jennifer E Garling; have possession of the keys for the Vehicle; and park the Vehicle in a street at the side of the plaintiff's office at
Kogarah, precluded from denying the first defendant's authority to sell the Vehicle to the second defendant." 
The plaintiff/appellant has contended that his Worship's determination was erroneous in point of law in a number of respects detailed as 4.1-4.9 of the stated case. It is unnecessary, for present purposes, to set out those grounds in detail.

It is important to observe that the Ford Telstar when first inspected by Mr
Edye was located in the plaintiff's holding yard. The purported vendor was not the registered owner of the vehicle. The purported vendor was a sales person in the employ of the plaintiff and as such likely to have in his possession on the plaintiff's behalf keys for motor vehicles and registration papers. Mr
Edye did not ask to see a receipt evidencing the purchase of the motor vehicle by Mr Barton from his friend at Parramatta.

In his reasons for judgment the learned Magistrate said: "...I do think that under section 26 subsection 1 (referring to the Sale of
Goods 1923 as amended) Newmans as the owner of the goods by their conduct were precluded from denying Mr Barton's authority to sell. The conduct by which they were so precluded was that they permitted Barton to actually have the keys and that is relevant in the own right(sic), it is relevant that they permitted him to have the car in the side street although that is after the event and this is of less importance, the sale had already concluded.

The importance of that is that from the fact that it was in the side street you can infer that it was in the side street beforehand, before the sale some few minutes earlier and so they were by permitting Mr Barton to have the car in the side street precluded from denying Mr Barton's authority to sell and also of course and perhaps mainly from the fact that one of the principal indicia title namely a signed transfer of registration on the registration papers were in fact in Mr Barton's possession in the office and he was permitted to have them without apparently any reference to anyone else..." 
The plaintiff/appellant submits that this is a case for the application of the principle nemo dat quod non habet - no-one can give what he does not have himself. The only basis on which the plaintiff could fail with its claim against Mr Edye was if the proviso to <case> of the Sale of Goods Act 1951 applied. That subsection provides as follows: "26(1). Subject to the provisions of this Act, where goods are sold by a person who is not the owner thereof and who does not sell them under the authority or with the consent of the owner, the buyer acquires no better title to the goods than the seller had, unless the owner of the goods is by his conduct precluded from denying the seller's authority to sell." 
The circumstances of this case are not entirely dissimilar from those which prevailed in Thomas Australia Wholesale Vehicle Trading Company Pty Limited v Marac Finance Australia Limited [(1985) 3 NSWLR 452.] 
Thomas Australia was a car dealer which specialised in buying and selling prestige vehicles. One such vehicle was a Mercedes which was the property of Barclays Australia (Finance) Limited which it had purchased and leased to a shelf company known as International Capital Corporation Limited. That company was controlled by a Mr Kerr who had his personalised number plates affixed to the car and registered it in the name of Kerr Real Estate Pty Limited. It was garaged at his home and driven by him to his place of work in the city. 
Mr Kerr proceeded to sell the vehicle to Thomas Australia which in turn sold the vehicle to Marac Finance. Barclays repossessed the car as a result of default made by International Capital Corporation Limited whereupon
Marac Finance sued Thomas Australia for the loss sustained by it.

The history of <case> was considered in detail by McHugh J in the New South
Wales Court of Appeal and reference should be made to his judgment at pp 469D to 474F. I will refer in these reasons to certain excerpts from the passage mentioned.

At p 469 his Honour said: "The subsection creates a statutory estoppel. An owner may be precluded from denying the seller's authority by reason of his conduct which, expressly or impliedly, constitutes an unambiguous representation to the buyer that the seller has his authority to make the sale; Goodwin versus Robarts [(1876) 1 App
Cas 476] at 489; Low versus Bouverie [(1891) 3 Ch 82] at 103-106, ; Canada and Dominion Sugar Co Ltd versus Canadian National (West Indies)
Steamships Ltd [(1947) AC 46] at 55-56; Moorgate Mercantile Co Ltd versus Twitchings [(1977) AC 890] at 902, 917-918, 922-923. In some cases, the omission of the owner to take steps to prevent the sale may also estop him from asserting his title. But inaction, silence, or even gross carelessness in the protection of property is not of itself enough to preclude an owner from asserting his title; Farquharson Brothers & Co versus C King & Co [(1902) AC ] at -336; Moorgate Mercantile Co Ltd versus Twitchings (at 923,925). The failure to register the transfer of ownership of a car or to register the existence of a hire purchase agreement over a car does not preclude the owner from asserting his title against one who bought from a person who did not have the owner's authority to sell; Cook versus Jenkins <case>; [(1947) VLR 369]; Moorgate Mercantile Co Ltd versus Twitchings; Associated
Midland Corporation versus Sanderson Motors Pty Limited [(1983) 3 NSWLR .] 
Throughout the history of the law of sale of goods, conduct, which stops short of a representation, has only estopped the owner from claiming his goods when it constitutes a breach of a duty of care which he owed to the buyer." 
At p 470B his Honour said: "The necessity for the existence of a duty of care has long been recognised." 
At p 471F he said: "In my opinion it is no more open to this Court to reject the requirement of duty than it would be for us to reject the doctrine of privity of contract." 
At p 472B he said: "Moreover to set aside the necessity for a duty would make the operation of s (1) even more difficult than it already is." 
At p 473D he said: "Thus to insist on the need for a duty before the careless omission of an owner precludes him from denying the seller's authority is to give effect to, and not to deny, the legislative purpose." 
At p 473E he said: "None of the foregoing means, that I think that the conception of duty in this context is a limited one. I agree with the remarks of Lord Wilberforce (at ) in Moorgate Mercantile Co Limited versus Twitchings that the tests for duty in other fields are not wholly appropriate. No doubt the area of duty in this field is one where it is still open to the courts to develop the law, bearing in mind, as Lord Wilberforce said (at 903-904), 'That the duty of care should not be stretched so widely as to make it a universal duty on the part of property owners to safeguard others against loss'. His Lordship thought (at ) that the existence of a duty was to be determined by the answer to the question: '...whether, having regard to the situation in which the relevant transaction occurred, as known to both parties, a reasonable man, in the position of the "acquirer" of the property, would expect the "owner" acting honestly and responsibly, if he claimed any title in the property, to take steps to make that claim known to, and discoverable by, the "acquirer" and whether, in the face of an omission to do so, the "acquirer" could reasonably assume that no such title was claimed.'" 
Finally, at p 474E his Honour said: "I think that the proper test of duty is that formulated by Lord Wilberforce in Moorgate read against the Judicial Committee's approval of the dictum of Blackburn J." 
As I see it, there were no circumstances in the present case which raised a duty of care on the part of the plaintiff to Mr Edye to prevent Mr Barton from being able to represent falsely to intending bona fide purchasers for value available that Mr Barton was the owner of the Ford Telstar vehicle. Just as
Glass and McHugh JJ found that there were no circumstances which would raise a duty of care in Thomas Australia, I do not consider that there were circumstances in this case which would raise such a duty.

The plaintiffs' conduct both in terms of action and inaction in this case was not such as to preclude it from denying Mr Barton's authority to sell the vehicle.

The defendant/respondent has submitted that there was no error of law in his
Worship's reasoning. I disagree (see The Australian Gas Light Company versus The
Valuer General (1940) 40 State Reports NSW 126 at 137-8; Azzopardi v
Tasman U.E.B. Industries Limited [(1984) 4 NSWLR 139] at 150;
Collector of Customs versus Agfa-Gevaert Limited <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 389] at 394-398.) 
In all the circumstances the appeal should succeed.

The orders of the Court will be: 
The question asked in the stated case be answered in the affirmative.

The matter be remitted to the learned Magistrate with the opinion of the
Court to be determined according to law.

The defendant/respondent is to pay the plaintiff/appellant's costs of the appeal.

Grant to the defendant/respondent an indemnity certificate in respect of the appeal in accordance with <case> of the Suitor's Fund Act as amended.
 * * * 
