

G C Collins versus Australian Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd [1996] NSWSC 266 (12 July 1996) 
GLENN CHRISTOPHER COLLINS versus AUSTRALIAN PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRIES LTD /93 
Friday 12 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Glenn Christopher Collins sues his former employer Australian Pharmaceutical Industries Limited for damages arising out of an accident which occurred on 20 March 1989. The plaintiff was employed as a storeman at the defendant's Wagga Wagga depot. This essentially consisted of a warehouse. Goods were stacked on shelves to a height of about nine to ten feet. Access was gained along aisles between them. The plaintiff had been instructed by his supervisor Mr Wallis to make a pre-stock take check. He needed to inspect the obsolescence dates on some product stored on the top shelf. He followed a practice known to the employer of using a packed cardboard box as a step stool. Several of these were available at the workplace. The one chosen for this task was oblong and was placed with its longer faces in vertical plane. The base gave way under the plaintiff's weight and he fell and sustained some injury.

In the light of the evidence and the report of Mr Simpson, an industrial safety expert, counsel for the defendant did not submit that the plaintiff had not established a prima facie case of negligence. He did submit that the defendant had established that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence in two aspects, first that he should have obtained a ladder and second that he should not have positioned the box so that its smaller face contacted the floor surface.

The practice at the warehouse was to use these boxes. There is evidence that the manager later told an investigator that a ladder had been removed from the depot at the time for some private purpose. The evidence does not establish whether, if the box was laid on the longer surface, it would have provided the necessary boost. The plaintiff said he was on tiptoe and the probability is that he needed all the extension he could get. The defendant has failed to prove contributory negligence and there should be no diminution of any damages on that account.

It is convenient to deal with particular matters raised by the pleadings. The relevant Defence is the amended document filed in Court on 1 May 1996.
Paragraph 5 of the Defence (responded to by paragraph 1 of the plaintiff's
Reply) pleads a limitation provision which was abandoned at the hearing (transcript p 5).

Paragraphs 6-13 of the Defence chronicle the receipt by the plaintiff from the defendant of $25,000 after the conclusion of litigation in the Compensation
Court and by various expressions which include "satisfaction and discharge", "abuse of process" and "estopped" there are sought to be founded matters now propounded to operate so as to deny the plaintiff any judgment in the action.

Insofar as this aspect of the dispute would seem to emerge out of procedures designed to settle a dispute between the parties while there were current proceedings in the Compensation Court I should record that I enquired of counsel whether what was purported to be done was frequent practice and, no doubt reflecting different experience, I received directly contrary assertions. I do not know what the situation might be but, of course, even if
I did my task would remain to consider independently the matters raised on the pleadings. The relationship between employer and employee in the context of a claim of injury by the latter has been the subject of extensive legislative activity particularly in 1987 and subsequently. It was common ground that the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) affected the plaintiff's claim (the accident occurring on 20 March 1989) but that provisions which required him to "elect" between statutory rights and action at common law did not apply.

The defendant's position was derived from the following facts and circumstances. The dispute between the parties reflected in an Application for
Determination in the Compensation Court was listed for hearing at Parramatta on 30 September 1992. The plaintiff's then solicitor and counsel were present at the courthouse on that day. The plaintiff made some criticism of these representatives but I am satisfied that there was communicated to him an offer by the defendant (then the respondent) to pay $25,000 which the plaintiff then understood was to finalize his "injury" (transcript p 75.40 - 75.540). Counsel was authorized by the plaintiff to settle the case (transcript p 74.11).

The agreed sum was dissected and allocated to claims which the plaintiff was making pursuant to the provisions of the [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). Exhibits
F ("terms of settlement - by consent") and G (a copy of the award of the
Compensation Court) reveal the breakdown of the amount.

Counsel then appearing signed a document entitled "Findings" (Exhibit 3) the content of which was : "1. The applicant has no economic incapacity after 18.3.92 causally related to any injury sustained during or aggravated by the applicant's employment by the respondent.
The applicant is not entitled to any further weekly payment or compensation.
Other than as set forth in the award herein, the applicant has no entitlement to compensation against the respondent, and suffers no other loss or impairment compensible under the Act." 
The status of this document is a little obscure. The evidence does not disclose whether it was filed in the Compensation Court or whether it was in some way comprehended as might be suggested by the preamble to the award where the incantation appears "having duly considered the matters submitted".

The next document (Exhibit 2) also dated 30 September 1992 was signed by the plaintiff and is entitled "Admissions". Its content is: "1. I have been paid all wages or compensation entitlements up to 18.3.92.
Since 19.3.92 I have been able to earn not less than I would have earned had I remained in the employ of the respondent.
Notwithstanding any loss of use of any part of my body, as set forth in the award herein, I am not prevented from undertaking employment that returns at least what I would have earned had I remained in the employ of the respondent or in the open labour market for those jobs available to me.
I agree to sign a common law release if required to do so.
Other than injuries the subject of these proceedings, I suffered no injury within the meaning of the Act in the employ of the respondent.
I have recovered from the effects of any injury or the aggravation of any injury caused by or resulting from my work duties." 
The plaintiff testified that he did not read this document but signed it in response to advice that "if he did not, he would not receive any money." In
June 1995 the plaintiff was requested to execute what is described as a common law release. By paragraph 5 of his Reply the plaintiff admitted that he had not executed such a release but denied his obligation so to do.

Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Reply respond to this aspect of the Defence in these terms: "2. The Plaintiff denies the agreement alleged in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the
Defendant's Amended Statement of Defence but admits that in about October 1992 the Plaintiff received the sum of $25,000.00 from the Defendant's Workers
Compensation Insurers.
In answer to paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Defendant's Amended Statement of
Defence the Plaintiff says: 
There is no or sufficient consideration for the alleged agreement.

Any consideration paid for the alleged agreement is illegal having regard to [Sections
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151a.html) and 151B and 272 of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) .

The alleged agreement is illegal having regard to [Sections
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151a.html) and 151B and 272 of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) .

The alleged agreement is unjust within the meaning of the [Contracts
Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) .

The alleged agreement is void and unenforceable by operation of the doctrine of non est factum.

To the extent that the Defendant seeks equitable relief the Defendant is disentitled from such relief having regard to its delay in pursuing equitable relief and unclean hands in procuring a defacto redemption and or commutation of the Plaintiff's rights in circumstances where the sum paid to the Plaintiff was entirely inappropriate having regard to the alleged affect of the agreement and in circumstances where the Defendant knew or ought to have known of that inappropriateness." 
Paragraph 11 of the Defence in effect pleads accord and satisfaction to the claim brought at common law. The evidence persuades me that the sum of $25,000 was primarily paid in consideration of settlement of the claims made by the plaintiff pursuant to the various entitlements available under the [Workers
Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) which were ultimately specified in the terms of settlement and the award. What is contended, as I understand it, is that the same payment is sufficient consideration to sustain the agreement set out in paragraph 4 of the "Admissions" (Exhibit 2). The common law distinguishes between a plea of accord and satisfaction and a plea of release from obligation by deed. I am unpersuaded that the parties were in mutual accord that the payment of $25,000 was in satisfaction of a claim for damages but they did agree that the payment would suffice as consideration for an agreement to enter a release at common law by the plaintiff in favour of the defendant in respect of the incident now sued upon.

That would appear to be the basis of the matters raised in paragraph 13 of the
Defence. Paragraph 12 advances the expression "abuse of process" but I do not find that the proceedings ought to be stayed - which is the remedy for any such abuse - in accordance with any applicable principle. The issues between the parties in the Compensation Court did not include whether the plaintiff was entitled to damages at common law and I do not conclude that any form of estoppel inhibits or acts as a bar to the plaintiff's action.

The defendant's ultimate contention was that the agreement to sign a release should be enforced to the extent of sustaining the defence which would become available if such a deed had in fact been executed by the plaintiff. It was submitted that the deficiency in the absence of the existence of a deed of which the terms could be pleaded should be overlooked by application of the proverbial equitable principle that what ought be done should be regarded as having been done. To uphold this submission it would be necessary to imply that the defendant would succeed in overcoming any obstacle to having the plaintiff obliged to perform the agreement evidenced in paragraph 4 of the "Admissions". I do not draw the necessary inference. In addition to the evidence of the plaintiff concerning the circumstances surrounding the settlement of the workers compensation proceedings - about which I emphasize I have no evidence from his former legal advisers and his testimony was left uncontradicted - it may very well be that the attribution of the whole amount of payment to ascribed statutory entitlements or some other reason would dissuade a court from exercising any discretion to grant remedy in the absence of separate consideration.

In whatever form the matters raised by the Defence in paragraphs 6 to 13 is looked at, I do not consider it is sufficient to entitle the defendant to judgment at common law against the plaintiff. It is not requisite to deal in detail with the issues purportedly raised in paragraph 3 of the Reply but I should shortly state my view that provisions such as <case> of the [Workers
Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) prohibiting "contracting out" of the Act do not render unlawful agreements to settle claims at common law. There was consideration but I do not regard that circumstance as conclusive. The evidence in the case does not appear to me to fulfil the requirements of proof visited upon the plaintiff in order to provoke a finding that the agreement (assuming it to be to sign a release from common law liability in exchange for $25,000) should be declared unjust within the meaning of the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). Although
I have found that the relevant agreement which might have given rise to a defence was a release which never came to be signed, I do not consider that the plaintiff can legitimately argue non est factum in respect of his argument as set out in paragraph 4 of Exhibit 2 in the light of the evidence that he understood he was being "paid out" for his injury.

As I would expect would be apparent from the foregoing, the conflict between the parties on these issues was not accompanied by entirely refined argument.
The opposing positions were adopted and stated in similar fashion to those preceding the interlocutory judgment on 1 May 1996.

I turn to the damages claimed. The plaintiff was born on 4 July 1949. The accident occurred when was aged 39 and he is now 47. His work history included training as an electroplater, labouring and storeman positions and a job in a car rental business. When the plaintiff fell from his ad hoc platform he said that he "skinned" his knee and hit his neck, head, shoulder and lower spine on the floor.

I find it difficult to ascertain precisely what injury the plaintiff suffered and what residual problems he might have. The plaintiff did not impress me as entirely open and frank but it would be harsh to make a judgment based on that impression alone which was necessarily formed over the two days when the plaintiff was in the no doubt relatively unfamiliar surroundings of the courtroom.

His post accident work history is not confirmatory of gross injury or disability. A little over four months after the accident (July 1989) the plaintiff returned to the defendant's warehouse for light duties. He was given filing and paperwork tasks. This was well within his capacity but he complained that the atmosphere was too cold and that he was suffering back pain symptoms. He left after a trial which extended over "a couple of days".
His specialist medical advisers offered epidural injection to relieve the symptoms of which he complained. He refused this because he alleged that he had read of a death in Perth following such a procedure. The inference is that the pain (if any) affecting the plaintiff was not intolerable. His employment was terminated in January 1990. In July 1990 he obtained employment at Metro
Meats. This work was strenuous. He was packing lamb legs and working in cool conditions. He was dismissed in October 1990 and he had implied that this was because he had not informed the employer about his previous compensation claim. He later obtained some work with a cleaning company.

He gave evidence that he would have continued in the abattoir employment but for the dismissal. I deduce that whatever symptoms he was experiencing were not such as to make him consider that he was unfit for this strenuous work or to work in cold conditions.

Eventually the plaintiff applied for sickness benefits apparently as a result of advice from the Commonwealth Employment Service to whom he had turned to seek help in finding employment. On one occasion he was sent to see a Dr
Oliver, a practitioner in Wagga Wagga. Subsequently he was placed on a invalid pension. No information from Dr Oliver was tendered. The pension commenced in
In 1994 the plaintiff obtained some work relieving a school handyman and he continues this occupation on an intermittent basis. He occupies part of his time making fishing lures which he sells at markets and other outlets.
Some of these lures were presented for inspection at the hearing. They were impressive samples of craft.

The medical reports which were tendered do not manifest a sufficient consistency to enable confident findings as to injury, diagnosis or prognosis.

Dr Verbeek was consulted on the day of the accident He initially thought that there might have been a ligamentous tear somewhere in the lower back. X-ray and CT scans showed no abnormality. In February 1990 (the date of his only report) he detected no indication of permanent damage although (presumably based on the plaintiff's complaints) he certified the plaintiff currently unfit for his pre-injury occupation.

Dr Dewey an orthopaedic surgeon saw the plaintiff eleven days after the accident at the request of Dr Verbeek. The plaintiff presented a rigid back but demonstrated "reasonable" straight leg raising. Dr Dewey found no neurological deficit. In March 1990 Dr Dewey reported and incorporated matters arising out of a consultation with his partner Dr Nicholls on 28 September
No definite prognosis was able to be offered.

Dr Nicholls himself wrote to Dr Verbeek on the lastmentioned day opining that the plaintiff's problems were likely to be related to a nerve root entrapment secondary to degenerative change. I have already noted the plaintiff's rejection of the suggested treatment for this by epidural injection.

Dr Patrick undertook two medico legal examinations on 9 May 1990 and 19 May respectively. On the first examination the plaintiff told him of many problems which are set out in his report and which I shall not repeat. He proffered this opinion: "Mr Collins has been involved in a significant fall at work on the 20th March,
He has a multitude of ongoing symptoms following this. He was an early school leaver and had been involved in some relatively heavy physical work since. His fall was a significant one and he has sustained a cervicobrachial strain and a low back strain. It is possible that here has been some disc injury probably at the L5-S1 level. There is some clinical evidence of nerve root irritation at the L5 level on the right. There was however considerable emotional overlay present and Mr Collins has developed a chronic invalid personality type. He remains unfit for heavy physical work and I believe will be so permanently. He may become fit for light work not involving heavy lifting or frequent bending with the ability to move about at will. For further elucidation further investigation would be necessary but I do not believe there investigations are indicated at the present time. Nonetheless on balance I believe the fall at work on the 20th March 1989 has resulted in a significant back injury which has greatly altered his life quality." 
A not dissimilar opinion followed the second examination. Dr Patrick recorded that he was given this history about the plaintiff's work in the abattoirs "He states that he was sacked from the first job with Metro Meats at Wagga because he was unable to perform his duties. He states that the work was too heavy at the abattoirs." 
This part of the history recorded by Dr Patrick as being given to him by the plaintiff is inconsistent with and virtually contradicted by his testimony. I decline to act upon medical opinion contaminated by false history.

Dr Smith saw the plaintiff once in May 1992. He did not receive any history of the work in the abattoir. He referred to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) dated 28 June 1991 which he stated showed very definite L5/S1 disc protrusion.
This reading was apparently different from the opinion of the radiologist as
Dr Smith noted that the MRI was reported as showing slight protrusion at L4-5 and (L)5/S1 and mild protrusion at (L)3/4.

Dr John Yeo on 28 August 1991 wrote of "recent" MRI on 1 July 1991 as identifying a slight posterior bulge of the L3/4 disc but added "I am not convinced of the significance of this finding". I think it unlikely that the plaintiff would have been scanned twice within three days but, even if he was, changes in the appearance of his spine would not have developed in the span.

Dr Seaton looked at an MRI scan taken at Westmead on 28 June 1991 which he opined showed disc protrusions most marked at lumbo sacral level but quite a marked protrusion also at L3/4.

Dr Caspary thought that the scan of 28 June 1991 showed a posterior disc protrusion at L5/S1.

Professor Gye recorded investigation by MRI on 28 June 1991 as showing no evidence of any significant intervertebral disc lesion. It is not stated whether he saw the scans themselves or was conveying the content of a radiological report.

The acquisition of damages is by statute made dependent upon the plaintiff qualifying by showing that the severity of his losses can be apportioned to given levels against a most extreme case.

I am unpersuaded that the plaintiff is significantly disabled and the views expressed by Drs Smith, Seaton and Caspary about what is said to be shown by an MRI scan do not cause me to alter that finding.

The plaintiff has rejected epidural injection and any suggestion of surgery.
He is entitled so to do but the level of pain has permitted him to engage in the work at Metro Meats, cleaning work and the handyman tasks referred to in the evidence. He has been able to engage in recreational activity such as shooting and fishing.

A letter signed by Dr Burgess of a general practice apparently attended by the plaintiff is revealing. The first mention of lower back problem is recorded by
Dr Burgess on 16 February 1994 although as long beforehand as on 22 January he had seen the plaintiff for a "pre employment checkup". Not only was mention of the back problem not then provoked but neither was it mentioned when the plaintiff saw Drs Keith, Burgess and Crago successively for upper respiratory tract infections on 23 December 1992, 29 June 1993 and 16 November
I do not accept that the plaintiff could have been having symptoms to the intensity of which he now complains and yet have refrained from mentioning them at all on any one of these visits to the general practitioners.

The medical reports refer to "emotional overlay". Although there was contention on behalf of the plaintiff that Professor Gye did not make it clear that he had seen the original MRI scans, there is no doubt that he was reporting his own observations during the consultation on 17 March 1992.

I accept this description of his observation: "Straight leg raising on the right was barely 5 degrees and 30 degrees on the left. However, when sitting up, straight leg raising was a full and normal 90 degrees on both sides indicating that he exaggerated his response to this test." 
I also accept the additional notation concerning the nervous system: "He exhibited a gross functional weakness of the whole of the right lower limb. There was no evidence of any muscle wasting and the deep tendon reflexes were present, normal and equal on both sides. Sensation was normal." 
The most recent report available from the evidence is that of Dr Minogue who saw the plaintiff on 29 February 1996. I quote from his report: "INVESTIGATIONS. He brought no plain X-rays with him. He showed me a CT scan of the lumbo-sacral spine performed on 17.5.89. I felt that there was a suggestion of a disc bulge at L5/S1 level, possibly more prominent on the right side. The disc spaces however appeared to be preserved on the miniature lateral films accompanying the scan images.

An MRI scan performed on 1.7.91 revealed no particular diagnostic features.
There appeared to be some mild mid and lower lumbar disc degeneration, probably consistent with his age. Apparently no further investigations have been ordered.

Copies of the two reports are enclosed.

DIAGNOSIS & OPINION. Mr Collins, a 47 year old former storeman who has been in receipt of an invalid pension since 1993, alleges substantial persisting pain and disability which he wishes to attribute to a back injury allegedly sustained at work in 1989.

His description of his original symptoms is suggestive of a diagnosis of a lumbar disc lesion with right [S1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s1.html) nerve root compression. However there is now no objective abnormality to be found on examination and several major inconsistencies in his responses strongly indicate that he is attempting to exaggerate his present disability, if in fact any exists. He probably made a good recovery from the alleged injury, long ago.

The MRI scan performed in July 1991 did not suggest a specific diagnosis. The presence of disc degeneration is to be expected in a man of his age. Disc degeneration is often entirely asymptomatic.

As I was unable to reconcile his history, the investigations and the examination findings, it seems very likely that his disability, if any is present, is much less pronounced than he claims. He may well be still fit to work as a storeman and would certainly appear to be fit for lighter types of manual work.

His prognosis from an objective point of view would appear to be very good.
Disc degeneration, if symptomatic, often becomes less symptomatic with the passage of time. The MRI scan indicates only mild disc degeneration in his case. I found no objective evidence of any permanent impairment, attributable to the incident in question or otherwise." 
I find the plaintiff has no significant medical impairment consequent upon the accident on 20 March 1989. Such functional abnormalities as he demonstrates are substantially emotionally based and although I accept that the prognosis in that respect should be guarded, the next step which needs to be taken is to determine whether the plaintiff fulfils the threshold criterion so as to found an entitlement to what the governing statute nominates as modified common law damages.

As I have commented, the statute has been almost serially amended since its original passage but it was submitted at the hearing (see Exhibit H) that in order to recover damages containing an ingredient for non economic loss he must be assessed at "$60,000 of a most serious case". I have concluded that this must be a typing error having regard to the reference to s151G(4) and the succeeding reference to <case> to which is added "thereafter between $45,000 and $60,000 there is a graduating scale". I treat the threshold figure for the award of non economic loss at $45,000.

In order to obtain an ingredient of economic loss the plaintiff must demonstrate "serious injury" which is defined for this purpose as proportionally representing in terms of non economic loss 33% of a most extreme case (s 151H). This is stated in Exhibit H to be $60,000 although the applicable maximum was $180,000 so that an arithmetical derivation of $59,400 would be more precise.

The initial issue is whether I assess non economic loss as $45,000 or more. I do not. I draw no conclusion that the plaintiff is grossly disabled from the circumstance that after one consultation with a Dr Oliver he was granted an invalid pension following, apparently the Commonwealth Employment Service placing him on sickness benefit and suggesting later that he be examined for pension purposes.

Whatever the MRI and/or radiological indications observable in the plaintiff's back may be, the essential question is whether the plaintiff has significant tort induced injury and disability. His symptoms have not been so intense as to cause him to seek treatment beyond acquiring some common painkillers.
Neither as a witness nor in the histories tendered to various medical examiners did he present as a stoic.

For his pain and suffering, emotional overlay and all the elements constituting non economic loss I would award the plaintiff a maximum of $30,000. He is therefore not entitled to modified common law damages and any entitlement arising from the accident is governed by other provisions of the statutory scheme.

I direct entry of judgment for the defendant. The plaintiff is ordered to pay the defendant's costs excluding those of the motion on 1 May 1996 which were ordered to be his costs in the cause.
 * * * 
