

Regina versus Ashveen Singh [1997] NSWSC 10 (30 January 1997) 
REGINA versus ASHVEEN SINGH (BY NEXT FRIEND AROON SINGH) /97 
THURSDAY, 30 JANUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT(On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: Ashveen Singh has applied for bail in respect of a charge of murder, and also in respect of any other charges which may be outstanding on which he does not have bail. Those other charges are not of the same order as the murder charge, and that is the matter which requires careful consideration.

The Crown case of murder against the applicant is, in substance, that the applicant persuaded another male to come with him and he ultimately murdered that other person. I will not rehearse the details set out in the Crown statement of facts as to the commission of the murder, but they are quite chilling, with extensive injuries being inflicted upon the deceased.

The Crown case on the charge of murder appears to be a strong one. At the time of the alleged commission of the offence of murder the applicant was on a recognisance in respect of a charge of assault and three charges of malicious damage in respect of an incident that occurred on or about 9 May 1996. The relevance of that incident is that it reveals a young man behaving in a disturbed way and aggressively. The facts appearing in the police statement also suggests considerable disturbance on the part of the applicant and much aggression.

The applicant is aged seventeen years and has had considerable learning difficulties. That was acknowledged in the evidence, and his difficulties were apparent as he gave evidence before me.

The applicant enjoys the considerable support of his family, and it is apparent that the family has gone to great efforts over the years to try and assist the applicant.

The applicant's father has given evidence that he has made special arrangements with his employer to take his son with him to work to exercise constant supervision over him. The father has the support of his employer and has told me that his son always obeys him whilst the son is under his direct care and control. It is the father's evidence that prior to the incident in respect of which his son was given a recognisance, he had received advice that the family should let the son integrate more into the community.

There is evidence that the applicant has experienced considerable difficulty at Karyong. Apparently the other boys had problems with him and there have been threats of physical violence.

I have been reminded that it is desirable, wherever possible, for children to live in their home. There has been a body of testimonial evidence as to the family, and also that the son was respectful. The son is undergoing treatment from Dr Clarke and has to take medication.

Even with the best will in the world, and much application, there are limits on the extent to which a seventeen year old boy can be controlled. The conduct since May 1996 gives rise to grave community concern.

The view that I have formed is that, having regard to the gravity of the offence, including the alleged circumstances of commission and the conduct revealed, and the incident of May 1996, and notwithstanding the evidence given by the father and Pastor Parish, this is a case where the interests of the community and the welfare of the community require that bail be refused and I do so.
 (Mr Bertini made application that his Honour make a recommendation that any application made by the applicant or his family to have the applicant relocated to a suitable remand centre closer to or in
Sydney be dealt with expeditiously) 
I would certainly do that.
 * * * 
