

McGlashan versus QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd (No 3) [2014] NSWSC 716 (2 June )

Last Updated: 3 June 2014 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
McGlashan versus QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd (No 3)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): May 2014  
Decision Date: June 2014  
Jurisdiction: 
Common Law  
Before: 
Campbell J  
Decision: 
Judgment for the defendant;  
The plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs of, and incidental to, the proceedings on the ordinary basis forthwith after they have been agreed or assessed.  
Grant leave to the defendant to apply to vary order (2) within 7 days of today by filing written submissions (not exceeding 2 pages) stating the costs order for which the defendant contends and the reasons why that order should be made, supported by an affidavit annexing any relevant offers of compromise;  
The plaintiff to have a further 7 days to file any written submissions (not exceeding 2 pages) in response supported by any evidence to which he wishes to refer.  
Catchwords: 
PROCEDURE - civil - separate questions - whether decision of separate questions of liability finally disposed of proceedings  
JUDGMENT
In my judgment of the 1st of May 2014, I recorded my answer to two questions the parties asked me to decide at the Trial separately from any other question in the proceedings. These questions went to the primary liability of the defendant's insured for the consequences of injuries suffered by the plaintiff performing work as an independent contractor for the insured on 7th September 2006. The questions and my answers to them are as follows: 
Is Lidoran Roofing Pty Ltd legally liable to pay damages to the plaintiff for the consequences of the injuries received by him on 7th
September 2006: 
Answer - no.

If the answer to (1) is yes, to what amount of damages is the plaintiff entitled? 
Answer - question does not arise.

Although the second question did not arise, I made contingent findings about the quantum issues lest there be an appeal.

Remaining issues
At a directions hearing on the 9th of May 2014, I identified 3 outstanding matters for the consideration of the parties: 
Should I have made contingent findings concerning contributory negligence, which I did not, lest there be an appeal; 
Is it necessary to decide the question of whether the policy of liability insurance issued by the defendant covered Lidoran Roofing Pty Ltd, had it been legally liable for the consequences of the plaintiff's injures; 
What order should be made under [Rule .4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s28.4.html) [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) .
I heard further argument from the parties about these issues on 26th May 2014. Essentially the plaintiff's legal representatives submitted that it was unnecessary for me to make any further decision. I understood this to be the adoption of a position based upon the unwillingness of the legal representatives to commence an appeal from my decision. Upon further questioning of Mr Grey, solicitor, who appeared for the plaintiff, it became apparent that Mr McGlashan, himself, was still considering his options. For that reason I reserved my decision until today to provide Mr McGlashan with the opportunity to put any further submissions that he wished to make before me. I have received no such submission.
Mr Chen of Counsel who appeared for the defendant argued that I should make my contingent findings in relation to contributory negligence, decide the insurance question, which was hived off at the trial, and enter judgment in favour of his client.

Decision
I have decided that I should make contingent findings in relation to contributory negligence which are relevant to the calculation of damages lest there be an appeal; not decide the separate insurance question; and enter judgment in favour of the defendant. My reasons follow.

Contributory Negligence
As I have decided the question of primary liability and assessed the damages to which Mr McGlashan may have been entitled if my decision were wrong, I think it appropriate that I record my findings about contributory negligence. Contributory negligence is not mentioned in my reasons of the 29th May 2013 nor in the separate questions as reformulated by me, but it is raised on the pleadings and was fully argued by the parties orally and in writing before I acceded to the application to decide the separate questions. In truth, my failure to deal with it in my judgment of 1st May 2014 was an oversight.
Mr McGlashan was Lidoran's independent contractor. He was an experienced roofer who had been in his own business for many years. Conventionally, the duty owed by a principal to its independent contractor is formulated in accordance with the judgment of Brennan J in Stevens versus Brodribb Saw Milling Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 16] as I discussed at [32] - [42] of my judgment of 1st May 2014. In the ordinary case, the content of that duty does not extend to an obligation to institute and maintain a safe system of work for the independent contractor.
My decision about that would have been different had the plaintiff proved that Lidoran assumed responsibility for the institution and maintenance of a safe system of work in the knowledge that Mr McGlashan was relying on it to do so; that is had I found he was legally vulnerable.
I made contingent findings about the question of breach at [75]-[80] of my earlier judgment. At [77] I decided that assuming the existence of a duty of care, "a reasonable person in Lidoran's position would have taken the precaution of providing adequate means of securing the ladder, even to the extent of providing a second tradesman, or offsider, to foot it if required". I found that, but for the availability of an offsider to foot the ladder during Mr McGlashan's descent, his personal injury would not have occurred.
I also found that accepted safe practice in the roof-fixing industry involved long ladder work being performed as a two-man job, the second man footing the ladder (at [43]). I accepted the evidence of the expert engineers, Hugh Stark and Ron Beckett that it was possible for an unaided tradesman to secure a ladder by tying, or lashing it, to appropriate anchor points which could be reached from ground level. However, none of the experienced roofers who gave evidence before me referred to this as a possible procedure. Accordingly, I found that the standard of reasonable roofers, as opposed to reasonable engineers, did not extend to the adoption of this practice. Moreover there was no evidence before me of any appropriate anchor point that could be reached from ground level to secure the ladder at the Sefton job being performed by Mr McGlashan at the time of his injury. 
Questions of contributory negligence are to be decided in accordance with the provision of <case> [Civil Liability Act 2002](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/) , that is, objectively. The principles expressed in [ss 5B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/s5b.html) and [5C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/s5c.html) of the Act likewise apply to questions of contributory negligence. But it should be borne in mind that the specific provisions of the Act operate against, and on the assumption, of the continued validity of common law principles, except where those principles are excluded, either expressly or implicitly, by the statute.
Where an "employer's" duty extends to instituting and maintaining a safe system of work, an employee injured by an incident of the system will generally not be guilty of contributory negligence: Davies versus Adelaide Chemical and Fertiliser Co Ltd <case>; [(1946) 74 CLR 541] at pp 177-8. The defendant has not discharged his onus of proving what precaution was reasonably available to a reasonable person like Mr McGlashan working alone to secure the ladder. He might have decided not to perform the job. But his decision to undertake it, in my judgment was not of itself unreasonable on the assumption adopted for the purpose of the argument that he was entitled to expect that Lidoran were responsible for sending the offsider, and had let him down. 
The insurance question
At the Trial, the insurance question was almost fully argued before me when an application was made on behalf of the plaintiff for an adjournment to enable another insurer to be joined as a second defendant, lest I decide that the "other insurance provision" in QBE's policy operated to deny Lidoran cover. It was the existence of a policy issued by the proposed new party that was said to engage the "other insurance" provision: see Zurich Australian Insurance Ltd versus Metals and Minerals Insurance Pte and Others Ltd  <case>; [(2009) 240 CLR 391.] After the adjournment application was argued, I took a short adjournment to consider my decision. When I resumed before pronouncing my order or giving my reasons, I was informed that both parties agreed that I should decide the primary questions informing Lidoran's liability separately from, and prior to, the insurance issue.
In these circumstances, I do not think it appropriate to decide the insurance issue now. The separate question procedure provided by the rules envisages that final judgment may be entered in a case without all issues between the parties being decided, notwithstanding the rule of practice that a Judge at first instance should decide all issues presented for determination even if they will not be decisive of the case, to allow for the possibility of an appeal.
My decision on the question of primary liability renders the determination of the insurance question almost entirely otiose. If my decision were overturned on appeal, it may yet remain that the plaintiff would wish to join the other insurer as a defendant. He is probably not out of time: Kinzett versus McCourt and Others  <case>; [(1999) 46 NSWLR 32.] It would be inimicable to the interest of justice to decide the question in such circumstances lest a plaintiff with a valid claim falls between two stools. Natural justice would require me either to hear the rest of the plaintiff's legal argument, or decide the sidetracked adjournment application. I decline to answer the insurance question.
Moreover, it must have been in the contemplation of both parties that if I decided the primary issue against the plaintiff, the insurance question would fall away.

Judgment 
As my decision of the separate questions substantially disposes of the proceedings, or at least the plaintiff's claim for relief in the proceedings, I think it appropriate that I enter judgment in favour of the defendant to finally dispose of the proceedings.
Before pronouncing orders, I record Mr Chen has foreshadowed an application for costs on the indemnity basis, based upon certain offers of compromise served during the course of the proceedings. I think it appropriate to deal with this application in Chambers without the need for the parties to attend and I will make directions in that regard in my final orders.
My orders are: 
Judgment for the defendant; 
The plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs of, and incidental to, the proceedings on the ordinary basis forthwith after they have been agreed or assessed.

Grant leave to the defendant to apply to vary order (2) within 7 days of today by filing written submissions (not exceeding 2 pages) stating the costs order for which the defendant contends and the reasons why that order should be made, supported by an affidavit annexing any relevant offers of compromise; 
The plaintiff to have a further 7 days to file any written submissions (not exceeding 2 pages) in response, supported by any evidence to which he wishes to refer.
 * * * 
