

Dolan Teoman versus Aydin Dedashvili and Ors [1996] NSWSC 97 (6 May 1996) 
DOLAN TEOMAN versus AYDIN DEDASHVILI & ORS /95 
Monday 6 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By notice of motion dated 17 April 1996, the first defendant moves for an order transferring the proceedings to the Family Court of Australia. The first defendant is the husband of the plaintiff, or more accurately was formerly the husband of the plaintiff. They have now been divorced. 
The plaintiff and the first defendant hold all of the shares in the capital of the second defendant. The second defendant and the third defendant apparently conducted a business known as Pidi Fez. That name is spelt in various other ways but nothing turns on that.

The plaintiff and the first defendant have been parties to litigation pending in the Family Court since 1988. I understand that the proceedings are at present listed for hearing in the Family Court in the running list in the week commencing 3 June next.

In the present proceedings the plaintiff seeks a declaration as to the ownership of the business, Pidi Fez and a declaration that a purported transfer of the business is invalid. These proceedings have been on foot since October last. Today is the eleventh occasion upon which the matter has been listed. The first defendant has foreshadowed the present application as long ago as 15 December last when he was directed to file the present application by 22 December. On 15 March a similar direction was given that the present motion be filed by 22 March. To date none of the defendants have filed any evidence at all in resistance to the summons.

In those circumstances, so far as I can see, there is no real issue in the present case. Assuming that there is, it is very difficult to work out what other issue might be made which fits into any of the relevant fragments of section 5(1)(b) of the Jurisdiction of Courts Cross Vesting Act.

The respondent/oblique plaintiff expresses concern that if the order now sought were made, its practical effect would be to disrupt the likely hearing date some four weeks' hence. It is easy to see how that might be so.

Having regard to the complete failure of the first defendant to file any affidavit at all in the present case except the formal solicitor's affidavit filed in support of the present motion, I dismiss the application with costs.

I am not satisfied that any of the grounds mentioned under section 5(1)(b) are made good. It might be so that the applicant has not put any information before the court which, in my view, enables an opinion to be formed that any of those grounds are made out. I dismiss the motion with costs.
 * * * 
