

Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd versus Pias Settlements P/L [2000] NSWSC (31 December 2000) `TOYOTA MOTOR CORPORATION AUSTRALIA LTD versus PIAS SETTLEMENTS P/L` `1483/97` ``TUESDAY 25 MARCH 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 27 October 1994 the plaintiff and the defendant entered into what they call a "Signage Rights Deed" whereby the plaintiff became entitled, subject to the conditions set out in the deed, to erect signs upon the defendant's property at Waterloo.

As at the date of the deed the plaintiff already had a sign erected. That sign had been in position from some time in 1992.

The evidence is that certainly in May or June 1996 the sign had been affected by the activities of cockatoos chewing on the backing board and the electrical working parts. The plaintiff consulted a professional sign consultant who advised that the sign had passed its serviceable life; the cockatoo damage was sufficiently serious to warrant the sign being removed because it was dangerous.

Some months passed and in November the sign consultants prepared plans for the erection of a new sign, and somewhere about 1 December 1996 the old sign was removed.

The deed granted various rights to the plaintiff up to 31 December 2000. The deed acknowledged that there was presently a sign which had the appropriate development consent, and that the licensee was at liberty during the course of the deed to prepare another development application for a replacement sign.
There were similar provisions made for building approval. There was a right under cl.4.1 to "erect display maintain and repair the Licensee's signs...in a proper and workmanlike manner" provided that the property of the defendant was not unduly interfered with or obstructed. Clause 4.7 of the deed reads as follows (the word "licensee" meaning the plaintiff): "The Licensee shall at all times maintain repair renew and keep the Licensee's
Signs in first-class working order repair and condition and shall immediately replace any damaged or faulty parts thereof." 
Clause 7.1 and 7.3 deal with the giving of notices. These are as follows: "7.1 Notices 
All demands requisitions consents elections or notices shall be in writing and may be given to or served upon a party hereto by being left at the party's registered office or principal place of business in New South Wales or by being posted in a pre-paid certified or registered letter addressed to that party at such office or principal place of business and any such demand requisition consent election or notice shall be deemed duly served at the expiration of 3 business days (being any day other than a Saturday Sunday or public holiday) after the time of posting and in proving the giving of the same it shall be sufficient to prove the envelope containing the same was properly addressed stamped and registered and put into a post office box in the Commonwealth of Australia. Any demand requisition consent election or notice may be signed by the Licensor or on its behalf by the Manager of the
Building or the Manager the Secretary or other authorised officer for the time being of the Licensor.
 .3 Licensor may terminate 
If the Licensee: fails to pay the Annual Fee or any part thereof within 7 days of its due date, provided that the Licensor has first notified the Licensee of such failure and the Licensee has failed to rectify the failure within 14 days of such notice; or fails to comply with any of its obligations under this Deed, provided that the Licensor has first notified the Licensee of such failure and the Licensee has failed to rectify the failure with 14 days of such notice, then the Licensor may terminate this Deed upon the giving of 14 days' notice to the Licensee." 
On Christmas Eve 1996, the then solicitors for the defendant gave to the directors of the plaintiff a demand on the solicitors' letterhead, the key paragraph of which is as follows: "We are instructed that you have failed to keep the signs erected at the above property in first class working order repair and condition as required by the
Signage Rights Deed between our client and your company. You are hereby notified that our client requires you to rectify such breach and that if such breach has not been rectified between 14 days of the date of this notice our client will be at liberty if it sees fit to terminate the Signage Rights
Deed." 
There was then some correspondence and exchange of facsimiles between the solicitors for the parties. On 23 January 1997 the then solicitors for the defendant sent to the directors of the plaintiff a two-page letter containing an indication that the solicitors noted nine matters, and ending with the words: "Take notice that our client hereby terminates the Signage Rights Deed pursuant to cl.7.3 of that deed, such termination to be effective from the date being 14 days from the date of the giving of this notice".

The notice would appear to have been put in an envelope addressed to "The
Directors, Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited" and posted in Sydney on January 1997. Although cl.7.1 is unclear as to when notices are deemed to have been given, that clause does indicate the notice would have been duly served at the expiration of three business days after the time of posting. As the giver of the notice was in one State and the recipient was in another
State, and the Australia Day holiday could have been at different times in either State, it is a little unclear exactly when the fourteen days would expire, but that is one problem I do not have to deal with in this case.

The plaintiff has issued this summons basically for a declaration that its rights under the Signage Rights Deed are still in force.

The argument for the defendant is that cl.4.7 of the Signage Rights Deed creates an obligation. That obligation it says includes an obligation to keep the licensee's signs in first-class working order, repair and condition. It says that breach of that obligation under cl.7.3(b) enables the defendant to give a notice to rectify, which it says it has done on 24 December 1996, and if there is no rectification of the failure within fourteen days then the deed may be terminated, and this it says happened.

It is always much easier to see the defects in a legal document after events have happened than it is to foresee them at the time of drafting.

However, the Signage Rights Deed is no great example of a legal drafter's art.
Clause 4.7 contains various problems of construction. The first is whether the word "shall" imports what lawyers used to call a condition as opposed to a warranty, or whether it indicates a promise by the licensee or merely an indication as to what is expected of the licensee. Then one gets the concatenation of verbs, "maintain repair renew and keep", all of which have established meanings in law and which are inconsistent one with another. One maintains something or keeps it in its existing condition, one repairs it by doing something which re-invigorates the thing but does not make it into something new, one renews something by replacing it: cf Williams versus Evans WN (Pt 1) 288. It is difficult to have all these verbs linked together by "and" and still convey real meaning.

Mr Martin for the defendant says one reads them conjunctively and that would make four different obligations in cl.4.7. It is difficult as a matter of legal construction to read "and" as if it were "or", but one does have to try and make some commercial sense out of documents which string a whole lot of words together without making grammatical sense, though as was said by the
Court of Appeal in Biotechnology Australia Pty Ltd versus Pace [(1988) 15 NSWLR ]
there is a limit as to how far one goes about that.

It is then difficult to see how grammatically the words "working order repair and condition" fit in with the four verbs that are used in the clause. These words fit in well with the word "maintain" and the word "keep", but do not at all apply to "repair" and "renew". Then, the word "immediately" is used to govern the verb "replace", which is an odd verb in itself because it is neither "repair" nor "renew" which is used in the first line. It would seem that if this is some sort of indication that the obligation to repair and renew is not an immediate obligation, then a reasonable time is to be allowed.

The document is a commercial document and so, despite the difficulties of making grammatical sense of cl.4.7, the court must take the view that the parties intended to make some commercial sense out of the concatenation of words used, and the question is what was it? 
The word "shall" is used throughout the document, though sometimes "will" is used instead. The word "shall" is not always used in connection with a promise. Clause 3.5(b) for instance, and 3.5(c) show that the word "shall" is used other than meaning any duty or promise on the part of the licensee.
However, it seems to me (though I have strong doubts), that in clause 4.7 "shall" does denote a covenant by the plaintiff to comply. I will proceed on this basis.

Clause 7.3(b) speaks of the licensee failing to comply with any of its obligations. The word "obligation" is an odd word. I analysed it in Dodlot
Ltd versus Hartogen Energy Ltd [(1991) 25 NSWLR 278] at -282. The word "obligation" always refers to a duty, something that someone is bound to do. Originally, the word meant what someone was bound to do under a bond, but later on that meaning has expanded. However, cases such as RMR
Housing Society Ltd versus Combs [[1951] 1 KB 486] show that there is a tendency to read down words such as "obligation" in leases. In that case the English Court of Appeal said that an obligation of a tenancy only included obligations connected with the land, not the personal obligations of the tenant, such as the obligation to remain in the landlord's employ.

Where one has a licence as opposed to a lease one is less able to distinguish between personal obligations and property obligations, but it would seem to me "any of its obligations" must be restricted in some way such as to deal with the obligations which go to the heart of the relationship between the parties.
So that, for instance, if there was a "breach" of clause 3.5(b) because the licensee had not ascertained what was the physical condition of the building on which the sign was to be erected and the land around it, then that would not be a matter which would come within 7.3(b).

However, one would have thought that whatever the term "obligation" means it would include a serious matter such as failing to look after the sign in such a way that it became dangerous. However, it must be realised that 7.3(b) is a condition of forfeiture and so it is one that must be strictly construed.

The commercial agreement between the parties was that up until 31 December the defendant would make available and the plaintiff was at liberty to use the building so that there could be an advertising sign advertising the plaintiff's trade, and the defendant would receive an annual fee.

Mr Martin said that it was also implicit in the deed that there was a goodwill value in the agreement to the defendant and the defendant was entitled to insist that there be a sign at all material times so that the goodwill value to the defendant would be maintained.

There is absolutely nothing in the agreement dealing with any goodwill value to the defendant that the plaintiff's use of the premises may have, though I agree that one would assume that a place which is used for an existing sign might have a greater re-letting value than others. However, the evidence in this case is that the position of the sign is unique and there is no other structure in the area of the sign which is constructed in the way that the building is constructed. It is a tall tower-like structure with a square top clearly visible from South Dowling Street Sydney and the surrounding area.

Accordingly, the main purpose of the agreement was that the defendant would receive money and the plaintiff would have a right for signage; provisions such as 7.3 were ancillary to that main aim.

I have great doubt as to whether one can read cl.4.7 conjunctively in the way in which Mr Martin says that it can be read. If one reads it that way one is really reading six different obligations on the part of the licensee; namely, to maintain the signs; (b) to repair the signs; (c) to renew the signs; to keep the signs in first class working order, repair and condition; (e) to immediately replace damaged parts; and (f) to immediately replace faulty parts. The obligation at all times to repair must mean only to repair at such times when repair is needed, likewise the obligation to renew must be read as only being an obligation to renew at such times as renewal is necessary. The same applies to the obligation to maintain. Then one goes to the "odd man out", the covenant to keep signs in first class working order, repair and condition, which seems to be quite outside the temporal obligation that is implicit in the other three verbs.

What the defendant would like to do is to isolate that part within the clause and to say that that is an independent breach.

That is what it has done in its notice. Technically speaking, the notice of 24
December does not give a notice to the licensee of its failure. It only notifies that the solicitors are instructed that there has been a failure.
Likewise, the notice is not directed to the defendant but to the directors of the defendant. Furthermore the notice is from solicitors who are not mentioned in clause 7.1 as amongst the persons who may sign a notice. Although notices of forfeiture are to be strictly construed, I will put all of those defects out of my mind when dealing with the rest of this case. However, the notice then says: "You have failed to keep the signs erected at the above property in first class working order repair and condition".

In other words, instead of dealing with the whole clause, part of the clause has been isolated as if all the verbs could be read conjunctively. I do not think that one can do this. It seems to me that there is one promise, if there is a promise at all, and that promise is to do the combined matters mentioned in cl.4.7, that is that so long as there is a sign on the building, it must be in first class working order.

However, there is nothing explicit to say that there must always be a sign on the building. Clause 4.1 is headed "Licensee may erect signs". It is clear that there was a sign on the building at the time when the Signage Rights Deed was entered into, but it was also contemplated that from time to time there might be a replacement sign after all relevant consents were obtained. The provisions as to development approvals and building approvals seem to suggest that the parties intended that there should be some basis for the changeover of the signs, but in both cl.3.1 and 3.2 the commercial reason for that would appear to be the fact that otherwise the licensee would be paying good money and not having signs in place.

Clause 4.7 itself uses the adverb "immediately" for the words referring to replacement of faulty parts but it is significant that the word "immediately" does not appear elsewhere in cl.4.7. It may be that one can read into 4.7 an implied obligation to renew any sign within a reasonable time of taking the old sign down. I am doubtful whether such an implication really arises under the traditional tests for implying a term, because if one rejects the idea of goodwill to the defendant and one realises that the signage rights are for the benefit of the plaintiff and the defendant is getting these there is little room for any such implication. If there is such an implied term, the facts do not show that the removal of the sign on 1 December and its non-replacement on December would be a breach of that implied term.

The allegation was that "you have failed to keep signs ..."; this seems to refer back to something that has happened in the past. That is understandable when one realises that the signs have been removed on 1 December or thereabouts. The notice seems to recite a breach, if it was a breach, that was past and gone. Certainly, to my mind one would not think as at 24 December when the notice was given and current that the signs were not in first class working order, repair and condition. Mr Martin put that the obligation was that even when the sign had been removed, before a new sign was in its place there was an obligation to keep it in first class working order, whether it was in the repair shop or otherwise. I cannot even in my wildest imagination think that the parties when putting this document together imagined that they would have any obligation to do that at all. Accordingly, I cannot see how there was a breach as at 24 December when the notice was given.

Clause 4.3(b) seems to suggest that it is only if there is a failure to comply with a current obligation that the termination process can be put in place. It seems only to contemplate a situation where there is a current failure and there has then been a failure to rectify. The word "fails" or "failure" in itself is a word of ambiguity because it can mean either not doing something or not doing something because of fault; see CBS Productions Pty Ltd v
O'Neill [(1985) 1 NSWLR 601.] 
The notice then has to be given under 4.3(b) where there is a notification of such failure. The obligation is not quite as strict as the obligation under [s.129(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s129.html) of the [Conveyancing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) in respect of leases, because there the section makes it clear that the landlord has to specify the breach, and if the breach was capable of remedy requiring remedy; if compensation was required making a demand for compensation. The present clause is weaker in that it does not contemplate that there can be a notice where there is only a past breach. Under the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) there must be a notice which specifies to the lessee the breach complained of "with such particularity, as fairly to tell him what he is required to remedy,... . To determine whether a notice complies with this test depends on the information which the notice, as a whole, may be fairly said to give", per Lord Parmoor in
Fox versus Jolly [[1916] 1 AC 1], 22.

Even though the requirements of cl.7.3(b) are different to the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) it seems to me that the notice that is given under 7.3(b) must be a fair notification to the licensee to specify the breach with particularity and to tell the lessee what it is required to remedy. All this particular notice says is that "our client requires you to rectify such breach". It does not indicate that what the licensor's solicitor intended to say was that she wanted the sign in the workshop to be put back into working order and to flash the word "Toyota".
Presumably that was not said because it was so ridiculous. If it was intended that the old sign be restored to its position or if it was intended that a new sign replace it within a reasonable time so as to comply with the implied condition, then there should have been some fair notification to the licensee that the licensee should rectify within fourteen days of the notice.

The notice was given on 24 December 1996. It is really a great shame that any party in Australia today would give a fourteen day notice within the traditional shutdown period of Australian industry. The question as to whether there had been any failure within fourteen days to rectify any breach that had been specified would have to be viewed by any court as to what was reasonable in the industry shutdown period over Christmas, and it may very well be that even if the notice given on 24 December survives the test of bona fides - and there has been no attack on bona fides in the present case - such a notice will really not do the giver any good because there will never be a failure to rectify in view of the facilities available over this period. However, in the present case these thoughts are merely obiter dictum rather than any part of the decision.

Accordingly, there has been no breach and there has been no proper notice within cl.7.3(b). Thus, there has been no termination and the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration that it seeks.

Accordingly, I make the following declarations:
That the purported termination by the defendant of the Signage Rights Deed between the parties on or about 23 January 1997 was invalid.
An order that the defendant by its servants and agents be restrained from terminating that deed pursuant to any notice issued by its solicitors to the plaintiff on or about 24 December 1996.
I will adjourn the summons to 13 May 1997 at 9.50 am before me to see whether there is any need to consider order 8 in the amended summons.
I order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs to date. Further costs reserved.

On any assessment of costs the assessor will doubtless apply the normal rule that where an affidavit is not read in the proceedings no costs are allowed for it against the opposing party.

I stand the matter over to 13 May 1997 at 9.50 am. The exhibits may be retained until then.
 * * * 
