

Shalhoub and Ors versus Schmidt and Anor t/as Bull Son and Schmidt Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 489 (28 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
SHALHOUB & ORS versus SCHMIDT & ANOR t/as BULL SON & SCHMIDT /97 July 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The first and second plaintiffs were the directors of the third plaintiff. The third plaintiff operated a nursing home known as Bon Accord Nursing Home on land owned by the first and second plaintiffs. 
In 1985, certain documentation came into being pursuant to which Trade Credits
Limited (now known as Challenge Finance Limited (the Challenge Bank)) provided financial accommodation for the plaintiffs. On 10 December 1990, the Challenge
Bank appointed Mr Donnelly as receiver, manager and agent. On 10 March 1991, the securities were discharged and the appointment came to an end.

In August 1991, the defendants were retained to act for the plaintiffs in proceedings brought against Mr Donnelly and the Challenge Bank. These proceedings were commenced on 11 March 1992.

A claim for damages was made which was founded on, inter alia, trespass and detinue. The proceedings were heard by Young J. The plaintiffs contended that the appointment was void. It was said that either there was no event of default or no available act of default because of waiver or estoppel.

The Challenge Bank argued that there were twelve acts of default which justified the appointment. His Honour found that there were ten acts of default and that any one of them justified the appointment. The arguments founded on waiver or estoppel were not raised in respect of all of the acts of default. His Honour rejected these arguments. On 25 June 1992, his Honour dismissed the proceedings with costs.

These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 10 October
In substance, the plaintiffs are claiming damages for professional negligence. The allegations of breach of duty are framed both in contract and tort.

The Particulars of the allegations of breach of duty may be found in paragraph
Largely, the case was argued on the basis that the claim turns on allegations of either failure to act on instructions to call various witnesses or failure to present all available evidence. The witnesses have been identified as Ian Ballingall, James Hammond, Rodney Ellison, Lalita White and
Edita Nykl. This presentation may represent some departure from the case as particularised in the pleading.

A Defence was filed on 11 November 1997. Largely, it traverses the allegations made in the Statement of Claim. Subsequently, the solicitors for the defendants advised that their clients were prepared to admit allegations made in paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 5, 9 and 12. The Court was told that the defendants now wish to amend the Defence.

On 15 April 1998, the plaintiffs filed a Notice of Motion seeking summary judgment. On 8 May 1998, the defendants filed a Notice of Motion seeking summary dismissal of the claim.

Both applications were heard on 18 June 1998. A formidable volume of documentation was placed before the Court. The plaintiffs relied on an affidavit sworn by Mr McEncroe. The defendants relied on two affidavits sworn by Mr Herron. Exhibit 1 comprises a folder of documentary material which had been referred to in one of the affidavits sworn by Mr Herron.

It is unusual to find both sides of the record seeking summary relief. Also, it is unusual to find that happening in a professional negligence case.
Generally speaking, in such cases, the issues throw up questions of both fact and law. Usually, there will be questions of credit. They tend to be cases which can only be determined at a trial.

The Court has a discretionary power to grant summary relief. The discretion is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before the Court and so that justice is best served between the parties. There is abundant authority for the proposition that the relief should only be granted in what has been described as clear cases (see, inter alia, Webster v
Lampard <case>; [116 ALR 545).]
The applicants bear the onus of satisfying the Court of an entitlement to relief.

What remains in dispute between the parties still throws up a number of issues. I shall mention two principal issues. The defendants deny breach of duty. Further, the defendants say that any found breach of duty would not be causative of any of the loss claimed by the plaintiffs.

Both Messrs Shalhoub (one of the plaintiffs) and Best (an officer of the
Challenge Bank) gave evidence before Young J. Young J made the following finding:- "Generally I much prefer Mr Best's evidence to that of Mr Shalhoub." 
This finding had relevance to certain of the other findings made by his Honour (including findings as to events of default).

The plaintiffs contend that, had other witnesses been called in their case, his Honour may have reached, inter alia, a different view on questions of credibility of witnesses and, as a consequence, the plaintiffs may have succeeded in the proceedings before him.

The documentation contains material which indicates what the witnesses may have said if they were called. It has to be borne in mind that, if this material was adduced at a trial, it may be tested by cross-examination and all or some of it may not be accepted by the judicial officer presiding at the trial. The probative value would have to be assessed in the light of the other material placed before the judicial officer.

I now turn to the arguments presented in respect of the applications. These were presented both in written form and orally. It is convenient to first look at the defendants' application.

The defendants look to four of the events of default found by his Honour. They are:- the plaintiffs did not pay $10,718.26 (group tax due under the relevant legislation) to the Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation due on 7 December ;
 there was a failure to cause the plaintiffs' books to be audited each year and to furnish a copy to the Challenge Bank; the nursing home suffered material adverse changes and a trading loss of $103,000 to 30 June 1990; the granting of a charge to the Commonwealth Bank of Australia on 22
December 1986, without the consent of the Challenge Bank.

I should mention that Counsel for the plaintiffs placed considerable stress on the contents of a memorandum dated 3 December 1990 and largely directed his submissions to matters related to the events of default mentioned therein. It was said that the memorandum identified the five grounds relied on by the
Challenge Bank to make the appointment. Whether or not that be the case, his
Honour took the view that the Challenge Bank was entitled to rely on the other proven events of default.

The defendants say that anyone of the four events of default was sufficient to justify the finding that the appointment was valid and that the evidence, which it is said the proposed witnesses could give, would not have altered the findings of Young J made in respect of any of those four events of default.
Therefore, it is said that the alleged breach of duty cannot be productive of the loss claimed by the plaintiffs.

At first blush, these submissions seem to have considerable force (particularly if the question is viewed simply in the context of whether or not the evidence from the nominated witnesses would have brought about a different result). The claim itself is put somewhat wider. The Particulars contain an allegation of failure to call all available evidence. In respect of certain of the four events of default, questions of waiver or estoppel were argued. In respect of at least two of them ((iii) and (iv)), the evidence of
Mr Best had relevance. Both the written and the oral submissions raised allegations which did not fall within the compass of the current particulars.

I am required to bear in mind that relief can only be given in clear cases.
The authorities emphasise the danger of the premature termination of proceedings. The plaintiffs may be deprived of the benefits of the use of interlocutory processes of the Court. At an early stage in proceedings, a judicial officer will usually not be in as good a position to determine the merits of a case as he would be at the end of a trial. The Court will then have the advantage of all the evidence with its unpredictable as well as its predictable features (Rushcutters Investments Pty Ltd versus Grellman (Court of
Appeal, unreported, 17 June 1987)). It is difficult, in a summary procedure, to assess the impact that the adducing of other evidence may have had in the determination of a case heard by another judicial officer. Further, from what was put during the course of this application, it appeared that there may well be other ways of presenting their claim open to the plaintiffs.

Whilst the case may have its problems, I am not satisfied that the plaintiffs' claim is hopeless or bound to fail. There remains doubt and the remedy is a discretionary one.

In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the defendants have discharged the onus of demonstrating an entitlement to summary relief. It seems to me, that justice is best served if the proceedings are allowed to proceed to trial.

In the light of what has been said in respect of the defendants' application, the plaintiffs' application cannot expect to succeed. The evidence simply does not demonstrate a clear case for summary judgment.

In my view, the plaintiffs have fallen well short of discharging the onus of demonstrating an entitlement to summary relief. In the circumstances of this case, it seems to me that, if the plaintiffs' claim is to succeed, it can do so only at a trial. The determination of the claim will be dependent on the making of findings of fact which themselves can be expected to turn on questions of credibility.

I dismiss the plaintiffs' Notice of Motion. The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of that Notice of Motion. I dismiss the defendants' Notice of Motion.
The defendants are to pay the costs of that Notice of Motion. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
