

Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus MacDonald and Anor Matter No 12414/97 [1998] NSWSC 492 (7 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA versus MacDONALD & ANOR /97 July 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Default Statement of Claim filed on 19 August 1997. The plaintiff seeks, inter alia, possession of certain property at Bower Street, Manly (the property). The claim is founded on default under an Equitable Charge created by Deed made on 26 November 1990. It is in the form of an "all moneys" security. 
The equitable security was held over certain shares which gave an entitlement to possession of the property. Efforts have been made to sell the shares (it had been intended to apply the proceeds of sale towards a discharge of the security). These efforts have continued but no sale has resulted. The plaintiff remains willing to consent to the sale.

The defendants are husband and wife. They live with their children at the property. The first defendant was a practising solicitor. He came to experience financial difficulty (at least by late 1996). Numerous documents were served on him by process servers at the property. He is now bankrupt.

The possession problems had surfaced at least by late 1996 or early 1997.
During the latter part of 1997, Mr Bell was acting in these proceedings for the first defendant. Mr Garling was acting for the second defendant in respect of a number of matters. He had been acting since at least 1996. During August , contact was made between Mr Garling and Abbott Tout (the solicitors for the plaintiff) in reference to the plaintiff's claim. The matter of instructions to accept service of process was raised. By letter dated 5
September 1997, Mr Garling advised Abbott Tout that he had instructions to accept service of process. The matter of the sale of the shares was also raised.

There is evidence from a process server (Mr Sestito) that service of, inter alia, the Default Statement of Claim was effected personally on both defendants during the evening of 8 September 1997.

On 19 September 1997, Mr Bell filed a Notice of Appearance on behalf of the first defendant. On 12 September 1997, Mr Garling met with the defendants for a period of about 1½ hours. He made a file note of that conference. It contains reference to the seeking of a progress report from Abbott Tout. It would seem that the originating process must have come to the attention of Mr
Garling. On 23 September 1997, he filed a Notice of Appearance. The second defendant contends that she did not give him instructions to file that document. She maintains that she was unaware that proceedings were on foot.

It seems that a prospective purchaser had been found and that arrangements were being canvassed for a resolution of the matter. The arrangements involved the entry of default judgment by consent on terms and the application of the proceeds of sale of the shares towards a discharge of the security. This was seen as bringing the matter to a rapid conclusion (see letter dated 11
December 1997). Mr Garling has said that these matters were discussed with the second defendant.

By letter dated 16 December 1997, Mr Garling was notified by Abbott Tout that it was intended to obtain default judgment. In late January 1998, the second defendant inquired of Mr Garling as to whether there were any judgments against her. She was told, "No, not yet, but you probably will have".

Exhibit A contains material indicating that other process had been served on her and had been handed to Mr Garling for attention (p 20).

In early 1998, documents were filed in the registry for the purpose of obtaining default judgment. Default judgment (which was expressed to take effect on 20 February 1998) was obtained by the plaintiff.

Shortly prior to that time, the second defendant had become dissatisfied with
Mr Garling. She terminated his retainer and employed Mr Bell to act on her behalf. He had received instructions at least by 12 February 1998. Mr Bell was informed of the application for default judgment by facsimile transaction on February 1998. He did not take any action to prevent its entry. He advised
Abbott Tout that, inter alia, he had instructions to act on a sale of the shares.

On 19 March 1998, a Notice of Motion was filed on behalf of the second defendant. She seeks, inter alia, to have the default judgment set aside. This application came on for hearing on 13 May 1998. It was part heard at the end of the day. The hearing was concluded on 12 June 1998.

The application was initially founded on two grounds. Firstly, it was said that the originating process was not personally served on the second defendant. Secondly, it was said that she has a bona fide defence on the merits to the plaintiff's claim for possession. It was said that she relied primarily on the principles of unconscionable conduct but also claims entitlement to relief under the Contracts Review Act, 1980 (the Act).

There has been a lack of eagerness to provide any precise formulation of the alleged defence. In particular, considerable encouragement has been necessary to finally obtain a formulation of the relief claimed by her.

An affidavit sworn by Mr Bell on 12 June 1998 and filed in Court on that day annexes a copy of a proposed Defence. No proposed Defence verified by affidavit sworn by the second defendant has been placed before the Court. At a later stage during that day, the Court was told that she claimed an entitlement to have the Equitable Charge set aside.

The second defendant has sworn two affidavits. Her solicitor (Mr Bell) has sworn two affidavits. Both of them gave oral evidence and were cross-examined.
The plaintiff relies on two affidavits sworn by Mr Roper (a solicitor for the plaintiff) and the affidavit sworn by the process server. Mr Garling appeared in response to a subpoena served on him by the plaintiff. He gave some oral evidence in chief and then retired. He was not recalled so his evidence was not the subject of any cross-examination. Both parties tendered documentation.

I have closely observed the demeanour of the witnesses during the giving of their evidence. In assessing credibility, I have taken into account both demeanour and evidence.

There is conflict between the evidence given by Mr Garling on the one hand and that given by the second defendant on the other hand. Counsel for the second defendant has chosen not to cross-examine Mr Garling. His evidence has been left unchallenged. Largely, the second defendant did not demonstrate a good recollection. Some of her evidence was not impressive. Where there is conflict, I prefer the evidence of Mr Garling.

There is also some conflict between the evidence given by the process server on the one hand and the evidence given by the second defendant on the other hand. There was lengthy cross-examination of the process server. The second defendant concedes that the process server served "some documents" but denies that any originating process had been personally served on her.

At one stage, during the course of hearing, Counsel for the second defendant informed the Court that he no longer relied on non-service as a ground for the setting aside of the default judgment. It was then said that it was to be treated merely as a relevant circumstance. Subsequently, there were further changes in position. Ultimately, in written submissions, it was sought to revive this ground. In my view, it is pointless to pursue that question. In the circumstances of this case, it could not provide a ground for the setting aside of the judgment. Accordingly, it is not necessary to express any views concerning the conflict between the process server and the second defendant.

As I have said, the hearing has proceeded over two days. Oral submissions were made. There were also written submissions. Those made on behalf of the second defendant saw the emergence of new arguments as well as the change of position previously mentioned.

The real question to be determined is whether or not the second defendant has a bona fide defence on the merits to the plaintiff's claim for possession. The onus of demonstrating an arguable case rests with the second defendant. In my view, that onus has not been discharged.

The plaintiff holds three Equitable Charges. The first was given by the first defendant and was dated 26 November 1990. It relates to Group A shares held in -84 Bower Street Pty Limited (the Company). The second was given by both the first defendant and the second defendant and dated 26 November 1990. It relates to Group D shares held in the Company. These Charges were given to secure advances made for use by the first defendant in his legal practice. In , a third Charge was given. This was given by the second defendant to secure an advance made to her in relation to her home (the home loan advance).
The originating process pleads both the first and the second Charge.

The second Charge was forwarded to the second defendant for execution under cover of a letter dated 22 November 1990. The letter contained the following:- "Your present maximum liability to the Bank under the document/s is $141,787 plus interest, costs, charges and expenses as provided in the document/s.

Prior to signing the document/s you should satisfy yourself that you understand the full nature and effect of your liabilities to the Bank and obtain appropriate advice, legal or otherwise, if you are at all uncertain of your position.

Your signature to the document/s should be witnessed by an adult person (specially qualified where so called for in the document/s) who is not the borrower/debtor or a co-guarantor/mortgagor (if any) under the document/s.

DOCUMENT/S 
Equitable charge by you and Ian Harley Donald MacDonald over property at /82-84 Bower St Manly in respect of the indebtedness to the Bank of Ian
Harley Donald MacDonald and Peter Leonard Fairfield." 
Subsequent to the execution of the Charge, further financial accommodation was made available to the legal firm. Acknowledgements were signed by the second defendant. Copy acknowledgements are annexed to an affidavit sworn by Mr
Roper.

As has been said, the Equitable Charge is in the form of an all moneys security. The width of the terms of the security are such as to embrace both the financial advances to the first defendant and the home loan advance.

There is no dispute that there has been default on the part of the second defendant and that default under the security would entitle the plaintiff to have possession of the property.

The second defendant does not dispute her liability in respect of the home loan advance. Accordingly, she does not seek to be relieved of any liability to repay the amount owing in respect of that advance.

In these circumstances, on one view, there is simply no defence available to the second defendant so far as the plaintiff's claim for possession is concerned. The full extent of her indebtedness would not be to the point in these proceedings. However, there is a question as to whether or not the originating process enables this argument to be put by the plaintiff. In the light of the conclusions that I have reached on other matters, it is not necessary to dwell on this question.

For completeness, I should add that certain new arguments appeared in the second defendant's written submissions. Although the plaintiff has not had the opportunity to address them, it seems to me that they are lacking in substance.

Although on one view the matter I have mentioned could be determinative of this application, I shall now turn to the question of whether or not the plaintiff has an arguable case for relief either on the principles of unconscionable conduct or under the Contracts Review Act.

One of the difficulties confronting the second defendant is the sparseness of the material that she has chosen to put before the Court. The case in chief was founded, inter alia, on what appears in paragraphs 11-14 and 18 of the short affidavit sworn by her on 5 March 1998. It presents a picture of the second defendant signing the Charge at the request of her husband without making any inquiry as to its contents or legal effect. Largely, the evidence is silent as to the circumstances in which this particular document came to be executed. She says that she did not receive any legal advice. She says that, if she had been aware that by signing the document she could have lost her shares or that the shares could in some way be mortgaged by signing the same, she would not have signed the document. In her other affidavit, she gives her occupation as "Home Duties". This material was to some extent supplemented and/or modified by what emerged during oral evidence.

The second defendant told the Court that she trusted her husband to look after her affairs. She said that because he was a solicitor she thought that he would be looking after her best interests.

She said that her husband put a lot of documents in front of her and that often he didn't explain them to her. It is not said that she was under any pressure to sign documents. It is not said that there was concealment or deception in relation to them. It is not said that there was refusal to provide any necessary explanation. She said that it was her habit to read letters from the Bank addressed to her. She said that she assumed her husband had told her that she needed to put up her part of the house to allow him to get loans needed for his practice. It is not said that the terms of the Charge are unjust. She conceded that she knew what a mortgage was. The transcript records the following question and answer:- "DUBLER: Q. You understand, don't you, if you mortgaged your house for a loan and you are in default the Bank would be able to take the shares from you, you understand that in effect? 
A. In effect I understand it." 
The second defendant and her husband are presently residing in the property.
He was a solicitor, who needed financial accommodation for his legal practice.
This legal practice would have been a source of income for the family. The financial accommodation would have been required for the purpose of sustaining the practice. Although she says that she did not read the document and/or get any legal advice concerning it, she could have done so if she had wished to take that course. She has no language or intellectual impediment. It has not been said that she lacked the capacity to understand the documentation. The
Charge had been sent to her for execution under cover of a letter from the plaintiff which specifically drew to her attention the need to satisfy herself that she understood the full nature and effect of her liabilities to the Bank and to obtain appropriate advice if she was uncertain as to her position. She chose not to heed that warning. She subsequently signed acknowledgements containing similar material. There seems to have been no problem about getting legal advice when she has felt the need to obtain assistance. Further, it seems that she had a reasonable understanding of a transaction involving a
Charge over her shares.

In my view, the material fails to throw up an arguable case for relief either under the principles of unconscionable conduct or under the Act.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The second defendant is to pay the costs of the application. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
