

Lehmann versus Haskard [1997] NSWSC 225 (30 May 1997) 
LEHMANN versus HASKARD /96 
Thursday 29 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under [s 63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s63.html) of the [Trustee Act, 1925](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/), by the trustees of the estate of the late Anthony Robert Burton. The trustees wish advice as to how they should administer the estate because of the unorthodox holograph will which the testator made.

The application really requires construction of the will. Normally the court would decline to make an order under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s63.html), except perhaps to advise the trustees that they should take out a summons for construction. However, as the whole estate only comprises about $400,000 and there would have to be representation of three interests, the practicalities are that the matter cannot be dealt with in that way. The parties are agreed that the economics of the situation mean that it is to be dealt with by way of judicial advice.

Another preliminary observation that I should make is that during argument both counsel and myself tried to find good practical solutions. However, we realised, and it should be stated that we realised, that the beneficiaries under the will, some of whom are infants, are entitled to have the will administered according to law and their legal rights preserved no matter how administratively inconvenient that might be, at least up to the point where the costs of administration do not exceed the amount of benefit.

The testator died on 26 August 1994. He had married June Phyllis Turner on 30
August 1965. At the time of their marriage June had two children from a previous marriage, the fourth defendant, Patricia Ortlipp, and the fifth defendant, Malcolm Burton. There were then three children of the marriage,
Julie Haskard, Cathie Lehmann and Christopher Burton.

The testator and June were divorced, the decree nisi being made on 21 April .

The testator made his last will, the holograph will, on 5 January 1993.
Clauses 4(A), (B) and (C) are as follows: "4(A) I give my real estate property situated at 5 Penrith Avenue, Wheeler
Heights, NSW to June Phyllis Burton (nee Turner) and the contents therin, including tools and equipment in garage on property for her natural life.
Should June Burton decide to re-marry or enter a common law relationship then the property is to be sold and divided equally between her children, Patricia
Ortlipp, Malcolm Burton, Cathie Lehmann, Julie Haskard and Christopher Burton.
Should June Burton choose not to reside in the premises then it can be rented and rental monies to be for her use. The property must be maintained and fully insured. Mortage balance existing to be discharged out of long service leave funds.
 (B) Super funds to be invested in reputable trust fund and interest received therefrom to a maximum benefit of $1,500 per year to be allocated by 20% to each family in total.
 (C) Upon each grandchild attaining the age of 21 years the investment of trust funds shall be allocated by 20% to each family and divided equally within each family by the number of grandchildren." 
Seventeen questions were asked with respect to the will. Some Mr Underwood, who appeared for the trustees and also presented argument for the children of the testator, and Mr Cashion, who appeared for the grandchildren of the testator, were agreed on the answers. I agree with their assessment of the situation and, accordingly, I would advise the trustees: 
That the trustees are justified in proceeding on the basis that cl 4(A) of the will gives June Phyllis Burton a life estate in 5 Penrith Avenue, Wheeler Heights defeasible upon her re-marriage or her entering into a common law relationship.
 
The condition of defeasance is not void as against public policy.
 
There is an intestacy as to the remainder of the deceased's estate which passes pursuant to <case> of the Wills Probate and Administration Act 1989 to Julie Haskard, Cathie Lehmann and Christopher Burton in equal shares.

The sum of $1,500 referred to in cl 4(B) of the will is a total sum of $1,500 per year.
 "Family" in cll 4(B) and 4(C) means a group of June Burton's issue of which the senior member is respectively (a) Julie Haskard, (b) Cathie Lehmann, (c) Christopher Burton, (d) Patricia Ortlipp, or (e) Malcolm Burton.

This leaves for decision (A) who must pay for the upkeep and insurance of 5
Penrith Avenue, Wheeler Heights? (B) for how long does the trust in 4(B) last? who are the beneficiaries under the trust in 4(B)? (D) who are the beneficiaries in the trust set out in 4(C)? and (E) how and when is the distribution of the fund referred to in 4(C) to be done? I will deal with each of these five general questions and then note further advice I give the trustees.

There are three possible meanings of the words "The property must be maintained and fully insured", viz (i) that it must be maintained and fully insured by the trustees; (ii) that it must be maintained and fully insured by the life tenant; or (iii) that the general law applies and the statement is merely a statement of expectation.

Mr Cashion submits that the specification that the mortgage is to be discharged out of the specific fund and the reference to June taking the rents for her own use are both indicators that the testator intended that she should bear the costs of maintenance and insurance. He says that if the testator has made specific provision for payment out of the mortgage, yet made a specific statement as to insurance, etc, but has not nominated a fund, then by an expressio unius rule one would assume that the burden falls on the life tenant.

This is again reinforced by the fact that if the property were let one would expect the net rent only to be paid over to the life tenant and that she would bear the normal expenses of letting, including estate agent's commission, insurance and day-to-day repairs.

The argument that the burden is to fall on the estate is based on the fact that the word "must" is a word of command. The only command could be addressed to the trustees and should be contrasted with a condition. The testator put on a condition in his dum casta clause, yet chose a command.

Whichever view one takes, one has got to look at the word "maintained". This is usually a word which indicates that day-to-day fair wear and tear and deterioration through natural forces must be made good, but not that facilities be upgraded. However, it must be remembered that the word "maintained" is a vague word. Sometimes it is not distinguished from "repair", but "it may in some context be a wider word which includes repairing as well as other operations": Day versus Harland & Wolff Ltd [[1953] 1 WLR ],
In A.C.T. Construction Ltd versus Customs and Excise Commissioners [[1981] WLR 49](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1981%5d%201%20WLR%2049 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 56-57, Brandon LJ said of the word "maintenance": "One extreme position is to say that, if the work done involves an improvement to the building, it can never be maintenance. The other extreme position is to say that, if the work has the purpose of remedying an existing defect in the building or preventing a future defect from developing, it must always be maintenance. In my view, neither of these extreme positions is correct. The expression "maintenance" should be given its ordinary and natural meaning. In regard to the first extreme position, there may well be cases where the work done, although it involves some degree of improvement (for instance, because of the use of modern or better materials or methods) is nevertheless maintenance in the ordinary and natural meaning of that word. For example, if metal gutters, which are liable to decay in time, are replaced with plastic gutters which are not liable to decay however long they remain there, that is an improvement to the building, but I would still regard that work as maintenance. With regard to the second extreme position, there may well be cases where, although the purpose of the work is to remedy existing or to prevent future defects in the building, it is nevertheless not within the expression 'maintenance' in the ordinary and natural meaning of that word. For example, if a building has a flat roof which leaks continuously and the owner decides to replace the flat roof with a pitch roof so as to eliminate that defect, then, although that work was designed to eliminate a defect, it would not in my view be maintenance in the ordinary and natural meaning of that word." 
In BP Oil Refinery (Bulwer Island) Ltd versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation [(1992) 23 ATR 65] at 73, Jenkinson J in the Federal Court of Australia, when dealing with the term "repair", said that repairs covered not only remedying defects but also work done in anticipation of forthcoming defects, but work would not be considered repair: "unless it includes some restoration of something lost or damaged, whether function or substance or some other quality or characteristic." 
Accordingly, whatever the expression "The property must be maintained" means, it can mean no more than remedying defects and not improving the structure.

Before dealing with what the words in the will mean, one must look to the general law position. The first thing that must be considered is whether the trustees are bare trustees, or whether they have active powers of management.
In my view, apart from the powers given by the [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/), the will itself confers no powers of management. The will does not contain any residuary gift so that the residue will pass to the children as on intestacy.

Where there are no powers of management, there is no power in anyone to apply money out of the estate for the purpose of effecting repairs: Re Willis [[1902] 1 Ch 15], 21; Wilkie versus Equity Trustees etc Ltd <case>; [[1909] VLR 277], 280; In re Dawes <case>; <case>; [[1960] VR 550], 561. The only exception is the case of salvage. See also in general Ford and Lee on Trusts 3rd ed [11250] et seq and cases there cited.

In Wilkie's case, Madden, CJ said at 280-1, "... where property is settled on life tenants and remaindermen and the trustees are only bare trustees without active duties to perform there is no power in anybody to apply money out of the estate for the purpose of effecting repairs. The Court cannot apply the corpus of the estate in effecting repairs unless the trustees can show that the estate is in jeopardy - ie, that a case of salvage has arisen, in that expenditure is necessary to keep the property in existence for the remaindermen. In that case, and in that case only, the Court will interfere and authorize expenditure out of corpus to keep the trust property from being destroyed. But in cases where life estates and remainders are created, and trustees are appointed to whom are given active powers of management, a different condition of things arises. The principle long known to the law, of course, always prevails, that a tenant for life without impeachment of waste is under no liability to spend a penny on the property. He may enjoy it during his life, putting up with the disrepair if he chooses, but he is under no obligation to repair. But while this is so, a trustee who has power of management has, in the course of good management, full authority to see that repairs are made for the purpose of preserving the property for the remaindermen. If it is neceessary to spend money for that purpose, the trustee has authority to do so to an extent necessary to pay for repairs, and to charge the cost of certain repairs against the rents coming to the life tenant and of others against the remaindermen. If it is necessary to raise money out of corpus for the purpose of making repairs chargeable to corpus the trustee may apply to the Court for assistance as to how it may be done. The Court will then, for example, authorize the money to be borrowed, and will declare a scheme for repayment of principal and interest. Where the repairs are such as recurring ordinary repairs of the sort which in all probability will enure substantially for the advantage of the life tenant, they are to be borne out of income; the princple being that where you have repairs of that sort so closely appertaining to the life tenant's enjoyment as distinguished from that of the remainderman, the trustees should not be troubled with estimates and nice balancing of rights of enjoyment in respect of that matter, and that on the whole the wisest course is thought to be that the life tenant shall bear them.
 "Then come structural repairs of a character which makes them essentially and in the full and proper sense matters appertaining to the remainderman's interest, structural repairs of such a character that the benefit arising from them will enure almost wholly to the remainderman. In that case the trustees would act properly in charging the whole cost against the remainderman.
 "Sometimes you find structural repairs of such a character that they clearly will for a time add to the benefit and the advantage of the tenant for life, although they will subsequently enure to the advantage of the remainderman. In these cases where the Court has authorized money to be borrowed on security of the corpus the rule has generally been that the life tenant is ordered to keep down the interest and the remainderman is charged with the principal. That rule has been acted on many times and was the rule referred to in Re Tong <case>; [[1907] VLR 338], it has also been acted on in other cases, as the accepted rule. But we think it is in the discretion of the trustees in a just exercise of their authority to properly apportion the cost between income and corpus of repairs of that kind." 
In Re Tong a life tenant's executor claimed that trustees had wrongly deducted from her income expenses incurred in maintaining the relevant property as well as insurance premiums. A'Beckett, J held that as the life tenant had no obligation to repair, any work done by the trustees without reference to the life tenant could not be charged to her account.

Do then the words "The property must be maintained and fully insured" alter this general law position? 
The problem is that the words which the testator used are in the passive voice. However, it is acknowledged by both counsel that the will did not impose any duties of management on the trustees. No residuary beneficiaries were named. Accordingly, it is clear that the testator intended that the property should be maintained and fully insured by someone, and the only someone that could be would be the life tenant.

Although accordingly there is little material to aid one in construing the will, it seems to me that there is sufficient to throw the burden of effecting maintenance, that is, remedying defects, onto the life tenant.

Mr Underwood relies on a passage in Underhill and Hayton, Law of Trusts and
Trustees 14th ed (Butterworths London 1987), Article 53, commencing on p
Subject to the directions of the will and of Statute, the learned authors say that the rules are as follows: "(a) the corpus bears capital charges, and the income bears the interest on them. If the current income is insufficient, arrears of interest on capital charges must be paid out of subsequent income.
 the income usually bears current expenses ...
 where repairs to trust freeholds are necessary to save them from destruction ... or for putting in repair leasehold property which was out of repair at the date of the creation of the trust, the court may empower the trustees to raise the necessary amount in such a way as will be equitable between income and corpus.
 all costs incident to the administration and protection of the trust property, including legal proceedings, are borne by corpus, unless they relate exclusively to the tenant for life. The corpus must pay all costs, charges and expenses incurred for the benefit of the whole estate." "Current expenses" includes rates and taxation; Fountaine versus Pellet [(1791) Ves 337], 342; <case>; [30
ER 374], 376. The day-to-day replacement of broken windows, the cleaning of floors and carpets, repair of blocked pipes are part of the normal current living costs and are borne by the life tenant. A substantial item, such as the installation of a new hot water service or a new bath, is something which should be borne by corpus, though if the trustees need to borrow to pay for the item then the interest is borne by the life tenant.

The evidence is that the actuarial value of a life estate of a 60 year old
Australian female is that she has 70.6% of the property in respect of which the life estate is held.

However, the passage in Underhill and Hayton only refers to situations where the trustee has a power of management and, although I was initially attracted by it, on further consideration do not really consider it helps the instant case.

In the present case, there is a report by a Mr Chalkley, a building expert that as at the date of his report the premises were in a state of disrepair.
Mr Chalkley says, "Generally the building is currently under-going repairs, maintenance and modest upgrading work, to correct a previously run-down condition. Work done and substantially completed at time of inspection was confined to removal of degraded internal furnishings and re-painting of all three bedrooms. Kitchen space has been `gutted' ready for completely new equipment. Bathroom has been partially refurbished, with provisions for new wall linings and wall tiles and new bathtub and vanity wash basin cabinet.
 "Garage was filled with household furnishings, preventing detailed inspection and side driveway contained rubbish stacked ready for disposal." 
I suggested that further evidence should be filed as to the state of the premises at the testator's death, as this may bear on the question of salvage.
This request was met by two further affidavits being filed. These show that the life tenant went into possession in December 1994 and that since that date she has effected and paid for certain of the matters referred to in Mr
Chalkley's report.

The further evidence showed that the work that was referred to in Mr
Chalkley's report was not to remedy a state of disrepair which was in existence at the date of the testator's death. The repairs which were being done when Mr Chalkley visited the property in November 1994 were repairs being done to upgrade the property prior to the life tenant moving in. Had the situation been that the testator had left the property in a state where the kitchen had been gutted intending to build a new kitchen, the case would clearly be one of salvage.

Thus the position is that the life tenant must do all necessary remedial work to remedy defects and that unless this is a case of salvage, whoever does any other work on the property pays the costs without recourse. Is the present case then one of salvage? 
Re Robins [[1928] Ch 721], it was held to be salvage where a retaining wall was erected consequent upon the local authority lowering the level of the front street. 
In Birkenhead versus Jones <case>; [(1906) 23 WN 86], it was held that the erection of a rabbit proof fence was a matter of salvage.
Probably this can be explained because the statutory authority had a power to erect the fence and charge the trustees with the costs of the fence if it was not erected voluntarily; see Re Wentworth <case>; [(1915) 15 SR 384], .

However, in Blyth versus Dowling  <case>, the Tasmanian Full Court held it was salvage to prevent a grazing property being overrun by blackberries. This case would fall outside the statutory notice principle. Again, in Permanent Trustee Co of NSW Ltd versus Fraser <case>; [(1922) 22 SR 606], it was held to be salvage for the trustees to keep the trust property (being life policies) alive by paying the premiums.

In Re De Teissier's Settled Estates [[1893] 1 Ch 153], 161, Chitty,
J said that propositions put from the bar in possible salvage cases are "very often of a very loose character indeed, and the court has to examine with care to see whether the case is one of salvage or not." At 161-2, his Lordship limited salvage to cases where, if the work were not done, the authority would condemn the property or do the work itself and bill the trust.

The principle as stated by Chitty, J is too narrow as can be seen from some of the examples given above, including Eyre versus O'Rorke. In Cousins versus Cousins <case>; [(1906) 3 CLR 1198], the High
Court adopted a different test, namely, could the testator's intention be effectuated if the subject work were not done in connection with the property?
However, in O'Donnell versus Perpetual Trustee Co <case>; [(1917) 17 SR 547], , Harvey, J held that Cousins' case did not affect the general law as to salvage, but was decided in a case where a trustee was really seeking authorisation in protecting an infant's estate by raising money to restore a vineyard to a condition where it might be efficiently worked for the production of wine. Harvey, J pointed out that Cousins' case was not a settled land case at all and it "cannot, I think, be considered as laying down any new law, or as widening the inherent jurisdiction of the Court in the case of salvage." It should be noted for what it was worth that Harvey, J was counsel for the appellant in Cousins' case: there were no other appearances in that case. What Harvey, J says about Cousins' case appears to be correct.

There is no question in the instant case of a public authority giving a notice to the trustees to do the work. If the principle extends beyond statutory notices and premises that were left out of habitable repair by the testator to the wider class of situations envisaged in cases such as Eyre versus O'Rorke we still do not have that situation encompassed by the facts in the instant case.

Accordingly, the present case does not fall within the principle of salvage.

The evidence shows that the life tenant is living on a pension. She has done considerable work to the property since she entered into occupation, but her funds are now exhausted. She would not be able to pay any expensive repair bills in the future unless something extraordinary happens.

Although the will does cast upon her the duty to maintain in the limited sense to which I have already referred, in my view the will does not impose that duty on her as a condition of her life estate continuing; see Carrodus v
Carrodus <case>; [[1913] VLR 1.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1913%5d%20VLR%201 "View LawCiteRecord" ) Accordingly, if she is unable through financial stringency to comply with the limited duty cast upon her, there is little the trustees can do about the matter. As I have said, the trustees also cannot force the life tenant to do repairs over and above that limited duty, nor can she force the trustees or the remainder persons to do any work on the property.

In these circumstances, there is a suggestion in some of the authorities that a trustee should explore with the life tenant and remaindermen the possibility of reaching a scheme which is fair and equitable; see eg Re Hotchkys [(1886) 32 Ch D 408.] Unfortunately, different people have varying ideas as to what is fair and reasonable. In Australia, recourse is often made to the proportion that actuaries give to the value of the life estate as compared to the value of the remainder. As I have indicated, the evidence on this point is that the ratio is 70:30.

There is a further complication in the instant case that the beneficiaries on intestacy differ from those who take in remainder. However, as the people involved are mother, children and grandchildren, this problem may be more theoretical than real. It would be acceptable for the trustees to prepare a scheme after consultation with such of the beneficiaries that were of age and if the trustees considered that they needed protection, to approach the Court either under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s63.html) of [s 81](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s81.html) of the [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) for the appropriate order. If no satisfactory scheme can be worked out, it may be that the property will need to be sold under the provisions of the [Conveyancing and Law of Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/calopa1898334/), and the proceeds invested on identical trusts.

Accordingly, I advise the trustees as follows:- 
The life tenant is responsible for remedying defects and for doing work in anticipation of forthcoming defects but not for improving the structure. The trustees have no obligation either to do any maintenance and repair work themselves or to compel the life tenant to do those works. The trustees would be justified in preparing a scheme after consultation with all beneficiaries of full age which would permit defects to be remedied and replacements and periodic maintenance to be carried out for the preservation of the estate.
 
I now turn to the question of insurance. I have already indicated that on the proper construction of the will the life tenant is to pay the insurance on the property. The insurance should be not only for the life tenant's right title and interest in the property, but also for the whole fee simple. However, if the life tenant does not comply with her duty to insure, then the trustees may consider it necessary to insure in the light of what I say below and to sue the life tenant for an indemnity. [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s41.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) provides: "A trustee may insure against loss or damage, whether by fire or otherwise, any insurable property, and against any risk or liability against which it would be prudent for a person to insure if he were acting for himself." 
In Pateman versus Heyen [(1993) 33 NSWLR 188], Cohen, J approved of statements in sundry United States cases including Merchants
Bank & Trust Co versus New Canaan Historical Society [54 A (2d) 696] (1947) (Conn), where it was held that there was a general duty of a trustee to insure in such a way and in such an amount as would an ordinary prudent person. It would seem to me in the instant case that the trustees should make proper enquiry each year to make sure that the life tenant has insured in a proper amount and if they find she has not, to effect insurance taking reasonable precautions to indemnify themselves against the life tenant should that happen.

Accordingly I advise the trustees: 
That the primary duty to insure the property is on the life tenant. They must make due enquiries each year to ensure that adequate insurance is effected by the life tenant. If they ascertain that the life tenant has not insured in a proper amount, then they should effect insurances and recover the cost from the life tenant if it is thought prudent to do so.
 
How long does the trust under 4(B) last? The gift under 4(B) is to terminate upon the gift of corpus under 4(C) taking effect. This really means that one must construe 4(C) to see whether it involves one distribution period or a series of distribution periods. If there is one distribution period then the trust under 4(B) must cease at that period. If there is a series of distribution periods then this question is a very difficult one.

In my view, on the wording of 4(C) there is but one distribution period. This is the whole focus of the clause. I acknowledge that one has to read the word "each" in 4(C) as if it were "each and every". I do not think that too much violence is done to the word "each" by so construing it and there is less violence done to the will by taking this viewpoint than in taking any other.
Accordingly, this question (B) answers itself because the trust of income will exist up until the time of distribution of the capital.

It is to be noted that the beneficiary in 4(B) is "each family", whereas the beneficiary under 4(C) is "to each family and divided equally within each family".

Under 4(B) the money could pass to "the family" or, alternatively, one could say that as the gift of the corpus was to each grandchild, and the whole focus of the trust is on the corpus, the gift of income merely being to deal with a situation before all the grandchildren were of age, the beneficiaries under (B) must also be the grandchildren.

I do not consider that this latter view is correct. There is to be a gift of $300 per year to each family and the persons who are to benefit under that will include grandchildren who are of very tender age. I cannot believe that the testator would have intended that the trustees or the parents of the grandchildren would have to open trust accounts into which they paid, say, $150 per year depending on how many grandchildren were in each family. It seems to me far more likely that the testator intended that the $300 per year be paid to the head of that family, being one of his or his former wife's children, for the benefit of the family.

Accordingly, I further advise the trustees: 
That the gift of income under cl 4(B) may whilst the five nominated children of June Burton are each alive be paid to that child on trust for his or her family without any necessity for the trustees to ensure that that sub-trust is carried out. Should any of those five children die then the trustees must make provision that the annual sum be paid for the benefit of the deceased person's family.

The will has not defined the term "grandchild". It could mean any grandchild in existence as at the date of his death, any grandchild subsequently born or any grandchild born until the class of grandchildren closes. Even though one of the grandchildren currently in existence, Madison
Lehmann, was born on 9 December 1994, after the testator's death, because she was en ventre sa mere at the date of the testator's death and was subsequently born alive the law considers that she was alive as at the date of the testator's death.

Accordingly, under any view the nine grandchildren named in the summons must qualify.

Under the class closing rules, sometimes known as the rules in Andrews v
Partington <case>; [(1791) 3 Bro CC 401]; [29 ER 610], where one has a gift with a qualification as to age, the class closes when the first member of the class becomes entitled to the distribution of his or her share. If this rule applies, then as soon as a grandchild attains twenty-one years the class will close and only grandchildren who are alive at that time will qualify. On the evidence, assuming that she survives to twenty-one, this will occur on 30 May 1997 when
Carly Ortlipp attains twenty-one.

The class closing rules have been associated with the modern rule against perpetuities, though it is clear that they pre-dated the final statement of the modern rule against perpetuities. They have been associated because the effect of the class closing rules has been to dampen the devastating effect of the modern rule against perpetuities. However, this is not the only effect of the class closing rules and it would seem that they have not been affected by the abolition of the modern rule against perpetuities by the [Perpetuities Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984172/); see
Sappideen and Butt [Perpetuities
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984172/) Law Book
Company, Sydney 1986, chapter 9.

Accordingly, assuming that Carly Ortlipp survives, only grandchildren who were in existence as at 30 May 1997 can take. However, this will include any child who was en ventre sa mere at that time and who was subsequently born alive.

As I have said above, there is one point of distribution. This must be when the youngest of the grandchildren who are in esse as at the date the eldest grandchild attains twenty-one attains that age. However, in the meantime each grandchild who attains twenty-one obtains a vested interest, so that even if a grandchild dies after attaining twenty-one but before the date of distribution his or her estate will benefit. A grandchild who was alive when the eldest grandchild attained twenty-one but who fails to attain twenty- one never obtains a vested share and his or her share falls back into the fund to be redistributed amongst the others.

Accordingly, I advise the trustees: 
That the beneficiaries under 4(C) are those grandchildren who are in being as at the date the eldest grandchild attains twenty-one years and who attains the age of twenty-one years.
 
Upon the youngest of the grandchildren referred to in (9) of the advice attaining twenty-one years the fund may be distributed by paying twenty per cent times the number of grandchildren in any particular family to each eligible grandchild.

Accordingly, the court by order advises the trustees in accordance with the ten paragraphs set out above and orders that the costs of all parties on the indemnity basis be paid out of the estate of the late Anthony Robert Burton.
 * * * 
