

Abdelahad versus Franklins Self-Service Pty Ltd Matter No Ca 40523/96 [1997]
NSWSC 308 (15 August 1997) 
Samira ABDELAHAD versus FRANKLINS SELF-SERVICE PTY LTD 
CA 40523/96 DC 4884/94 August 1997 
Handley JA, Sheller JA, Cole JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court - Garling DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA40523/96;DC4884/94 
DELIVERED: 15 August 1997 
HEARING DATE: 15 August 1997 
PARTIES: Samira ABDELAHAD versus FRANKLINS SELF-SERVICE PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT OF: HANDLEY JA SHELLER JA COLE JA 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: P O'Loughlin * Respondent: P Maiden 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: Colin Daley Quinn * Respondent: Glover & Glover 
CATCHWORDS: No question of principle 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Appeal dismissed with costs 
NO OF PAGES: 3 
Samira ABDELAHAD versus FRANKLINS SELF- SERVE PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: Mrs Abdelahad fell at about 2.00pm on 17 October 1993 at a store operated by the respondent at the Bankstown Shopping Square. She suffered a serious injury to her leg. She sued the respondent but Garling DCJ found a verdict for the respondent. In so doing he recorded the evidence of the appellant that she did not know what caused her slip and he rejected the evidence of her son that she had slipped on a squashed lettuce leaf which he said he saw. Having regard to the evidence of an independent witness, a Mr Reid, he being a St Johns Ambulance Officer who attended the injured appellant and who looked for substances which might have caused her to slip or upon which she slipped, but saw none, his Honour found that he was unable to determine the cause of the appellant's slipping. Having found that she did not slip on the large lettuce leaf that the appellant's son said he saw, he also found that she did not slip on a fifty cent piece size piece of lettuce nearby. Not knowing on what she slipped, or, if it be assumed that she slipped on some object, as distinct from turning her ankle and falling, how long that object had been on the floor, his Honour was unable to find that if that was the way the fall occurred, the respondent had an opportunity to clean away the offending object. However his Honour found that there was in place a proper cleaning system, there being evidence that the floor was both regularly inspected and regularly cleaned during trading hours. There was evidence that the front of the store where the accident occurred was checked for spillage at least every half hour. In those circumstances a verdict was found for the defendant. 
The appellant has contended on the appeal that the trial judge ought to have accepted the evidence of a Mr Olsen, an engineer called on behalf of the plaintiff and not cross-examined. Mr Olsen's report was based upon an inspection of the floor on 25 July 1996, almost three years after the accident. He wrote his report upon the basis that on the floor there was "an amount of debris including paper, cigarette butts and one squashed lettuce leaf". As I have said the trial judge rejected the existence of the allegedly squashed lettuce leaf, and there was no finding that the fall was caused by paper or cigarette butts on the floor. This seriously diminishes the impact of
Mr Olsen's report.

Mr Olsen found that the floor when inspected in 1996 had a coefficient of friction of 0.4o and expressed the opinion that that was "borderline safe". He conclude that "in the event that the plaintiff did step on either a cigarette butt or a lettuce leaf then there would be a risk of injury through slipping on such an object". Absent a finding that she did so, Mr Olsen's report gives little assistance to the appellant.

It was contended on appeal, however that as in 1996 the floor was "borderline safe", and in view of the circumstance that there was on the floor cigarette butts, a piece of cardboard, and a fifty cent piece sized piece of lettuce, the trial judge should on the balance of probabilities have held that the appellant trod on some such object thus reducing the coefficient friction to less than .40 rendering the floor unsafe. In my view, assuming in the appellant's favour that that submission was put to the trial judge, there is no basis upon which this Court can interfere with the trial judge's finding that he was not satisfied that the appellant did slip on a cigarette butt, the cardboard or the small piece of lettuce.

There was an abundance of evidence entitling the trial judge to reach the finding that there was in place a proper cleaning system. The evidence of Miss
Mohn supports such a finding. Based on the trial judge's findings of fact, there was no evidence of negligence on the part of the respondent. Accordingly the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

HANDLEY JA: I agree. 
SHELLER JA: I also agree. * * * 
