

Smith versus Smith and Ors No. 12624/94 [1995] NSWSC 79 (16 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
MASTER MALPASS
HRNG
SYDNEY, 4 September 1995 #DATE 4:9:1995 #ADD :10:1995
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
MASTER MALPASS The plaintiff is, and at all material times has been, a resident of Victoria.
On 14 February 1988, she suffered personal injury as a result of a motor vehicle accident. The accident took place in New South
Wales.
Following the accident, a report was made to the Narooma Police
Station.
Upon her return to Victoria, she consulted Tyler Tipping and Woods and obtained legal advice regarding her entitlement to compensation. The advice canvassed her entitlements under the relevant legislation then in force in both Victoria and New South Wales. She was advised not to lodge any claim under the New South Wales
TransCover scheme as she was entitled to compensation benefits in Victoria. She was further advised that common law actions had been effectively abolished in New South Wales. A copy of the letter of advice is in evidence.
An application for benefits was made under the Transport Accident Act, (the Victorian Act) to the Victorian Transport Accident Commission (TAC).
It seems that "medical and like expenses and loss of earnings" may have been claimed. Whether or not she received any benefits in respect of that claim is unclear.
In or about October 1988, she consulted another firm of solicitors (Simon
Parsons Raby and Co). In or about May , that firm advised her to lodge a claim for impairment benefits with TAC. Subsequently, a claim was lodged. She did not receive any advice from that firm regarding the possibility of making a claim in New South Wales.
In or about October 1990, her level of impairment was assessed by the TAC.
An application for review of that decision was made.
She became dissatisfied with the manner in which Simon Parsons Raby and Co were handling her matter, and on 1 April 1992, she sought legal advice from
Slater and
Gordon. She gave that firm instructions to take over her file. In
July 1992, the file was obtained. In January 1993, her claim for impairment benefits was settled with the TAC. Presumably, benefits were received by her as a result of that settlement from TAC.
In February 1993, she instructed her solicitors to pursue and investigate a claim for common law damages. By letter dated 22
February 1993, a
Certificate pursuant to Section 93(2)(b) of the Victorian Act was sought. In
March 1993, a letter was received from
TAC. It advised that it would be totally inappropriate to issue the Certificate. It further advised that:- "Any action to recover damages at common law must be brought under the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) as the substantive law.
This NSW legislation does not have a corresponding enabling provision to that of section 93 of the Victorian Act.

TAC reminds you that it intends to recover all benefits paid from any common law damages, and that this should be considered at the time of settlement."
By February 1993, Mr Stiffe of Counsel had been briefed to advise as to the plaintiff's common law entitlements. His Advice was received on or about March 1993. A copy of that Advice is in evidence.
The Advice recommended the immediate engagement of specialist solicitors in New South Wales and of the need to obtain leave under [section 52(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act, 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) (the Act). The Advice stressed the importance of making the application "very promptly".
Following further instructions from the plaintiff, Turner Freeman were engaged as agents in New South Wales for the purpose of instituting proceedings for common law damages in that State. In June 1993, advice was sought from Counsel. It was received in August 1993.
In August 1993, the plaintiff purported to give notice of her claim to the insurer. Because the Claim Form did not satisfy the statutory requirements, notice of the claim was not given until October 1993. The six month period was then allowed to elapse before an approach was made to the
Court.
The Summons seeking leave pursuant to section 52(4) was filed on 26
October 1994. The filing of the Summons had been delayed by reason of a number of matters. There had been some difficulty in the obtaining of the supporting affidavit evidence. There had been delays due to other work commitments and holidays. The responsibility for that delay fell on Mr Goldberg, the solicitor who now has the conduct of the matter on behalf of the plaintiff.
The Summons did not come on for hearing until 11 August 1995. Prior to that time, it appears that the Summons had been before the Court on many occasions.
The approach to be adopted to applications of this nature is now well known. The principles upon which the judicial discretion is exercised, need not be repeated once more in this judgment.
Relief is sought only against the third defendant. The application is opposed. Ultimately, it was opposed on three discretionary grounds. At the commencement of the hearing, the grounds were said to be the making of an election by the plaintiff and lack of diligence. Later, towards the conclusion of submissions, prejudice was also raised.
There have been five affidavits filed on behalf of the plaintiff. The plaintiff herself has sworn two affidavits. Mr Palmos (a solicitor in the employ of Slater and Gordon) has sworn two affidavits. Mr Goldberg (a partner in Turner Freeman) has sworn an affidavit. None of the deponents have been cross-examined. The third defendant has not placed any evidence before the
Court.
I shall first deal with the election submission. It was presented in a broad brush manner. As I understand the submission, it was submitted that the plaintiff had made an election between competing rights and had therefore waived her entitlement to relief under the Act. The competing rights were said to be the entitlements she had under the Victorian Act and the entitlements she had under the Act.
The Court was informed that this question was raised as a discretionary consideration. It was further informed that it was not put in a futility context.
I should say that I do not regard this question as having been fully argued before me. In the presentation of this submission, the Court was not taken to any relevant legislation or any of the provisions thereof. Brief reference only was made to matters of evidence. The approach was taken that the onus was on the plaintiff to refute the third defendant's contention.
I do not accept the third defendant's submissions on this question. They founder both in fact and in law. Not only is there a lack of evidence to found the submissions, in fact, there is material which tends to refute any contention that there could have been such an election between competing rights in the sense required by the authorities. The claims made for benefits in Victoria were made to the TAC.
The present claim is made against the third defendant under the Act. The Act, of course, was not in force at the time of the alleged election.
General mention was made of the principles of double compensation. In this case, the relevant remedies are not made against the same party and the same measure of recovery would not seem to be involved. There may be the possibility of some overlapping.
The TAC has manifested an intention to recover benefits that have been paid in the event that the plaintiff obtains an award of common law damages. It was not submitted that it would be futile to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff. If it be necessary to express any view on the matter, I am certainly not satisfied that it would be futile to grant that relief. If the third defendant does ultimately take the view that there are arguable questions of double recovery, these may be raised in any proceedings brought by the plaintiff.
I regard these submissions as being misconceived and ill founded in law.
The relevant principles have no application in the circumstances of this case.
I now turn to the lack of diligence submission. Again, this was not the subject of detailed argument.
There has been great delay in the prosecution of this claim. Some five affidavits are relied on for the purpose of explaining that delay. Some of the responsibility for delay rests with the plaintiff herself. Some of it rests with the various solicitors who have had the conduct of her claim. The explanation is not as satisfactory as it might have been.
However, in the circumstances of this case, I consider that it is just sufficient.
Finally, I shall deal with the prejudice submission. Again, this was briefly put. In essence, it is complained that by reason of the delay, the third defendant has been deprived of an earlier opportunity to have the plaintiff medically examined. The third defendant did not become aware of the claim until about August 1993. The third defendant has not placed any evidence before the Court. The Court does not know what steps have been taken by the third defendant to have the plaintiff medically examined. There is no evidence to suggest that the delay has brought about any real prejudice to the third defendant.
The Court may always imply some prejudice by reason of delay. It seems that the plaintiff may have been medically examined by experts other than her own for the purposes of the applications made in Victoria. It may be that the third defendant can obtain access to that material. Any inferred prejudice needs to be balanced up against the other relevant circumstances.
The plaintiff bears the onus of satisfying the Court that leave should be granted. It seems to me, when regard is had to all of the relevant circumstances of this case, that justice is best served between the parties if leave is granted.
I grant leave pursuant to section 52(4) of the Act. I direct that any proceedings commenced pursuant to that leave, be instituted by Statement of
Claim filed on or before pm on 11 September 1995. The plaintiff is to pay the third defendant's costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/79.html  
