

Regina versus S J Sandeman; Regina versus S Hilditch [1997] NSWSC 584 (26 November )

REGINA versus STEVEN JOHN SANDEMAN REGINA versus STEPHEN HILDITCH /95 60506/95 
WEDNESDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SULLY J, BELL AJ 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: On 15 August 1995 Mr Stephen Hilditch and Mr Steven John Sandeman were presented for trial in the Newcastle District Court,and before his Honour Judge Coleman of Queens Counsel,upon an indictment which charged each of them with having maliciously inflicted grievous bodily harm upon a particular named victim. Each of Mr Hilditch and Mr Sandeman pleaded that he was not guilty. Each was put upon his trial accordingly;and each was,on 17 or 18 August,found guilty by verdict of the jury.

On 18 August each stood for sentence before his Honour. His Honour sentenced each to a sentence of penal servitude of three years, apportioned between a minimum sentence of two years and three months,and an additional term of nine months. Each of Mr Hilditch and Mr Sandeman seeks leave to appeal against the asserted severity of sentence.

It will be convenient to look first at the objective facts in so far as they can be divined from the material at present available;then to consider the position of Mr Hilditch;and then to consider, separately, the position of Mr
Sandeman.

The objective facts as they are summarised in the remarks on sentence are, broadly speaking, to the following effect. On 26 April 1994 both of the present applicants had been drinking together throughout the course of the day. Each of them then had, and had had for some time, a chronic alcohol problem. By the time they went to the premises at which the offence in question was committed,they were apparently both well affected by alcohol.

At those premises Mr Sandeman,at least,appears to have continued drinking with the victim;and, as the learned primary Jdge points out in his remarks on sentence, "(t)he events from that point onwards are not clear, except that at some stage the victim ... was ejected from the house because of his unruly behaviour." 
It seems that the three men got into the back yard of the premises; and, in circumstances which are not at all clear, the two present applicants committed a very serious assault upon the victim.

The learned primary Judge describes the incident in terms of what his Honour calls "two phases." His Honour describes the first of those "phases" in the following terms: "Whilst (the victim) was on the ground both accused kicked him across towards the side fence ... . Then he was moved by a means which is not clear on the evidence to another location closer to the house. During the first phase both accused delivered kicks to the torso of the victim." 
His Honour describes the second "phase" as follows: "In the second phase the (applicant) Hilditch delivered a number of blows to the body of the victim using a length of water pipe about eight to ten centimetres in diameter. The injuries sustained by the victim were serious. He was taken to the John Hunter Hospital, where he came under the care of neurosurgeon ...".

So far as concerns Mr Sandeman, that bare summary of the relevant facts is fleshed out to some extent by certain of the answers given by Mr Sandeman to the investigating police, and during the course of a record of interview conducted by the police with him. Questions and answers 12, 15, 17, 18, 19 and suggest that Mr Sandeman's perception of the victim was that he was a "rock spider" who deserved a beating; that he, Mr Sandeman, had "punched and kicked him"; that he, Mr Sandeman, had punched the victim "in the face and ribs"; had kicked him in the back; and had, as it would seem, kicked him once in the head. The answer to question 20 suggests that the two assailants in effect rammed the victim's head into a brick wall.

It is not clear, as I think, from a reading of the remarks on sentence whether his Honour approached his definition of the objective facts upon his Honour's perception that the jury by its verdict must be taken to have implicated Mr
Sandeman as a principal either in the first degree or the second degree in that part of the continuing assault represented by the blows struck with the iron bar; or whether his Honour, having no assistance from the bare verdict of the jury in that regard, himself concluded beyond reasonable doubt that such had been Mr Sandeman's level of inculpation in that part of the overall assault.

The materials which have been put before this Court are, to say the least, incomplete; and one feels some hesitation about being too precise in one's own definition of the objective facts. For myself, I do not see that there is to hand any material which would justify a finding, reached beyond reasonable doubt, that Mr Sandeman was not only implicated in the so-called "first phase," as in my view he plainly was, but that he was culpable as a principal in connection with the so-called "second phase." 
Once there is room for that view, as I think there is, then it seems to me that one of the factual bases upon which the sentencing exercise proceeded has been shown to have been unsound. That is, in my view, a sufficient warrant for this Court to look for itself at the sentences imposed at first instance.

Against that background, it is now convenient to look at the situation of Mr
Hilditch.

As I have said, the assault in question was an extremely serious one. The victim suffered a fracture of the skull, with a small subdural haematoma. His cheek bone was fractured on the right side. His head was said by those who came fairly soon upon the scene to have shown a very clear indentation in the area where the pipe had connected with it. The victim not only required admission to hospital but he required surgery which involved, put simply, the draining of a blood clot beneath the skull.

Mr Hilditch presented before the primary Judge, as indeed he presents before this Court, with significant subjective circumstances that required then, as indeed they require now, to be brought properly to account. It is not necessary to dilate upon them. They are set out in all sufficient detail in the remarks on sentence of the primary Judge, and in the additional materials which this Court has received as exhibit A.

There is room, I think, to feel, in purely subjective terms, a measure of sympathy for Mr Hilditch. He is in the grip of alcohol and related problems which have plagued him, if his criminal antecedents are any indication, from his very early years. His present condition of health is not good. There are other exigent personal and family circumstances, which appear especially from the materials exhibit A.

It seems to me, however, that when allowance is made for all of those subjective circumstances, and when allowance is made for every proper feeling of sympathy for the present predicament of Mr Hilditch, it cannot be said that the sentence imposed upon him was outside the range of a sound sentencing discretion.

It needs to be borne steadily in mind that the principal offence which is being dealt with in Mr Hilditch's case is a grave one involving an assault of the most serious kind upon a victim outnumbered two to one.

In those circumstances, I think that Mr Hilditch should have leave to appeal but I think that his substantive appeal ought fail.

The position of Mr Sandeman falls to be considered upon a rather different basis. As I have said, part of the objective facts which were taken into account upon his initial sentencing are shown, in my view, to have been wrongly taken into account. That itself requires, as I think, some adjustment of the sentence imposed at first instance upon Mr Sandeman.

He, too, has sad and troubled personal problems. Once again, and in deference to the fact that he is present in Court, it is not, I think, necessary to take time to rake over the fine detail of them; but the Court is alive to them, as they appear both in the remarks on sentence, and as they have been developed in the submissions put by learned counsel for Mr Sandeman.

I think that justice would be done in his case if the minimum term of two years and three months that was imposed at first instance were reduced to a minimum term of one year and nine months, with an accompanying additional term of seven months.

I have considered the question of special circumstances. I would allow at once that there are any number of features in Mr Sandeman's case, - (as I might say parenthetically there were in Mr Hilditch's case), - which in principle would be available to be considered as "special circumstances." But if it is correct to understand, as I apprehend it is, that the ultimate point of adjusting minimum terms and additional terms is a demonstrated utility in terms of overall and ultimate rehabilitation to be achieved by a longer rather than a shorter additional term, and a correspondingly shorter rather than longer minimum term, then I think that the sad reality is, that in Mr Sandeman's case, - (and I say again parenthetically, as in the case of Mr Hilditch), - there is, so far as one can tell from the available evidence, next to no prospect of overall rehabilitation.

It seems that both of these men are locked into a sad and difficult personal situation which one can only suppose is not likely to be improved by detention in prison; but for the proper treatment for which there is, so far as I can see on the available material, no alternative.

For those reasons I would not, for myself, vary the proportions between the suggested minimum and additional terms to which I latterly referred.

I should observe, lest this particular case of Mr Sandeman at once take on a life of its own as a precedent in other cases, that it ought not be for one moment supposed that serious assaults of the kind here in question, even if accompanied by exigent subjective factors, will result, as a matter of course, in sentences of the level now proposed. This is one of those cases in which, as I think, a proper application of the settled law as to parity of sentencing requires that Mr Sandeman be dealt with in the way that I have suggested. But
I want to say again, for myself, and with all proper emphasis, that there is not to be regarded as being some near-magical forensic precedent value in what has done in these two sad and troubling cases. These were very serious assaults; and they might with all justice, in a different kind of subjective case, have attracted distinctly more severe sentences.

I propose therefore the following orders.

In the case of Mr Hilditch, that the application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

In the case of Mr Sandeman, that the application for leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal be allowed, and the sentence imposed in the Court below quashed, and that there be substituted a sentence to comprise a minimum term of one year and nine months to date from 27 July 1995 and to expire on 26
April 1997, with an additional term of seven months to commence on 27 April and to expire on 26 November 1997.

In terms of the relevant provision of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/), it is ordered that Mr Sandeman be released to parole at the expiration of the minimum term thus set.

So there may be no doubt about it, I, at least, am of the view that in the case of each of these applicants it is important that such supervision as can be made properly available, be made available in fact when each is released respectively to parole in terms of the sentences that have been imposed. I would myself make a recommendation that when released they be released on terms framed accordingly. I propose those orders.

BELL AJ: I agree with the proposed orders and with the reasons for them.

I think the parole order should include provision for supervision and for further supervision. I specifically wish to note my agreement with the closing remarks of his Honour; that is to say, as I interpret them, that had we been looking objectively at Mr Sandeman's sentence there would not have been any adjustment to it. The adjustment is simply for the purpose of giving some effect to the parity principle.

SULLY J: The orders of the Court will then be as I have announced them. They will incorporate in due course, and in a proper form, what has fallen from his Honour in regard to the post-release supervision.

Perhaps it should be noted that this is a case in which the appeal papers that have been made available to the Court have been made available in a form hopelessly inadequate for what was required. As I speak, I have no idea at whom the finger ought to be pointed in that regard. But the Court will have the matter taken up with the Registry.

Exhibit A may be returned.
 * * * 
