

Richard Small Pty Limited and 2 Ors versus Richards Matter No CA 40214/97 [1998] NSWSC 441 (10 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 30 October 1998 
RICHARD SMALL PTY LIMITED & 2 ORS versus JENNIFER RICHARDS 
CA 40214/97 September 1998 
Mason P, Meagher JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM MAHONEY DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40214/97 
DELIVERED: 10 SEPTEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 10 SEPTEMBER 1998 
PARTIES: RICHARD SMALL PTY LIMITED & 2 ORS versus Jennifer RICHARDS 
CORAM: MASON P, MEAGHER JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: J HARRISON SC 
Respondent: J KEESING 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: RILEY GRAY SPENCER 
Respondent: D J FISCHER & ASSOCIATES 
CATCHWORDS: General damages, quantum. 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 6 
RICHARD SMALL PTY LIMITED & 2 ORS versus Jennifer RICHARDS 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: In this matter, the appellants appeal against a judgment and orders made by Mahoney J in the District Court some time ago, arising out of an accident suffered by the plaintiff, the present respondent, on 26 September 1991, when she was walking on the footpath and scaffolding collapsed on top of her. 
This must have been an horrendous experience for her. It resulted in considerable injury. She broke her pelvis in five places and her spine in two places. She was in hospital for six weeks and was practically six months in convalescence.

The verdict against which the appellants appeal is a verdict which totals $226,643.10. There are only items in it which in fact are challenged, that is the award of $150,000 for general damages and the award of $80,000 for future economic loss.

In my view, the appellants' case cannot bear any weight and should be dismissed, with the result that the appeal is dismissed with costs.

As far as the challenge to the $150,000 is concerned, these are the plain facts. The plaintiff suffered the most incredible pain in this accident. She suffered the injuries to which I have already referred and she must have suffered very great mental stress. His Honour referred to the experience as being terrifying and extremely painful. I do not see how any other description would be apposite.

It is perfectly true that his Honour found that there was no case of a post- traumatic stress disorder and it is also true that the plaintiff made the best out of her condition and said every now and then that emotionally she was perfectly well. Whatever she said, she could not in fact have avoided being greatly distressed by the accident.

In those circumstances, I cannot see how it can be said that $150,000 is too much.

It is always difficult in a personal injuries case to judge whether the sum ordered by way of general damages is adequate or inadequate and that is principally for two reasons. One is that it depends to a considerable extent on one's first impression and the other is that it is a discretionary judgment. In the present case, I must say that my impression is precisely the same as his Honour the trial judge's. As far as the discretionary element is concerned, I cannot see any basis for interfering with his Honour's discretion.

On the question of the future economic loss, where the figure is $80,000, it was agreed by the parties very sensibly that in view of the plaintiff's work history it was best that a sum should be awarded by way of buffer rather than any more precise calculation. In that respect, there is no challenge to the methodology of his Honour's finding.

In argument, learned senior counsel for the appellant, Mr Harrison, has put and put very skilfully the various factors which would lead one to conclude that the figure of $80,000 is too excessive, and in particular has drawn our attention to various medical assessments which would indicate a lack of pain and a lack of any disability in finding work. However, to say that there was no future pain and no interference with her ability to obtain work would be to fly in the face of reality. The plain fact is that on her evidence of what has happened so far, she has had difficulty in obtaining work. It is not every job that she would like that she is capable of doing and there is no reason to suspect that the future will be much kinder to her. For example, in her evidence which she gave at pages 22 and 23 of the appeal book, there is the following examination of her.
 "Your first job back into the workforce was working at a cafe? Yes, it was.
That was the Green Street Cafe? Yes, that's right. That was a job you got assistance in obtaining through the CES? Yes. His Honour: it was in
Paddington, was it? Question: where was the Green Street Cafe? In Burwood.
Question: what was the nature of your work in that cafe? I was employed as a sandwich hand but I mostly did dishes. Did that require you to stand up? Yes.
For lengths of time? Yes. And occasionally carry weights? Yes and lean over a sink. What if anything did you feel you were doing in that job? My back hurt a lot from bending over and lifting heavy weight, the plates. Did you eventually leave that job? Yes, I did. And why was that? Because it was too much of a strain on my back and my pelvis, my hips." 
That is an example of what we know to have happened and it is an example of the sort of problem that the plaintiff will have in the future.

As far as the medical evidence is concerned, there are a variety of doctors who gave more or less optimistic accounts. One of them gave oral evidence (Dr
Cameron) whom his Honour disbelieved.

On the other hand, Dr Quadrio, at page 152 of the appeal book, said this: "The quality of life of this young mother has been seriously affected by the accident." 
At page 174 of the appeal book, Dr Giurgis had this to say: "As a result of her injuries, I would consider her to be permanently unfit for work or other activities involving any heavy or repeated lifting, repetitive bending or twisting, or prolonged unrelieved static posturing of the trunk or jarring of these structures. As such, I would consider her unfit for labouring and for most other forms of unskilled or semi-skilled manual occupation. The patient would not be able to cope with sedentary or sitting based process or assembly work built for the static posturing of the spine. She is fit for light sedentary type of work in which she could easily alter her posture and be allowed to stand or sit at will.

In other words, in my view, the figure his Honour found is justified by the evidence which the plaintiff herself gave, by the medical evidence and by common sense.

I would therefore reject both grounds of appeal.

MASON P: I agree. I had no difficulty with the appeal on its second ground but was for a time troubled by the first ground of appeal. 
I acknowledge that some of those concerns are probably due to thinking the sort of thoughts that the High Court says one is not meant to think in Planet
Fisheries Pty Limited versus La Rosa <case>; [(1968) 119 CLR 118.] 
Ultimately, I am not persuaded that the award of general damages in a sum totalling $127,500 was outside a permissible range. I think it is appropriate to look at that as being the figure. It is true his Honour reached that by a process of discounting for unreasonable failure to mitigate but the evidence on that seems to be extremely exiguous and a challenge to a damages award needs to satisfy the appellate court that the bottom line figure is wrong. A challenge that merely attacks some of the reasoning on the way will not be sufficient.

Here the trial judge clearly and expressly accepted the appellant's evidence that even ordinary household chores were affected by pain and discomfort and that her sleep was disturbed. Meagher JA has referred to other evidence in the employment context.

His Honour must also, I infer, have accepted the evidence of Dr Giurgis who at page 174 of the appeal book gave a decidedly more pessimistic assessment of the ongoing situation of the appellant. It is based upon that assessment that the award of the cushion is understandable and that assessment implicitly if not explicitly encompasses the acceptance of the plaintiff's case that there will be lifelong and degenerating pain and discomfort flowing from this injury.

For these reasons, I agree with the orders proposed. The appeal will be dismissed with costs.

KEEZING: Would your Honour hear me on costs? 
MASON P: Yes.

KEEZING: We have served an offer of compromise in this matter, your Honour. It was served on 2 July 1997, it was for $226,000 which is a few hundred less than the judgment of the court below.

MASON P: You want indemnity costs, do you? 
KEEZING: I want indemnity costs.

MASON P: I've often wondered whether there's any difference these days. Do you oppose the award of indemnity costs, Mr Harrison? 
HARRISON: Having been on the Chief Justice's cost assessor's rules committee,
I think not. My opposition to it in the face of it, I notice that it conforms with the rules and my friend seems to have done better than that, or at least not as badly. There is nothing I can say.

MASON P: Costs will be on the indemnity basis.
 * * * 
