

Kalokerinos and Anor versus Hia Insurance and Anor [2003] NSWSC 991 (4 November )

Last Updated: 10 November 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Kalokerinos & Anor versus HIA Insurance & Anor <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law - Administrative Law List  
FILE NUMBER(S): 30072/2002  
HEARING DATE{S): 24 June 2003  
JUDGMENT DATE: 04/11/2003  
PARTIES: 
Leo Kalokerinos  (First Plaintiff)  
Marcia Bounds  (Second Plaintiff)  
HIA Insurance Services Pty Limited  (First Defendant)  
Consumer Trader & Tenancy Tribunal  (Second Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Master Harrison  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: CTTT  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): BH1/76584  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Member C Paull  
COUNSEL: 
Mr M D Young  
Mr M J Jacobs QC  (First Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Mr A Cameron 
McLaughlin & Riordan  
Mr S Aroney 
McLachlan Chilton  (First Defendant)  
Submitting Appearance  (Second Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Appeal decision of CTTT - building contract  
ACTS CITED:  [Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctatta2001361/) - [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctatta2001361/s65.html)  [Home Building Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/) - [ss 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) &
[10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s10.html)  
DECISION: 
The appeal is dismissed 
The amended summons filed 24 June 2003 is dismissed 
The decision of Tribunal Member C Paull dated 25 July 2002 is affirmed except so far as costs referred to in Order (4) are concerned 
The matter is remitted to the Tribunal Member for the determination of costs 
The plaintiffs are to pay the first defendant's costs of the appeal  
JUDGMENT:  - 19 -  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW LIST  
MASTER HARRISON  
TUESDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2003  /2002 - LEO KALOKERINOS & ANOR versus  
HIA INSURANCE SERVICES PTY LIMITED  & ANOR  
JUDGMENT (Appeal decision of CTTT - building contract)  MASTER: By further amended summons filed 24 June 2003, the plaintiffs seek an order that the orders made by Member C Paull on 25 July 2002 in the
Consumer Trader and Tenancy Tribunal (CTTT) in HB1/76584 be set aside and in lieu thereof an order be made that the first defendant pay to the plaintiffs the sum of $200,000 less the costs of rectifying defective items of work pursuant to the consent orders filed in the proceedings on 28 March 2002; and the first defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of the application and of this summons; alternatively, an order that the matter be remitted to the Tribunal for rehearing by a freshly constituted Tribunal. The plaintiff relied on two affidavits of Andrew Gordon Cameron sworn 30 August 2002. The first defendant relied on the affidavit of William Cappello sworn 7 March 2003.  The first plaintiff is Leo Kalokerinos. The second plaintiff is Marcia
Bounds. The first defendant is HIA Insurance Services Pty Limited. The third defendant is the CTTT who has filed a submitting appearance. The list Judge has referred this matter to a Master for hearing.  [Section (3)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s65.html) [Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctatta2001361/) 2001 (the Act) provides that relief can be granted by way of a judgment or order in the nature of prohibition, mandamus, certiorari, and a declaratory judgment or an injunction if in relation to the hearing or declaration of the matter, a party has been denied procedural fairness.  Section 67 of the Act allows for an appeal to be made to this court on a question of law. An appeal may only be made with leave of the court. A reference to a matter of law includes a reference to a matter relating to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The onus lies on the plaintiff to demonstrate that there has been an error of law. Section 67(3) of the Act provides that after deciding the question of the subject of an appeal the court may, unless it affirms the decision of the Tribunal on the question that should have been made by the Tribunal, remit its decision on the question to the Tribunal and order a rehearing of the proceedings before the Tribunal.  At the outset, it is helpful to set out some of the provisions of the Act.
The functions of the Tribunal are to adjudicate disputes between consumers and commercial disputes between landlords and tenants. The Tribunal is not constrained by the rigour of the court room. Its objects are to ensure that the Tribunal is accessible, its proceedings are efficient and effective, its decisions are fair and to enable proceedings before the Tribunal to be determined in an informal, expeditious and inexpensive manner. The Tribunal is to act with as little formality as the circumstances of the case permit and according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case without regard to technicalities or legal forms (s 27(3)).  Evidence must be given on oath or statutory declaration (s 39(1)) but the
Tribunal is not bound by the rules or practice of evidence and the Tribunal may inform itself on any matter in such manner as it considers appropriate (s (2)). The Tribunal must conform to the rules of natural justice, but broadly speaking, has control of and responsibility for its own procedures (s 28(1) and (2)). Its business is conducted in public (s 33). Normally a party to the proceedings has carriage of his or her own case and is not entitled to be legally represented (s 36(1)). The Tribunal has the power to award costs (s ), but usually each party bears its own costs. Pursuant to <case> of the Act the Tribunal is obliged to use its best endeavours to bring the parties to a settlement before making an order. The Tribunal has a power to correct its decision (s 50) and the registrar can issue a certificate which operates as a judgment (s 51).  
Grounds of appeal  The plaintiffs plead that the Member erred in law firstly, by finding that the contract made in August 1999 between the plaintiff and Baltimore
Constructions Pty Limited (the builder) obliged the plaintiffs to pay the builder more than the sum of $350,000 to complete the scope of works provided for in that contract, particulary (a) that the Member failed properly to consider the provisions of <case> of the [Home Building
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/) 1989 (HBA); (b) that the Member rejected the $350,000 limit as a term of the contract because she was not persuaded of the plaintiffs reliance on that as a representation (when this was not a misrepresentation case); (c) that the
Member relied for her construction of the contract on things the parties said or did after the contract was made; (d) that the Member failed to make any finding or proper finding as to what were the terms of the contract; (e) that the Member placed excessive significance on limited reference to the $350,000 in documents when it was common ground that the contract was part oral/part written; (f) that the Member took into account an irrelevant matter, namely the views of Mr Ziade on the appropriateness of a cost plus agreement with a $350,000 limited; and the Member should have found that it was a term of the contract that there was a maximum price of $350,000.  Secondly, that the Member erred by failing to find that a signed copy of the contract had not been presented to the plaintiffs as required by [s
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7b.html) of the HBA and by failing to have applied the legal effect of that fact provided for in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s10.html) of the Act. Thirdly, the Member erred in law in holding that by February 2000 the plaintiffs "owed" the builder $75,000 outstanding under progress claim 6.
Fourthly, by failing to have given effect to the evidence that the cost of variations to the scope of works was to have been offset by omissions and partial deletions from those works. Fifthly, the Member erred by failing to find that as of late January/February 2000, the builder's conduct in closing down the site and refusing to proceed with the job either by rectifying the defects (which defects were admitted and the subject of orders in the proceedings) or completing the works constituted both repudiation and "wrongful failure or refusal to complete the works" entitling the plaintiffs to terminate the contract and giving rise to a claim under the insurance policy with the defendant. Sixthly, the Member misdirected herself as to the operation and effect of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s10.html) of the Act by holding that the builder was entitled to enforce the remedy of termination of the contract notwithstanding the admitted failure by the builder to have complied with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) of the Act. Seventhly, the Member erred by failing to consider at all the claims for loss and damage for breaches of statutory warranties and conditions, namely the obligation to proceed with the work with due diligence and the obligations to do the work in accordance with law, which breaches and claims for loss and damage flowing from such breaches were not dealt with by her at all.  The eighth ground of appeal is that the Member erred by failing to find on the evidence that the plaintiffs were relevantly indemnified and were entitled to the indemnity for alternative accommodation provided for in cl 5 of the relevant insurance policy, in particular (a) the Member inferred an inconsistency in the evidence led for the plaintiffs where no such necessary inconsistency existed and the plaintiffs were given no opportunity to address such inconsistency; (b) where there has been no challenge to the evidence that the defects to the works (which were agreed in the subject of consent orders) required the plaintiffs to rent alternative accommodation; (c) failed to give reasons for her rejection of the claim or accord the plaintiffs procedural fairness by requiring matters to be put to the plaintiff.  The ninth ground of appeal is that the member erred by failing to find that the plaintiffs otherwise had suffered loss and damage as a result of the builder's breaches of contract, and were thereby entitled to an indemnity under the insurance policy. Tenthly, the member erred by finding that the builder in the circumstances of the case was entitled to claim on the quantum meruit on the ground that such a claim is not a remedy in respect of a breach of contract, or alternatively, that such a claim was available in the circumstances of the case. Eleventhly, the Member erred by failing to have part of the proceedings recorded thereby denying the plaintiffs procedural fairness in relation to an appeal from her decision. Twelfthly, the Member erred in law in the exercise of her discretion on costs and exercised such discretion according to wrong principle so that her discretion miscarried in that the plaintiffs having succeeded on a matter put in issue until during the hearing and obtained final consent orders in relation to building defects should not have been ordered to pay 100% of costs. Grounds 1(f) 3, 4, 5, 7 8, are not questions of law that give rise to an appeal to this Court. In relation to round 12, the costs issue is remitted to the Member. Ground 11 of the appeal has not been made out. That leave grounds 1, 2, 6 and 10 to be considered  
Background  On 28 March 2000 L Kalokerinos and Ms Bounds commenced proceedings in the
Home Building Division of the FTT against Baltimore Constructions Pty Limited (the builder). For the sake of convenience the reference to the builder includes Mr Cappello a director, who dealt with the plaintiffs and gave evidence before the Tribunal. Those proceedings were subsequently stayed by virtue of the builder having entered into a deed of administration. On 25 June the plaintiffs lodged an application before the Tribunal against HIA
Insurance Services Pty Limited. The plaintiffs and the builder entered into an agreement under which the builder was to do residential building work as defined under the HBA for the plaintiffs. In accordance with the requirements of that Act the builder arranged insurance with the defendant. It was common ground that the contract between the parties was partly oral and partly written and that the builder did not comply with the requirements for a written contract under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) of the HBA. The plaintiffs submitted that the Tribunal Member did not properly consider the evidence and did not make adequate findings of fact and that constituted an error of law.  The critical error, the plaintiff submitted, was that the Tribunal Member did not make findings of fact as to what the oral terms of the contract were and this constituted an error of law. However, it is important to bear in mind the factual enquiry that the Tribunal Member was asked by the parties to undertake, particularly in the light of an agreed statement of facts and issues which was before the Tribunal Member. The first agreed issue the
Tribunal Member was called upon to decide was whether the agreement was for a fixed price contract or was it a costs plus contract? The second issue was what are the terms of the contract? Was there a fixed price contract not to exceed $350,000 or was there a costs plus contract not to exceed $350,000. Was it cost plus contract with unknown price? Hence it was unnecessary for the
Tribunal Member to embark on the exercise of determining all of the oral terms of the contract because she was obliged to confine her fact finding to the agreed issues and answer specific questions.  The approach adopted by the Member in giving her reasons for judgment was that she addressed these agreed issues in seriatim. I have reproduced the
Member's reasons from paragraphs 37 to 61.  "37. The absence in this document (or indeed in any of the documentation that passed between the parties) of any reference to a fixed price of $350,000 is particularly curious given the Applicants' evidence that their financial constraints required that the building works be capped at that sum. 
Mr. Zaide admitted in cross-examination that at the time that the contract was being negotiated the relevant plans and specifications did not contain sufficient detail to provide a fixed price quote. The Applicants submit that it is not now open to the Respondent to argue that the plans and specifications were inadequate for the Builder to give a fixed quote. As I understand it, the Respondent points to the scant detail in those documents as support for its case that the Builder did not and was not required to give a fixed price under the agreement reached with the Applicants. An argument to which I attach significant weight. 
Mr Zaide went on to give evidence that there was an arrangement that following the signing of document 8-Al, the Builder would produce the detail which had been discussed orally and on which the $350,000 fixed price had been set, in a standard Master Builders' home building contract. Mr. Zaide admitted that the Builder did not do this. His evidence, in response to questions, that he did not ask the Builder during the whole course of the dealings between the parties to provide this contract, is difficult to accept. 
There is also the role played by Mr. Zaide, not only in preparing the document marked 8 at exhibitA1 but also in advising the Applicants generally.
Their evidence was that they both relied on Mr. Ziade. 
Mr. Zaide described himself both in his affidavit and his oral evidence as a licensed builder, a qualified supervisor and the holder of a supervisor's certificate in relation to home building. His oral evidence was that he is more than familiar with home building being the head of a company which is involved in the construction of large residential flat buildings and houses. 
He confirmed the Applicants' evidence that he was advising them and they were relying on him. He produced a file at the hearing which he had compiled in this capacity. My impression from observing Mr. Zaide giving evidence is that he played an active role in the negotiations and once the building works commenced. His evidence was that he lived down the road from the premises and would drop in on Sundays when no one was working to inspect what was happening. There was a period, from July to September 1999, when he was not, to use his words, "on board" for personal reasons. From this I conclude that he was back "on board" around the crucial time of November 1999 when the building costs exceeded the $350,000. 
Mr Zaide's evidence is that sometime in November, he could not give a date, he became aware that the Applicants had overpaid the Builder and asked
Dr Kalokerinos how this could have happened. Dr Kalokerinos replied that he had "just paid the Builder". 
I can only draw the inference therefore that it was with Mr. Zaide's knowledge that the Applicants paid the Builder $80,000 worth of cash payments from 29 November to 12 December 1999 and a further $15,000 in response to
Progress claim no.6 on 24 January 2000. 
More importantly, on the Applicants own evidence they were armed with the knowledge that the building works were costing in excess of $350,000 when they made those payments. 
On 26 November 1999, the Applicants had paid Progress Claim 5 which states "Already claimed $382,243.72", "Already Paid $293,101.13", "Balance Due $89,142.59" and "Contract Balance $382,243.72". 
This progress claim, like the four that preceded it, was issued directly to the Applicants and Dr Kalokerinos kept them in a file. AlI progress claims included schedules of labour rates and work rates and quite conspicuously state:- "Original Contract $0,00; Variations to Date... ...$0.00,' Amended
Contract $0. 00. All contain specific amounts beside the words "Already
Claimed"; "Already Paid"; "Contract Balance ", 
The Applicants made much of the fact that they had no building experience and did not understand much of what transpired. Mr. Zaide's version of the
Applicants' previous house renovations was somewhat different to that presented by the Applicants. His evidence suggested that these renovations were larger and more extensive (including kitchen, bathroom and general refurbishment) than the Applicants suggested in their evidence. It was my distinct impression of them giving evidence that the Applicants played down the role of their previous renovation experience. 
Further, while Dr Kalokerinos may, as he stated, have a busy medical practice he was able to take time and attend weekly site meetings with the
Builder. He was able to take it upon himself to make direct purchase when he thought that this would, in his own words, result in "a good buy" so as to reduce the overall cost. He was also sufficiently cognisant of building procedures to advise the Builder when he did so, so that the Builder could make the relevant adjustment under the contract. 
It is difficult to accept in the light of these matters that the
Applicants could mistakenly have made overpayments in excess of $100,000. 
The Applicants point to the Builder's admission that the figure of $350,000 was discussed and that he undertook to try to meet that budgetary constraint at the time the parties were negotiating. It is the Respondent's case that this figure never assumed contractual significance or contractual force. It is the Applicants' case that by looking at various objective factors, I should arrive at the opposite conclusion. 
In considering the evidence before me, in particular the matters I have traversed above, I am not persuaded by the Applicants argument and find that the figure of $350,000 was not a term of the contract 
It is particularly difficult to accept that the Applicants could have expected the $350,000 figure to remain firm when they proceeded to make changes which were of a more expensive nature. For example, requiring floor to ceiling marble in the bathrooms and changing the walls from gyprock to brick.
I note that these items were changed after November 1999, when on the
Applicants' own evidence they were aware that the costs were in excess of the $350,000. 
Finally, contrary to the Applicants' submissions, I am not persuaded that anything turns on the Builder being licensed. Nor am I persuaded that the
Applicants ever relied on or were induced to enter the contract because of any representation made by the Builder to keep the work within the $350,000 estimate. In rejecting such submissions I have been particularly swayed by the active roles played by Dr Kalokerinos and his adviser, Mr Zaide, both of whom, as I have commented above, I observed to be experienced, I knowledgeable and astute in building matters. 
I am therefore not satisfied upon an objective consideration of the facts surrounding the transactions between the parties that the Applicants have discharged the onus on them to establish that they entered into a fixed price contract with the Builder.  : What the terms (sic) of the contract:  was there a fixed price not to exceed $350.001.  was there a cost plus contract not to exceed $350,000.  was it a cost plus contract with unknown price? 
In light of the findings in 1 above I must answer question 2 (i) in the negative and question 2 (iii) in the affirmative. 
The Applicants submit that such a finding is "inconceivable" as it would result in no limitation on the amount they could be required to pay for the work. It seems to me that it was to avoid this very result that the Applicants put in place the requirements that Dr Kalokerinos or Mr. Zaide approve all quotes and the Builder submit all day labour work itemised on a daily basis.
(I refer here to the conditions in Document 8 at Exhibit A1). 
In relation to the Applicants' argument of a cost plus contract not to exceed $350,000 Mr. Campbell, the Applicants' expert, gave evidence of a hybrid "open book contract" with a fixed "estimate of costs" which cannot be exceeded without a variation. 
The Respondent's expert, Mr. C Martin, directly refuted such a concept.
When cross-examined on this point, Mr. Zaide conceded that it does not make sense to argue that there is a cost plus agreement not to exceed a cost of $350,000. 
Given the diverging views of the experts, the fact that the Applicants bear the onus of proof and that their own witness, Mr Zaide, an experienced builder, did not support this proposition, I am not satisfied that the contract was one for "cost plus not to exceed $350,000" and so answer question in the negative."  Further the plaintiffs submitted that in reaching her determination the
Tribunal Member made the following errors of law outlined in ground 1 referred to in this judgment. It was not necessary for the Tribunal Member to determine all oral terms of the contract but rather her task was confined to answering specific questions raised by the parties in the document entitled "Statement of Agreed Facts and Issues". She referred to Mr Zaide (the plaintiffs' representative) who admitted that the builder did not incorporate the fixed price of $350,000 into the master builder's contract. The builder admitted that the figure of $350,000 was discussed and he undertook to meet that obligatory constraint at the time the parties were negotiating. At paragraph the Tribunal Member concluded that she was not persuaded by the plaintiffs' argument and made a finding that the figure of $350,000 was not a term of the contract. It was open to the Member to make these findings and these findings depended in part on her assessment of the credibility of the witnesses' evidence. Both parties referred to paragraph 54 in which the Tribunal Member referred to reliance on representations. This was an additional and perhaps unnecessary finding but it does not amount to an error of law.  [Sections 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) and [10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s10.html) of the [Home Building Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/)  The appellant submitted that the Member failed to consider the significance of the warning required by [s (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) from any written pieces of paper which might have been said to form part of the written part of the contract and failed to apply the legal effect provided in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s10.html) of the Act (Ground 2).  [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) of the HBA provides that a contract must be in writing, and [s (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) states:  "If the contract price is not known or may be varied under the contract, the contract must contain a warning to that effect and an explanation of the effect of the provision allowing variation of the price. The warning and explanation must be placed next to the price if the price is known."  [Sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s10.html) provides:  "10 Enforceability of contracts and other rights  
A person who contracts to do any residential building work, or any specialist work, and who so contracts:  ...  under a contract to which the requirements of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) apply that is not in writing or that does not have sufficient description of the work to which it relates (not being a contract entered into in the circumstances described in [section (2))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s6.html), or  ...  is not entitled to damages or to enforce any other remedy in respect of a breach of the contract committed by any other party to the contract, and the contract is unenforceable by the person who contracted to do work. However, the person is liable for damages and subject to any other remedy in respect of a breach of the contract by the person.  ....  
This section does not affect the liability of the person for an offence against a provision of or made under this or any other Act."  The builder did not institute these proceedings for breach of contract, nor was he entitled to do so. The Tribunal Member was not obliged to consider the absence of a [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s7.html) warning in the partly written, partly oral contract. It was not necessary for the Tribunal Member to canvass this issue in order to answer the questions she was asked.  In relation to appeal ground 6, the Tribunal Member did not determine that the builder was entitled to enforce the remedy of termination, but rather she stated that she did not find that the builder wrongfully refused to continue with and rectify the work <case> which has been the most recent decision in the New South Wales Court of Appeal on this topic.  In Magill the Court of Appeal (per Ipp JA with whom Meagher and Heydon
JJA agreed) stated [at paras 50 and 51]:  "The admissibility of subsequent conduct as an aid to the construction of a contract remains to be authoritatively resolved. It is sufficient to point to the differing views flowing from Hide & Skin Trading Pty Limited v
Oceanic Meat Traders Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR 310] expressed by Santow J in Spunwill Pty Limited versus Bab Pty Limited [(1994) 36 NSWLR ]
(where subsequent conduct was held to be potentially admissible) and by Bryson
J in Sportsvision Australia Pty Limited versus Tallglen Pty Limited [(1998) 44
NSWLR 103] (where the contrary was held).  
In my respectful opinion the views expressed in Sportsvision Australia Pty
Limited versus Tallglen Pty Limited are to be preferred. Like Bryson J, I consider the reasoning of Lord Reid in James Miller & Partners Limited v
Whitworth Street Estates (Manchester) Limited [[1970] AC 583] at 603 to be unanswerable. His Lordship there said:  "I must say that I had thought that it is now well settled that it is not legitimate to use as an aid in the construction of the contract anything which the parties said or did after it was made. Otherwise one might have the result that a contract meant one thing the day it was signed, but by reason of subsequent events meant something different a month or year later".  However, the defendant referred to Asia Television Ltd versus Yau's
Entertainment Pty Ltd  <case> (10 March 2000); Great City Pty Ltd versus Kemayan Management Services
Pty Ltd & Ors  <case> (24
June 1999); Amaca Pty Ltd formerly known as James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd v
CSR Ltd  <case> (18 April 2001); Magill; and Sasson versus Fahevu  <case> (28 October 1999). The defendant submitted by reference to those authorities, that in none of them was it held that subsequent conduct of the parties was inadmissible in determining whether, on the probabilities, a term had been agreed on as contended for by one of the parties as part of an oral contract.
The defendant further submitted that the Member was not in error in taking into account the ongoing commercial relationship as a relevant factor and she was saying no more than the fact that the ongoing commercial relationship was consistent with the probabilities that there was no such upper limit as contended for by the plaintiffs and the defendants' counsel referred to Port
Jackson Stevedoring Pty Ltd versus Salmond & Sparggon Aust Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 139 CLR 231] at 252.  When the Tribunal Members reasons are read carefully she evaluates the evidence and concludes that she is not satisfied upon an objective consideration of the facts surrounding the transactions between the parties that the applicants have discharged the onus that they entered into a fixed price contract. However, when the Tribunal Member did evaluate the evidence, she did take into account subsequent conduct such as Dr Kalokerinos attending weekly site meetings, making "direct purchases", and being cognisant of building procedures so to advise the builder when he did so, so that the builder could make the relevant adjustment under the contract [para 49]. At paragraph 58 the Tribunal Member also referred to subsequent conduct but this is not of critical importance as it comes immediately after her conclusion as to whether the contract is for a fixed price.  There is conflicting authority in Australia as to the legitimacy of the use of post contract conduct in construction of a contract, and this conflict extends to the recent decisions of this Court. This is alluded to in the passage I have cited above from Magill. Nevertheless, it still remains the law that evidence of clear and mutual conduct is admissible as part of the factual matrix for the limited purpose of resolving ambiguities in the language of the contract. (see White versus Australian and New Zealand Theatres
Ltd [(1943) 67 CLR 267] at 315; Boranga versus Flintoff [(1997) 19 WAR 1] at 6;
Spunwill Pty Ltd versus BAB Pty Ltd (1994) 36 NSWLR at 290 at 304-312 and the references to Codelfa Constructions Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority of New
South Wales <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] at 307-308). Were these subsequent actions referred to by the
Tribunal Member considered for the limited purposes of resolving the ambiguity as to whether the contract was for a fixed price. It is my view that the
Tribunal Member's considerations of direct purchases and the ensuing adjustments fall into this category. Perhaps less so in relation to the attendance at site meetings, but Dr Kalokerinos may have attended for a number of reasons such as to ascertain the costs that were incurred. Hence it is my view that this does not constitute an error of law.  
Costs of alternative accommodation  The parties agreed that by consent that the builder was liable to the applicants for items of defective building which were identified. A copy of the consent orders is annexed to the judgment. The respondent submitted that accommodation was only sought from the date when the works were due to be completed. However, in the points of claim at paragraph 23(a) to (c) reference is made to the damages sought for the cost of rectification of defective works.  In relation to the accommodation the Tribunal Member stated and paragraphs to 101 of her reasons:  "98. Clause 5 of the policy provides (as far as is here relevant) for "loss or damage resulting from... the cost of alternative accommodation...
reasonably and necessarily incurred as a result of" non -completion of the work because of insolvency of the Builder (in accordance with clause 11 of the policy) or the Builder's breach of a statutory warranty (in accordance with clause 2 of the policy). 
I have found that the Applicants, having entered into a cost plus contract with no fixed price, for which they have failed to make full payment under the final progress claim, have not sustained a loss. More specifically I have found that they have not suffered loss or damage as a result of the
Builder being insolvent or in breach of a statutory warranty so as to fall under clauses l or 2 of the policy. 
Clause 5 is premised on a loss stemming from the events provided for under either clauses 1 and 2. As I have found that the Applicants did not sustain a loss under either of these clauses it follows that the Applicants cannot succeed under clause 5. I 
Even if this were not the case I accept the Respondent's submission that the evidence relied upon by the Applicants to establish the amount claimed is less than satisfactory. Dr Kalokerinos when giving evidence before the
Tribunal stated that he had not actually paid the amount claimed but would do so at some future time. An unsworn letter signed by Mr Zaide and tendered at the conclusion of the proceedings suggests otherwise."  The finding that the applicants had not suffered loss or damage was open to the Tribunal Member on the facts as she found them. It was also open to the
Tribunal Member to find that the evidence in relation to alternative accommodation costs was less than satisfactory. There is no error of law.  
Costs in the Tribunal  The original consent orders contained provisions that the parties have liberty to apply to the Tribunal from matters arising from these orders. A copy of this decision was forwarded to the parties. The Tribunal Member ordered that the plaintiffs were to pay the defendant's costs. The plaintiffs did not have an opportunity to address the Tribunal Member as to why they should not have to pay the builder's costs in relation to the rectification of the defective work which was a significant issue in this case where orders were made in the plaintiffs' favour.  The defendant submitted that the correct procedure would have been to approach the Tribunal Member to seek the appropriate order for costs, but no such application was made. This may be so but in any event, the defendant has conceded that, provided it does not otherwise prejudice this appeal, it consents to having this issue remitted to the Tribunal Member for determination. This matter had a number of hearings and the Tribunal Member formed views on the witnesses' veracity, it is my view that it is more appropriate that the Tribunal Member determines this costs application. Hence,
I accede to this request and make an order accordingly.  
Costs of this appeal  Costs are discretionary. Normally costs follow the event. The plaintiffs are to pay the first defendant's costs of the appeal.  The Court orders:  
The appeal is dismissed.  
The amended summons filed 24 June 2003 is dismissed.  
The decision of Tribunal Member C Paull dated 25 July 2002 is affirmed except so far as costs referred to in Order (4) are concerned.  
The matter is remitted to the Tribunal Member for the determination of costs.  
The plaintiffs are to pay the first defendant's costs of the appeal.  
LAST UPDATED: 07/11/2003 * * * 
