

Regina versus Charles Matter No Cca 60092/97 [1998] NSWSC 74 (23 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 April 1998 
REGINA versus EDGAR DESMOND CHARLES /97 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, James J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence.

FILE NO: 60092/97 
DELIVERED: 23 March 1998 
HEARING DATE: 26 February 1998 
PARTIES: Regina versus Edgar Desmond CHARLES 
JUDGMENT OF: Gleeson CJ, James J, Barr J. 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: BA Caffrey 
Respondent: M Latham 
SOLICITORS: 
Respondent: SE O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law - perjury - false evidence given at Coroner's inquest - whether material to inquest - test for materiality. Criminal law - perjury - false evidence given at Coroner's inquest - whether inquest a judicial proceeding. Criminal law - doing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice - jury directed that the act of misinforming a police officer during an investigation perverts the course of justice - whether direction correct. 
NO. OF PAGES: 56 
RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed in part 
REGINA versus Edgar Desmond CHARLES 
Criminal law - perjury - materiality of false statement on oath.

The appellant gave evidence to a Coroner at an inquest and suggested that death might have resulted from strife within the family of the deceased. He said that he had seen the deceased some years earlier suffering from severe injuries and had not believed her explanation for them. Some of the information he imparted was what he said a social worker, whom he did not name, had told him that the deceased had told her. He said that his conversation with the social worker had occurred at a place which he named and that a woman, identified only as June, had been present as well. It was apparent from his evidence that the only likely way of identifying the social worker was by identifying and interviewing the woman June. The police sergeant assisting the Coroner asked the appellant a number of questions designed to assist in identifying and finding both women. The appellant was asked whether he had seen June since the occasion of the conversation and he said that he had not. That answer was untrue, because the appellant had visited the woman three or four times during the following few days. The Crown relied on the appellant's answer as a statement false to the knowledge of the appellant made on oath in a judicial proceeding.

S 327 Crimes Act required the false statement to be material to the proceeding. By subs (4) the question whether any matter is material to a proceeding is a question of law. The trial judge held the statement material.

HELD by a majority, dismissing the appeal against conviction on this charge, the statement was material. Test for materiality discussed. The Queen v
Davies [(1974) 7 SASR 375]; Regina versus Jones, Court of Criminal Appeal, New
South Wales, 16 June 1988 unreported, applied.

Criminal law - perjury - judicial proceeding.

By <case> Crimes Act a judicial proceeding means a proceeding in or before a judicial tribunal in which evidence may be taken on oath. At the time of the inquest the term "judicial proceeding" was defined as including a person (including an arbitrator) court or body authorised by law to conduct a hearing for the purpose of the determination of any matter or thing.

HELD, the Coroner's inquest was a judicial tribunal and the proceeding was a judicial proceeding.

Criminal law - doing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice - whether misinforming a police officer during the course of an investigation perverts the course of justice.

Having given his evidence, the appellant telephoned the woman June and told her, if the police should contact her, to tell them that she had seen him only once. The Crown relied on that request as an act done with intent to pervert the course of justice at the inquest. The trial judge directed the jury that suggesting to someone that they should give false information to a police officer in the course of an investigation amounts to perverting the course of justice.

HELD, this was a misdirection. Although such a suggestion is capable of perverting the course of justice, the question whether it does or would in any particular case is for the jury. The effect of the direction was that the jury must have inferred the intent of the appellant to pervert the course of justice without considering the evidence and available arguments against such a conclusion. The Queen versus Rogerson <case>; [(1991-1992) 174 CLR 268] applied.

ORDERS
Appeal against conviction on the first count dismissed.
Appeal against conviction on the second count allowed; conviction quashed and verdict of acquittal entered.

REGINA versus Edgar Desmond CHARLES 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the judgments of James J and Barr J. 
The appellant was convicted of two offences, one of perjury, and the other of doing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice. Both James J and
Barr J agree that the second conviction should be quashed. Barr J would uphold the first conviction. James J would quash that conviction but substitute a conviction for the offence (which carries a lesser penalty) of making a false statement on oath not amounting to perjury.

The point of disagreement in respect of the conviction for perjury is whether the trial judge was right in holding that the false statement made on oath by the appellant concerned a matter which was material to the proceedings in which the statement was made. That was a question of law to be determined by the trial judge pursuant to s327(4) of the Crimes Act.

The question only arises upon the assumption that the appellant was proved beyond reasonable doubt to have made a false statement on oath at the Coronial
Inquiry knowing the statement to be false. I agree, for the reasons given by
Barr J, that all the other grounds of challenge to the conviction for perjury should be rejected. It is the point concerning materiality which remains to be resolved.

On that point, for reasons which I will state briefly, I am in substantial agreement with the reasoning of Barr J.

When he was called to give evidence at the inquest into the death of Mrs
Collins, the appellant, after originally professing reluctance, told the
Coroner that he had information concerning the deceased which might incriminate a third party. When pressed to reveal the information he said, in substance, that he had been told, by a lady, of a feud within the deceased's family. He had been told that, in the course of that feud, the deceased had sustained serious injuries as a result of physical violence inflicted by her husband. (Since the husband had pre-deceased Mrs Collins, presumably the husband was not the person whom this information might have tended to incriminate. It could, however, have been another family member.) 
The officer assisting the inquest asked the appellant a series of questions designed to test this evidence, and to open up possible avenues of further inquiry.

The appellant, in response to questions, said that the lady who gave him the information had been introduced to him by another lady on a certain occasion at a shopping centre. A series of questions were asked about the circumstances of the occasion, including whether the appellant had ever seen either of those two ladies before, or since, the conversation at the shopping centre. He answered in the negative.

The main issue of fact fought at the trial was whether the evidence that the appellant had never seen Mrs Marshall after the meeting at the shopping centre was knowingly and deliberately false. It was established that the evidence was incorrect. However, the appellant said at his trial that he was confused, and that he misunderstood the purport of the questions. His case in that regard would not have been assisted by the evidence of Mrs Marshall to the effect that, shortly after he had given his evidence to the Coroner, the appellant had contacted her, and attempted to persuade her to pretend that she had only ever met him once if the police contacted her.

What motive the appellant had for giving false information about this matter is not clear. His evidence about what he had been told concerning the deceased appears to have been substantially true. However, it was not necessary for the
Crown to establish that the appellant had some good reason for giving false evidence. The question now in issue is an objective question as to the materiality of the matter about which he gave false evidence.

When the appellant came out with his information about what he had been told concerning Mrs Collins, and the family feud, it was relevant for the officer assisting the inquest to test the evidence by asking for details of the circumstances in which the information came to the appellant, and by asking, in particular, whether the ladies to whom he spoke at the shopping centre, on the occasion when he was given the information, had ever been seen by the appellant, either before or since, apart from that occasion. Furthermore, insofar as there was a possibility of pursuing further inquiries about the information, it was material to know whether the appellant had ever had any further contact with either or both of the ladies.

Evidence may be relevant and material even though, for one reason or another, it does not affect the ultimate outcome of the proceedings in which it is given. It has been held, for example, in the context of perjury, that all false statements made by a witness on a matter affecting his credit are material. (Reg versus Baker [[1895] 1 QB 797)] 
I agree with the conclusion reached by the trial judge, and by Barr J, on this point.

As to the conviction for attempting to pervert the course of justice, the
Crown case at the trial was put on the basis that the relevant course of justice was that involved in the coronial inquest. As the trial judge summarised the Crown case to the jury, it was contended that the false information which the appellant asked Mrs Marshall to supply to the police "would have obstructed that particular inquiry".

The case was never conducted upon the basis that the appellant, having committed perjury in his evidence at the inquest, was attempting to persuade
Mrs Marshall to make a statement to the police confirmatory of his false evidence and, by so doing, to frustrate or deflect prosecution of himself for perjury.

It was necessary for the Crown to establish that the conduct of the appellant in seeking to persuade Mrs Marshall, if interviewed by the police, to support his story that the two of them had only ever met on one occasion, was doing an act which had a tendency, and was intended, to pervert the administration of public justice. As the case was conducted at the trial, in that context perverting the administration of public justice meant perverting the exercise by the Coroner of his proper functions and, in particular, impairing the
Coroner's capacity to perform those functions by denying to the Coroner knowledge of the true circumstances of the case. (The Queen versus Rogerson <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 268] at -280) 
I agree that the manner in which the learned trial judge set about seeking to explain to the jury the essence of the case about the appellant in this respect was flawed.

After the Crown had established beyond reasonable doubt the primary facts relied upon concerning the communication between the appellant and Mrs
Marshall, there remained substantial room for argument about whether the appellant's conduct had the tendency, and was accompanied by the intention, which the Crown set out to establish. Even if the appellant's evidence that he had never seen Mrs Marshall since the meeting at the shopping centre had been intended to make it less likely that the police could establish contact with
Mrs Marshall, once the police had contacted her it is difficult to see what effect there would have been, upon the conduct of the inquest, of her supporting the false evidence which the appellant had given about the number of times they had met, other, of course, than to conceal the falsity of that piece of evidence.

It was held in Rogerson that giving false information to an investigating police officer can amount to an attempt to pervert the course of justice, even though police investigations themselves are not part of the course of justice.
However, as Barr J has pointed out, in the present case the jury were instructed that suggesting to somebody that she should give false information to a police officer in the course of an investigation amounts to perverting the course of justice. The jury could well have understood that, once they found against the appellant that he had deliberately set out to encourage Mrs
Marshall to tell a lie to the police, then a finding of attempting to pervert the course of justice was virtually inevitable.

A possible explanation of the appellant's conduct in attempting to persuade
Mrs Marshall, if interviewed, to tell the police that the two of them had only ever met once, may have been that, when he reflected upon the evidence he had given at the inquest, he realised that if and when the police ever made contact with Mrs Marshall she would, (as she ultimately did), give them information which falsified some of the evidence he had given. He might have been intending, not to obstruct the Coroner in the proper discharge of his duties, but to protect himself against the consequences of what he might have regarded as his own foolish behaviour. The Crown did not seek to rely on that as the relevant attempt to pervert the course of justice.

In the result, the appeal against the conviction on the first count in the indictment should be dismissed. The appeal against the conviction on the second count in the indictment should be allowed, the conviction on that count should be quashed, and the court should direct the entry of a verdict of acquittal on that count.

R versus Edgar Desmond CHARLES 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: Edgar Desmond Charles appealed against his conviction, after a trial conducted before his Honour Judge Coleman and a jury in the District Court in Newcastle, on one charge of perjury and one charge of doing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice. Perjury is an offence under s327 of the Crimes Act. Doing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice is an offence under s319 of the Crimes Act. On the first count Judge Coleman imposed a sentence of penal servitude for twelve months, consisting of a minimum term of four months commencing on 31 January 1997, the date on which his Honour passed sentence, and an additional term of eight months. On the second count Judge Coleman imposed a sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude for four months. The appellant remained in custody pending the hearing of this appeal and has completed serving the sentences imposed on him. 
The first count in the indictment presented at the trial alleged that on 11
November 1993 at an inquest into the death of a woman named Ada Elizabeth
Collins ("Mrs Collins") the appellant made a knowingly false statement on oath concerning a matter material to the proceedings, namely that he had met a woman named Gloria June Marshall ("June Marshall" or "Mrs Marshall") on one occasion only.

The second count in the indictment was amended during the trial and one of the grounds of appeal against conviction on the second count was that the trial judge erred in ordering that the second count in the indictment be amended. In its original form the second count alleged that on 12 November 1993, with intent to pervert the course of justice, the appellant performed an act, that is, prevailed upon Mrs Marshall to give false evidence, Mrs Marshall then being a witness to be called in an inquest into the death of Mrs Collins. As at 12 November 1993 Mrs Marshall was not in fact going to be called as a witness at the inquest into Mrs Collins's death. On the second day of the trial, on the application of the Crown and against the opposition of counsel for the appellant at the trial, the trial judge ordered pursuant to s365 of the Crimes Act that the second count in the indictment be amended. After the second count in the indictment had been amended it alleged that on 12 November , with intent to pervert the course of justice, the appellant performed an act, that is, prevailed upon Mrs Marshall to give false information to the police concerning the death of Mrs Collins.

It is necessary to refer to some of the background facts, to some of the evidence given by the appellant at the inquest into Mrs Collins's death and to some of the evidence given by the Crown witnesses and by the appellant at his trial.

On 30 November 1992 the dead body of Mrs Collins, who was eighty years old, was found in her home at Swansea near Newcastle. The pathologist who conducted the post mortem examination found that the cause of death was manual strangulation. The appellant, who was himself sixty-eight years old at the time Mrs Collins's body was found, had had some kind of association with Mrs
Collins and he was interviewed a number of times by police in the course of the police investigation into the death of Mrs Collins. The appellant believed that the police regarded him as a suspect. It is appropriate that I should repeat what the trial judge said, when sentencing the appellant, that there is no evidence to suggest that the appellant was in fact in any way connected with the homicide of Mrs Collins.

The appellant gave evidence at the inquest on 10 and 11 November 1993. It is necessary to refer to parts of his evidence in some detail.

On 10 November 1993 the appellant gave evidence that he had his own theory about how Mrs Collins might have died but that he was not prepared to disclose to the inquest what that theory was. He was pressed by the police officer assisting the Coroner to disclose any information he had. He then told the inquest that Mrs Collins herself had told him a lot of things which he had not disclosed to the inquest. The appellant was then informed by the officer assisting the Coroner of the provisions of s316 of the Crimes Act relating to concealing the commission of a serious offence. The following questions and answers then occurred:- "Q. What's the information? 
A Well I was informed - I met a lady-- 
Q. Just nice and slow yes? 
A. I don't know her name, I think it's possible that she would come forward if it was televised, I don't know. She said, `I know you from somewhere'.

Q. Where did you met her? 
A. In Belmont, I was coming out with some shopping about two months after I'd been interrogated by the police, and she said to me, `I know you from somewhere', and I didn't recognise her, I said, `I'm sorry I don't know you'.
She said, `Well I know you, I've seen you before somewhere and I can't place it'. And as a result of this conversation, we got to the fact about the pool, and she remarked, `That's where I've seen you' she said, `I was doing social work'. As a result of the conversation about the social work at the pool I got on to telling her that I was a suspect to a murder of Ada Collins. And she said, `I knew Ada Collins very very well' she said, `As a social worker', and she took me into her confidence completely. She said `She had bad ankles'. I said, `That's correct' and she said `Did she ever tell you why she had bad ankles?' and I said, `No'. She said, `Well some years ago there was a family feud within her family and her husband took a pick, elm or a stave, and broke both her ankles' and that was information which was given to me by this woman.
But Ada Collins had never told me how she came to have her ankles broken".

The appellant then said in his evidence on 10 November that at some unidentified time he had seen Mrs Collins in hospital, that she was "black and blue", that Mrs Collins told him she had had a fall but the appellant thought that she had been "beaten up". When Mrs Collins got out of hospital she told the appellant that her son knew he had been coming to see her and that her son had forbidden her to see the appellant.

On the following day, 11 November 1993, the appellant gave further evidence.
He was asked questions by the police officer assisting the Coroner about his meeting with the woman at Belmont. The appellant said that he had been alone but that the woman who had spoken to him about Mrs Collins had been with another woman called "June". He could not remember the name of the woman who had spoken to him about Mrs Collins. He had not seen either woman before. June had said that she lived in Beresfield, a suburb of Newcastle, in a street which the appellant thought he remembered her saying started with the syllable "well". The appellant was asked, "have you ever seen this June since that time?" The appellant replied "no". The appellant gave an undertaking that if he ascertained the identity of the woman June, he would contact the police officer in charge of the police investigation into Mrs Collins's death, so that a statement could be obtained from her.

The appellant was asked further questions about the conversation with the woman other than June, of which he had given evidence, and he was then asked, "had you ever seen either of them June or this other lady since that conversation?" to which he replied "no". It was this question and answer on which the charge of perjury was based.

At the appellant's trial the Crown called as witnesses June Marshall, Freda
Baker and June Marshall's daughter, Colleen Belinda Delaney. There was no issue at the trial that Freda Baker was the woman who on some occasion had spoken to the appellant about Mrs Collins.

Mrs Marshall gave evidence that during a period in February - March 1993 she and Freda Baker, a friend of hers, had been looking after a house at Eleebana, while the owners were temporarily away. On a date, which would seem to have been 1 March 1993, she and Freda Baker had gone shopping at Belmont. At a time when Freda Baker was inside the shopping centre and Mrs Marshall was waiting for her outside the shopping centre, the appellant, who she did not know, had approached her and started talking to her. Mrs Marshall told the appellant that she lived at Beresfield but was minding a house elsewhere. When Freda
Baker returned to where Mrs Marshall was, Mrs Marshall introduced Freda Baker to the appellant. Freda Baker suggested to the appellant that he come to the house at Eleebana and have a cup of tea with them. On Mrs Marshall's evidence, nothing was said on this occasion about Mrs Collins.

Mrs Marshall gave evidence that she had seen the appellant on a number of occasions since the meeting at Belmont. The appellant had telephoned her and on Wednesday 3 March 1993 she and the appellant had lunch together at a club.
A couple of days afterwards the appellant came to Eleebana and had a cup of tea with Mrs Marshall and Freda Baker. According to Mrs Marshall's evidence, it was at this meeting that the conversation about Mrs Collins occurred. In this conversation the appellant said he had been questioned by police about the death of Mrs Collins. Freda Baker said that she had known Mrs Collins, having picked her up to take her to a day care centre. When asked what Freda
Baker had said, Mrs Marshall said in her evidence, "I think it was through Ada
Freda got the information that, in a drunken stupor, he (Mrs Collins's husband) had thrown her against a wall".

Mrs Marshall gave further evidence that she had seen the appellant on the following Tuesday, when the appellant came to Eleebana and had a cup of tea with her, and again on the following Friday (12 March). She did not subsequently see him on any other occasion prior to the appellant giving evidence at the inquest.

Mrs Marshall then gave evidence which was relevant to the second count. She said that on 11 November 1993 she had seen the appellant on television, when he was shown as he came out of the court where the inquest was being held. At about 9 o'clock on the following day, 12 November, the appellant had telephoned her at her home at Beresfield, while she was with her daughter,
Colleen Belinda Delaney. Mrs Marshall recognised the appellant's voice. Her evidence continued:- "I just said, `Hello Charlie.' Anyhow he said, `If the police get in contact with you -` He said, `We've got to have a talk.' He said, `Just tell them I've seen you once.' Anyhow my daughter, as I said, was there. Anyhow I handed the phone over to her. He said, `What are you doing at the week-end?' And Belinda took the phone and she said, `Just leave my mother alone and don't make any more phone calls or we'll call the police".

Mrs Marshall said that when she said "hello Charley" her daughter had come over to her and she, Mrs Marshall, had held the ear-piece of the phone out, so that her daughter could hear what the appellant was saying.

In further evidence, when she was recalled for further cross-examination, Mrs
Marshall said that she had not known Mrs Collins or Mrs Collins's husband or
Mrs Collins's son and had no information about her death, apart from what
Freda Baker had told her and the appellant.

Freda Baker gave evidence at the trial that during a period in February -
March 1993 she and Mrs Marshall had been looking after a house at Eleebana.
She said that she and Mrs Marshall had gone shopping at Belmont, that after she had come out of the shopping centre she had seen the appellant and Mrs
Marshall together, that the appellant had introduced himself to her and that there had been some conversation. Freda Baker said that her name was "Freda".
She said that it was during this conversation that the appellant had invited
Mrs Marshall out for lunch on the following Wednesday. According to Freda
Baker's evidence, there was nothing said that day about Mrs Collins.

Freda Baker said in her evidence that on the Tuesday week, which would have been 9 March 1993, the appellant called in at the house at Eleebana and it was on this occasion that the conversation about Mrs Collins occurred. Freda Baker said:- "Well somehow the topic of conversation had got around to Mrs Collins and I had said that I knew her briefly because being involved with St Vinny's and the activity centre at Swansea I used to go with a chap, we picked her, along with several other people, up on the bus and delivered them to the activity centre" 
She gave further evidence:- "That one day during taking her from the house to the car I'd asked why she wore the boots that she wore and she said she had to wear them because her husband had thrown her against the wall some time during her life and had broken both of her ankles".

Freda Baker said that she had seen the appellant again, in that he had come to visit Mrs Marshall on the following Friday, that is 12 March, at Eleebana.
This was the last day she and Mrs Marshall had been at the house at Eleebana.
She had not seen the appellant since.

Colleen Belinda Delaney gave evidence corroborating her mother's evidence that on 12 November 1993 she had been at her mother's house, that the appellant had telephoned and that she had heard the appellant say to her mother, "if the police contacted you that you've only seen me once or something like that".

The appellant gave evidence at his trial. He said that he had met Mrs Marshall and Freda Baker outside a shopping centre at Belmont and that it was on that occasion that Freda Baker had told him that she had known Mrs Collins and that
Mrs Collins had told her that she (Mrs Collins) wore lace up boots because her husband had assaulted her and had broken her ankles. The appellant said that after the meeting at the shopping centre he had seen Mrs Marshall and Freda
Baker twice at the house at Eleebana. After seeing the two women at Eleebana, he had not seen them again. The evidence the appellant had given at the inquest on which the perjury charge was based was put to the appellant and he claimed that when he had given evidence at the inquest he had been confused about what conversation was being referred to in the question. When asked by his own counsel whether he had any explanation for the answer he had given at the inquest he said:- "I can only say what I believed I said and that was I'd met them at Franklins,
I went to Eleebana on at least two occasions and from that moment onwards I never saw them again until they appeared in this Court room".

It can be seen that, whether "that conversation" in the question asked at the inquest was to be identified as the conversation outside Franklins or the conversation in which Freda Baker told the appellant about Mrs Collins, the appellant's evidence that he had not seen either woman since the conversation was untrue, even on his own evidence and on the evidence of both June Marshall and Freda Baker.

In his evidence the appellant accepted that he had made a telephone call to
Mrs Marshall in November 1993. He said that he had obtained Mrs Marshall's surname, and thence her telephone number, by making house to house enquiries in a part of the suburb of Beresfield for a woman named "June", answering to the description he gave. The appellant gave the following account of the telephone conversation:- "Yes I rang the number and a person answered the phone, they said `Hello' and
I said `Is that June?' and the voice said `Yes'. I said `Well this is Charlie,
I'm the gentleman who spoke to you at Franklins and went to Eleebana, or words to that effect, in other words I introduced myself in a conversation that she could understand who I was and a voice said `This is not who you think speaking, this is her daughter and we've seen you on television' or words to that effect `and my mother wants nothing to do with you. So you can get off the phone and forget it'. I said `Look', I said `Just a moment' and then she said `Look if you don't get off the phone I'm going to hang up and I will send for the police' or words to that effect. I said `Well that's just what I'm ringing for. I've been instructed', remember I have no intention of going to see this woman under any circumstances, `I was instructed by the coroner to try to contact these women--" 
The appellant said that Mrs Marshall's evidence that the appellant had said, "if the police contact you, tell them you have only seen me once" was a lie.

In finding the appellant guilty on the second count the jury must have accepted the evidence of Mrs Marshall and her daughter that in the telephone conversation on 12 November the appellant had said words to the effect, that if the police contacted Mrs Marshall she was to say that the appellant had seen her only once, and this Court should proceed on that basis.

An agreed fact at the trial was that Mrs Collins's husband had died in 1987.

A number of grounds of appeal were raised in the appeal against conviction.
Barr J, whose judgement I have had the advantage of reading in draft, has dealt with all of these grounds of appeal. In relation to most of the grounds of appeal, I agree with what Barr J has written and I do not wish to add anything on my own account. I do, however, wish to deal myself with two of the grounds of appeal.

Ground 2(b) in the Notice of Appeal, which related to the conviction on the first count of perjury was in the following terms:- "In relation to the count of perjury... " 
The alleged statement did not concern a matter material to the proceedings.

It is an element of the offence of perjury under s327 of the Crimes Act that the false statement should have been made "concerning a matter which is material to the proceedings". Under s327(4) the question of whether any matter is material to the proceeding is a question of law, and hence a question for the trial judge, and not the jury, to decide.

As I have already indicated, the evidence on which the charge of perjury was based, as identified by the trial judge in his summing up, was the answer "no" given by the appellant in his evidence on 11 November 1993, in response to the question "had you seen either of them June or this other lady since that conversation?" Although this evidence related to both women, the charge in the first count in the indictment, which was never amended, was that the appellant in giving evidence had made a knowingly false statement that he had met Mrs
Marshall on one occasion only and I consider that it is the materiality of the statement that he had met Mrs Marshall on one occasion only, which should be regarded as the relevant issue.

An objection that the evidence on which the charge was based did not concern a matter which was material to the proceedings in the Coroner's court was taken at the trial. Consistently with s327(4) of the Crimes Act, the trial judge himself decided the question of materiality and subsequently directed the jury in his summing up that they need not concern themselves with the question of materiality. The trial judge gave a careful judgment in which he held that the evidence did concern a matter which was material to the proceedings before the
Coroner.

In his judgment the trial judge referred to s327 of the Crimes Act and to the unreported decision of this Court in R versus Jones (16 June 1988) and the cases cited in that case. His Honour adopted the test approved in R v
Jones of whether the evidence in question was "practically relevant", in order to determine whether the evidence concerned a matter which was material to the proceedings. His Honour noted that it was common ground that, in order to decide whether the evidence was practically relevant, regard had to be had to the functions of a Coroner and the purpose of the inquiry a Coroner undertakes (see R versus Jones at p16 per Lee J). Under [s22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca120/s22.html) of the [Coroners Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca120/) a
Coroner inquiring into a death is required, so far as is relevant, to make findings as to the manner and cause of the death.

In his judgment the trial judge noted a submission made on behalf of the appellant that the evidence had no practical relevance because Mrs Collins's husband had died in 1987. The trial judge then recorded a submission made by the Crown Prosecutor that the evidence in question, that the appellant had not seen Mrs Marshall since the conversation in which he had been told by the other woman that Mrs Collins had told the other woman that she had been assaulted by her husband, had to be considered in the context of the rest of the evidence given by the appellant at the inquest. His Honour then recorded submissions by the Crown Prosecutor in which the Crown Prosecutor summarised the other evidence given by the appellant at the inquest, in a way broadly similar to the way in which I have already summarised that evidence. His
Honour concluded:- "In my view that evidence was practically relevant. It was practically relevant because it went to the issue of whether or not it was open to the
Coroner's consideration that there was violence within the family and that that violence may have been the cause of death.

The Crown submits that the denials made on the second day of the inability to name the person as the source fortified the position adopted by the accused because it enabled him to maintain the suggestion or possible suggestion as to the cause of death. I accept that submission and it again goes to the practical relevance of the evidence because the evidence, on one view, enabled the accused to maintain his assertion as to the cause of death without revealing the source and subjecting it to critical scrutiny and that was all relevant to a purpose which the Coroner had to meet or fulfil.

I find that the matter relied upon by the Crown is material for the purposes of the Section".

I agree with all the statements of principle made by the trial judge in his judgment, including his Honour's statement of the test to be applied, the need to have regard to the functions of the Coroner and the purpose and width of his inquiry and the need to have regard to the other evidence given by the appellant at the inquest. I have, however, reached the conclusion that the evidence given by the appellant which was the subject of the charge, that is that he had not seen Mrs Marshall since the conversation in which the other woman, Freda Baker, had told him what Mrs Collins had told her about being assaulted by her husband, was not of practical relevance or practical significance, within the tests approved by this Court in Jones. I will endeavour to state concisely the combination of reasons which have led me to this conclusion.

The information about Mrs Collins which had been imparted by Freda Baker to the appellant and Mrs Marshall was that on one occasion Mrs Collins had been assaulted by her husband. Mr Collins had died in 1987 and could not possibly have had any part in the "manner" or "cause" of Mrs Collins's death by strangulation in November 1992.

The circumstance that at least five years, and probably longer, before her death, Mrs Collins's husband had assaulted her, breaking her ankles, could be of only marginal relevance, on whether some other member of her family might have strangled her in 1992.

The evidence which the appellant gave at the inquest about what he had been told by Freda Baker about Mrs Collins was a substantially correct report of what Freda Baker had told him.

Mrs Marshall was not the source of the information about the assault on
Mrs Collins by her husband; the source was Freda Baker. Mrs Marshall knew nothing about Mrs Collins or her family, apart from what Freda Baker had told the appellant and her in the same conversation.

It is not in my opinion correct to say that the evidence was practically relevant "because it enabled the accused to maintain his assertion about the cause of death without revealing the source and subjecting it to critical scrutiny". The appellant gave evidence at the inquest about how he had acquired the information. In his evidence he did reveal some information about
Mrs Marshall. He said that her first name was June and that she lived at
Beresfield and he gave part of the name of the street in which she lived. It would seem that all of this information which the appellant gave about Mrs
Marshall was correct. The appellant had not been to Mrs Marshall's home.

How many times, since the time Freda Baker told the appellant on 1 March about the assault on Mrs Collins by her husband, the appellant had seen or met Mrs Marshall, who was not his informant about Mrs Collins and who knew nothing about Mrs Collins, apart from what Freda Baker had told the appellant and her, had no practical relevance or significance. In fact, the appellant had seen Mrs Marshall socially on a few occasions, within a couple of weeks of the conversation in which Freda Baker had spoken about Mrs Collins, and had not seen her since.

I am conscious of the argument that because the appellant telephoned Mrs
Marshall on 12 November 1993 and said what the Crown witnesses gave evidence that he said and what the jury must have accepted that he said, the appellant himself must have thought it important that the police not know that he had seen Mrs Marshall more than once. However, in my opinion, the materiality of the evidence given by the appellant on which the charge was based, has to be determined objectively.

I would uphold this ground of appeal and quash the verdict of guilty on the charge of perjury. However, the appellant would still be guilty of an offence under s330 of the Crimes Act of making a false statement on oath not amounting to perjury and this Court should exercise its power under s7(2) of the Criminal Appeal Act to substitute a verdict of guilty of this offence.

A ground of appeal in the Notice of Appeal, which related to the conviction on the second count, was as follows:- "In relation to the count of pervert the course of justice:- 
The Crown changed the indictment during the trial when it was realised that they could not succeed on the original second count as a matter of law.
The trial judge should not have permitted the amendment at that late stage".

Submissions ostensibly in support of this ground of appeal ranged widely and extended beyond the strict limits of the ground, including submissions that on the evidence the appellant could not lawfully have been convicted on the second count and that on the second count the appellant had been tried, not on the charge which was brought against him of performing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice, but as if some other charge had been brought against him, such as an offence under s315 of the Crimes Act of hindering an investigation. I consider that this Court should be prepared to entertain all of these submissions, particularly as there was a general ground of appeal that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory and at the trial the trial judge dismissed an application for a directed verdict on the second count, which was made inter alia on the ground that the act by the appellant alleged in the Crown case could not amount to an act done with intent to pervert the course of justice.

As the second count was originally framed, it alleged that the act which the appellant had done with intent to pervert the course of justice was that he had prevailed upon Mrs Marshall to give false evidence, Mrs Marshall then being a witness to be called at the inquest into Mrs Collins's death. If the word "prevail" is given its usual meaning in this context of "use persuasion or inducement successfully" (see the definition of "prevail" in the Macquarie
Dictionary), then the act alleged, of inducing a person who was to be called as a witness in a judicial proceeding to give false evidence and procuring the result that the person gave false evidence in the proceeding, would clearly amount to an act done with intent to pervert the cause of justice.

After the amendment was made to the second count, it alleged that the act which the appellant had done with intent to pervert the course of justice was that the appellant had prevailed upon Mrs Marshall to give false information to the police concerning the death of Mrs Collins. In the amended count the word "prevailed" was retained. It was, however, quite inept. There was no evidence at the trial, and no suggestion at the trial, that Mrs Marshall had actually given false information to the police. The allegation that was made, and the evidence that was given by Mrs Marshall and her daughter, was that the appellant had asked her, or suggested to her, that if the police contacted her she should give false information to the police, and the trial judge summed up accordingly. Despite the ineptness of the word "prevailed", I do not consider that the use and retention of the word in a part of the charge which merely supplied particulars of the charge led to any miscarriage of justice. It would have been clear to the defence throughout what the Crown's case was on the second count.

Under s365(1) of the Crimes Act the trial judge is required to make an order for the amendment of an indictment, if it appears that the indictment is defective, unless having regard to the merits of the case the amendment cannot be made without injustice.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the amendment in the present case was made at a late stage of the trial. However, under s365 an amendment can be made at any stage of the trial and hence it is not of itself an objection to an indictment being amended that the amendment is to be made at a late stage of the trial, although if the amendment is made at a late stage of the trial, there is a greater likelihood that the amendment cannot be made without injustice. In the present appeal counsel for the appellant, who did not appear for the appellant at the trial, was pressed by the Court to specify how counsel for the appellant at the trial might have conducted the defence case differently, if the indictment as originally presented had contained the second count in its amended form. Counsel, while contending generally that the case would have been conducted differently, was unable to specify plausibly any particular way in which this might have been done and I would reject the submission that the trial judge should have held that the amendment could not be made without injustice, because the defence case would have been conducted differently prior to the amendment, if the second count in the indictment had originally been in its amended form.

It was submitted that the amendment should not have been ordered, because, without the amendment, the appellant would have been entitled to a verdict of not guilty on the second count. However, it is not an objection to an indictment being amended that, if the amendment was not made, the accused person would be entitled to a verdict of not guilty. It is frequently in these very circumstances that an amendment of an indictment is applied for and ordered.

Although I have rejected some of the submissions which were made by counsel for the appellant, there remain submissions that the appellant could not lawfully have been convicted on the second count and that on the second count the appellant was not tried on the charge which had been brought against him of performing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice. The first of these submissions, if made out, could provide a reason why the amendment applied for should not have been allowed.

Both before and after the amendment to the second count, the charge against the appellant was a charge under s319 of the Crimes Act of doing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice and that was the charge on which he was to be tried. It is fundamental to a criminal trial that the accused person be tried for the precise offence charged Andrews versus The Queen <case>; [(1968) 126 CLR 198.] 
Section 319 is in Pt7 of the Crimes Act. Section 312 in Pt7 of the Act provides that a reference in Pt7 to perverting the course of justice is a reference to obstructing, preventing, perverting or defeating the course of justice or the administration of the law. There is no definition in the Act of the expressions "the course of justice" and the "administration of the law" and they should be given their meanings at common law.

In R versus Rogerson <case>; [(1991-2) 174 CLR 268], where the applicants had been convicted of conspiring to pervert the course of justice, the High Court held that such expressions as "the course of justice" and "the administration of justice" are synonymous, that the course of justice consists in the due exercise by a court or a competent judicial authority of its jurisdiction and that police investigations of actual or suspected crimes are not part of the course of justice for the purposes of the common law offences concerned with perverting the course of justice. However, the High Court went on to hold that an act done in the course of a police investigation can amount to an act which perverts the course of justice.

Brennan J and Toohey J in their joint judgment, in a passage which was quoted with approval in the joint judgment of their Honours and McHugh J in
Meissner versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 693], said at p280:- "The course of justice consists in the due exercise by a court or competent judicial authority of its jurisdiction to enforce, adjust or declare the rights and liabilities of persons subject to the law in accordance with the law and the actual circumstances of the case. The course of justice is perverted (or obstructed) by impairing (or preventing the exercise of) the capacity of a court or competent judicial authority to do justice. The ways in which a court or competent judicial authority may be impaired in (or prevented from exercising) its capacity to do justice are various. Those ways comprehend, in our opinion, erosion of the integrity of the court or competent judicial authority, hindering of access to it, deflecting applications that would be made to it, denying it knowledge of the relevant law or of the true circumstances of the case, and impeding the free exercise of its jurisdiction and powers including the powers of executing its decisions. An act which has a tendency to effect any such impairment is the actus reus of an attempt to pervert the course of justice".

Later in their joint judgment in Rogerson Brennan J and Toohey J said at pp283-284:- "Although police investigations into possible offences against the criminal law or a disciplinary code do not form part of the course of justice, an act calculated to mislead the police during investigations may amount to an attempt to pervert the course of justice. An act which has a tendency to deflect the police from prosecuting a criminal offence or instituting disciplinary proceedings before a judicial tribunal or from adducing evidence of the true facts is an act which tends to pervert the course of justice and, if done with intent to achieve that result, amounts to an attempt to pervert the course of justice. It impairs the court's capacity to do justice in the actual circumstances of the case".

In my opinion, the passages I have quoted can be applied to the case of a coroner conducting an inquest and to a police investigation for the purposes of the inquest. I consider that a question which arose on the charge of performing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice, was whether the appellant's act of saying to Mrs Marshall "if the police contact you, just tell them I've seen you once" (Mrs Marshall's evidence), with the intent, which could readily be inferred, that the police, and hence the Coroner conducting the inquiry into Mrs Collins's death, would be denied knowledge of the fact that, rather than seeing Mrs Marshall once only, the appellant had seen Mrs Marshall socially a few times over a period of a couple of weeks in
March 1993, was an act done with the intent to produce a situation, in which the capacity of the Coroner to perform his functions of inquiring into the death of Mrs Collins would be impaired, by the Coroner being denied knowledge of part of the "true circumstances of the case".

In my opinion, the capacity of the Coroner to perform his functions under the [Coroners Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca120/) in relation to the death of Mrs Collins could in no way be impaired by the
Coroner being denied knowledge of the fact that the appellant had seen Mrs
Marshall a few times socially in the first two weeks of March 1993. I am accordingly of the view that the appellant could not lawfully have been convicted on the second count.

Even if I am wrong in the opinion I have just expressed, I consider that there was a real issue in this case, whether the conduct of the appellant was an act done "with intent to pervert the course of justice". This issue, unlike the issue of materiality on the first count in the indictment, was an issue to be determined by the jury. In refusing the application for a directed verdict, the trial judge, appropriately, merely ruled that "there is sufficient in the
Crown case taken at its highest to show that he did it with the intention of perverting the course of justice within the meaning of s312". However, when the trial judge summed up the issue was not left to the jury. It was assumed in the summing up that if a person gives a false answer to a police officer conducting an investigation or asks another person to give a false answer to a police officer conducting an investigation, that conduct is necessarily an act done with intent to pervert the course of justice. The trial judge told the jury in his summing up:- "Now you may ask, ladies and gentlemen, what is to pervert the course of justice, and the Act of Parliament which creates this offence says, `A reference to perverting the course of justice is a reference to obstructing, preventing, perverting or defeating the course of justice or the administration of the law'. Inducing or suggesting to somebody that they should give false evidence to a police officer in the course of an investigation, if that is proven beyond reasonable doubt, ladies and gentlemen, amounts to perverting the course of justice".

The only issue which was left to the jury on the second count was the issue of what was said in the course of the telephone conversation on 12 November 1993.

It is true that no objection was taken to the summing up by counsel for the appellant at the trial but counsel for the appellant at the trial had at least raised the issue of materiality on the first count and had applied for a directed verdict on the second count and the question of whether the number of times the appellant had seen Mrs Marshall had any relevance or materiality was a live issue at the trial. Leave under r4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) should be granted, because it is necessary to grant leave to avoid a miscarriage of justice. In my opinion, the omission to give directions about the element of the offence charged involving intent to pervert the course of justice, deprived the appellant of at least a chance of being acquitted on the second count.

In my opinion, the verdict of guilty on the second count should be quashed, on a ground which I would compendiously state as being that the trial miscarried on the second count.

REGINA versus Edgar Desmond CHARLES 
JUDGMENT 
BARR J: The appellant was convicted on charges of perjury and doing an act with intent to pervert the course of justice following a trial by jury in the District Court of New South Wales and was sentenced to serve concurrent terms of penal servitude. He has appealed against his convictions. By his notice of appeal he also sought leave to appeal against the sentences, but his application has not been pressed because he has served the sentences. 
In 1992 the body of an elderly woman was found in circumstances suggesting that she had been murdered. The appellant had been a friend of hers and police interviewed him because they suspected that he may have been involved in her death. However, no charges were brought against any person, and in November Mr CA Elliott, Coroner, held an inquest into the death. The appellant was called to give evidence at the inquest. It seems that by that time the police no longer suspected him, though he might still have considered himself a suspect. It does not appear whether any statement of his was tendered or what questions he was asked, other than matters to which I shall refer. It became clear as he gave his evidence at the inquest that he wanted to tell the
Coroner something that might explain how the deceased had died. The evidence that followed included these questions and answers - 
Q. Now you said a minute ago that you've got your own theory about all this, about what occurred? You've got some information for the Coroner: You said that a minute ago? 
A. I did say that yeah.

Q. What's the information? 
A. I'm not prepared to disclose that sir.

Q. Why not? 
A. Because I think it's very unfair to incriminate anybody here or anywhere else which a woman who is now deceased had passed on to me in a form of conversation and also what a certain - another certain person had informed me about the past of (the deceased).

Q. Well first of all who's the woman that's now deceased? 
A. Well (the deceased). She told me lots of things which I haven't disclosed.

Q. (The deceased) told you certain things? 
A. Yeah.

Q. That would assist in this enquiry in establishing who murdered (the deceased)? 
A. I didn't say that.

Q. Well what's the information? 
A. I'm not prepared to say that sir because I would be incriminating someone and by doing so it will appear that I am maybe making excuses for myself, and
I do not intend to do that. I think if anyone should find this out I think it's a matter of the police, not me, to incriminate people, not me if an innocent party.
 ...

Q. Well ten seconds ago you just said, "I'd be incriminating someone", that's what you said. "I'd be incriminating someone"? 
A. No I said I didn't wish to incriminate anyone. I think I said "I have no intentions of incriminating anyone", but according to what has been brought out there, it was a person, another person who's tried to incriminate me.
 ...

Q. What's the information? 
A. Well I was informed - I met a lady-- ...

A. I don't know her name, I think it's possible that she would come forward if it was televised, I don't know. She said, "I know you from somewhere".

Q. Where did you meet her? 
A. In Belmont, I was coming out with some shopping about two months after I'd been interrogated by the police, and she said to me, "I know you from somewhere", and I didn't recognise her, I said, "I'm sorry I don't know you".
She said, "Well I know you, I've seen you before somewhere and I can't place it". An as a result of this conversation, we got to the fact about the pool, and she remarked, "That's where I've seen you" she said, "I was doing social work". As a result of the conversation about the social work at the pool I got on to telling her that I was a suspect to a murder of (the deceased). And she said, "I knew (the deceased) very very well" she said, "As a social worker", and she took me into her confidence completely. She said "She had bad ankles",
I said, "That's correct" and she said "Did she ever tell you why she had bad ankles?" and I said, "No". She said, "Well some years ago there was a family feud within her family and her husband took a pick, elm or a stave, and broke both her ankles" and that was information which was given to me by this woman.
But (the deceased) had never told me how she came to have her ankles broken.
But I was sure that it should be on record somewhere in the hospital or somewhere how her ankles come to be broken.
 ...

A. ... I don't know whether I mentioned it to the police, was when I went and saw her in hospital, she was black and blue.

Q. And you thought she'd been assaulted? She was so badly bruised? ...

A. ... This poor woman was black, bruised, down the side of her face, her arm, all down her right side, all down her right leg, and I said, "What the hell happened to you?" and she said she fell down in the house, and I still don't believe it, and it looked like she'd been beaten up something terrible.
 ...

Q. There's nothing you've kept back now? 
A. No. Except that when she came out of hospital, it's very hard for me to repeat what a dead woman said, but she said to me - I've got to see her back home, and she was doing all right, she was getting around, and she said, "Oh by the way my son knows that you've been coming to see me and he's forbidden me to see you" and I said, "Well I'll keep away". ... And she broke down and got emotional and she didn't want me to not see her again ... she told me that her son had forbidden her to see me and I said to her, "I'll come around and see your son" and when I said that, it was like giving her an electric shock.
She said, "Please don't you ever do that" she said. And for some reason or other there was something within the family that she never told me, well I can feel it, there was something wrong, because-- 
Q. Do you think that might have something to do with her death? 
A. I'm not saying that, what I am saying is that I feel very strong about this issue that she didn't want me to meet her son, she didn't want me to meet anybody in the family ... But the son, in all due respect to some terrible feeling of either jealousy through the son, me meeting her, or there was something there afoot, and that is why I always - from the time - when she come into the hospital, I always telephoned her before I went around and I asked her if it was all right. I never went to the door and knocked at the door and said "Can I come in", I used to telephone her first.

The appellant was asked about the conversation he had had with the women at
Belmont. His evidence included these answers - 
Q. What time of the day was it, at Belmont Plaza, when you saw this person? 
A. I believe it was late morning. I didn't take any particular notice of the time.

Q. Were you alone? 
A. I was alone.

Q. Was she? 
A. No, she was - who are we referring to now? 
Q. I think you understand full well that we're referring to the person who gave you information about (the deceased's) broken ankles.

A. No she was not alone, she was with another person called June. But I can't recall her name.

Q. Another person called? 
A. June.

Q. Had you ever seen June before? 
A. I've never seen any of them before.
 ...

Q. Yesterday did you give me to understand that you didn't have the ability to make contact with this person so that she could be interviewed by the police? 
A. I have no ability to be able to contact the person with the other person
June, I remember her saying which I think she said, "Wells ..(not transcribable).. Street" or something.

Q. Which street? 
A. I'm not quite sure, I think it started with a "Well", in Beresfield.
 ...

Q. Why was it that in front of this very important disclosure from June's friend that you were getting all this information about June, can you just help us out there? 
A. Well she told me that all she said was that she had been the social worker and she knew (the deceased) from the past, I don't know where, but in the past, and that she took her into her fullest confidence, and that's when she told me about the ankles.
 ...

Q. Have you ever seen this June since that time? 
A. No.

Q. Had you ever seen her before that day? 
A. No.
 ...

Q. And did June remain there with the two of you whilst you had this conversation? 
A. She was there and witnessed what she said yes. And I am confident that I can contact this woman, I am fairly confident that I can contact this woman.

Q. You've given undertaking to the Coroner-- 
A. I will give an undertaking to the Coroner-- 
Q. Just a minute. That the very second you learn of her identity you will contact Detective Hetherington? 
A. Yes.

Q. So that he can have access to this lady to obtain a statement from her.

A. Yes.
 ...

Q. Had you ever seen either of them, June or this other lady since that conversation? 
A. No.

The appellant got in touch with the woman he had identified only as June. She was Mrs Gloria June Marshall, who lived in Beresfield as the appellant had said. How he did so is not material to the questions to be answered in this appeal. The second woman was also identified, though whether that was on information given by Mrs Marshall does not appear. Her name was Mrs Freda
Baker. She and Mrs Marshall were called to give evidence at the trial.

The first charge, of perjury, relied on the appellant's evidence that he had not seen June since their meeting at Belmont. The Crown asserted that the appellant made the statement knowing it to be false and that the statement concerned a matter material to the proceeding.

Mrs Marshall told the Court that the meeting at Belmont had taken place on a
Monday and that she had seen the appellant a number of times shortly afterwards, namely on the following Wednesday, when they lunched together at an RSL Club, and on two further occasions during the following week when the appellant visited the house where she and Mrs Baker were staying at Eleebana.
Mrs Baker's evidence did not precisely coincide with Mrs Marshall's, but she made it clear that the appellant had visited Mrs Marshall more than once soon after the meeting at Belmont. In fact she said that it was at one of those subsequent meetings and not at Belmont that she, Mrs Baker, had spoken to the appellant about the things that the deceased had told her.

Although the defence tried to gain advantage from what were said to be differences between the accounts of Mrs Marshall and Mrs Baker, it was accepted that the appellant had seen Mrs Marshall after the Belmont meeting and before the inquest, and that the evidence he gave to the Coroner and on which the first count was based was incorrect. The defence was that the appellant was confused about the meaning of the questions and that his evidence was not wilfully false.

The second charge arose out of events that took place after the appellant had finished giving evidence to the Coroner. According to the evidence of Mrs
Marshall, the appellant telephoned her at about 9 am on 12 November 1993, the day after he had given evidence. She knew immediately who her caller was. She had seen a television film of him leaving the Coroner's Court on the previous day, and recognised his voice and the name he used in introducing himself. Her evidence included the following answers - 
Q. Did you answer the phone? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did you say? What did he say and what did you say? 
A. I said, "Hello." And the minute I heard his voice I knew it was him.

Q. Well what did you say? 
A. I just said, "Hello, Charlie." Anyhow he said, "If the police get in contact with you -" He said, "We've got to have a talk." He said, "Just tell them I've seen you once." Anyhow my daughter, as I said, was there. Anyhow I handed the phone over to her. He said, "What are you doing at the week-end?"
And Belinda took the phone and she said, "Just leave my mother alone and don't make any more phone calls or we'll call the police.

She explained that her daughter, Mrs Belinda Delaney, was with her in the bedroom when she answered the telephone and that when she recognised the appellant's voice she held the receiver in a way that allowed them both to hear what he was saying. Her evidence continued - 
A. he said, "We have to have a talk." He said, "If the police contact you tell them you've only seen me once." 
Q. Did he say anything to you before that? Did he mention anything before that? 
A. No.

Q. Did he say something about-- 
A. Oh, yeah, he asked me had I seen or read about him and I said, no, I'd seen him on the television the night before.

Q. And you told us that he mentioned something about the week-end? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did he say? 
A. Was I busy at the week-end. And I said, yes, I was. And that's when Belinda grabbed the phone.

Q. And you heard Belinda speak to him? 
A. Yes.

Q. And what did Belinda say to him? 
A. And she said, "If you don't leave my mother alone you're going to be sorry.
We'll get in contact with the police." 
Mrs Delaney gave evidence and said that her mother answered the telephone, said "Hello Charlie" and then held the receiver so that she could hear what was being said. She gave these answers - 
Q. All right. Well what did you hear said? 
A. I heard him say, Charlie say, whatever his name is, `I suppose you saw me on the news or read about me in the papers.' Mum said, `Yes.' He said, `Well it's most important that we talk' and Mum said, `Right.' Than he said, `Well we'll have to get together, what are you doing on the weekend?' Then I grabbed the phone off Mum and I told him that I don't want Mum involved in whatever was going on and told him not to ring her again, or else, and then I rang
Detective Smythe out at Belmont.

Q. You heard him say something about got to talk, or got to get together or something? 
A. Yeah.

Q. Did he say anything after saying that? 
A. Yeah he said to mum, if the police contacted her to, I can't remember exact words, but he said if the police contacted you that you've only seen me once or something like that.

The Crown case was that the appellant had tried to persuade Mrs Marshall to give the desired false information to the police with intent to pervert the course of justice at the inquest.

The defence was that the appellant made no such request of Mrs Marshall.

Two documents were filed on behalf of the appellant setting out grounds and submissions in support of the appeal, one apparently framed by the appellant unassisted by counsel and the other by counsel. Counsel appeared on the hearing of the appeal and dealt orally with some of the matters raised in the documents to which I have referred and added others. It is convenient to group the grounds of appeal according to the counts to which they refer.

The first ground relating to the first count was that the inquest was not a judicial proceeding. The charge was brought under <case> of the Crimes Act, which is in the following terms - 
Offence of perjury
Any person who in or in connection with any judicial proceeding makes any false statement on oath concerning any matter which is material to the proceeding, knowing the statement to be false or not believing it to be true, is guilty of perjury and liable to penal servitude for 10 years.

By <case>, the Crimes Act defines "judicial proceeding" as meaning a proceeding in or before a judicial tribunal in which evidence may be taken on oath. At the time of the inquest, the section defined "judicial tribunal" as meaning a person (including an arbitrator), court or body authorised by law, or by consent of parties, to conduct a hearing for the determination of any matter or thing and as including a person, court or body authorised to conduct a committal proceeding. On a day after these events that definition was amended so that the bracketed portion read "(including a coroner and an arbitrator)".

The appellant submitted that before the amendment a coroner was not a judicial tribunal because <case> did not so define the term. That, it was submitted, would explain the need to make the amendment. It followed that the inquest was not a judicial proceeding.

The nature of proceedings in the Coroner's Court has been considered in a number of cases. In Attorney General versus Mirror Newspapers Limited [[1980] 1 NSWLR 374] the New South Wales Court of Appeal was concerned with the punishment for contempt of the Coroner's Court of the publisher of a statement which was thought likely to interfere with the proper administration of justice in connection with an inquest into certain deaths and an inquiry into a fire. The question arose whether the Coroner exercised judicial power and whether the proceedings in his Court concerned or involved the administration of justice. No distinction was made for those purposes between the inquest and the inquiry. The Court answered the questions in the affirmative and observed that the character of proceedings in the Coroner's Court involved questions to be decided after formal inquiry, regulated by the rules of common law. The
Court concluded that the public interest in the manner and cause of any violent or unnatural death was such as to establish the tribunal which inquired into its causes as an instrument of public justice. See the judgment of the Court at 386. That case was decided when the Coroners Act 1960 was in force.

The Coroner continues to exercise judicial power under the succeeding Act of
Notwithstanding the executive nature of the functions of the Coroner, proceedings in the Coroner's Court involve the administration of justice.
Mirror Newspapers Limited versus Waller [(1985) 1 NSWLR 1], per Hunt J (as his Honour then was) at 6. See also Civil Aviation Authority v
Australian Broadcasting Corporation [(1995) 37 NSWLR 540.] 
Under [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/index.html#p3) of the [Coroners Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/) a coroner has jurisdiction to hold an inquest concerning the death of a person who appears to have died a violent or unnatural death. I think that when Mr
Elliott exercised that jurisdiction he constituted a court authorised by law to conduct a hearing for the determination of matters and things relevant to the death of the deceased. The Court was therefore a judicial tribunal and the inquest was a judicial proceeding as defined in <case> Crimes Act. I think that that section was amended not to widen the definition of the term "judicial tribunal" but to make clear how wide it was.

The next ground was that the appellant's statement on oath did not concern any matter which was material to the proceeding, as required by <case> Crimes Act.
By subs (4) of <case> the question whether any matter is material to a proceeding is one of law. Objection was taken on this ground at the trial and the trial judge ruled that the appellant's statement was material to the inquest.

Because of the public interest in the causes and circumstances of violent and unnatural deaths, the nature of inquests into them is special. The Coroner's duty under <case> [Coroners
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/) is to record findings as to the manner and cause of death of the deceased person.
The enquiry to be undertaken may be very wide. In proceedings in other courts and judicial tribunals it is usual for the parties themselves to determine the issues for resolution and to decide who will be called to give evidence. In a
Coroner's inquest the court itself exercises control over such matters. The
Coroner may grant leave to persons having sufficient interest to appear or be represented. That leave may also be refused. The Coroner may issue summonses to attend and give evidence and produce documents, and may have people arrested to achieve those purposes. The rules of procedure and evidence do not apply.

In The Queen versus Davies [(1974) 7 SASR 375], the Full
Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia was concerned with a charge that the appellant had wilfully made a declaration contrary to a provision of the
South Australian Oaths Act knowing it to be untrue in a material particular.
On the meaning of "material particular" Bray CJ said at 377 - 
Material, I think, in this context must mean, not only relevant, but practically relevant. A statement of only remote or theoretical relevance might not be material.

This definition of materiality was cited with approval in this Court in the unreported decision of Regina versus Christopher Robin Jones, 16 June 1988.
See the judgment of Lee J at 31. As his Honour observed at 32, the question of materiality should be considered in relation to the functions of the Coroner and the purpose of the enquiry he undertakes.

The nature of an inquest extends materiality to matters which might be regarded by other courts as of peripheral materiality and ultimately of no relevance to the ultimate question to be decided. See the judgment of Roden J in Regina versus Jones at p 4.

In delivering his judgment on the question of materiality, the trial judge adopted the test of practical relevance, correctly I think. His Honour referred to the appellant's evidence about what the deceased had said to him about her son and about never visiting her house without first telephoning, and expressed the view that that material was relevant to the inquest. His
Honour then dealt with the appellant's evidence that he had not seen either woman since their meeting at Belmont and said that it was practically relevant because it went to the issue whether it was open for the Coroner's consideration that there was violence within the deceased's family and whether that violence may have been the cause of death.

His Honour accepted a submission by the Crown that the appellant's inability to name the woman fortified the position he had adopted, because it enabled him to maintain his suggestion or assertion as to the cause of death without revealing its source and subjecting it to critical scrutiny, which was relevant to a purpose which the Coroner had to fulfil.

It was submitted on appeal that the appellant's statement as to whether he had seen Mrs Marshall since their conversation at Belmont was not material because -

Mrs Marshall had no information concerning the death of the deceased, and even Mrs Baker could only speak about an incident which occurred before the death of the deceased's husband, which had occurred in 1987, and concerned only an attack by her husband on her. The subject-matter was therefore factually and temporally remote, of only theoretical relevance and outside the proper limits of the Coroner's inquiry; 
Whatever Mrs Baker could say was intrinsically worthless because it was founded in gossip and rumour.

The following propositions may be taken or deduced from the portions of the appellant's evidence reproduced above.

The information about how the deceased received her injuries came from a social worker who claimed that it had come to her directly from the deceased.
The only two people in the chain of information were the person who had first- hand knowledge of the events and a responsible person who knew her professionally. The information was therefore likely to be reliable. It was supported by more direct evidence of what the deceased had told the appellant about her son's hostility and of the appellant's impression, gained from what he had seen and heard, that there was something wrong within the family of the deceased.

The appellant believed that his disclosure might incriminate somebody.
That person could not have been the deceased's husband, who had died in 1987.
He also believed that somebody had tried to shift the blame onto him.

The story was of a feud within the deceased's family. The participants were not defined, but included the deceased's son, whom the deceased might have feared. Relations within the deceased's family after her husband's death might have been violent and might have had some bearing on her death.

In answer to a question, the appellant gave a general description of the second woman, but it was unlikely to assist in her identification. If the appellant's answers were true, the only possible way of identifying her was through June.

It is significant, I think, that the police sergeant assisting the Coroner obtained from the appellant as much evidence as he could about June and extracted a promise from him that he would try to get in touch with her. It may be assumed, therefore, that those assisting the Coroner considered the matter serious enough to warrant at least an interview with the social worker if she could be identified and found. I think that they had reasonable grounds for taking that view.

In the circumstances it was relevant to the subject matter of the inquest to ask questions, the answers to which might point to the identity or the whereabouts of June. It was relevant to ask whether the appellant had seen
June more recently, because the answer might constitute a step in identifying and finding her and, in turn, the second woman. I think that the appellant's answer to the question was material to the inquest and I would dismiss this ground of appeal.

The next grounds were that the appellant did not make a false statement, that the trial judge failed properly to direct the jury that the Crown had to prove that his statement was wilfully false and that his Honour failed properly to put the defence on the first count. I will deal with these grounds together.

The appellant told the jury that he had seen Mrs Marshall again, three or four days after the Belmont meeting, in the company of Mrs Baker at Eleebana and again after that. He agreed that he had had lunch with Mrs Marshall on one of those occasions. He was reminded about his answers to the question whether he had seen June again. His answer was, "Well, that's the truth then. Must have been no". He was asked about the matter again and answered, "That's correct, I never seen her since the last time I went to Eleebana, I never seen her since." 
The appellant was asked why he had answered the second such question, which inquired whether he had seen either woman again, in the same manner. He said - 
A. I'm a bit confused here about what conversation, I mean I had three or four conversations with them, which conversation are you referring to, the first one, the second or the third? 
Q. Do you agree with me that you gave that answer to the inquest? 
A. Well to my knowledge at the inquest I told the truth as far as I could put it so I'm prepared to stick to that. But I mean the time, two and half years, three years has gone by, I can't recall every question what was put to me ...

The appellant went on to tell the jury that he was hard of hearing. Finally he said that he believed that everything that he had told the Coroner was true and that if it was incorrect he could not explain why.

His Honour drew the jury's attention to this evidence and then said - 
The real issue in relation to the first count in the indictment is the circumstances in which the accused gave his answer. You will remember, ladies and gentlemen, that he gave evidence and he was asked why he had given the answer that he gave. ...

Now, ladies and gentlemen, the accused's evidence was that when he gave that answer he was in fact answering in relation to the last visit to Eleebana. ...

That material, ladies and gentlemen, is very relevant to the next proposition and that is that the statement which forms part of a perjury charge must not be merely false but must be wilfully false. That is deliberately and intentionally made by the accused person, knowing that it was false.

The Crown must satisfy you, ladies and gentlemen, that the false statement was not made through mistake or a lapse of memory or because the accused was so taken by surprise that he was not wilfully making a false statement but speaking out of confusion. A statement is wilfully false if the maker of the statement knew that it was untrue or did not believe it to be true.

His Honour then reminded the jury of the defence submission that the appellant may have been confused and that that and his poor hearing were relevant to the question whether the Crown had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant's statement was wilfully untrue. At the conclusion of the summing up his Honour recalled the jury at the request of defence counsel and gave the following additional directions.

Well ladies and gentlemen the first count in the indictment which is the count of perjury, the statement relied upon the Crown as you will recall, was that at page 36 of exhibit B2, the question, `Had you ever seen either of them June or this other lady, since that conversation?' and the answer, `No.' I have already given you a direction ladies and gentlemen on the ingredients of the charge and I do not intend to go back over that. I told you that you had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as part of one of those ingredients, that the statement was not only untrue, but was wilfully false.

You must be satisfied of that ladies and gentlemen, but of course if you think that he made that answer mistakenly, well of course that would not be wilfully false, and I have already directed your attention to the evidence that he gave concerning his belief concerning Eleebana. I have already given you directions as to the arguments put by both parties in relation to that particular statement, and the submissions made by the Crown, that you would need to consider that statement in the context of the answers that came before and after it.

So the additional direction I give you is this ladies and gentlemen, that if you conclude that his statement contained in his answer to that question had been made mistakenly, but genuinely believing it to be true, well the
Prosecution would have failed to establish an essential ingredient of the
Crown case. That is, that the statement was wilfully untrue.

Throughout the directions, his Honour referred the jury to the answer the appellant gave to the question about having seen either June or the other woman since their conversation, rather than to the question which came first and dealt only with June, but the two answers were of the same significance so far as concerned the appellant's having seen Mrs Marshall. No complaint was raised about that matter at the trial or on appeal, and it appears to have produced no difficulty. I am satisfied that his Honour correctly and fairly put the appellant's defence on the first count to the jury and directed them appropriately about the need for proof that his statement was wilfully untrue.
There was evidence that it was untrue, of course, and the jury were entitled to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about that. These grounds of appeal fail.

The next ground complained that there was no evidence corroborating the evidence of the falsity of the appellant's answer. The ground was raised only formally, I think, and was not referred to in argument on the hearing of the appeal. Both Mrs Marshall and Mrs Baker proved the falsity of the answer, which is not in doubt. There is no substance in this ground.

The final ground was that his Honour should have ordered separate trials of the two counts. The circumstances of what the appellant told the Coroner and what he said to Mrs Marshall were closely connected. Evidence of what the appellant asked Mrs Marshall to do was admissible on the first charge as well as the second because it made it more probable that he knew that what he had told the Coroner was untrue. That may be why the trial judge was not asked to order separate trials. I would not grant leave to appeal on this ground.

The first of the grounds dealing with the second count asserts that the trial miscarried when the Crown was permitted to amend the indictment over the objection of defence counsel. When the appellant was arraigned, the second charge was in the following terms - on 12 November 1993 at Newcastle in the State of New South Wales, with intent to pervert the course of justice, (the appellant) performed an act, that is to say prevailed upon Gloria June Marshall to give false evidence, the said
Gloria June Marshall then being a witness to be called in a judicial proceeding, namely the inquest by Mr C A Elliott, Coroner, touching the death of (the deceased).

On the first day of the trial Mrs Marshall was examined, cross-examined, re- examined and excused from further attendance at the trial. Her daughter Mrs
Delaney gave evidence as well and was being cross-examined at the close of proceedings for the day. At the commencement of proceedings on the second day, the Crown prosecutor sought leave to amend the indictment so that the second count should read as follows - on 12 November 1993 at Newcastle in the State of New South Wales, with intent to pervert the course of justice, (the appellant) performed an act, that is to say prevailed upon Gloria June Marshall to give false information to police concerning the death of (the deceased).

The matter was dealt with before any further evidence was taken, leave was granted and the indictment was amended accordingly. Then the cross-examination of Mrs Delaney continued and Mrs Baker was called and gave the whole of her evidence. The Crown prosecutor then announced the intention to recall Mrs
Marshall at the request of defence counsel and consequent upon the amendment to the indictment. Mrs Marshall was recalled and the record shows that all the
Crown prosecutor asked her in chief was enough to identify her as the person who had given evidence on the previous day. She was further cross-examined shortly by defence counsel and excused a second time.

Factually, the only difference resulting from the amendment was that whereas at the commencement of the trial the Crown intended to prove that the appellant tried to persuade Mrs Marshall falsely to tell the Coroner that she had seen him only once, on and after the second day of the trial it intended to prove that he had tried to persuade her falsely to say the same thing to the police. The amendment did not necessitate or result from any change in the anticipated evidence of Mrs Marshall. In her evidence in chief, she related the conversation set out earlier in this judgment. Defence counsel cross- examined her about the conversation. When she was recalled after the amendment, defence counsel asked her nothing further about the telephone conversation but restricted his questions to whether Mrs Marshall had any information about the deceased's death that she could supply to the police.

On appeal, counsel was asked to state how the amendment had produced an unfair trial. The response was that counsel would have taken a different approach if he had been informed from the beginning of the trial about the Crown's intention to amend, but it never became clear what the different approach might be. In my opinion defence counsel was in as good a position to deal with
Mrs Marshall's evidence before as after the amendment.

The second submission made under this ground was that the amendment denied the defence the chance to secure a verdict by direction on the second count. But that will often be the case where it becomes apparent as the case proceeds that an amendment is inappropriately worded. The overriding principle was that the amendment should not result in injustice to the appellant. Crimes Act s (1). In my opinion the amendment was properly permitted and no injustice resulted.

It may be appropriate here to remark that, notwithstanding the assertion in the second count, the Crown never intended to prove that the appellant prevailed upon Mrs Marshall to give false information to the police. The Crown case always was that his effort to persuade her had not succeeded. But I think that no injustice resulted, because throughout the trial the words "prevailed upon" were used as though they meant "tried to persuade".

The next ground asserted that there could have been no attempt or intent to pervert the course of justice in asking someone to give false information to a police officer because police officers do not administer justice. The ground was never precisely framed and was developed in oral submissions and provokes consideration of the directions his Honour gave the jury about proof of the relevant intent, though no complaint was made about them at the trial.

In The Queen versus Rogerson <case>; [(1991-1992) 174 CLR 268], the High Court of Australia was concerned with a conspiracy to fabricate evidence in order to frustrate or divert a police investigation into a possible crime. The following principles may be drawn from the case.
The course of justice or administration of justice (for the expressions have the same meaning) does not commence until the jurisdiction of a court or judicial tribunal is enlivened by the filing or issue of process. Police do not administer justice and their investigations do not form part of the process of the administration of justice. See the judgments of Mason CJ at ; Brennan and Toohey JJ at 280 and McHugh J at 300-304.
The course of justice is perverted or obstructed if such a court or judicial tribunal is prevented from exercising its capacity to do justice or if that capacity is impaired. Such an impairment may arise in a number of ways, including by denying the court or tribunal knowledge of the true circumstances of the case. See the judgment of Brennan and Toohey JJ at 280.
The course of justice may include future as well as existing proceedings.
An act calculated to mislead police during investigations may amount to an attempt to pervert the course of justice. An act which tends to deflect the police from invoking the jurisdiction of such a body, if it is their duty to do so, or from adducing evidence of the true facts, tends to pervert the course of justice. See the judgments of Mason CJ at 276, 277-279; Brennan and
Toohey JJ at 280, 284 and McHugh J passim.

In the present case the Crown had to prove that -
The appellant believed that if Mrs Marshall misled the police in the desired manner the Coroner's Court would in due course be misled in the same manner.
The appellant either knew that misleading the Coroner's Court in that manner would pervert the course of justice or intended that it should have that effect.

It was not sufficient for the Crown to prove merely an intention to deceive the police.

In his directions to the jury his Honour said this - 
Now the second count in the indictment, ladies and gentlemen, is that on 12
November 1993 at Newcastle, with intent to pervert the course of justice, the accused performed an act, that is to say prevailed upon Gloria June Marshall to give false information to police concerning the death of (the deceased).
Now, ladies and gentlemen, the ingredients of that offence, or the elements, are these. (1) that the accused did an act, (2) with the intent to pervert the course of justice.

His Honour dealt with the appellant's telephone request and continued - ... the Crown says that the accused rang Mrs Marshall with the intention of perverting the course of justice by making a request of her that when the police asked her a question she would give the police information which was false, and to his knowledge false.

Now you may ask, ladies and gentlemen, what (it) is to pervert the course of justice, and the Act of Parliament which creates this offence says, "A reference to perverting the course of justice is a reference to obstructing, preventing, perverting or defeating the course of justice or the administration of the law." Inducing or suggesting to somebody that they should give false evidence (sic) to a police officer in the course of an investigation, if that is proven beyond reasonable doubt, ladies and gentlemen, amounts to perverting the course of justice. And that is what the
Crown relies upon in this case. The Crown must prove that at the time that he had that conversation he had the intention of bringing about that result that he intended to pervert the course of justice. (Emphasis added.) 
His Honour then explained to the jury how the Crown made out its case on the second count. The direction included the following - ... the Crown submits that at the time that he had the telephone conversation in the terms that the Crown alleges that was clearly an intention to pervert the course of justice because he was suggesting to Mrs Marshall that she should give false information to the police and that the course of justice would be perverted because the Coroner was at that time engaged in a Coronial inquiry. He was inquiring into the cause of death of (the deceased). And the information which the accused asked Mrs Marshall, according to the Crown, to supply would have obstructed that particular inquiry. So the Crown says.

The jury were never told that the Crown had to prove the appellant's belief that the Coroner's Court would be misled if Mrs Marshall did as he asked. More importantly, the appellant was entitled to have the jury decide whether the
Crown had proved either that he knew that to misinform the Coroner's Court in the manner contended for would pervert the course of justice or that he intended by that means to produce that result. Although his Honour directed the jury that the Crown had to prove that the appellant intended that result, that direction was coupled with a statement in absolute terms that suggesting to someone to give false information to a police officer during the course of an investigation amounts to perverting the course of justice.

Once the jury were satisfied that the appellant spoke the words complained of, they were bound to infer that he intended that Mrs Marshall should give false information to a police officer during the course of an investigation. Because of his Honour's direction, they were bound also to infer that the appellant intended thereby to pervert the course of justice. The jury were never told just how the Crown asserted that the false information that Mrs Marshall had seen the appellant only once might pervert or obstruct the course of justice at the inquest. They were never told what the defence response was, if any. In my opinion the jury convicted the appellant on the second count without considering an essential part of what the Crown had to prove, and the trial miscarried.

Notwithstanding that no correction or further direction was sought by defence counsel, I think that this matter is of such fundamental importance that the appellant should have leave to argue this ground of appeal, and I would uphold the appeal on this ground.

The question arose during the hearing of the appeal whether a false statement that Mrs Marshall had seen the appellant only once could have perverted the course of justice at the inquest. However, I do not consider it necessary to answer that question in view of the course I intend to propose.

Success on this ground of appeal would ordinarily have led to an order for a new trial but, because the appellant has now served his sentences, I think that the Court should order a verdict of acquittal on the second count.

I would have dismissed the appeal on the remaining grounds, and in the circumstances I can deal with them in summary form. The first was that the false information intended to be given to the police was not "concerning the death of" the deceased, as asserted in the indictment as amended. I think that those words were only particulars, intended to make clear that it was at that inquest that the course of justice had been perverted. The final ground was that there was no intent to pervert the course of justice. That was a jury question.

I propose the following orders -
Appeal upheld in part.
Quash the conviction on the second count and direct the entry of a verdict of acquittal on that count.
 * * * 
