

Garthwin versus Cowell and Ors Matter No 20152/95 [1997] NSWSC 295 (7 August )

Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Garthwin versus Cowell & Ors /95 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 - Garthwin versus Cowell & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 24 February 1995. The Court was informed that the plaintiff presently resides in the United Kingdom. He suffered injury in an accident that took place on 27 February 1989. He was then a pest controller and was engaged in the task of endeavouring to locate a possum in the roof of the property known as 53 Morven Road, Leura (the property). He fell through the ceiling and suffered serious injury. 
The process names four defendants. The first defendant acquired the property in 1987. The third and fourth defendants owned and occupied the property during the period between 1983 and 1987. The second defendant owned and occupied the property during the period between 1979 and 1983.

The thrust of the case alleged against, inter alia, the third and fourth defendants concerns the removal of a ceiling joist.

The third and fourth defendants sought further and better particulars of the claim by letter dated 1 October 1996. The requests included the following:- "14. Please specify the facts and circumstances upon which the plaintiff relies in support of the allegation that the third and fourth defendants removed the ceiling joist from the premises." 
As the particulars had not been furnished, the solicitors for the third and fourth defendants sent a further letter dated 28 October 1996. As the particulars still had not been furnished, on 6 December 1996, those solicitors filed a Notice of Motion seeking an order that the particulars be furnished.
The Notice of Motion came on for hearing on 3 February 1997. An order was made that the particulars be furnished within 28 days.

The order was not complied with by the plaintiff. On 18 March 1997, the third and fourth defendants filed a further Notice of Motion. It sought dismissal of the proceedings. It was made returnable on 3 April 1997. On 2 April 1997, the plaintiff provided certain particulars. The particulars provided in response to request No. 14 were as follows:- "14. The Plaintiff was told that the ceiling joist had been removed by one of the previous owners of the premises." 
This response was regarded as being inadequate by the third and fourth defendants. Further correspondence was forwarded to the solicitors for the plaintiff. On 30 April 1997, the Notice of Motion came before a Registrar. He made a consent order dismissing the proceedings. The question of costs was stood over to be dealt with at a later date.

On 5 May 1997, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. It seeks, inter alia, an order setting aside the consent order made on 30 April 1997. This application came on for hearing on Wednesday, 2 July 1997. The relief is sought pursuant to Part 40 rule 9 of the Supreme Court Rules. Both Counsel have assured the Court that a Master has power to entertain this application pursuant to that provision.

There is no affidavit from the plaintiff. He has relied on an affidavit sworn by Mr Feher (a solicitor in the employ of the solicitors for the plaintiff).
The plaintiff has tendered Exhibit A (which comprises three letters passing between the solicitors). The third and fourth defendants have relied on certain material contained in a number of affidavits sworn by Nicole Maria
Maude (a solicitor in the employ of the solicitors for the third and fourth defendants).

There is material before the Court which deals with the discussions had between the solicitors for the parties prior to the making of the consent order. It seems that the solicitors for the plaintiff had instructions to consent to a dismissal of the proceedings on terms that each party pay their own costs. Mr Farmer of Counsel was briefed to appear on behalf of the plaintiff on 30 April 1997. There is material which deals with the instructions given to him. There is material that suggests that he failed to act in accordance with his instructions.

The present application is founded on what is said to be Mr Farmer's misconception as to his instructions. I shall proceed to deal with the application on the assumption that he did have such a misconception.

The application is resisted by the third and fourth defendants. It is resisted on a number of grounds. They say that the pleading and the particulars do not disclose a reasonable cause of action. They are entitled to have the proceedings dismissed because of the plaintiff's want of prosecution. They say that the only real issue between the parties is the question of costs.

At this stage, I should refer to certain of the contents of Exhibit A. The first of the three letters is from Turner Freeman and is dated 22 May 1997. It was written by Mr Feher. It contains the following:- "In addition, we advise that the writer was not the solicitor with the initial care and conduct of this matter on behalf of the Plaintiff at the time proceedings were commenced and that subsequent to a recent review of the file the writer has found a notation from Mr Brenton Boswell, a solicitor formerly of our office, who previously had the care and conduct of the file. It appears that Mr Boswell had a telephone conversation with the Third Defendant, Mr
Bassett which indicates that work had been performed in the ceiling of the premises at Morven Road, Leura during the period in which the Third and Fourth
Defendants had possession, control and ownership of those premises and the
Plaintiff seeks to rely on the substance of that conversation in further answer to the further and better particulars sought by you." 
Abbot Tout responded by letter dated 22 May 1997. In that letter, the following was said:- "We note with interest your assertion that Mr Boswell, a solicitor formerly of your office, held a conversation with our client regarding work performed in the ceiling of the premises. Naturally, we are concerned to know whether Mr
Boswell spoke to Mr Bassett directly despite the fact that Mr Bassett was represented by solicitors. In the circumstances, would you please let us know by return details as to the following: 
When did the alleged conversation take place? 
In what circumstances did the alleged conversation take place? and 
What was the substance of the conversation?" 
Turner Freeman responded by letter dated 22 May 1997. The letter contained the following:- "As to the conversation between Mr Boswell on Mr Bassett we advise as follows: 
The conversation took place on the 20th February 1995 prior to the commencement of any court proceedings.

The conversation took place by way of a telephone call from Mr Boswell to
Mr Bassett.

The substance of that conversation is a matter for evidence." 
This material was tendered by the plaintiff in support of, inter alia, his contention that he indeed did have a reasonable cause of action against the third and fourth defendants.

The Court has been referred to a number of decided cases. It is not necessary for me to make any specific reference to the cases. It is common ground that the Court has a discretionary power to set aside the order. The power is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court that an order should be made.

Before proceeding further, I should refer to certain of the material contained in Mr Feher's affidavit. It contained the following paragraphs:- "8. On the Morning of 30th April 1997 I spoke with G Farmer of counsel who was to appear for the Plaintiff in the circumstance of the unavailability of A
Quinlivan of counsel who held the Plaintiff's brief.
I asked to be transferred to Mr Quinlivan so that I could discuss with him the appropriate courses to be taken by or argued on behalf of the Plaintiff.
During this conversation I advised Mr Quinlivan that the request of particulars had been answered but that Abbott Tout had contended that the particulars were inadequate and that it therefore seemed that Abbott Tout would be seeking dismissal of the Plaintiff's action against their clients.
After receiving certain advice from Mr Quinlivan I advised that my instructions allowed me to consent to dismissal of the action against the
Third and Fourth Defendants provided the parties paid their own costs. Mr
Quinlivan advised as to the appropriateness of that course, and that otherwise the Motion ought be resisted. Counsel's advice was to the effect that there were good prospects of successfully resisting the Motion, on the basis that particulars had been provided and any alleged deficiency in the particulars amounted to matters for evidence, not particulars. Then, Mr Quinlivan advised, if the Motion were defeated, the Third and Fourth Defendants were likely, in his view, to become amenable to a dismissal, with the parties bearing their own costs. I asked Mr Quinlivan to discuss the matter with Mr Farmer and he said he would.
I then spoke to Mr Farmer. He told me that he had spoken to Mr Quinlivan.
I instructed him that we could consent to a dismissal of the action against the Third and Fourth Defendants provided the parties would bear their own costs. He asked me to telephone the solicitors for the Third and Fourth
Defendant, in an effort to come to agreement.
I then telephoned Ms Maude of Abbott Tout. She was unavailable. I left a message for her to return my call. She telephoned me. In part, I said to Ms
Maude words to the effect of, `We will consent to dismissal of the claim provided the parties bear their own costs.' In part, she said words to the effect of, `I'll get some instructions and call you back.'
Ms Maude called back and, in part, said words to the effect of, `Our client wants costs.' I said words to the effect of, `I can't consent.' She said words to the effect of, `We will proceed with the Motion this morning and argue for dismissal and costs.'
I then telephoned Mr Farmer. I told him that there was no agreement. We discussed arguments that might be available to the Plaintiff, with respect to costs. I asked him to call me with the result, after the matter had been dealt with in Court." 
The material manifests that the plaintiff had given instructions to consent to the dismissal of proceedings provided that the parties paid their own costs.
This position was taken after advice had been received from his solicitors and
Counsel. The real concern had by the plaintiff and his advisers related to the question of costs.

I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has any bona fide intention to prosecute the claim made against the third and fourth defendants. It seems that his real concern may be to extricate himself from the claim without paying the costs of the other parties.

There has been a want of prosecution. The saga of the particulars has been referred to earlier in the judgment. There has been both delay and default.
Sufficient particulars have still not been furnished.

These matters alone would suffice to justify the dismissal of the present application. However, there are other relevant matters. I shall refer to one of them.

There is the lack of material to demonstrate a viable cause of action. The material that has been placed before the Court does little more than highlight the weaknesses of the case.

I am not satisfied that a setting aside of the consent order would serve any good purpose. It seems that it would only lead to the incurring of further unnecessary costs.

In my view, the plaintiff has failed to discharge the onus. It seems to me that justice is best done between the parties if the application is dismissed.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion filed on 5 May 1997. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
