

Roth versus Pollard and Ors Matter No 4045/97 [1997] NSWSC 670 (19 December )

Last Updated: 6 November 1998 `CHARLES GEORGE ROTH versus WARWICK MICHAEL POLLARD & ORS` `004045/97` `19 December 1997` `Master Macready` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: In this matter I heard the substance of the matter yesterday which is a claim under <case> G for sale of a jointly owned property and there were no affidavits of fitness of the trustees and I adjourned the matter to this morning so that affidavits of fitness of trustees could be filed. I indicated that I would then make orders. 
The second defendant was represented yesterday and made an application for an adjournment by his representative before Master McLaughlin which was refused.
Today the second defendant has appeared in person and has sought a further adjournment upon the grounds which he says relates to the fitness of the trustees. He wishes to obtain an affidavit from Mr Saab, his employed solicitor, who apparently after the close of business yesterday had a number of discussions with Mr Pollard, the first defendant. Those discussions covered a number of matters and reference was made to the fact that the trustees do not have to sell by auction and can call tenders and included, if they did occur, what might be well thought to be somewhat inflammatory statements that "Van Aalt wouldn't see any of the money as it was going to the Commonwealth
Bank" which apparently is not the mortgagee.

Mr Van Aalst has said that he wishes to cross-examine the trustees to see whether they had any contact with Mr Pollard or Mr Roth. From what I have been told of the conversations which would be deposed to if the affidavit is filed, there is nothing in that that I think reflects upon the appropriateness of the trustees.

I point out that the two trustees are partners in the accountanting firm of
Jones Condon. They each hold various qualifications and are fellows of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Australia. They each have been appointed official liquidators and are obviously people from their description who are well used to the type of work involved. There has also been an affidavit of fitness of the trustee sworn by Mr Dirston. It seems to me there is nothing in the evidence that Mr Van Aalst would wish to present to the Court which would in any way question the trustees. Accordingly, I do not propose to grant the adjournment.

Accordingly the orders that the Court makes are: 
I appoint Michael Gregory Jones and Schon Condon as trustees of the property in Folio Identifier 21/6/22 and I vest that property in such trustees subject to incumbrances affecting the entirety, but free from incumbrances affecting any undivided shares to be held by them on the statutory trust for sale under s 66 G of the Conveyancing Act.

I reserve leave to the trustees to apply for any directions regarding sale.

I reserve leave to any party to apply for directions if if any party wishes to purchase the property from the trustees.

I order the defendants to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
