

Regina versus Graham Anthony Sloane [2000] NSWSC 1300 (14 September 2000) 
REGINA versus GRAHAM ANTHONY SLOANE /96 
THURSDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
HUNT CJ at CL (FOURTH DAY) 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Might I ask for the return of the indictment. It is an unsigned indictment which became an exhibit in these proceedings. I would propose to sign the indictment and ask your Honour to arraign the accused.

I have handwritten the file number and I have crossed out the solicitor's name who found the bill originally and inserted my name and signed it, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: Stand up Mr Sloane.

CHARGE: For that he between 31 May and 6 June 1995 at Windale in the State of New South Wales did murder Barbara Mavis Wilson.

PLEA: Not Guilty. Guilty to Manslaughter.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: The Crown accepts the plea to the lesser charge of manslaughter in full satisfaction of that indictment.

HIS HONOUR: What do we do about the basis upon which it is put forward and accepted? Is there some dispute between you? 
CAVANAGH: There is little dispute between us on the unlawful and dangerous act of manslaughter. The proposal is that the defence will be interviewing in significant detail Mr Sloane and providing that detail to the Crown and also obtaining further reports providing that detail to the Crown and also providing Mr Sloane to the police for the purpose of interviewing so that all material can go before the Court on the issues.

HIS HONOUR: At this stage then I record the conviction of guilty of manslaughter. Is this something that we would then deal with in Newcastle? 
CAVANAGH: It could be dealt in Newcastle at the sittings. It will take until then for all the material to be gotten together.

HIS HONOUR: I will put you first in the list for the plea on 4 November. Can you supply me with the material in advance? 
CAVANAGH: Certainly.

HIS HONOUR: I will stand the matter over to the Newcastle sittings commencing on 4 November and it will be listed on that day for sentence. The prisoner is remanded in custody until 4 November in Newcastle.

REGINA versus Graham Anthony George SLOANE /96 
Friday 14 February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
HUNT CJ at CL 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: 
The prisoner (Graham Anthony George Sloane) was charged with the murder of
Barbara Mavis Wilson at Windale, a suburb to the south of Newcastle, between 1
June and 5 June 1995. The trial was fixed to commence here at Newcastle before me on 4 November last.

Because there were a number of legal issues which, it was agreed, would arise during the trial, I commenced a voir dire hearing in Sydney last September in which, by consent, those issues could be resolved prior to the trial. I heard a substantial amount of evidence as to the cause of death, the issue being of importance in relation to the admissibility of some tendency evidence. There were other issues to be determined also, but it is unnecessary for present purposes to refer to them. On the third day of the voir dire - after the medical evidence had been heard, during the discussion of the tendency evidence and the evidence of complaints by the deceased of harassment by the prisoner, but before any of the issues had been determined - there was some discussion between counsel in relation to a plea. On the following morning, and by agreement, the indictment was presented and a plea of guilty of manslaughter to the charge of murder was accepted by the Crown in full satisfaction of the indictment.

I was informed that there remained a dispute between the parties as to the precise act of the prisoner which caused the death of the deceased, and it was agreed that he would be interviewed by the police before the matter proceeded further. The matter was stood over to the Newcastle sittings in November for sentence. That interview took place in November, and the version given by the prisoner was largely exculpatory - to such an extent that an application was made for leave to withdraw the plea. Counsel appearing for the prisoner by the time the matter returned to Newcastle (Mr Lord QC) very wisely sought and obtained an adjournment for counsel who had appeared in Sydney to consult with the prisoner and his present legal representatives, so that the position could be cleared up. As a result of that further consultation, the application to go behind the plea was withdrawn. It was noted that the prisoner did comprehend and know that his plea admitted that it was his act which caused the death of the deceased. By that time, the November sittings were concluding, and the matter was stood over again for hearing this week.

Counsel appearing for both parties have sensibly sought to avoid placing before me much of the enormous volume of material upon which the Crown relies by agreeing upon many of the relevant facts, in particular those concerning the relationship between the parties. This process in itself took time, and there was some debate before me as to the relevance of two paragraphs of the document which had been prepared. This led to further discussion between the parties, and in the end I was presented with an agreed document, together with material relating to the investigation and the three interviews which the prisoner had with police. The preparation of the agreed document has been an extensive task, and counsel are to be congratulated upon their efforts. I am very grateful to them for reducing the issues in such a sensible way, and in a way in which the interests of both parties have been jealously guarded.

The deceased, who was a seventytwo year old widow living alone, had lived in her home at Windale for forty years. Following an approach by concerned neighbours, police entered the premises on 5 June and found her body lying naked in the bath. The bath plug was in place, and there was some water still in the bath. Tests revealed that the plug nevertheless permitted a slow seepage of water. The deceased's hair and extremities had the appearance of having been submerged in water at some stage. Her clothing was in the position in which it would be expected to be placed by someone who intended to have a bath. There were no signs of any disturbance or of forced entry. The lights and the television were still turned on. The deceased's purse with more than $200 in cash in it was located. The initial impression was that the deceased must have suffered a fall whilst having a bath and drowned.

The police located in the kitchen area two cups which had been used and rinsed, and an uncovered plate of biscuits, which suggested that someone had visited her the day upon which she died, and someone whom she was content to allow into the house and to entertain. A male person had been observed by neighbours to enter the house during the early evening of 1 June.

A post mortem examination on the day following the discovery of the body demonstrated that that initial impression was wrong. Death had been caused by manual strangulation, and the reasonable possibility that she had drowned was excluded. It was suggested later by the prisoner that the deceased had fallen over a chair, a suggestion which the Crown is unable to refute. Nevertheless, even if that had happened following the strangulation, such a fall could not reasonably account for the number and spread of bruises and abrasions to the deceased's head, neck and body. DNA testing of material under the deceased's fingernails established that the material most likely originated from the deceased herself, which suggests that she must have been grasping at the hand or hands around her throat in a struggle with her killer. Vaso-vagal inhibition, which is the medical term for the cause of death, requires more than a passing blow. It requires an inhibition for an appreciable period of some seconds. I am satisfied on the medical evidence that the attack upon her involved substantial violence.

The deceased was the mother of the prisoner's former wife, Sharyn Stone.
Following his discharge after twenty years service in the Army in 1989, the prisoner and the deceased's daughter commenced to operate a security business on the Gold Coast in Queensland. They had commenced to live together in 1976 and were married in 1978. The business had been purchased using a lump sum entitlement which the prisoner had received on leaving the Army. This business had originally been successful, but financial problems later arose. The business was unable to meet its obligations to pay group tax to the Australian
Tax Office amounting to some $27,000, and its bank overdraft limit had been used up.

The prisoner obtained a loan of $40,000 from his father, being a lump sum entitlement which his father had recently received on retirement and which represented a large proportion of his life savings. As part of the loan, the equity in the house which the prisoner and his wife owned was to be made available to the father in the event that the business failed to trade its way out of its financial difficulties. The deposit of the cheque in the business's bank account effectively wiped out the overdraft, and the group tax and other minor debts were paid.

The prisoner's wife had become aware of an extramarital affair in which he had been engaged for some time, and there were considerable problems with the marriage. In August, 1992, they separated. The business failed. When the house was sold, the mortgage discharged and other debts repaid, the only equity remaining in it was approximately $812. This was paid to the prisoner's father. The prisoner and his wife were divorced early in 1994.

The prisoner formed the belief that his ex-wife had been responsible for the failure of the business and for the loss suffered by his father as a result of their inability to pay off the loan. He believed that he would have been able to trade the business out of its financial difficulties by re-financing, but his ex-wife had refused to co-operate. He appears to have convinced himself that she actually made off with some $24,000 of the $40,000 loan, although it is now agreed that this was not so. He wanted to locate her, but he was unable to do so. He made a number of harassing telephone calls to the deceased in an effort to establish his ex-wife's whereabouts, but the deceased refused to reveal them. These conversations did on some occasions become heated. I am satisfied from the evidence that the animosity which the prisoner felt towards his ex-wife became an animosity towards the deceased when she refused to assist him to locate her.

Inquiries by the police led them to interview the prisoner on 10 June 1995. At the time of the killing, he had returned to live with his parents within a short walking distance from the deceased's home. He denied any involvement in her death, or having been in contact with her since his return to Newcastle in
May. Indeed, he said that he probably had not seen her for two or three years.
His mother provided him with an alibi for the evening of 1 June. On 14
September, the prisoner had a conversation with one of his sons from his first marriage (the deceased was the mother of his second wife). The conversation was tape recorded at the request of the police. The prisoner was arrested and charged the next morning. As was his right, he declined to answer any further questions when interviewed.

The prisoner's plea of guilty to manslaughter was entered before me almost twelve months later, on 12 September 1996, and in the circumstances which I have already outlined. Arrangements were made for the prisoner to be interviewed again by the police. Two documents were produced to the police by the prisoner's solicitor. The first, which the prisoner acknowledged was in his handwriting and which had been prepared during October, admitted that he had entered the deceased's house at about 6.30 pm on 1 June 1995 and that he had had a conversation with her for about two and a half hours. The discussion had become "heated" after something was said about her late husband. It also admitted that he had "grabbed" the deceased, and it asserted that he had let her go as quickly as he had grabbed her. She had fallen over and hit a chair, and both she and the chair had fallen to the floor. He examined her and realized that she was not breathing and had no pulse. He attempted to resuscitate her but was unsuccessful. In a panic, he had put her body in the bath. He said that he had consumed eight to ten schooners and two cans of full strength beer since 11.00 am that day. He had also consumed a can of Jim Beam and Cola. The second document, which was dated 5 November, was signed by the appellant but was not in his handwriting. It was expressed in more guarded language. It said that he had "grabbed" the deceased, but had reached towards her chest (rather than towards her neck), although it was "possible" that he had made "some contact with her neck area". I infer that this somewhat tendentious document had been prepared by one of the prisoner's then legal representatives, but even so the prisoner was prepared to sign it.

When he was interviewed by the police on 12 November, the prisoner elaborated upon those statements but many issues remained unresolved, and it was not until the agreed statement of facts was produced this week that any direct admission was made by the prisoner - other than by his plea, when the precise act causing death remained unidentified - that his act of grabbing the deceased by the throat caused her death (by vaso-vagal inhibition). He told the police that he did not know why he had visited the deceased, but that he had been walking past her home when he decided to do so on the spur of the moment. He claimed that she was a good friend, and that there had been no animosity, although he said later in the interview that he had wanted to talk to the deceased and for "for the animosity to stop". He said that they had had a "generalised" discussion. The mention of the money owing to his father was "sort of brushed over", he said, because it had been "all over and done with" for six to twelve months.

In explanation of the discussion becoming heated after something had been said about the deceased's late husband, the prisoner said that the deceased and her husband had minded the security business when he and his then wife (their daughter) had had a holiday, and that, as a result of ill health following a heart attack, her husband had become critical of him to such an extent that he had got tired of it. He said that the prisoner had become "fired up a fair bit", apparently as a result of his attitude towards her late husband, and that she was defending him. There has been no attempt by the prisoner to explain the tenuous logic of this explanation. He has not given evidence.

The prisoner went on to assert to the police that they had been standing and facing each other when he put his hand up, she came forward and fell, hit the chair and both fell to the ground. He said that he had put his arm up to grab her clothing, not to strike her. It was not made clear then as to whether there had been any contact - deliberate or otherwise. He was unable to give any reason for having put his arm up for that purpose. He said that he had put the deceased's body in the bath in order to "cover it up", to make it look as if she had had a heart attack in the bath. He was unable to say whether he had been satisfied that she was already dead when he did so. He was, he said, in a "sheer panic". In relation to the alcohol which he had consumed that day, the prisoner said that he was "pissed" when he went to the deceased's home. When asked to describe what he meant by that expression, he said that he thought that that was an interesting question and something which he had never thought about. He finally stated that he had felt in quite a relaxed, easygoing, mood.
I am satisfied for myself that he knew very well what he was doing.

None of these somewhat differing versions fit the medical evidence. As I have already said, the prisoner did not give evidence himself. I am unimpressed by any of those different versions, and I am left with the conclusion based upon the medical evidence that the attack upon the deceased involved substantial violence. The Crown accepts that the killing was not pre-meditated, but it does not accept that the incident itself was merely a spur of the moment one.
It is manifestly clear to me that the prisoner grabbed the deceased by the throat for an appreciable period. No satisfactory explanation has been given to exclude the inevitable conclusion in all the circumstances that the action was done as a hostile act, affected to at least some extent by the animosity which he held towards the deceased. The evidence does not permit me to reach a satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt that he intended her some form of injury, but the hostility with which it was done constitutes a matter of aggravation in the manslaughter which occurred. The objective gravity of the offence was in my view very serious.

The prisoner has a criminal record. In Queensland, he was fined $600 for failing to take precautions to secure weapons and to produce a register (I assume a firearms register). He opted to undertake community service in lieu of the fine, but he failed to perform it and the community service order was revoked. I do not know the circumstances of those offences. He was also found guilty of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, breaking and entering a dwelling house at night with intent, and two charges of assault. The victims' versions of these events were before me on the voir dire but they have not been re-tendered. However, the remarks of the judge in Queensland District
Court sufficiently identify the circumstances of the offences to show that the offences arose out of a suspected sexual intrigue and somewhat immature conduct on the part of the prisoner. Pursuant to what seems to be an equivalent to <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), the judge did not record any convictions, but released the prisoner on a recognizance to be of good behaviour for three years. The prisoner was still subject to that recognizance at the time when he killed the deceased, and that too is a matter of aggravation in relation to the manslaughter. The prisoner has also been convicted in New South Wales of possessing property stolen outside the State, being a tape recording device belonging to the Queensland Police. He was fined $750.

I turn now to the subjective material put forward on behalf of the prisoner.
He received a Duke of Edinburgh Award in 1964, when he was sixteen years of age. (He is now fortyeight years of age.) His twenty years in the Army were very successful. He rose to the rank of sergeant, and references prepared at or around the time of his discharge speak highly of his motivation, honesty and professionalism. He received a Commendation for Brave Conduct in 1982 for having in 1980 saved the life of a recruit whom he was training in the use of live hand grenades and who had fumbled the grenade when throwing it. The grenade had dropped back at their feet in the throwing bay, and the normal evacuation procedure had to be aborted because the grenade was in the safety pit with them. He wrestled the frightened recruit bodily into another area of the throwing bay and shielded his body with his own from the explosion which occurred seconds later. A reference from a former colleague in the Army also attests to the prisoner having saved his young son's life when the child fell overboard from a yacht some years ago. The prisoner deserves great credit for those actions.

There are also in evidence a number of references from friends and employers which speak highly as to the prisoner's conduct - as to his honesty, reliability and professionalism - and as well as to the respect in which his family is held in the community. His behaviour in custody since his arrest in
September 1995 has been well regarded by the prison authorities. He is the
Deputy Governor's Clerk (or "sweeper", as the position is more familiarly known), who has assessed him as being very capable, a good worker and as having a good influence upon other inmates. He says that the prisoner's overall behaviour and attitudes are an excellent example for other inmates to follow, that he gets on well with the other inmates and with the staff (both custodial and non-custodial), and that his easygoing nature often proves useful in calming and assisting other inmates who turn to him for advice. The
Deputy Governor says that the prisoner's efforts in his work are an asset to his overseers.

The prisoner has undergone a number of education courses, including some provided by the Tertiary and Further Education system. The Senior Education
Officer reports that he is highly motivated with a consistent and excellent focus in seeking to improve himself, showing great determination and dedication. He sees little or no difficulty for the prisoner in obtaining employment upon his release. The same positive influence upon other inmates is noticed. Another of the TAFE teachers reports favourably upon his self- discipline and organizational skills, and refers also to his steadying influence on more volatile members of her group. She says that he has a realistic and positive attitude to his time in gaol. Again, all of this is to the great credit of the prisoner. His subjective circumstances may fairly be described as very strongly persuasive.

However, it is always important in seeking to determine the sentence appropriate to a particular crime to have regard to the gravity of the offence viewed objectively, for without such an assessment the other factors requiring consideration before arriving at the proper sentence to be imposed cannot properly be given their place. Except in well-defined circumstances such as the youth or the mental incapacity of the offender, public deterrence is generally regarded as the main purpose of punishment, and the subjective considerations relating to the particular prisoner (however persuasive) are necessarily subsidiary to the duty of the courts to see that the sentence which is imposed will operate as a powerful factor in preventing the commission of similar crimes by those who may otherwise be tempted by the prospect that only light punishment will be imposed: Regina versus Dodd [(1991) A Crim R 349] at 354.

What all of those principles make clear is that rehabilitation (or reform) - the hope that the offender will be released back into the community a better person than when he or she left it - is only one of the purposes of punishment and that, when some measure of rehabilitation has been achieved, such a subjective consideration remains necessarily subsidiary to the need for the sentence to act as a deterrent to the public. There was debate before me as to the extent to which this principle should be applied in those cases of homicide which, like the present, arise out of domestic circumstances.

It was submitted that - unlike the burglars and the drug dealers, who do not ever contemplate being caught and so do not care about the consequences - the person who commits an unpremeditated and spontaneous manslaughter is unlikely to have had any contemplation of either being caught or the consequences.
Public deterrence, it was said, would be ineffective in such a case. I do not accept that the prisoner's action here was spontaneous, but the point nevertheless remains one to be considered. In my view, the principle is one of universality, but there is no general rule as to how it is to be applied in every case. Each case must be considered in relation to its own circumstances.
Almost everyone's actions are conditioned to at least some extent by their knowledge of what the community believes to be right or wrong. The duty of the courts is to ensure that that knowledge is underscored by a knowledge also that a failure to act in accordance with these beliefs will have serious consequences. In the present case, I see no reason to reduce the application of that universal principle.

It was also submitted that, because sentences these days receive little publicity except in relation to the very serious (or sensationalised) cases, there is no opportunity for public deterrence to work. That argument, too, is rejected. It is not a question of the public knowing the sentences in particular cases; it is a question of the public obtaining (or retaining) a perception that the courts will deal severely with crimes of this nature.

There was also debate before me as to the extent to which the prisoner's plea should be considered as contrition on his part. A plea of guilty is a matter which is taken into account when imposing sentence. Section 439 of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) does no more than reflect the common law. However, the degree of leniency to be afforded for the plea will depend upon many different factors. It may be taken into account in mitigation as a factor in its own right, independently of contrition, for the purely utilitarian considerations of the time and cost involved in a trial. The trial in the present case was estimated to last five weeks in addition to what was expected to be more than a week's hearing of the voir dire in advance of the trial. Although the sentencing proceedings have in fact consumed a lot of time, there has necessarily been a substantial savings in both cost and time by the plea.

Contrition, however, is a different matter. The plea did not come very early.
Many lies were told to the police as to the prisoner's involvement in the killing. Whether or not it was a result of over-enthusiastic legal advice, the prisoner permitted an issue to be raised on the voir dire in relation to the cause of death where the only remotely credible medical opinion presented as to there being a reasonable possibility that the deceased had died in the bath depended upon the consultant pathologist's assumption that the only circumstances to be considered were that the body was found in the bath in which there was water and there had been more water - a situation which he knew to be false. There were the differing versions given, even after the plea had been entered, as to what he had in fact done. Although the Crown case on murder may have had its difficulties, the circumstantial case against him that he was nevertheless responsible for her death was a strong one. The plea followed some discussion during the voir dire as to the likelihood of a verdict of manslaughter. In my view, his plea of guilty to manslaughter resulted to a substantial extent from a recognition of the inevitable.
(Reference may be made to the authorities collected in Regina versus Winchester [(1992) 58 A Crim R 345] at .) I have taken the plea into account, but more for the utilitarian considerations to which I have referred than as any particular demonstration of contrition.

I have not taken the prisoner's consumption of alcohol into account in mitigation. I have already said that I am satisfied that he knew very well what he was doing. In any event, the excessive consumption of alcohol was not out of character for him at the time: Regina versus Coleman [(1990) 47 A Crim R ] at 327 [SLAR: [(1991) 174 CLR 629].] 
Finally, there was debate before me as to whether there were demonstrated by the evidence special circumstances within the meaning of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) which warranted a variation of the statutory ratio between the minimum and additional terms which that section provides. I was at first unconvinced that there were, but upon reflection I am satisfied that, because this is the prisoner's first custodial sentence, he will require a longer than usual additional term under supervision to assist him at his stage of life to fit back into the community when released on parole. Such supervision may be required for a period of up to three years: Sentencing (General) Regulation , cl 10(2). The longer than usual additional term requires a corresponding reduction in the minimum term.

Graham Anthony George Sloane, for the manslaughter of Barbara Mavis Wilson, I impose upon you a sentence of penal servitude for eight years, consisting of a minimum term of five years and an additional term of three years. The minimum term commenced on 15 September 1995, and it will conclude on 14 September 2000. You will become eligible for parole on 15 September 2000.
 * * * 
