

Rdj International P/L and Anor versus Preformed Line Products (Australia) P/L [1997] NSWSC 250 (7 July 1997) 
RDJ INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD & ANOR versus PREFORMED LINE PRODUCTS (AUST) PTY
LTD /95 
FRIDAY 3 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Up until 2 July 1994 the plaintiffs owned a business that manufactured jars and pails with lids. On 7 July 1994 the plaintiffs sold that business to the defendant and the parties executed a deed on that date. The salient portions of that deed are cll 3.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3 and 23.6, which are as follows: "3.1. The purchase price for the businesses hereby sold is: (i) the amount of $1.00; plus the terms payment sum determined in accordance with clause 4 of this Deed for goodwill; plus the sum of $300,000 for the plant and equipment; plus the value of the inventory calculated in accordance with Schedule 9.
 .1. Additional Payment 
In addition to the amounts referred to in clause 3.2(a) and (b), the purchaser shall pay an amount equivalent to 5% of the Dinpak Turnover as defined in this clause.
 .2 Dinpak Turnover 
Dinpak Turnover shall be the amount of all revenue received by the purchaser from sales of jars and pails during the period of three (3) years commencing on the completion date.
 .3 Instalments 
The additional amount to be paid pursuant to this clause shall be paid by the purchaser to the vendor by quarterly instalments calculated in arrears as from the completion date. The amount payable in respect of the preceding quarter shall be paid to the vendors or as the vendors or their solicitors may in writing direct, within fourteen (14) days of the end of each quarter. The purchaser shall provide reasonable evidence of the value of sales as referred to in clause 4.2 made during the preceding quarter and the method of calculation of the instalment when making each payment. The vendors shall be entitled at their own expense to audit the sales figures provided by the purchaser on an annual basis and the purchaser undertakes to make available to any auditor nominated by the vendors, all such records as may be required by the auditor for the purpose of auditing all the revenue received by the purchaser. This clause will not merge on completion.
 .6 Governing Law and Jurisdiction: 
This Deed is governed by, and is to be construed in accordance with, the law of New South Wales and the parties submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of New South Wales and any court hearing appeals from those courts." 
The $300,000 referred to in 3.1 was duly paid and the royalties referred to in .1 were paid at least up until the end of 1995 and somewhere between $30,000 and $40,000 was received by the plaintiffs. However, on 20 December 1995 the defendant ceased carrying on the subject business. Since then only nominal royalty payments have been made on residual product in stock.

On 31 October 1995 the plaintiffs filed a summons seeking a direction that there was an implied term in the deed that the defendant would conduct the business sold up until 7 July 1997. There were other orders sought in the summons as well.

The matter came before me on 7 December 1995 when I ordered that the question of construction arising from para 1 of the summons be determined separately and the matter be placed in the short notice list. That in due course meant that the matter was placed in my list as a short matter to deal with this particular point.

Today the plaintiffs sought to amend the summons and have me deal with other matters as well, but I declined the invitation to do that, though if time remains after delivery of these reasons the matter can be re-examined.

I received evidence from Mr Sullivan, who was the controlling director of the plaintiffs for all intents and purposes, and from Mr Humphreys, who at that stage was the managing director of the defendant. These gentlemen gave evidence on behalf of the plaintiffs. There was also evidence from Mr
Schweizer, the solicitor and now a director of the defendant, and some evidence from Mr Vella, the current company secretary of the defendant.

There were a considerable number of objections to the evidence that was tendered on the ground of relevance. The basis of these objections was that it was not permissible for the court to look at this material for the purpose of considering whether it should make a declaration under para 1 of the summons.
Under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) all evidence which is relevant is admissible and, generally speaking, all evidence which is irrelevant is inadmissible. It is difficult thus for the court to adopt the traditional method of admitting evidence subject to relevance. What
I did was to reserve my decision on the objections to evidence and then to take cross-examination on the objectionable material on the basis that if the evidence was not admitted I would also strike out the cross-examination.

As things turned out, it seemed to me that part of the evidence was admissible and part was not. However, as the part which was not, strictly speaking, admissible has no real bearing on the result of the case, probably the best thing to do is for me to rule that what I have summarized below is relevant and admissible and to admit it, but reject the balance.

The background or factual matrix of the deed of 7 July was that the plaintiffs were in a commercial relationship with Jet Plastics (Australia) Pty Ltd, which was acquired by the defendant. The defendant let the plaintiffs know that its trade with Jet was twenty-five per cent of the custom of Jet Plastics and that the defendant was about to compete with the plaintiffs. It thus invited the plaintiffs to sell. Mr Sullivan made it quite clear that in those negotiations he realised that all the aces were in the hands of his opponent and he had to do the best deal he possibly could. The initial price that Mr Sullivan asked for was $718,000, but Mr Humphreys was only prepared to pay $500,000. Mr
Sullivan rejected this, but Mr Humphreys then suggested a method whereby honour could be satisfied, that is the price would be $300,000 "Cash up front" plus a royalty over three years.

Questions were put to both Mr Sullivan and Mr Humphreys as to the royalty being open-ended. Mr Humphreys denied this. He appeared to be a very experienced person of business. He said that the defendant had a forecast of sales and he worked out his possible exposure from those forecasts, which he thought were conservative. Indeed, the evidence is that during the due diligence phase of the sale piles of invoices, accounts and other documents were made available by the plaintiffs to the defendant.

Accordingly, whilst as a matter of just looking at the legal document one might have thought that the royalty question was open-ended, the men of commerce in the real world knew otherwise.

I believe that from the evidence they are the only matters of background that are fit to be considered as part of the factual matrix, except I should say that neither party turned its mind to the question as to whether the business would be continued for three years and neither party turned its mind to what might happen if it was not commercially feasible for the defendant to continue to operate the business.

The problem that arises in the instant case is not a new one. Cases can be found in the law reports back to 1599 (see Morris versus Lutterel <case>;
Cro Eliz 672; [78 ER 910)] where similar problems have presented themselves. The method of dealing with the problem has changed a little over the years, as has the classification as to what is the legal method of classifying the way in which the courts deal with this particular problem. The court very early on abandoned the method of merely looking to see the words that were actually used and the cases, to use the words of Prof Patterson in his article
Constructive Conditions in Contracts [(1942) 42 Columbia Law Review ] at 932: "...indicates the ascendancy of the principle of cooperation over the principle that obligations are to be literally fulfilled." 
Just how this ascendancy of the principle of cooperation is to be worked out in individual cases is the subject of many learned articles. The father of
American contract law, Prof Langdell, said that it was because of a "condition implied-in-fact" which he distinguished from a condition implied in law; see for instance Patterson's article at p 929. Other analyses were that one must look to see what is the substance of the contract and then one construes the contract as containing whatever ancillary provisions as are required to carry out the substantive intentions of the parties. This analysis sometimes requires one to draw a very very fine line. One has got to work out whether the parties needed to cooperate together in order to bring about their agreed result or whether the contract has cut off obligations at a certain point and there is no requirement on a party to do anything more than was absolutely necessary to make the contract workable; see for instance Mona Oil Equipment
Co versus Rhodesia Railways Ltd [[1949] 2 All ER 1014] at .

The Australian and English rule of cooperation does not go as far as the Roman law doctrine of good faith or the implied term that is apparent in New York commercial contracts that each party is to carry out the contract in good faith. The Australian law does not require a person to interrupt his or her own activities merely to help the other if he or she sees the other getting into difficulties (see Burrows' Contractual Cooperation Under the Implied
Term (1968) 31 Mod LR 390 at 404), but there are circumstances where the law will insist that parties cooperate to bring about the substantial requirement of the contract as shown by their common intention. This principle may operate in two ways. First, it may mean that a person is excused performance if the duty of cooperation falls down. Secondly, the person affected may sue for damages for breach of the implied term as to cooperation.

It is also clear that this duty is not limited to cases where there is an absolute failure to cooperate because of a capricious decision. It may operate to sound in damages to the other party, even where the person who is not cooperating has made a decision based on that person's legitimate economic interests. Inchbald versus The Western Neilgherry Coffee Tea and Cinchona
Plantation Co Ltd <case>; [(1864) 17 CB (NS) 733] is such a case. Again, the person can even be liable or dispense the other person from liability if he has negligently not cooperated. So, in The Balsesia [[1927] P 115](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1927%5d%20P%20115 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 119, a tug owner was still able to sue for damages even though the ship it was towing had foundered because the reason for foundering was that the ship being towed failed to slip its anchor at the right moment because of the negligence of the captain. The captain had tried to cooperate, but had negligently failed and the condition of cooperation gave damages to the tug owner.

Counsel have addressed in this matter on the basis of the doctrine of implied term as set out in the High Court's decision in Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New South Wales <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337], which built on the five propositions of the Privy Council in
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Hastings SC (1977) 180 CLR 266, 283; <case>; [52 ALJR 20](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=52%20ALJR%2020 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 26, or alternatively on the decision of the High Court in Secured Income
Real Estate (Australia) Ltd versus St Martins Investments Pty Ltd <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR 596.] It is perhaps unfortunate that these days we tend to analyse the present problem in terms of fixed rules. As Cooke P says in Vickery v
Waitaki International Ltd [[1992] 2 NZLR 58] at 64 the first question must always be to work out from the express terms and the substance of the contract what was the intention of the parties. It is only after doing that exercise that one can turn to see whether implied terms are necessary, either under the Secured Income situation or the Codelfa situation.

Mr Bevan for the defendant says that the present case cannot come within the
Secured Income category because the substance of the contract was that the vendor had the option of selling for a lump sum or wagering whether they would take a smaller lump sum with royalties, which royalties could be either nil or $400,000 or perhaps more. He says that when one looks at the contract the price is an indeterminate amount and the Secured Income type cases do not cover that ground. He says that one gets reinforcement for his point of view when one looks at cl 4.3, the audit provision. The seller was to have no control over the price for which the product was subsequently vended by the purchaser. Its only control was to see what the actual sales were.

With respect, I do not see how these distinctions cut across the general thread that can be seen from the authoritiies. If one can see from the contract, including its factual matrix, that the parties have made a common assumption that a certain state of affairs needs continue in order for the contractractual purposes to be achieved, one does not merely act on the strict literal construction of the contract. Rather one looks to see what other provision should be implied which, had the parties turned their minds to it (or had an impartial bystander turned his or her mind to it), they (or he or she) would have said "yes, of course, that is necessary as a provision in this contract in order to make it work".

Although I am speaking in terms of "implied condition", it must be remembered that there are at least five types of implied conditions. I adverted to these in Carlton United Breweries Ltd versus Tooth & Co Ltd [(1986) 7 IPR ] at -6 where, quoting the words of Hodgson J in an earlier judgment in the same case, I listed: "(i) Implications contained in express words of the contract; ...

Implications from the `nature of the contract itself'; ...

Implications from usage; ... [and] 
Implications from considerations of business efficacy." 
There is probably a fifth category and that is common intention which would permit Equity to rectify a contract by adding a term.

Although the cases tend to put the present type of implied condition into the fourth category, if one studies the learned writings on the topic which summarise most of the cases over the last 400 years, such as the two articles
I have referred to and the article by Prof Stoljar in [(1953) 31 Canadian Bar
Review 231], one can see that this classification into the fourth category is not necessarily correct in the sense that it cannot explain all the cases. However, for present purposes I will continue to so classify it.

The various cases usually fall into three categories. First, there are cases where a builder is either excused from performance or can get damages or the contract price if he is impeded by the non-cooperation of the proprietor. An example is Roberts versus The Bury Improvement Commissioners [(1870) LR 5 CP .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281870%29%20LR%205%20CP%20310 "View LawCiteRecord" ) A second class of case is where an estate agent is prevented from earning his commission because the owner sells the property himself. A well known case
Luxor (Eastbourne) Ltd versus Cooper <case>; B&S 341; [ [122] ER .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) 
In all three classes of cases it is held almost without exception that the claimant is entitled to succeed because there is an implied term that the circumstance from which the person is to get their remuneration will not by the voluntary act of the other party be terminated. However, the principle applies in a wider class of case than these. The classic illustration is
Foreman State Trust and Savings Bank versus Tauber [180 NE 827] (1932) (Illinois) where there was a marriage settlement in which a husband promised that should his wife survive him his estate would pay her $20,000. The husband shot his wife and then shot himself, so putting it out of her power to survive him. It was held that the wife's executors were entitled to $20,000.

I could, but will not, refer to many other authorities, but I think it is only necessary to revisit shortly the Inchbald case. That is one where the plaintiff was retained as a broker to dispose of shares and he was to receive [sterling]100 down and [sterling]400 when all the shares had been allotted. By an act of the directors, without any default on the part of the broker, the company was wound up before the whole of the shares had been disposed of. The broker sued for his [sterling]400 and succeeded for [sterling]250, that being the amount which the court considered was the loss of the chance of earning the [sterling]400.

Willes J in giving the leading judgment said at ER p 297:- "One who enters into a contract is bound to perform his engagement in substance. This is illustrated by the case in Bulstrode, where the defendant contracted to deliver to the plaintiff a horse, but poisoned him before delivery. That was held not to be a substantial performance of the contract, because one of the contracting parties had done an act which prevented the other from having the benefit of it. I apprehend that wherever money is to be paid by one man to another upon a given event, the party upon whom is cast the obligation to pay is liable to the party who is to receive the money, if he does any act which prevents or makes it less probable that he should receive it. This is a clear proposition of good sense as well as law." 
Although I have perused all three volumes of Bulstrode I cannot identify the case which is referred to. The concurrent report in [13 WR 95] suggests it is Lea v
Adams (1616) 3 Buls 25; <case>; [81
ER 30.] However, I cannot see how this is so. It is more likely to be Quick versus Ludborrow Buls 29; <case>; [81
ER 25.] 
Turning then to the instant case. The contract was that in addition to the $300,000 there would be paid an amount equivalent to five per cent of the amount of revenue received by the defendant from sales of jars and pails during three years. Both parties had in mind the forecast of sales. Neither turned its mind to the question of this business ceasing. It seems to me that both parties, or an innocent but alert bystander, if asked at the time would have said that there was an obligation on the defendant not voluntarily to do anything which would make it materially more difficult for the royalty stream to flow. This term would satisfy the five prong test set out in the BP
Refinery versus Hastings SC case. The test is made clear by Dr Burrows at p 407 of the article I quoted.

Mr Bevan puts that it would have been quite possible for the defendant to have sold the jars and pails at an under value or otherwise so adjust its accounting that there was no revenue received from these sales, that the audit provision in cl 4.3 would not have been sufficient for the purchaser to have been able to do anything about it so that why, he asks rhetorically, should that be allowed and ceasing the business for good commercial reasons not be allowed? The answer to this is that the situation which Mr Bevan posits would not be allowed. Anything that made it materially more difficult for the substance of the contract to be fulfilled would have been a breach of the implied term that must be read supplementally to cl 4.2.

This, I think, is sufficient for me to grant a declaration not as strong as in para 1 of the summons, but one which may be sufficient for the plaintiffs, that is that there is an implied term in the deed of 7 July 1994 that the defendant will not do any voluntary act which will make it materially more difficult for the royalty stream referred to in cl 4 of the deed to continue up until 7 July 1997. It may be that that declaration should be refined and that can be done by short minutes of order being brought in.

The next questions that may or may not worry the court are (a) whether there has been a breach of that implied term; and (b) if there has been, what are the damages? 
Mr Bevan says that the financial position of sales of the product made it imperative that the defendant stop selling the product. If that is so, it may be that there is no breach of the implied term not voluntarily to cease activities so that the royalty stream is cut off. However, Mr Sullivan's case is that there was mismanagement or deliberate white-anting in order to make it appear that the product was uneconomic. If that be the case, then it may very well be that the judge who hears the final trial of this matter may consider that there has been a breach.

If there has been a breach then the court will have to turn its mind as to what damages flow. The damages cannot exceed the amount of royalty which might reasonably be expected to flow. However, as was shown by the Inchbald case, the court will have to work out the chance of recovering an amount, which chance was shot to pieces by the breach of the implied term.

As the plaintiffs have substantially succeeded on today's argument, the defendant must pay the plaintiffs' costs of the hearing of the separate question arising under paragraph 1 of the summons. I reserve further consideration and further costs. I stand the matter over for mention and in order for short minutes to be brought in on Monday 3 June 1996 at 9.50am.
 * * * 
