

Regina versus Osman Matter No 60101/97 [1998] NSWSC 13 (10 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 April 1998 
REGINA versus ERNEST JAMES OSMAN /97 March 1998 
Wood J, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Pain DCJ 
FILE NO/S: 60101 of 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 25 February 1998 
DELIVERED: 10 March 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Ernest James OSMAN 
JUDGMENT OF: Wood, Smart, Sperling JJ 
COUNSEL: * APPELLANT - G R James QC * RESPONDENT - L M B Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: * APPELLANT - Galloways * RESPONDENT - SE O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: 
CATCHWORDS: 
Criminal law and procedure - appeal against conviction - sexual intercourse without consent (Crimes Act <case> I) - exclusion of evidence as to nature of relationship between appellant and complainant. Whether misdirection to jury concerning evidence relied upon by the appellant as evidencing a motive on the part of the complainant to fabricate the allegations. Relationship evidence should have been admitted as having significant probative value. Misdirection resulting in jury being misled. Appeal upheld. New trial ordered.

No. of pages: 31 
REGINA versus Ernest James OSMAN 
The complainant alleged that some time after her relationship with the appellant ended, he had sexual intercourse with her, without her consent, and before doing so struck her occasioning actual bodily harm. The appellant denied that the relationship had ceased and alleged that the act of sexual intercourse had been with the consent of the complainant. It was his case that after intercourse the complainant had become angry, accused him of having an affair with another woman, and then struck him. The injury she sustained on his account resulted from his attempt to protect himself. 
Evidence which the appellant sought to lead showing that the complainant was given to moodswings and had struck him on prior occasions was rejected in reliance upon Browne versus Dunn. Upon the day after the alleged offence the appellant noticed in the apartment a photograph of himself and another woman naked in bed together. The photograph had previously been kept concealed in a suitcase in which both the accused and complainant kept personal papers. At trial the defence submitted that the complainant had made a false complaint, motivated by jealousy which was triggered by the photograph.

The accused was acquitted of an offence charged under S 61 J(1)l Crimes Act (aggravated sexual assault) but found guilty of one count of sexual intercourse without consent under (Crimes Act S 61 I). He was also acquitted of an offence of indecent assault arising out of the same incident.

His appeal against conviction was on two grounds: ) That the trial judge had erred in excluding the evidence concerning the moodiness and prior occasions when the complainant had struck the appellant.

Held: 
The evidence should have been admitted as the matter had been put to the complainant in cross examination, and the rule in Browne versus Dunn did not apply. The evidence was admissible in relation to the nature of the relationship, and to the issues of consent and aggravation.

Applied: 
R versus Lock [91 ACR 356] ) That in summing up, the trial judge had misdirected the jury concerning the photograph and had failed to properly put the defence case to the jury.

Held: 
It was legitimate for the appellant, on the evidence admitted in the trial, to put to the jury, as a reasonable possibility that the complainant had seen the photograph before making her complaint, and that it was the trigger for such complaint. It was not necessary for him to establish that it was in fact the explanation for her complaint. By directing the jury to avoid speculation on the matter, and by incorrectly summarising the defence submission, the summing up effectively took the defence case away from the jury and misled them as to the way in which they should approach the evidence.

Applied 
Regina versus Al Khair NSW Court of Criminal Appeal 20 June 1994, unreported.

ORDERS 
Appeal upheld. Conviction set aside. New trial ordered.

REGINA versus Ernest James OSMAN 
JUDGMENT 
WOOD J: The appellant was indicted on 17 February 1987 before his Honour Judge Pain QC, on one count of aggravated sexual assault contrary to S 61J(1), the relevant circumstance of aggravation comprising the malicious infliction of actual bodily harm on the complainant. A second count of indecent assault contrary to S 61L Crimes Act was preferred, arising out of the same incident. The jury returned an alternative verdict to the first count of guilty of sexual intercourse without consent, contrary to S 61 I. The appellant was acquitted of the second count. He was sentenced in relation to the first count to an overall2 sentence of three years and four months, made up of a minimum term of two years six months penal servitude, and an additional term of ten months. He now brings an appeal against conviction and sentence. 
The Crown case: 
From some time in 1994 the complainant and the appellant lived together in a de facto relationship in Hong Kong. In April 1995 they moved to Sydney. At the time of the alleged offences they were living in rented premises and working for the same employer.

The complainant said that some three weeks prior to 6 February 1996, she informed the appellant that the relationship was over. According to her, sexual relations then ceased although they continued to live in the same apartment, pending expiry of their lease. The complainant said that sometimes she slept in the same bed as the appellant, and on other occasions she slept on a sofa bed in the living room.

At 5.00am on 6 February 1996, the complainant observed the appellant, who had been out of the apartment earlier that night, entering the bedroom naked. He turned the light on and kissed her on the forehead. She told him to leave her alone, but he said that he wanted to discuss their relationship. She replied that she was not interested in talking at that stage, and turned the light off. He turned the light back on and began to shout at her, saying that she always hurt him and because she had hurt him so much, now he was going to hurt her. He rolled her on her back, forcibly separated her legs and placed his body between them. She resisted and he punched her on her temple, making her dizzy. He said, `Look what you've made me do. I've hit you and I'd never hit you'.

He then seized her wrists in one hand. She managed to release one hand and struck him on the upper arm. He again punched her, called her a bitch and spat in her face. He slapped her across the left side of her face, striking her nose. She tasted blood in the back of her throat. He then pulled off her black underpants, ripping them in the process. He took a jar of lubricant which was beside the bed and put lubricant onto his penis and onto the complainant. He alternatively masturbated himself and fondled her before putting his penis in her vagina. Her head was gradually pushed up against the wall behind the bed and after a time it began to hit that wall. The appellant ejaculated in her and then refused to allow her to get up until she apologised for hurting him.
This she eventually did. These circumstances gave rise to the first count.

When the complainant went to the bathroom, she noticed that the left side of her face was red and a bit swollen. Her jaw was painful and her wrists were red and tender to touch. Her left hand was particularly painful. The appellant came into the bathroom, apologised, took her hand and tugged her back to bed.
He put her hand on his testicles while he masturbated. He wiped ejaculate onto the complainant's face. These further events gave rise to the second count.

The complainant acknowledged that after these events she and the appellant remained together in the bed, until about 10am. before going separately to work. After work she went to the Surry Hills Police Station to obtain information about making a complaint. No complaint was made at that time. That night she stayed at the home of a friend. On the following day, i.e. 7
February 1996, at 4.00pm she returned to the Police Station and reported the events of the preceding morning. She was examined at the King George V
Hospital. Genital and vaginal examination revealed no abnormality. Swabs taken from the high and low vaginal areas were subsequently tested and revealed the presence of semen in each area. Bruising to the appellant's left upper arm was noted along with a tender spot on her left temple and a very sore left wrist.
There was no complaint of tenderness in relation to her face or the back of her head. Following the hospital attendance she provided a statement to police at Surry Hills station, and then went to the apartment with police at about pm, to collect some of her belongings.

The police spoke to the appellant at the apartment during this visit. They found a tube of lubricant in the bedroom and a pair of torn pants in the kitchen garbage bag. The appellant participated in an electronically recorded interview, which was tendered by the Crown. In the course of this interview he stated that he had not hit or slapped the complainant or had sexual intercourse with her on the previous morning. He acknowledged, however, that after coming home he had tried to kiss and cuddle her. She said that she did not want to talk to him. An argument ensued, in the course of which he asked her why she hurt him so much. He agreed in this interview that he had become angry and torn her underpants, although according to him this occurred after he found them lying on the floor of the bedroom.

The defence case: 
The appellant gave evidence at the trial, denying his guilt. He said that the complainant had not informed him prior to 5th February 1996, that the relationship was over. He also denied that she had slept in the sitting room, or that sexual relations with her had ceased, over the preceding three weeks.

He acknowledged having been out with his parents and later with friends on the night of 5/6th February, before returning home about 5am. He said that on his return he found the complainant awake in bed. He had a shower and got into bed with her. She was wearing one of his T shirts, but no underwear. They kissed and cuddled and then had consensual intercourse.

The complainant then accused him of having an affair with another woman. She pushed him off and called him names. She kicked and punched him and he held one of her wrists to protect himself. He left the bed, and seeing the black underpants she had left on the floor tore them out of anger. He said that this was an act of frustration arising out of her mood swing and accusations. They then moved to the lounge room where they began to talk and calm down. They kissed and cuddled and returned to bed. The complainant touched his testicles while he masturbated. They then went to sleep before rising at about 10am, after which each went separately to work.

On the afternoon or early evening of 7th February, the appellant met a female at a Sydney hotel and took her back to the apartment. After watching a video he had sexual intercourse with her on the sofa bed in the living room. It was after this occurred that the appellant noticed a photograph of himself and another female which he said had been given to him some time earlier. It was one of three photographs sitting on the lamp table beside the sofa bed.

The photograph of immediate relevance was one which he had earlier hidden inside a pouch, placed in a suitcase in the corner of the bedroom. Both the appellant and the complainant kept their private papers in this suitcase. It showed the appellant and another woman naked in bed. It was imprinted with the date 19th July 1995. The other two photos were of him alone, naked under a shower. The appellant said that he did not know how the photographs came to be on the table. He had not seen them since they had been placed in the suitcase some months previously. It was the defence suggestion that the complainant had found this photograph, and had then made a false complaint, by way of revenge for the appellant's infidelity to her.

The appellant denied hitting, slapping or punching the complainant on the morning of 6th February. He also denied that she had hit her head against the wall during intercourse. He explained his denial, in the record of interview, of having had sexual intercourse with the complainant, on the morning of the alleged offence, as a response to her accusation of rape.

The brother of the appellant gave evidence to the effect that the complainant had spoken to him by telephone at 2.00pm. on 7th February. In that conversation, she stated that there had been a fight between her and the appellant, but she made no mention of having been sexually assaulted or of suspecting the appellant of having had an affair. She did say that she did not want to see him again, and indicated her intention to seek a restraining order against him. She also mentioned wanting back the sum of $2,000 which he owed her.

The appellant's father gave evidence of a further telephone conversation with her at about 11pm. that day, during which she said that the appellant had been having an affair. She also made mention of seeing a photograph of the appellant and of another female naked in bed. She said that she had informed the police that the appellant had sexually assaulted her, and that he had been arrested. Mr. Osman Senior said that when he went to the apartment, on 8th
February, he saw the relevant photograph on top of a table near the curtains.

In the light of the competing versions concerning the events of 6th February, and the fact that the critical issue in the trial was that of consent, the nature of the relationship between the appellant and the complainant assumed central significance. In essence, it was the Crown case that the relationship had been effectively terminated by the complainant for about three weeks, and that on 6th February, having been earlier rebuffed, the appellant chose to physically force himself on the complainant. It was the defence case that the relationship had not been terminated, that after having consensual intercourse on 6th February the complainant suffered a mood swing of the kind to which she was accustomed and assaulted him, and that as a result of her discovery that he had been involved in a sexual liaison with someone else, she made a false claim of sexual assault against him.

The grounds of appeal relied upon each concern this aspect of the trial, it being the appellant's submission that by reason of the exclusion of certain evidence, and by reason of a direction given by his Honour in the summing up, he was precluded from having his case properly placed before the jury. I will deal with these matters in turn.

Ground 1 - the learned trial Judge erred in excluding evidence from
Gregory Le Chat relating to the nature of the relationship between the appellant and the complainant 
The evidence excluded related to an incident of which Mr. Le Chat, a character witness, was in a position to depose. As appears from a statement tendered on appeal but not at the trial, since the matter was not subject to any examination on the voir dire, he would have given evidence to the following effect: "I know the complainant Louise very well. During the time that Ernest was keeping company with her I went out with them several times and I visited their apartment where they lived together many times. I remember vividly
Louise shouting at Ernest and I remember two occasions on which she struck him. I observed him to be quiet and restrained on such occasions. I formed the opinion that she dominated him in the relationship." 
The appellant had earlier been cross examined concerning his assertion during the record of interview that the complainant had slapped him before the day of the incident charged.

Counsel sought to tender the evidence of Mr. Le Chat upon the basis that it went to balance the cross examination of the appellant as to his tendency to aggression, and to support the defence case that it was the complainant who had been the aggressor at the time of the alleged offence. The Crown did not object to the evidence on the basis of relevance; rather, it took a Browne v
Dunn (1894) 6 R 67 point.

In dealing with the argument, his Honour and Counsel were hampered by the lack of a transcript. A reading of the transcript which is available to us, however, reveals that this point was erroneously taken. Whether the complainant was given to mood swings, and whether she had assaulted the appellant on a prior occasion had been specifically raised with her, as the following passages of transcript show: "Q. Is it fair to say that you do tend to have mood swings? 
A. I can.

Q. You can be very happy and joyful one moment and suddenly you become angry? 
A. They're not that sudden.

Q. But you accept or you agree that you do have mood swings? 
A. But not that erratic.

Q. Well do you agree that your moodiness or mood swings was a cause of conflict between you and Ernest? 
A. It could be." ...
 "Q. There had been a previous occasion when you had hit Mr. Osman, hadn't there? 
A. When? 
Q. Do you recall, well I withdraw that. Do you recall any other occasion when -

HIS HONOUR: Well I reject the other.

LYDIARD. I withdraw that.

Q. Do you recall an occasion prior to 5 February when you in fact hit Mr.
Osman? 
A. No." 
Although it might have been preferable for the last question to have been framed in more specific terms, identifying the occasion of the alleged assault, there was no objection to it and the answer was an unequivocal negative.

This evidence assumed added significance in the light of two further matters.
The first concerns the suggestion volunteered by the complainant, in the course of her cross examination, that a week before the incident charged, the appellant had restrained her from leaving the apartment following a disagreement between them. The second relates to the fact that the appellant was cross examined at some length by the Crown, to the effect that in anger he had, prior to the date of the offence, put his foot through a plate glass coffee table and a goldfish bowl in the apartment. The sole purpose of this cross examination was to show that he had been aggressive in the relationship.

For the reasons mentioned, evidence going to the relationship was, in my view, admissible and important for the defence case. It was admissible in relation to character, and it went directly to the issue concerning the elements of consent and aggravation charged. Although no objection was taken at the trial based upon S 97 [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), I am of the view that such provision would not have operated to exclude the evidence.
It had a significant probative value as that term has been defined in Regina v Lock [91 ACR 356] at 360-361, per Hunt CJ at CL.

The Crown submission that the evidence did not have a probative value which was of importance or of consequence, because it was unrelated to an occasion of sexual contact, but rather to some social event, should be rejected. It is at odds with the cross examination of the appellant, in relation to the table incident which, on its face bore no relationship to any form of sexual contact. More significantly, it went to the nature of the relationship, the identity of the party who initiated aggression in that relationship, and the response of the other party to such aggression.

This has added significance when it is borne in mind that by its verdict, the jury must be taken not to have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the element of aggravation in relation to the first count. The circumstance of aggravation was expressly left on the basis that the Crown needed to prove that the appellant had intentionally, and without lawful excuse, inflicted actual bodily injury to the complainant immediately before sexual intercourse took place.

I leave aside the question whether a jury acting properly could, in the way this case was left, have found an absence of consent yet not have been satisfied of the element of aggravation, that being a matter more appropriate for an unsafe and unsatisfactory ground of appeal. However, the information that, on prior occasions, the complainant had assaulted the appellant, and that he had not responded physically, was a matter which in my view would have called for serious consideration by the jury on the issue of consent. It might also have gone to the credibility of the complainant. That must be taken to have already been questioned, to some degree, by reason of the finding on the issue of aggravation, and by reason of the acquittal of the appellant on the second count.

I am accordingly of the view that this ground of appeal has been made good.

Ground 2. - the learned trial Judge misdirected the Jury regarding the significance of Exhibit 6 (Ground 3) and failed properly to put the defence case to the Jury (Ground 4) 
Each of these grounds relates to the photograph of the appellant and another female in a state of undress, which both the appellant and the complainant said they saw on a table in the lounge room during the evening of 7th
February. It was the defence case that the complainant must have seen this photograph earlier than the time of her return to the flat with the police at about 10pm. that day. The inference which the defence suggested was reasonably open, was that she had seen it at some time before her decision to inform the police, and that it was the trigger for a false complaint. The Crown, however, asserted that she did not see it until after her complaint was made, and hence it could not have operated as the trigger suggested.

Again, in a case involving conflicting versions given on oath, concerning events occurring in a private bedroom, this was an important matter for the defence. Although the Crown had to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and the appellant bore no onus of proving anything, the identification of a reasonable hypothesis consistent with his innocence was, in a practical sense, very important.

As Priestley JA, said in Regina versus Al Khair NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported 20 June 1994, (at 57/58): "There is no doubt that it is legitimate for an argument to be put to the jury on behalf of an accused, in final address, that the evidence before them is as a whole susceptible of a reasonable explanation other than that the accused committed the crime, and that this is so whether or not there is evidence before the jury upon which the jury could conclude that reasonable explanation was in fact the explanation. It is not incumbent on the defence to establish the explanation; all that is necessary is that the explanation is, as a matter of reason consistent with a version of the facts open to the jury to find, upon the whole of the evidence: see Barca versus The Queen  <case>; [(1975) 133 CLR 82] especially at 105, per Gibbs, Stephen and Mason JJ. It would be wrong for a trial judge to direct a jury not to consider the possibility of such a rational alternative hypothesis, if it was not inconsistent with what it was open to the jury to find the facts to be, simply because there was no positive evidence of it." 
As I have observed, both the appellant and the complainant gave evidence to the effect that the photograph was in the lounge room on the evening of 7th
February, along with two other photographs. The appellant's father also gave evidence of seeing it there on the following day. The appellant and his father both said that it was on the small table in the corner between the sofa bed, and the curtains. A similar table, also holding a lamp, stood at the other end of the sofa bed in a more centrally located position. A third larger and lower table was positioned at the front of the sofa bed.

The complainant said in her evidence that she saw the photographs clearly on the `coffee table' after the appellant had been arrested, i.e. at a time when she was in the company of the arresting police. Whether by reference to a `coffee table' she meant the larger and lower table, or one of the lamp tables, is a little unclear, although very early in her cross examination she corrected Counsel for the appellant when she referred to one of the tables at the end of the sofa bed as a `coffee table,' pointing out that it was in fact a `lamp table'.

She said that she pointed out the photos to police, and that after seeing them she became `absolutely distraught' at the thought that the appellant had cheated on her so early in the relationship, and had `broken down and cried'.
She denied the suggestion put to her in cross examination that she had seen the photos on the evening of 5th February or early in the morning of 6th
February 1996.

It was not put to her that she had returned to the flat between the time she had gone to work at about 10am. on 6th February and returned to it at about pm. on 7th February. It was the case that she had her own key to the premises and used it to open the door for police.

Detective Barwick, who accompanied the complainant back to the flat on the evening of 7th February, had no recollection of seeing any photographs in the unit, or of anyone drawing them to his attention. He was, however, in the vicinity of the coffee table at one point when he spoke to the female whom the appellant had taken home that evening and who was still sitting on the sofa.
It had at that stage been pulled out as a bed, and it was there that she and the appellant had earlier had sexual intercourse.

The appellant gave evidence to the effect that he had not moved the three photographs out of the bag and suitcase where they were normally kept, and that he was surprised to see them on the lamp table.

There was little doubt during the trial as to the potential significance of the photographs. The cross examination of the appellant contained the following exchange: "Q. What you are suggesting to the Court, are you not, is that the reason that
Louise has made this allegation against you is because she found this photograph, is that right? 
A. A possibility.

Q. What you are inferring, are you not, is that sometime before you came home at 5am on the 6th Louise had found this photograph? 
A. That's right, a possibility.

Q. And that that was the cause of the argument you had with her after you'd had sex? 
A. A possibility.

Q. As far as you know between the time she left for work at about 10am. on 6
February and the time you found this photograph and the other two on the coffee table on the evening of the 7th Louise hadn't been back to the flat, had she? 
A. I don't know, I wasn't home." ...
 "Q. So you're inferring that that photograph was seen by Louise before she left the flat on the morning of 6th? 
A. That's right." 
He was then challenged as to the probability or improbability of the complainant not having made mention of this photograph during their earlier discussion concerning his infidelity, if, as he suggested, she had seen it before 5am. on 6th February. He was also cross examined as to why, if he had been in the flat on the 6th or 7th February, he had not seen the photos earlier, particularly as he had engaged in sexual activity with the other female on the sofa bed during the evening of 7th February. It was put to him (and denied) that he had placed the photos out during the night of 7th
February, `to boast to his new conquest' - a somewhat unusual proposition! 
The summing up dealt with this matter on several occasions, in a way that caused counsel for the appellant to seek a redirection. First, in summarising the evidence, his Honour outlined the appellant's account in relation to the place where the photographs were normally kept, and where he saw them on the evening of 7th February. Reference was then made to the evidence of his father concerning the phone call that witness had received following his son's arrest, in the course of which the complainant made mention of seeing the photograph.

In his summary of the Crown address, his Honour said: "She then referred to the defence submission, which she anticipated no doubt from an appraisal of the cross examination of the complainant and evidence adduced from the accused, that the reason for the complaint being made, and what the defence describe as a fabricated allegation against the accused, arose from the complainant seeing the photograph, Exhibit 6. The Crown has then sought to deal with that submission of the defence that in effect the fabrication that it is suggested the complainant then undertook was a reaction and as I understand it the Crown is saying it is for you to assess just how likely this is, after consensual intercourse, and she drew your attention to the evidence of where the photo was on the coffee table beside the sofa, and she invited you to consider carefully the believability of the proposition or supposition or possibility that is put forward by the defence in relation to that submission.

She reminded you that the complainant said in her evidence she had no knowledge of that photograph until she arrived at the flat with the police on February. The Crown reminded you as supportive of that evidence of the complainant that in her conversation on the telephone with the accused's brother, Gerald, ... about 2pm. on the 7th, that in that conversation as deposed to by both the complainant and the accused's brother Gerald, there is no reference to any extra relationship sexual intercourse by the complainant to the accused's brother, Gerald. However, by 11pm. that night - and of course the significance of the visit a little after 10 with the police is the matter that the Crown is drawing to your attention - by 11pm that night when she had a phone conversation with Mr Osman senior, the accused's father, in both his evidence - well, in the father's evidence it is confirmed that she did make reference to the fact that his son had been having an affair throughout the relationship and the Crown was seeking to emphasise that that quite significant difference in the content of the conversations had firstly with the brother at about 2pm, and then with the accused's father at 11pm, underpins or supports the narrative that the complainant gave you as to when she became aware of that photograph.

If the defence submission that it was the sighting of that photograph that caused a reaction in the complainant that caused her to fabricate the non- consensuality of the activity early on the morning of the 6th, then obviously it is critical to the acceptance of that submission that you find that there was a real possibility that she had seen it at a much earlier stage then she said she had. She reminded you that you would be entitled to take into account the effect upon the complainant of the sense of the betrayal she might experience having found such a photograph, and the learned Crown drew to your attention that those two phone conversations in that way supported her in that they were consistent with the complainant's evidence that she did not see the photograph until shortly after 10pm. on the 7th." 
In this section of the judgment, his Honour correctly defined the defence submission in terms of raising "a real possibility" in the minds of the jury, but in the way that the defence case was summed up this submission was effectively taken away from them: "Ms Lydiard described that photograph as crucial to your decision making, and reminded you of the accused's evidence that was taken in December '95 or
January '96, and his evidence that he had put the photos in a case in which both he and the complainant put their personal papers, and his evidence that he did not see it until just before the police came, and he marked on exhibit where they were when he saw them, and the accused's father had marked on exhibit 4 (sic) where they were when he had seen them. She submitted to you that on the evidence the complainant knew by 11pm. on 7 February, as appears from the conversation with the accused's father that night - but, of course, members of the jury, the complainant's evidence is that she saw those photographs when she got to the flat with the police about shortly after 10pm on the 7th, and I have already drawn your attention to the juxtaposition by the Crown of the significance of the difference between the content of the conversation with the accused's father on that night at about 11pm with the conversation with the accused's brother at about 2pm. Ms Lydiard submitted to you that it was possible that the photograph was found by the complainant on the evening of the 5th or the early morning of the 6th, and that it is possible that that is her motivation for making these allegations falsely.
Members of the jury, that is an invitation to speculate on possibilities.
There is no evidence that the complainant saw the photograph before she says she saw it and it is a matter for you, members of the jury, as I have indicated earlier, it is not your function to speculate, but that was the submission made to you. Ms Lydiard invited you to look at the photographs and determine what did happen, and her submission was that it was impossible for the complainant not to find the photos before the 7th. Well, you will consider that submission as you see fit, members of the jury. I do, however, remind you that the evidence - and it is common ground - is that the accused remained in the flat after the complainant left it until he went to work about 10.30, that he returned again that evening with friends on two occasions and eventually came back to sleep there and awoke, got up and went out again and came back with another lady friend with whom he had sexual intercourse, and the Crown does not have any right of reply, but I would anticipate that if the Crown did, that any response to that particular submission would be that it is far more reasonable for you to find it impossible for the accused not to have seen the photographs until just before the police arrived on the evening of the th." 
At the conclusion of the summing up, Counsel asked his Honour for a redirection to explain to the jury that the defence argument, that it was "impossible for the complainant not to have found the photo before 7th
February", rested additionally upon the evidence of Detective Barwick. If the complainant had not been in the vicinity of the lamp table nearest the window and had not brought the photographs to Detective Barwick's notice, then so the argument went, she could not have found them for the first time that evening.
By necessity she must have found them before leaving the premises on the morning of 6th February. His Honour partially, but not wholly, addressed this matter by then reminding the jury: "... that the basis of her submission that it was impossible for the complainant not to have found the photos before the 7th was that the evidence of Detective Barwick was that he had no recollection of seeing the photographs or of being shown them. Well that submission was made in the context of that evidence, members of the jury, and I omitted to include it and I do so now and otherwise adhere to what I said at that point in time." 
The vice in the summing up relied upon by the appellant relates to the section emphasised where his Honour described the defence submission that it was possible that the photograph was found by the complainant on the evening of th or early morning of 6th February, and that it was possible that this was the motivation for making a false allegation, as an "invitation to speculate on possibilities", accompanied by the direction that it was not the function of the jury to speculate. Additionally, it was submitted that the argument advanced by Counsel for the appellant in support of that proposition, namely that it was impossible for the complainant not to have found the photographs before 7th February, was not fairly left, even with the redirection related to
Detective Barwick's evidence.

I am of the view that these further grounds of appeal have been made out. The possibility relied upon by the appellant arose fairly, as a matter of inference, from the evidence: first, of the appellant to the effect that he had placed the photos in the suitcase, had not himself taken them out of the bag, and was not responsible for their presence in the lounge room on the evening of 7th February; secondly, from the evidence of Detective Barwick to the effect that he had no recollection of the complainant bringing them to his attention that evening, (an unlikely response had it been the case, as the complainant said, that she became completely distraught and cried when she found them); and thirdly, from the fact that if the photographs were on the lamp table nearest the curtain and the sofa bed was unfolded, and the complainant had not walked in the vicinity of that table, then it would have been difficult for her to see them that evening.

It was in my view quite inappropriate to dismiss this, as his Honour clearly did, as an invitation to speculate on possibilities. It was an error of law in the light of the principle discussed in Al Khair, to suggest that the appellant needed to point to positive evidence that the complainant did in fact see the photograph before the evening of 7th February.

It was equally inappropriate for his Honour to have suggested a possible Crown response to the defence argument. The response offered was one going to the credibility of the appellant, and in the way it was put framed it raised a false issue. What was relevant in relation to the defence submission was not the time at which the appellant first saw the photograph, but the time at which the complainant first saw it.

Although the objection to the summing up was not put to his Honour as clearly as it was to us on the appeal, particularly in relation to the Al Khair point, I am of the view that leave should be granted under R 4. The effect of the summing up was to effectively take the defence case on this important matter away from the jury, and to mislead them on the practical application of the burden and standard of proof.

Accordingly, I would propose that the conviction be set aside, and a new trial ordered. I stress that despite certain curious features of the complainant's evidence, relating, eg. to the circumstance that she slept, at least on some occasions, in the same bed as the appellant after the date on which she said the relationship ended, and to the fact that she gave a different account in her initial complaint to police as to the matter that had initiated the argument with the appellant on the morning of 6th February (namely, his annoyance at the fact that she was sleeping in his T shirt), the factors that lead me to the conclusion that the appeal should be allowed do not involve any adverse conclusion as to her credit. The matters I have mentioned would also need to be considered in the light of certain curious circumstances concerning the appellant's evidence, for example the fact that it differed markedly from his record of interview, and the fact that his return to the flat on 7th
February with another female would have been a somewhat reckless and provocative act, bound to invite another incident, unless he was confident, by reason of his prior misconduct, that the complainant would not be returning.

These are truly jury issues, and it is for that reason that I would order a new trial confined to the alternative charge on which the appellant was convicted.

REGINA versus Ernest James OSMAN 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: I agree with Wood J. 
REGINA versus Ernest James OSMAN 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: I also agree with Wood J. * * * 
