

Thomas and Anor versus Nedeljkovic [2004] NSWSC 524 (21 June 2004) 
Last Updated: 25 June 2004 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Thomas & Anor versus Nedeljkovic <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law  
FILE NUMBER(S): 13161/2003  
HEARING DATE{S): 7 June 2004  
JUDGMENT DATE: 21/06/2004  
PARTIES: 
Sean Thomas  (First Plaintiff)  
Dianne Thomas  (Second Plantiff)  
Kosta Nedeljkovic  
JUDGMENT OF: Master Harrison  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Local Court  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 905/2003 - Small Claims Division  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Magistrate C Forbes  
COUNSEL: 
Mr W W Sneddon  
SOLICITORS: 
Mr L McAuley, 
DTA Lawyers  
Mrs D Hunter, 
Emmerson & Emmerson  
CATCHWORDS: 
Appeal decision of Local Court Magistrate - refusal to grant an adjournment application  
ACTS CITED: 
Local Court (Civil Claims) Act 1970 - <case> and <case>(2A) 
Suitor Fund Act 1951 (NSW - <case>  
DECISION: 
The appeal is allowed 
The judgment of the Local Court dated 31 October 2003 is set aside 
The proceedings are remitted to the Local Court, Small Claims Division to be heard and determined according to law 
The defendant is to pay the plaintiffs' costs as agreed or assessed 
Pursuant to <case> of the Suitors' Fund Act (1951 an indemnity certificate in respect of this appeal is to be granted to the defendant.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
MASTER HARRISON  
MONDAY, 21 JUNE 2004  /2003 - SEAN THOMAS & ANOR versus  
KOSTA NEDELJKOVIC  
JUDGMENT (Appeal from decision of Local Court Magistrate - refusal to grant an adjournment application)  MASTER: By summons filed 27 November 2003 the plaintiffs seek an order that the decision of Magistrate C Forbes in the Small Claims Division of the
Local Court at Manly, proceedings No 905/2003 dated 31 October 2003 be set aside on the basis that the plaintiffs were denied natural justice. The plaintiffs relied on the affidavit of Lachlan McDonald McAuley sworn 23 March
The first plaintiff is Sean Thomas. The second plaintiff is Dianne
Thomas. The first and second plaintiffs were the defendants in the Local Court proceedings. The defendant is Kosta Nedeljkovic who was the plaintiff in the proceedings below. For convenience I shall refer to Mr and Mrs Thomas and the plaintiffs and Mr Nedeljkovic as the defendant.  At the outset, it may be helpful to make some brief comments concerning the remedy pursued by the plaintiff. Section 69(2A) of the Local Courts (Civil
Claims) Act 1970 (the Act) allows an appeal to this Court from the
Small Claims Division of a Court only on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction or a denial of natural justice. The only ground that is pressed in this case is a denial of natural justice. Section 69(4) of the Act provides that the court may determine an appeal by either (a) setting the judgment or order aside or (b) by varying the terms of the judgment or order or (c) by setting the judgment or order aside and remitting the matter for determination in accordance with the court's directions or (d) by dismissing the appeal. The onus lies on the plaintiff to demonstrate that there has been a denial of natural justice.  
Grounds of appeal  The plaintiffs appeal the whole of the decision of Magistrate Forbes on the grounds that firstly, the Magistrate did not grant the plaintiffs an adjournment at the hearing in the Local Court on 31 October 2003 and as such denied the plaintiffs natural justice; secondly, the Magistrate did not consider the plaintiffs' evidence regarding a set off or cross claim and such denied the plaintiffs natural justice; thirdly, the Magistrate did not exercise her duties pursuant to <case> of the Act and as a result the plaintiffs were denied natural justice; fourthly, the Magistrate failed to inform herself of matters relating to the plaintiffs' defence and set off or cross claim and as such did not exercise her duties pursuant to <case> of the Act; fifthly, the plaintiffs were denied procedural fairness and as such were denied natural justice; and sixthly, the plaintiffs were not provided with proper directions at the pre-trial review on 16 September 2003 and as such were denied natural justice.  Section 23B of the Act provides:  "Procedure generally in Small Claims Division  
Proceedings in the Small Claims Division of a court are to be conducted with as little formality and technicality as the proper consideration of the matter permits.  
The rules of evidence do not apply to an action being heard or other proceedings in the Small Claims Division of a court.  
An Assessor or Magistrate exercising the jurisdiction conferred on a court sitting in its Small Claims Division may inform himself or herself on any matter relating to an action being heard or other proceedings in the Small
Claims Division in such manner as he or she thinks fit.  
Proceedings in the Small Claims Division of a court (other than any judgment given or order made in respect of the proceedings) are not required to be recorded."  
Local Court proceedings  In the Local Court proceedings the plaintiff (defendant in the current proceedings) claimed $9,366.69 for seven months unpaid rent being for the period December 2000 and January to June 2001, less an amount of $1,250.00 paid by the defendant in April, June 2001 and March 2003. The defendants filed a notice of grounds of defence denying that there were any monies owing. On balance, the Magistrate found in favour of the plaintiff and made an order for verdict in the sum of $9.366.69, plus the issue and service fee of $122.00.
Interest was to be calculated by the Registrar from 15 December 2000.  At t 4.39 the following exchange took place:  "BENCH: Thank you. Now I've read the defence and you rely on in support of your defence the statement by you. Now it says here the defendant claims an amount. There is no document in the Court proceedings where you are claiming an amount. You can't claim it by way of statement. You have to start proceedings to claim it. Have you filed a cross-claim?  
DEFENDANT SEAN THOMAS: Your Honour, we were told by the registrar here on 16
September in this very room for us to come before here furnishing copies to him on 28 October with details of what we sought in the area of compensation from the plaintiff for the five reasons that we have listed there before you.
Now to this very minute we have done exactly what the Court had asked us to do. He said, the registrar requested us to come before here with a figure, a claiming figure amount for what we seek in compensation for being overcharged in rent, being misrepresented under Trades Practices section 45A of the
Tenancies Act. That is what we were told to do by the registrar here on 16
September to come, furnish it on 28th and be here to answer questions for it on the day of the 31st."  The Magistrate then proceeded to explain that a cross claim is an actual
Court document like a defence or statement of claim (t 5.15). The Magistrate asked whether the defendants would like her to adjourn the matter and get some legal advice. Mr Thomas replied "You can adjourn it, and we'll put it in as a cross-claim if you want" (t 5.26). Meanwhile, while the Magistrate interposed a matter she suggested that the Thomas's go and have a chat with the Chamber
Magistrate. The Thomas's were free to get some advice while the Magistrate was dealing with this other matter. Later the court officer informed the
Magistrate that the Thomas's were waiting to see the Chamber Magistrate. The
Magistrate asked the court officer to tell them they had to come back (t .58). Mr Thomas again asked for an adjournment. At t 7.50 the Magistrate informed the parties that she was not going to adjourn the matter and proceeded to hear it. There were other requests for an adjournment after the
Magistrate had decided not to grant the adjournment.  At t 11.38 the Magistrate stated:  "Well Mr Thomas, that - these are small claims hearings and there's a certain practice directions of the court that these matters should start and begin and finish within a certain amount of time. There isn't usually adjournments granted. They're meant to be small matters, less than $10,000, come through and in the court quickly. You've been here, you've had an opportunity to get legal representation, you've told the court you'd finalised your pleadings on the last occasion, that the matter was ready to be dealt with. You've been to mediation. I mean, today's the day for this claim to be dealt with. If you want to bring a separate claim, you can bring that yourself on another occasion."  In Kojima Australia Pty Ltd versus Australian Chinese Newspapers Pty Ltd <case> and Wakim versus Mathiew Pty Ltd t/as Dove Migration Services <case>,
O'Keefe J made the following observations:  "20 The requirements of natural justice (or procedural fairness as it is now commonly referred to) apply to the Small Claims Division of the Local Courts.
This is clear from the nature of the function to be performed by that tribunal and the statutory recognition that is afforded to natural justice by <case>(2A) of the Act.  The content of the requirements of natural justice is not fixed. The content fluctuates. The overarching requirement is that of fairness (National
Companies and Securities Commission versus News Corporation Ltd (1984) 156 CLR at per Gibbs CJ with whom Brennan J agreed). For a court that normally involves a duty to:  act judicially;  deal with the matter for decision without bias;  give each party the opportunity of adequately presenting its case;  observe the procedural and other rules provided for in the relevant statute;  come to its decision with that sense of responsibility that is the necessary accompaniment of the duty to do justice."  In Kearns & Anor versus Fair Trading Tribunal of NSW & Anor <case> Grove J stated at para 25:  "There is ample authority that procedural fairness is denied if a decision maker fails to adjourn proceedings where such a failure has the effect of depriving a person of adequate opportunity to prepare or present a case:
Sullivan versus Department of Transport [(1978) 20 ALR 323]; Opitz v
Repatriation Commission [(1991) 29 FCR 50]; Humphrey v Wills <case>; [(1989) VR 439.]"  And in Titan versus Babic & Ors [(1994) 49 FCR 546] at 554-555 the Full Court of the Court of Australian Capital Territory stated:  "Where it is apparent that a party who does not have legal representation has misunderstood procedural requirements so that he or she is not in a position to complete the presentation of evidence, an adjournment might be considered in the interests of justice provided that no irreparable substantive or procedural injustice is done to the other party involved. In any such case the granting of an adjournment will be a matter of discretion."  In Watson versus Watson [[1968] 2 NSWR 647] the Court of Appeal at 652 stated:  "The principle is that it is a matter for the discretion of the trial judge whether judicially and not according to whim or fancy. Primarily a case should proceed to be heard when it comes into the list for hearing. When a case has been specially fixed for hearing at a date some months in the future then it cannot be said when both parties are present with their witnesses that a judge is wrong in law in exercising his discretion to refuse an adjournment at the request of one of the parties unless to refuse an adjournment would prejudice that party to the point that he has been denied justice, Walker versus Walker, supra. Equally an adjournment should not be granted that would prejudice the other party."  In Bloch versus Bloch & Anor <case>; [(1981) 37 ALR 55] at 58-59 the High Court stated:  "The decision whether to grant or refuse an adjournment lies in the discretion of the trial judge, and it is indeed seldom that an appellate court will feel justified in reviewing such a decision. In Maxwell versus Keun [[1928] 1 KB ] at ; [[1927] All ER Rep 335] at 338-9, Atkin LJ stated the rule in terms which have won general acceptance: "I quite agree the Court of Appeal ought to be very slow indeed to interfere with the discretion of the learned judge on such a question as an adjournment of a trial, and it very seldom does do so; but, on the other hand, if it appears that the result of the order made below is to defeat the rights of the parties altogether, and to do that which the Court of
Appeal is satisfied would be an injustice to one or other of the parties, then the Court has power to review such an order, and it is, to my mind, its duty to do so." cf also, Hayes versus Hayes (No 1) [[1934] St R Qd 219]; Myers v Myers [[1969] WAR 19]; Walker versus Walker [[1967] 1 All ER 412.]"  And finally in Scott versus Handley [(1999) 58 ALD 373]; <case>, the Full Federal Court stated at [29]:  "For a judge to refuse an adjournment of the hearing of proceedings sought by the applicants on the day of the hearing on the basis that they are not in a position to proceed, and thereby to dismiss those proceedings, is a most significant step, not lightly to be taken. The refusal of an application for an adjournment may, in some circumstances, involve a denial of procedural fairness. In the absence of demonstrable prejudice to the respondents, why, it might be asked, can an adjournment on appropriate terms adequately protect the interests of those parties? (cf in the context of amendment, Cropper versus Smith [(1884) 26 Ch D 700] at 710-11; Queensland versus J L Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 146]."  The plaintiffs submitted that they were denied natural justice, firstly, by being denied an adjournment to remedy the obvious misunderstanding of the procedural requirements even though it was pressed by the plaintiffs on six occasions; secondly, by being denied an adjournment to complete the presentation of their evidence; thirdly, by disregarding that the plaintiffs appeared in person and had not been advised by the Chamber Magistrate before the matter proceeded; fourthly, by not advising and by corollary denying the ability to amend the plaintiffs' cross claim while acknowledging a document entitled statement of cross claim had been filed; fifthly, by failing to correctly assess the respective prejudices of the parties and the legal criteria to be determined; and sixthly, by shutting the plaintiffs out from having their day in Court. The defendant submitted that the Magistrate was correct and that there is no denial of natural justice.  From the cases cited above, it is clear that the discretion of the
Magistrate in refusing to grant an adjournment is not to be lightly interfered with. It is also accepted that the Small Claims Court is obliged to deal with claims quickly, that the parties had previously been to mediation and that the defendants had previously informed the court that they were ready to proceed with the matter. However, the Magistrate was aware that they had prepared a statement but had misunderstood the procedural requirements about filing a pleading, namely a cross claim. The Magistrate suggested an adjournment and referred the plaintiffs to seek advice from the Chamber Magistrate. But due to time constraints, they did not receive any such advice. When weighing up the considerations as to whether or not to grant an adjournment the Magistrate did not consider the prejudice that the plaintiffs would suffer as a result. The plaintiffs were effectively shut out of the proceedings because they had misunderstood the procedural requirements of the Small Claims Division of the
Local Court. The possibility of a separate cross claim being brought by the defendant is not an ideal course of action because it may involve issue estoppel and res judicata arguments. The Magistrate did not sufficiently define the competing prejudices and conduct the balancing exercise essential to the proper putting into effect of her discretion to grant or refuse the adjournment application. Hence, it is my view that there has been a denial of natural justice.  The appeal is allowed. The judgment of the Local Court dated 31 October is set aside. The proceedings are remitted to the Local Court, Small
Claims Division to be heard and determined according to law.  Costs are discretionary. Costs usually follow the event. The defendant is to pay the plaintiffs' costs as agreed or assessed.  
Orders  The Court orders:  
The appeal is allowed.  
The judgment of the Local Court dated 31 October 2003 is set aside.  
The proceedings are remitted to the Local Court, Small Claims Division to be heard and determined according to law.  
The defendant is to pay the plaintiffs costs as agreed or assessed.  
Pursuant to <case> of the Suitors' Fund Act 1951 an indemnity certificate in respect of this appeal is to be granted to the defendant.  
LAST UPDATED: 21/06/2004 * * * 
