

Doublewyn Corporation Pty Ltd and Anor versus Cosco and Ors (No 2) Matter No /96 [1997] NSWSC 403 (16 September 1997) 
Doublewyn Corporation Pty Limited & Anor versus Cosco & Ors (No 2) /96 September 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: DOUBLEWYN CORPORATION PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus COSCO & ORS (NO 2) 
Proceedings: 50179/96 
Date of Hearing: 22 August 1997 
Date of Judgment: 16 September 1997 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr P.J. Finch 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Yee and Company 
Solicitor for First, Third and Fourth Defendants: Mr A. Ventura 
Solicitors for First, Third and Fourth Defendants: Hickson Lakeman & Holcombe 
Solicitor for Second and Fifth Defendants: Mr M.F. O'Neill 
Solicitors for Second and Fifth Defendants: Nash O'Neill Tomko 
Costs: Appropriate order, in the circumstances of the particular case, where successful defendants abandon a claim during the hearing, which has occupied preparation and hearing time. /1996 - DOUBLEWYN CORPORATION PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus COSCO & ORS (NO 2) 
JUDGMENT ON COSTS 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
I heard these proceedings for thirteen days between 14 and 30 July 1997 and, on 13 August 1997, I stated that I proposed that they be dismissed and, for reasons I gave on pp.69 and 70, that I required to hear submissions as to costs. On 22 August 1997 the parties made their submissions on costs. Because of the exigencies of the list on that day I reserved my decision.

I do not propose to set out the details of the matters in issue in the principal proceedings as I believe that they are stated adequately in my judgment of 13 August 1997. Suffice to say, for present purposes, that the matters causing me particular concern in relation to the appropriate order for costs was the abandonment of the issue of rectification raised by the first, third and fourth defendants, ("the defendants"), after it had taken up a considerable time in the preparation for and during the hearing, and the adoption of somewhat different positions by the defendants, during the course of the proceedings, from those pleaded by them. My reasons of 13 August 1997 identify these matters in greater particularity.

On the hearing as to costs Mr Finch tendered the Outline of Plaintiffs' Case, (Exhibit A), the Outline of the Damages Claim, (Exhibit B), and the affidavit of John Niccolo Cosco and material exhibited to it sworn 10 December 1996, (Exhibit C). He also handed up, but did not read, the affidavit of Mr J.L.R.
Bowman, sworn 6 February 1997. In relation to the affidavit of Mr Cosco he said he was not tendering it to seek to prove the truth of the facts alleged therein, but rather to show that material set forth therein was in some way inaccurate. After the particular paragraph to which he referred, namely paragraph 22, was examined in a little detail, it did not appear to me that it was inconsistent with at least one way in which the defendants' case had been put.

Mr Finch requested me to note, for reasons which were not clear to me, that shortly prior to Mr Brereton's stating on the hearing that he did not propose to call Mr Cosco, in the circumstances which I have set out in detail in my original reasons, I said that I had read Mr Cosco's affidavit. I may or may not have stated that and I have no recollection that I did. Conformably with
Mr Finch's request I have noted the matter.

The Submissions 
Mr Finch submitted that I should order the defendants to pay the plaintiffs' costs in full. The written submissions of the defendants, which, I was advised, were prepared by Mr Brereton, and were presented by his instructing solicitor, Mr Ventura, conceded that there should be some concession made to the plaintiffs and submitted that they should pay two thirds of the defendants' costs of the proceedings. Thus the defendants did not seek to maintain the prima facie position that a successful party is entitled to costs.

In relation to the second and fifth defendants, which and who were dismissed from the proceedings on the first day in circumstances already stated by me in other judgments, Mr Finch submitted there should be no order for costs. Mr
O'Neill, who appeared for the second and fifth defendants, submitted that the plaintiffs should pay his clients' costs on an indemnity basis.

Mr Finch submitted that as originally propounded the plaintiffs' case was simple and depended upon a proper construction of four or five documents. He submitted that the case was complicated by the intrusion of the issue of rectification and by the change in approach taken from time to time by Mr
Brereton, and that certain interlocutory applications, including an application for security for costs, had not been pursued. However, the main burden of his submissions was that the issue of rectification allowed in much evidence of pre-contractual and post-contractual discussions and, in effect, converted a case of simplicity into one of complexity. He also submitted that this issue necessitated a great deal of further preparation.

Conclusions 
In my opinion this is a substantial over-simplification of the case. As I have pointed out in my reasons the ultimate pleading on which Mr Finch relied comprised 155 paragraphs and sought various relief. So far as the Court was aware it was not until the matter was mentioned before Bainton J in May 1997, when there was a lengthy directions hearing, that there was any suggestion that a claim for damages, as ultimately formulated, was the only relief to be sought and the only way in which the case was to proceed. Even then there was still some doubt about that, although, as I have once again recorded, it was clarified at the commencement of the hearing. None-the-less, the case still involved considerable complexity because, as I have pointed out, a "global" claim for damages was made on the basis of various breaches alleged. In addition there was a very real issue as to the quantum of any damages the plaintiffs were entitled to recover, which involved a consideration of a large quantity of valuation evidence. To some extent the complexity of the issues can be gauged from the time occupied by addresses, which was almost three days. Mr Finch addressed from 10 am until 4 pm on 28 July 1997 and from 10 am until .30 pm on 29 July 1997, which address, of course, took place at a time when rectification was no longer in issue.

Mr Finch also submitted that if one were to look at the issues "by and large the plaintiffs were successful". Save to the extent that they were able to have the rectification claim discontinued I do not believe the plaintiffs had any success in the way in which the case was ultimately contested. Their essential case failed. It failed not only on the methodology adopted for seeking to claim damages by reference to particular breaches, but also at the level of the claim for damages itself. Such success as the plaintiffs had resulted from concessions made by the defendants, but that success did not reflect in the relief ultimately sought in these proceedings. The concessions may be of some usefulness in other proceedings.

I can see no basis at all on which, in all the circumstances of this case, there is any justification for me to make the order against the defendants for which Mr Finch contends. On the other hand I consider that the concession by those defendants was properly made. Although at one stage Mr Ventura submitted that it was inappropriate to divide up issues, I consider it is established that it is within the recognised discretion of a trial Judge, in considering the appropriate costs' order, to have regard to his or her assessment of the amount of time spent in relation to issues on which the ultimately successful party was unsuccessful. In such circumstances the proper approach is for the trial Judge, having regard to his or her close knowledge of what transpired at the hearing, to assess a proportion by which the costs to be recovered by the successful party should be reduced.

In the present case I have given careful consideration to that question. I think the issue of rectification, at least until it was discontinued, played a larger part in the proceedings than Mr Brereton's written submissions acknowledge. Not only did it occupy a reasonably substantial part of the hearing, but it also affected matters such as preparation and the evidence presented. While Mr Brereton's submissions made a detailed assessment of what was said to be the actual hearing time occupied by the cross-claim, I think it is also necessary to have regard to preparation time, in which I include the preparation of witness statements, and to the over-all effect of the claim being part of the hearing until it was discontinued.

A way of dealing with the matter would be to order that the defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs of the cross-claim. However, it seems to me that that would not give an adequate guidance to the taxing assessor and, it would not take into account the other matters which caused me concern and to which I referred at pp.69 and 70 of my judgment.

In my opinion I consider that a proper exercise of discretion is to order the plaintiffs to pay fifty five per cent of the first, third and fourth defendants' costs of the proceedings. This will take into account, in my view, the overall costs of the cross-claim, which has been discontinued. It will also take into account the other matters to which I have referred.

As between the plaintiffs and the second and fifth defendants I can see no reason why the plaintiffs should not pay the costs of those defendants. On the other hand there was nothing in the conduct of the plaintiffs which would warrant an order being made that the costs be paid on an indemnity basis.

Final Orders
I order that the proceedings be dismissed.
I order the plaintiffs pay fifty five per cent of the costs of the first, third and fourth defendants.
I order the plaintiffs pay the second and fifth defendants' costs of the proceedings.
I order that the exhibits be returned.
 * * * 
