

Regina versus W R Gore [1996] NSWSC 576 (27 November 1996) 
REGINA versus WAYNE RUSSELL GORE /95 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, HIDDEN J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law - sentence - dangerous driving cause death - sentence of six years with minimum term of four years and an additional term of two years - not manifestly excessive.

RESULT: DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: This is an application by Wayne Russell Gore who seeks leave to appeal against a sentence imposed upon him in the District Court at Newcastle on 8 December 1995 by his Honour Judge Gallen.

The applicant pleaded guilty to an offence of dangerous driving occasioning death under <case> of the Crimes Act. That section provides in sub-sections , (2), (3) and (4): "52A. (1) Dangerous driving occasioning death. A person is guilty of the offence of dangerous driving occasioning death if the vehicle driven by the person is involved in an impact occasioning the death of another person and the driver was, at the time of the impact, driving the vehicle: under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a drug; or at a speed dangerous to another person or persons; or in a manner dangerous to another person or person.

A person convicted of an offence under this subsection is liable to imprisonment for 10 years.

Aggravated dangerous driving occasioning death. A person is guilty of the offence of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning death if the person commits the offence of dangerous driving occasioning death in circumstances of aggravation. A person convicted of an offence under this subsection is liable to imprisonment for 14 years.

Dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm. A person is guilty of the offence of dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm if the vehicle driven by the person is involved in an impact occasioning grievous bodily harm to another person and the driver was, at the time of the impact, driving the vehicle: under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a drug; or at a speed dangerous to another person or persons; or in a manner dangerous to another person or person.

A person convicted of an offence under this subsection is liable to imprisonment for 7 years.

Aggravated dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm. A person is guilty of the offence of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm if the person commits the offence of dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm in circumstances of aggravation. A person convicted of an offence under this subsection is liable to imprisonment for 11 years." 
Section 52A(7) defines "circumstances of aggravation" for the purposes of the section as including the circumstance that at the relevant time the offender was driving with the prescribed concentration of alcohol in his blood. Such concentration is defined by <case> as being 0.15 grams or more of alcohol in mls of blood.

Of particular relevance to this offence is <case>(a). The Crown here relied upon evidence concerning the alcohol and the drugs that the applicant had consumed.

The applicant was sentenced to a total sentence of six years imprisonment comprising a minimum term of four years and an additional term of two years.
The sentence was expressed to commence on 8 December 1995, that being the date of sentence. The applicant had been on bail since his arrest.

It is to be noted from the above section that the maximum penalty imposed for the category of offence in respect of which the applicant was convicted was a term of imprisonment for ten years.

The accident in which the deceased was killed happened at about 1.35 am on
Sunday 29 January 1995 in Wharf Road, Newcastle. That road, running beside
Newcastle Harbour, has been described as running generally east - west and the applicant was driving his vehicle in an easterly direction having driven to
Newcastle from Singleton. The deceased was one of a group of people who had been celebrating and who had left the Brewery Nightclub, which is located on the northern side of Wharf Road. The deceased was crossing with a number of other people from north to south, that is from the applicant's left to his right as he drove his car along the street. The street lighting was described as being of good quality, and the scene was also lit by light from the nightclub. The learned sentencing judge, in his remarks on sentence, has summarised the circumstances in the following passage of his remarks and there is no challenge to what his Honour there said: "The undisputed facts are that at about 1.35 am, on Sunday 29 January 1995, the accused drove a motor vehicle in an easterly direction in Wharf Road,
Newcastle. He was driving this vehicle immediately before the impact on the incorrect side of the road and at a high speed. A young man Dean Spruce was struck by the accused's vehicle and suffered injuries from which he subsequently died. After striking the deceased the accused's vehicle collided with the front offside of a parked Laser sedan and the accused's vehicle continued and rotated and apparently came to a stop at an angle across Wharf
Road.

It has been stated that the accused immediately attempted to drive from the scene, accelerating his vehicle. This allegation is not denied by the accused, but he has stated that he was not attempting to drive from the scene, or if he were so doing he was doing so in panic. He was stopped from driving from the scene as a result of the action of bystanders, one of whom pulled on the steering wheel and this caused the accelerating vehicle to mount the footpath on the southern side of Wharf Road and the vehicle came into collision with a wire fence and stopped.

After the vehicle had come to a stop it appears that the accused attempted to inject air into his veins. The attempt apparently was not successful." 
There was evidence before the District Court that the applicant had been drinking alcohol on the Saturday evening and there was also evidence that he had been using heroin. Following the accident the applicant was taken to hospital and admitted and a blood sample was taken from him at 4.00 am on 29
January 1995. That returned a blood alcohol concentration of not less than .12 grams in 100 ml of blood. The sample was also analysed for drugs and was found to have present temazepam, .52 ml per litre, and morphine, .18 ml per litre.
It was the pharmacologist's opinion, as expressed in her report, that the alcohol level at the time of the accident would have been not less than .15 g in 100 ml, but apparently at committal this expert conceded that the level may have been less than .15 g, and the Crown conceded for the purposes of the case that the blood alcohol concentration at the time of the impact was less than .15 g. So far as the temazepam was concerned, it was the applicant's evidence that he took this substance after the accident and his Honour did not reject that evidence. The significance of the concession about the blood alcohol concentration is that a concentration of .15 grams or more would have exposed the applicant to the penalty for the aggravated offence under <case>.

Based upon the blood test results, the pharmacologist, Dr Perl, expressed the view that the applicant would have been, at the time of the accident, under the influence of alcohol to the extent that his driving ability would have been very significantly impaired. According to this expert it would have been further impaired also by the drugs taken. Dr Perl based her opinion on the drugs all having been taken before the accident and on a concentration also of no less than .15 grams of alcohol per 100 ml, but the learned judge was alert to the necessary modification of Dr Perl's opinion by reason of the temazepam having been taken after the accident and by reason of the concession that the blood alcohol concentration was something less than .150 grams. However, as his Honour concluded, the applicant had nevertheless consumed a considerable quantity of alcohol prior to the impact and he was also affected by heroin use. Those findings were undoubtedly supported by the evidence and, indeed, no challenge is made to them. His Honour further concluded: "It is clear, it seems to me, that the accused was driving his motor vehicle immediately before the impact in a condition in which he had little or no control over the way the vehicle was being driven. His behaviour is highly criminal, or was highly criminal, and in my opinion deserving of severe punishment." 
I do not understand Mr Strickland to challenge those findings either but in any event it seems to me that his Honour was justified in making them. The only question is whether, as Mr Strickland contends, the punishment imposed was manifestly excessive. The applicant also makes a submission about the structure of the sentence, to which I shall shortly refer.

However, firstly I should refer to the subjective features of the case. The applicant was, at the time of sentence, twenty-four years of age. Evidence was placed before the judge that the applicant was in employment and there was evidence from a supervisor, to which the judge referred, that the applicant was a good worker. The applicant gave evidence before sentence in the course of which he expressed his contrition and his Honour accepted that expression of contrition. The applicant was also entitled to consideration for his plea of guilty.

The applicant's record was not a good one having regard to the nature of the present offence. Apart from some drug offences which were dealt with at Local
Court level and none of which led to a custodial sentence, there were a number of driving offences. I note that in February 1992 he was placed on a recognizance for a period of two years for being a disqualified driver. He was an unlicensed driver when this accident happened although the term of his recognizance had expired. The record was not one which called for leniency.

The applicant sought treatment from a psychologist after this accident. The psychologist noted the applicant's drug problem and assessed him following the accident as suffering from a post traumatic stress disorder. In a report tendered before the District Court, the psychologist referred to the efforts the applicant was making to control his drug abuse and to his then current attendances upon a drug and alcohol counsellor. Mr Nicholas, the psychologist, concluded that the applicant required "ongoing supportive counselling and as long as this is undertaken his psychological prognosis is positive".

The evidence also disclosed that apart from his drug problem the applicant was emotionally disturbed by the breakdown in a personal relationship and, indeed, that on Saturday 28 January, having left his girlfriend's place in Newcastle, he drove to Singleton for the purpose of seeing his mother to discuss that relationship. According to the applicant, he was on his way back to see his girlfriend when the accident occurred.

Mr Strickland has submitted that having regard to all the features of this case, both objective and subjective, the sentence was outside the appropriate range and was manifestly excessive. He submitted that the sentence was manifestly excessive as a result of the learned judge failing to give adequate weight to these features: the plea of guilty; the applicant's contrition; his age.

It was submitted that the plea of guilty was made as early as possible, once the Crown accepted that that the offence was not one under <case>. That is to say, the applicant pleaded guilty as soon as the Crown was prepared to accept that the blood alcohol concentration was less than .15 grams. That plea made at that time was, of course, a very relevant matter because it avoided the need for a contested hearing with its associated expense and inconvenience. On the other hand, of course, the case against the applicant under <case> was a compelling one.

It was submitted that the judge did not give adequate consideration for the applicant's contrition. His Honour did say: "I accept that he is contrite. I could not understand how anyone could be other than ashamed and contrite in behaving the way that the evidence indicates that the accused did." 
Mr Strickland argued that the above remarks tended to minimise the significance of the contrition. He referred to the many features of the evidence which showed the applicant's contrition.

I do not consider that the remarks quoted indicate that the learned judge did other than to accept the applicant as genuinely contrite. It remains, of course, to determine whether due allowance was made for the contrition in the penalty imposed.

As to the applicant's age, the learned judge referred to it specifically. The applicant was, as the judge stated, twenty-four years of age at the date of sentence and he was moreover a young man who had never been to prison before.

Whilst the applicant's age was a matter to be weighed, it is timely to refer to certain of the dicta of the former Chief Judge at Common Law in McIntyre ((1988) [38 A Crim R 135)] where his Honour Lee CJ at CL said (at 139): "In order to arrive at a proper penalty it is always necessary, in my view, for a court to consider, first objectively the seriousness of the crime before taking into account the matters which may mitigate that seriousness. The essence of the crime under <case> is not merely the drinking of alcohol and driving. That is what the Motor [Traffic
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta77/) deals with. That factor in association with the taking of the life of a human being is the gravamen of the offence under <case> of the Crimes Act.

In the present case the high concentration of alcohol and the evidence as to the respondent being under the influence of liquor needed to be given its full significance in order to come to a proper conclusion that this was indeed a very serious breach of the section.

His Honour took into account, of course, the good character of the respondent, and properly so. But it must be said that this class of offence is one which in many, perhaps even in most, cases is committed by persons who are not in any sense members of the criminal class or who even have criminal convictions against them, and for that reason the courts need to tread warily in showing leniency for good character to avoid giving the impression that persons of good character may, by their irresponsible actions at the time, take the lives of others and yet receive lenient treatment.

Likewise with the question of age of the respondent, which his Honour properly took into account and was concerned about, as he naturally would be. In dealing with the commission of a serious crime by a young man the courts make every effort, if it can properly be done, to avoid the penalty of gaol. But as against that, it must be said that when young men are able to hold licenses at years of age and driving their cars after drinking excessive quantities of alcohol, and at a high rate of speed as in this case, and cause death, no significant reason can be found for differentiating between their driving and that of persons who are older. Each is a potential killer on the roads. The lack of foresight in youth, the reckless spirit of youth will always be there and must always be recognised by courts, but that cannot, when punishment is under consideration, be recognised to the point of leading young drivers - who, regrettably, form a significant proportion of motor traffic offenders - to believe that an offence under <case> resulting in death will lead to light punishment." 
Mr Strickland furnished sentencing statistics in relation to penalties imposed for the crime of culpable driving causing death but the statistics provided were compiled for sentences prior to the very significant amendments to the section effected by Act No.78 of 1994 which was assented to on 12 December
Those changes resulted in the section being in the form which I set out at the commencement of this judgment. For an offence of dangerous driving occasioning death, without the aggravating circumstances referred to in sub-s , the legislature doubled the maximum penalty from five years to ten years and for that reason added caution has to be used in considering those statistics which Mr Strickland provided.

The amendments made in 1984 followed the decision of the Court of Criminal
Appeal in Garlick [(73 A Crim R 433)] where the court drew attention to the gap between the maximum penalty for manslaughter and the penalty of five years for culpable driving. Carruthers J said in that case (at p 440): "The legislation was carefully drafted to meet the situation where a manslaughter charge was inappropriate, but the difference between the maximum penalty of twenty-five years penal servitude for manslaughter and five years for culpable driving causing death is, I think, too great a gap. If the legislature takes the view that these maximum penalties should remain, then in my respectful view attention should be given to the drafting of an appropriate offence somewhere between manslaughter and culpable driving." 
The legislature has plainly addressed the gap to which his Honour referred in
Garlick, in which case Carruthers J made reference to the following remarks of Street CJ in the appeal of Murnin (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, August 1985), which it is pertinent to repeat now: "Overriding the whole consideration, however, is the seriousness that the legislature has placed upon this particular offence [that is, driving in a manner dangerous causing death]. A motor vehicle is a particularly dangerous - indeed lethal - machine. Those who drive motor vehicles on public highways, as do the overwhelming majority of members of our community, must inevitably accept that if they drive those potentially lethal machines dangerously and cause death or grievous bodily harm, then the criminal law will exact from them a penalty appropriate to the degree of criminality which the whole of the circumstances disclose. The legislature has always placed a premium upon human life and the taking of a human life by driving a vehicle dangerously is by virtue of this particular section to be regarded as a crime of some seriousness." 
Unquestionably the sentence that was imposed in this case was a very stern one but whilst making allowance for the subjective features upon which Mr
Strickland has addressed the Court, I am not persuaded that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive. I reach this conclusion having regard to what I perceive to be the gravity of the objective features of this case.

The other matter on which Mr Strickland has made submissions concerns the structure of the sentence. His Honour found special circumstances for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).
Mr Strickland has no quarrel with that, but submits that the additional term which was fixed, although in excess of one-third of the minimum term, was not sufficiently long to address the particular needs of the applicant.

In finding special circumstances his Honour did so having regard to the applicant's age, the fact that this sentence was to result in the applicant's first period of imprisonment and the fact that the offence was committed at a time when the applicant was addicted to heroin. He also had regard in that finding to the upheaval in the applicant's personal life and the prospects of rehabilitation. The sentence imposed was accompanied by a recommendation that the applicant continue to have counselling for his drug problem and emotional instability whilst in custody.

Having regard to those features which his Honour considered to be special circumstances so as to warrant an extended additional term, Mr Strickland submitted that the additional period of two years provided for was insufficient to address them following the applicant's release.

I do not find appealable error in the structure of the sentence. It seems to me that having found special circumstances, it was open to his Honour in the exercise of his discretion to set an additional term of the length indicated, and I do not perceive that there is any justification for this Court to interfere with the length of such term.

In the result I do not consider that the sentence imposed in this case calls for intervention by this Court. Because of its duration, I would grant leave to appeal but I propose that the appeal be dismissed.

HIDDEN J: I must say that I have given this application anxious consideration as the sentence is undoubtedly severe. Nevertheless, for the reasons given by Studdert J, I am not persuaded that this Court should intervene.

I agree with the orders proposed.
 * * * 
