

Conagra International Fertiliser Company versus Lief Investments Pty Limited
Matter No 50120/97 [1997] NSWSC 511 (27 October 1997) 
Conagra International Fertiliser Company versus Lief Investments Pty Limited /97 October 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: CONAGRA INTERNATIONAL FERTILISER COMPANY versus LIEF INVESTMENTS PTY LIMITED 
Proceedings: 50120/1997 
Dates of Hearing: 18, 19 September, 7, 8 October 1997 
Written Submissions: 9, 10 October 1997 
Further Submissions: 22 October 1997 
Date of Judgment: 27 October 1997 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Dr A S Bell 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Phillips Fox 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr P E King 
Solicitors for Defendant: Withnell & Co 
Notice of Motion to stay proceedings either pursuant to [s.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/iaa1974276/s7.html) of the [International Arbitration Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/iaa1974276/) because of the incorporation into the contract sued upon of an arbitration clause, or on the ground of forum non conveniens.

Held: 
The arbitration clause was not part of the formal contract expressly or by implication.

Matters necessary to imply a term in a formal contract not established: 
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Limited versus Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 and Codelfa Construction Pty Limited versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales <case>; [(1981-82) 149 CLR 337] followed.

Not an appropriate case to imply a term to give business efficacy or by course of business dealing: 
Mackay versus Dick [[1881] App Cas 251] considered.

As to implied terms in informal contract: 
Hospital Products Limited versus United States Surgical Corporation <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] considered.

Not a case for rectification: 
Pukalus & Anor versus Cameron <case>; [(1980-81) 180 CLR 447] followed.

Uncertainty of reference to the contractual terms sought to be incorporated: 
Love & Stewart (Limited) versus S. Instone & Co (Limited) [(1917) 33 TLR 475] followed.

For an arbitration clause to be incorporated specific reference is required: 
T.W. Thomas & Co Limited versus Portsea Steamship Company Limited [[1912] AC 1]; Carob Industries Limited (In Liquidation) versus Simto Pty Limited (Supreme Court of Western Australia - Scott J - 17 March 1996 - unreported) considered and remarked on.

Notice of Arbitration Clause and Need for Certainty in the law: 
Ferris & Anor versus Plaister & Anor [(1994) 34 NSWLR 474] 
Whether Fraud Allegations Can be Arbitrated: 
Cunningham-Reid versus Buchanan-Jardine [[1988] 1 WLR 678]; Cherman Productions Pty Limited versus Prestest Pty Limited (Supreme Court of Victoria - Cummings J - 20 November 1989 - unreported) noted.

Onus of Proof Where Attack on Jurisdiction: 
The Owners of the Ship "Shin Kobe Maru" versus Emperor Shipping Company Inc (1994) 181 CLR 404 and FAI General Insurance Co Limited versus Ocean Marine Mutual Protection and Indemnity Association & Anor [(1997) 41 NSWLR 559] referred to.

Forum Non Conveniens: 
Oceanic Sun Line Special Shipping Co Inc versus Fay [(1988) 165 CLR 247] discussed and followed.

Notice of Motion Dismissed. 
I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Contract 4 
The Issues 6 
The Evidence Of Mr Yu 10 
The Evidence Of Mr Ouyang 20 
The Evidence Of Mr Lee 23 
When Was The Contract Entered Into? 27 
Was There Incorporated In The Contract "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's standard contract"? 30 
Rectification 36 
Unconscionable Conduct 39 
Were There Standard Sinochem Terms and Conditions? 40 
The Incorporation Of An Arbitration Clause 43 
Fraud Not Amenable To Arbitration 66 
Onus 66 
Forum Non Conveniens 67 
Orders 84 /1997 - CONAGRA INTERNATIONAL FERTILISER COMPANY versus LIEF INVESTMENTS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
These proceedings were commenced by a Summons issued on 22 May 1997 whereby the plaintiff, for which Dr A.S. Bell of Counsel appeared, sought judgment against the defendant, for which Mr P.E. King of Counsel appeared, in the sum of US$2.820m or, in the alternative, damages, and ancillary relief. The plaintiff pleaded that on or about 21 February 1997 it sold to the defendant, which is an international trader in fertiliser, 15,000 metric tonnes of urea, which is a fertiliser, in bulk for US$188 per metric tonne ex Huangpu Port in
The People's Republic of China, ("China"), for which the defendant agreed to pay before 26 March 1997. It was alleged that the defendant refused to do so and evinced an intention no longer to be bound by the agreement, which repudiation the plaintiff accepted on or about 27 March 1997. The defendant has asserted that the quality of the urea was so poor that the plaintiff breached the contract entitling it to terminate it.

In paragraph 3 of its Contentions, the plaintiff alleged that on or about 21
February 1997 it entered into the agreement, through its agent, with the defendant. The particulars specify various facsimile transmissions of 21
February 1997, to which it will be necessary to refer in more detail, a facsimile transmission of 24 February 1997, an invoice from the plaintiff number 97031/170/97AF dated 24 February 1997 and contract number CFC-97AF dated 24 February 1997, which was executed by the plaintiff and the defendant.

Giles CJCommD gave leave to file an Amended Summons on 11 July 1997, whereby the plaintiff pleaded the contract as being that dated 24 February 1997 and executed by the plaintiff and the defendant. The transcript of that date records:- "Mr Bell sought leave to file a copy of the amended summons in court, a copy of which was handed to his Honour, in order to get rid of a prospective arbitration clause, if there was one.

Discussion ensued.

The defendant sought leave to amend its notice of motion." 
On 28 May 1997 the defendant filed an Appearance and, on 6 June 1997, a Notice of Motion, which sought orders that the action be stayed pursuant to an arbitration clause in the contract upon which the plaintiff sued or, alternatively, on the ground of forum non conveniens. An Amended Notice of
Motion was filed on 6 August 1997. Whereas the original Notice of Motion sought a stay pursuant to the arbitration clause in the contract "sued upon by the plaintiff", the Amended Notice of Motion sought a stay "pursuant to the arbitration clause in the contract". I can see no other changes in the Amended
Notice of Motion. Although, initially, the defendant relied on [s.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/iaa1974276/s7.html) of the [International Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/iaa1974276/) and [s.53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s53.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), it did not pursue the latter basis for relief.

On 18 September 1997 I granted the defendant leave to file a Cross-Claim, whereby it sought rectification of the "document" on which the plaintiff sued dated 24 February 1997 by identifying correctly the plaintiff as the seller, and the defendant as the buyer; by adding after clause 8: "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's Standard Contract"; and by appending the Sinochem
Standard Terms and Conditions in the form of annexure "A" to the affidavit of
Mr Zhenbang Yu sworn 13 August 1997. Rectification was sought on the basis that the document of 24 February 1997 failed to:- record correctly the concluded agreement of the parties of 21 February ; or record, to the knowledge of the plaintiff, the intention of the defendant to incorporate the Sinochem Standard Terms; or include a customary term arising from the nature of the trade and the prior course of dealings between the parties.

In the alternative an order was sought, in the exercise of the equitable jurisdiction of the Court and/or pursuant to ss.51A and 87(2)(b) of the Trade
Practices Act, altering the document dated 24 February 1997 to the effect set out in (a), (b) and (c) above. The Contentions asserted that the Sinochem
Standard Terms and Conditions should have been incorporated in the agreement.

The Contract 
On 21 February 1997 the defendant sent to an agent of the plaintiff a facsimile transmission bearing date 14 May 1996, which confirmed a bid for ,000 metric tonnes of urea in bulk with stated specifications at a price of
US$188 per metric tonne ex Huangpu Port, to be packed in 300,000 50 kilogram bags, with payment thirty days after delivery. Certain charges and costs were expressly provided for, and paragraph 10 stated:- "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's standard contract." 
I shall refer to the plaintiff and its agent compendiously as "the plaintiff" for nothing turns on any distinction.

On the same day the plaintiff sent a facsimile transmission to the defendant acknowledging the "firm bid" and confirming a number of particulars. Payment was required "before" 26 March 1997, which was a variation on the firm bid, and there was also a variation in the "charges and costs" clause. It concluded in the same terms as paragraph 10 of the firm bid.

On 24 February 1997 the plaintiff sent a contract bearing that date by facsimile transmission to the defendant, which was identified as contract number CFC-97AF. The buyer and the seller were incorrectly and inaccurately described, but nothing turns on that. The document provided:- "This contract is made out by and between the Buyers and the Sellers, whereby the Sellers agree to sell and the Buyers agree to buy the undermentioned goods subject to terms and conditions as stipulated below:" 
There were paragraphs referring to the commodity, its specifications and other detail, and the document concluded:- "This contract is concluded on 21 February 1997 and made out in two originals in the English Language, each party holding one as evidence thereof after signing." 
The document did not include a term as set out in paragraph 10 of the firm bid and the response, nor was there any other reference to or appendage of the terms and conditions of the Sinochem standard contract. Mr Yu, who said he considered the contract was an important commercial document which he read through carefully before executing it on behalf of the defendant, explained that he believed that the standard terms and conditions would be physically appended to the hard copy of the contract when it was received. They were not.
Shortly thereafter a dispute arose about the quality of the urea, which led to the alleged repudiation and rescission of the contract and to this litigation.

Clause 10 of a document, said to be the standard terms and conditions of the
Sinochem contract, provided:- "10. Arbitration 
All disputes in connection with this contract or the execution thereof shall be settled by amicable negotiations. In case no settlement can be reached, the case under dispute can then be submitted to the Foreign Trade Arbitration Commission of the China Council for the Promotion of International Trade for arbitration. The arbitration shall take place in China and shall be executed in accordance with the [Provisional Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/pr209/) of Procedures of the said commission and the decision made by the commission shall be accepted as final and biding (sic) upon both parties for settling the disputes. The fees for arbitration shall be borne by the losing party unless otherwise awarded." 
The Issues 
The defendant submitted, firstly, that on a proper consideration of the facsimile transmissions of 21 February 1997 the contract was concluded on that day and, therefore, included the term incorporating the standard terms and conditions. The effect of that, so it was submitted, would be that the words "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's standard contract" would incorporate the arbitration clause into the contract with the consequences that these proceedings should be stayed pursuant to [s.7(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/iaa1974276/s7.html) of the [International Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/iaa1974276/) and the parties referred to arbitration. Alternatively, the defendant submitted that if the contract was contained in the document of 24 February 1997, the standard terms and conditions should be found to form part of that contract either by virtue of an express or an implied term, or because the contract should be rectified because of a unilateral mistake, or because it would be unconscionable not to include the standard terms and conditions by reason of certain provisions of the Trade Practices Act. It was submitted that if for any of these reasons the standard terms and conditions were incorporated, the same results would flow in relation to arbitration. In relation to the last two bases of relief it was submitted, in the alternative, that the alleged standard terms and conditions should be physically appended to the contract.
The consequence, so it was submitted, would be that the arbitration clause, inter alia, would become part of the contract.

The plaintiff submitted that the facsimile transmissions of 21 February 1997 did not bring about a concluded contract, but constituted negotiations for the contract, which was contained in the document identified as the contract, accorded a contract number, executed by the parties and dated 24 February
It was submitted that that contract did not incorporate the standard terms and conditions because there was no reference to them, and that it provided expressly that the contract was entered into on the terms and conditions set out in the document. It was submitted that the concluding words did not refer back to an agreement of 21 February 1997 but provided that the contract should operate from that date, although not entered into until 24
February 1997.

Nextly the plaintiff submitted that the standard terms and conditions could not be implied into the contract. The defendant had submitted that they should be implied to give business efficacy to the contract, and/or pursuant to the principle in Mackay versus Dick [(1881) 6 App Cas 251], and by reason of the customary method of dealing the parties adopted. The plaintiff responded that one could not imply a term simply to give business efficacy and that the implication of a term into a formal contract required various other well established requirements to be met. It submitted that the principles in
Mackay versus Dick had no application, and that there was no evidence of any usual or customary method of dealing. The plaintiff submitted that rectification could not be granted because there was no evidence that Mr Yu acted under a mistake, or that, if he did, it was not one of which the plaintiff was aware or which it induced. For essentially the same reasons it submitted that the claim under the Trade Practices Act could not succeed.

It submitted that even if, contrary to its submissions, the terms and conditions for which the defendant contended were incorporated in the contract alleged to have been made on 21 February 1997 or 24 February 1997 that would not avail it. Firstly, it was submitted, the evidence established that there was not a standard Sinochem contract containing terms and conditions but various versions of the Sinochem terms and conditions upon which, depending on the nature of the contract, certain terms and conditions were "based", and that the defendant could not pick one term, such as the arbitration provision, and incorporate only that. To some extent this submission divided into two.
Firstly, that there was no evidence of any standard contract. Secondly, that the reference to a standard contract led to uncertainty because there were various versions or adaptations thereof. In making this submission Dr Bell was careful to submit that even if there was uncertainty the clause could be severed and, therefore, the contract on which the plaintiff sued would not be destroyed if such a term was found to be incorporated in it.

Secondly, the plaintiff submitted that if all these difficulties were overcome there is a long established body of law, which precludes an arbitration clause being incorporated without express reference to it. Even if that be so this may not apply if relief was granted, which led to terms and conditions, including the arbitration clause, being physically appended. Thirdly, it submitted that even if the arbitration clause was incorporated by reference this dispute was not amenable to arbitration because one of the issues, (and the nature of the issue was common ground), is fraud.

Finally the defendant submitted that if it was not entitled to a stay because of the existence of the arbitration clause, the Court is a forum non conveniens such that the proceedings should be heard either by arbitration in
China or in a Chinese Court. The plaintiff submitted that if there was a valid and operative arbitration clause, all the other difficulties it raised having been overcome, the parties were required by their agreement to arbitrate. If there was not then arbitration became irrelevant, and it was necessary for the defendant to meet the test laid down in Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty
Limited [(1990) 170 CLR 538] to establish that this Court is a forum non conveniens.

A critical issue is when and on what terms the parties contracted. It was not in contest that at all material times the urea was in an open bonded warehouse at the port. The evidence established that whilst the defendant may have been able to export the urea from China, it sold it to, or for the benefit of, three wholesalers in China for use on agricultural land in that country.

The Evidence Of Mr Yu 
In his affidavit of 20 June 1997 Mr Yu stated that he is the General Manager of the defendant, which carries on the business of international trading in fertilisers, including regular trade to China. He stated who were the shareholders in the defendant, and that a seventy per cent interest in the
Lief Group of Companies is held by China National Chemicals Import and Export
Corporation, which is known as Sinochem. Mr Yu was formerly an employee of
Sinochem before joining the defendant in Sydney in June 1995. His duties, as general manager, include "negotiating and concluding contracts for fertiliser trading, and the execution of those contracts".

He referred to the nature of the dispute and the urea having been shipped from
Russia to China, when it was made the subject of the agreement between the parties whilst in an open bonded warehouse at Huangpu Port. He stated that the importation of urea into China required an import licence from the Chinese
Government.

In paragraph 13 he said that the defendant had purchased fertiliser from the plaintiff three times in the past six years, but that this was the first purchase it had made in China in bags. He referred to a contract, number
CFC-97U, which had been entered into on 3 December 1996, clause 14 of which stated:- "Other Terms: See the attached terms and conditions which shall form an integral part of this contract." 
Those terms and conditions incorporated an arbitration clause in the same terms as that to which I have referred.

The defendant arranged for sub-sales of the urea to three buyers in Southern
China, who refused to take delivery of it because, allegedly, of its poor quality. He referred to certain certificates of quality, which supported the view that the urea was in good saleable condition but as to the authenticity and validity of which there will be, on the hearing, a very real dispute. It is this aspect of the matter, in part, which will, or potentially will, give rise to allegations of fraud. Mr Yu expressed the view that certain certificates provided by the plaintiff in relation to the quality of the urea were not genuine, and he referred, in paragraph 28, to the fact that after the contract between the plaintiff and the defendant was terminated the plaintiff entered into an agreement to sell portion of the urea to a third party, which took delivery of 3,000 metric tonnes, but refused to take delivery of the balance because of its poor quality.

In paragraph 29 Mr Yu set out evidentiary difficulties, which he said would arise if the dispute is litigated in Australia, rather than arbitrated in
China. Firstly, he referred to the fact that the defendant would need to call evidence as to the quality of the urea from Chinese witnesses, including the three sub-buyers and the third party purchaser, and he said that in his experience:- ".. it would be very difficult, and may not be possible, for such witnesses to obtain exit visas from China. Even if the exit visas could be obtained, the witnesses may not be prepared to come to Australia, and cannot be compelled to do so." 
The latter statement was not in issue.

Secondly, Mr Yu said that witnesses and other evidence to clarify whether certain certificates were genuine were located in China and, possibly, in Hong
Kong. Thirdly, he said that witnesses and other evidence as to the market price of the urea in China, as at 27 March 1997, would have to be obtained from traders and government records in China. In paragraph 30 he said, by way of submission, that if the defendant was obliged to defend the claim in
Australia:- ".. it most likely will not have the benefit of the Chinese evidence referred to in the preceding paragraph, without which Lief Investments could not prove its defence and would thereby be severely prejudiced." 
On 4 July 1997 Mr Yu swore a further affidavit in which he stated that he had become aware that the three prior dealings were between different companies within the two groups. He annexed copies of those contracts. The first, dated December 1992, in relation to other terms, referred to an attachment. The attached document provided for arbitration in the terms to which I have referred. The second, dated 25 February 1993, had the same notation about other terms and annexed the same terms, including clause 10. The third, dated December 1996 was in the same form as to "Other Terms" and clause 10 was in the same terms.

On 13 August 1997 Mr Yu swore a further affidavit, in paragraph 4 of which he referred to the receipt on 24 February 1997 of the "formal contract" with a request that he sign and return it, which he did. He continued:- "When I signed the faxed copy I noticed that it did not have attached to it the Sinochem terms and conditions. However I was not concerned at this because I expected those standard terms and conditions which at the time I believed were well known to both parties and customer in the trade to be attached to the executed copies of the original contracts when prepared by the plaintiff and forwarded to me in due course. The terms to which I referred are those attached to the contract which is annexure "A" to my affidavit sworn 20 June 1997. I was not concerned that this may have been overlooked by the plaintiff because in this case there had been an exchange of facsimile transmissions on 21 February 1997 from both the plaintiff and the defendant which expressly referred to those terms. Furthermore normally when we exchange contracts by facsimile transmission it is not customary to include the standard terms and conditions which comprise an extra series of pages in standard form known to the parties." 
In paragraph 10 Mr Yu said that in early March 1997 he received two copies of the original contract, which did not have Sinochem standard form terms and conditions annexed. By that time the dispute had arisen between the parties and, in those circumstances, he did not raise with the plaintiff the omission of the standard form terms and he did not sign the contract.

Mr Yu, in oral evidence in chief, said that after he sent the facsimile transmission on 21 February 1997 he spoke to Madam Ku Cichen, who is a director of the plaintiff's Hong Kong subsidiary and the mother of Mr David
Lee to whose evidence I shall refer. He discussed with her whether the cargo was fresh and the date for payment, which was to be thirty days from 24
February 1997. After that he received the facsimile transmission from the plaintiff of 21 February 1997.

Mr Yu said he received a document, which became Exhibit C, from Sinochem
International Fertiliser Trading Company. The document stated that Sinochem is a State owned company, which had been appointed by the Chinese Government to be the sole agent for all fertiliser imports to China, and that Sinochem
International Fertiliser Trading Company is an immediate subsidiary of
Sinochem and authorised by it to have the exclusive right to sign all contracts for fertiliser imports into China before customs clearance. The document continued:- "Also known to all manufacturers and trading companies in the fertiliser industry related with China market, Sinochem standard contract terms and conditions must apply to all fertiliser contracts to be signed by us for China market. Especially major terms like inspection, arbitration, and documents requirement etc have to follow Sinochem standard contract terms and conditions which have been stipulated in compliance with China Government regulations.

Enclosed please find the Sinochem standard contract terms and conditions for your reference." 
Those include clause 10 in the terms to which I have referred.

In cross-examination Mr Yu agreed that the three contracts annexed to his affidavit of 4 July 1997 related to shipping fertiliser to China. He said that did not matter and that the main terms and conditions "should be the same, no matter ex warehouse or by ocean": Tp.15.

On the same page Mr Yu said:- "When I say the standard Sinochem standard contract, there might be some very minor change of the term, but that will not change the standard terms and conditions agreed by the fertiliser industry.

Q. So you accept that there are from time to time changes between the terms and conditions of the so-called Sinochem terms and conditions? 
A. Sometimes there are small changes, but the main points will not be changed." 
Mr Yu was referred to differences between the terms and conditions, and asked about a number of changes, and, Tp.19, he was asked whether certain terms were standard Sinochem terms and conditions. He replied that they were based on them and:- "No, it is a version adjusted or, by Conagra, based on Sinochem standard terms and conditions." 
Mr Yu was then referred to agreements entered into by another officer of the
Lief Group, Mr Wang Gang. Mr Yu repeated, Tp.24, that the terms and conditions were "based on Sinochem standard terms and conditions" and, when asked what he meant by that, he said:- "Means that the key points and major, main points should follow the Sinochem standard terms and conditions, for the main part, the inspection, arbitration, documents and all those terms and conditions, because what I am buying for China market are on sale through Sinochem." 
Subsequently he added:- "When we said standard terms and conditions, we don't say it is a fixed printed or one hundred per cent no variation or changes - is the standard terms and conditions. There might be some minor changes." 
He agreed the changes might depend on the type of contract. After he suggested that other divisions in the Lief Group would follow the same procedure he was referred to annexure "B" to the affidavit of Mr David Kang Lee sworn 14 July , which made no reference to other terms and did not annex any terms. In those circumstances he said he did not know whether Mr Wang Gang attached any such terms and conditions to that contract.

The cross-examination pointed up differences between various terms and conditions and there was some debate as to whether they were important or not.
In relation to the present contract Mr Yu said he thought it was better to follow fully the Sinochem standard terms and conditions, but he agreed that the terms and conditions, which are annexed to the contract of 3 December , were based on but not "one hundred per cent" Sinochem standard terms and conditions. He repeated that the terms and conditions were "based on" the
Sinochem terms and conditions.

Mr Yu agreed that the method of payment was not specified in the facsimile transmissions of 21 February 1997, although it was in the contract of 24
February 1997. He said that was not important and, at Tp.36, he agreed formal contract documentation was "terribly important". He said he read the contract closely and although he said that every contract had "this wording", he agreed that formal contracts were very important in "this" international commodity trade. He said that after receiving the contract he did not communicate that the name of the purchaser was incorrect because he did not worry too much as it was within the Lief Group of Companies. He confirmed that he noticed the
Sinochem terms and conditions were not attached and that the contract made no reference to their forming an integral part of it: Tp.37. He did not communicate with the plaintiff:- ".. because I understood at that time that the terms and conditions should be an integral part of the contract otherwise it is not a contract. Without terms and conditions you cannot close the contract. That is my understanding." 
He agreed that executing the document was "a very important act".

At Tp.38 Mr Yu was cross-examined about the absence of any documentation relating to the sub-sales by the defendant. He said the sales into China would be agreed verbally and the three buyers were "very reliable buyers" with which the defendant had "considerable dealings". The sub-purchasers were wholesalers on the Chinese market.

At Tp.39A Mr Yu agreed that between February 1997 and September 1997 the price of urea has dropped significantly and that it is part of his business to know the market price and, accordingly, he kept records of it.

Mr Yu was asked about his assertion of difficulties in obtaining exit visas from China and it appeared, Tp.39C, that he thought the problem may be obtaining an entry visa into Australia.

At Tp.41 Mr Yu said that the arbitration clause was important because if purchasers in China arbitrated against the defendant and there was not an arbitration clause "then maybe they make different decision and we will have exposure and the risk also. So we have to stick strictly to this terms conditions and one hundred per cent back to back basis. Once the decision made in China, if they are off us then they are all against us we will have no exposure and risk". The difficulty with this assertion was that he did not produce any documents evidencing the sub-contracts. Accordingly, it was not possible to see whether there was any provision for arbitration with the sub- buyers. He suggested that those contracts were verbal. I am not satisfied that they contained any requirement for arbitration.

In view of the amendment to allow the claim for rectification to be brought forward, Mr Yu was cross-examined further commencing at Tp.123. He said, in chief, that he was aware the Lief Group of Companies had an official registered representative in China and that Mr Meng was his representative in
China. He also said that Lief Resources Pty Limited or the defendant have conducted a commercial arbitration in China.

In cross-examination he agreed that it was part of the Lief Group policy always to obtain a formal document styled contract, when a contract was entered into with a contract number, and that if he set out a list of current contracts he would do so by reference to those numbers. The facsimile transmissions of 21 February 1997 did not have a number. He agreed that it was essential in the international commodity business to know precisely the terms of an agreement and that that was the reason for the policy requirement of a written contract. He could not remember entering into an international commodity contract where he failed to obtain a written formal contract document, and he said that to do so would be contrary to Lief policy. He repeated he was unable to produce any documentation from the sub-purchasers.
He also said he did not know the practice of the other companies in the Lief
Group involved in the purchase and sale of fertilisers: Tp.129.

The Evidence Of Mr Ouyang 
Mr Lawrence Qing Ouyang swore an affidavit on 12 August 1997. He is the general manager of the Corporate Affairs Division of Lief International Pty
Limited, and holds other positions in the Lief Group of Companies. He has been involved in the trading of commodities, including fertilisers, since 1989, and in the resolution of disputes concerning those and other commodities. He is aware of the Sinochem standard form terms and has been involved in arbitrations in China. He expressed the view, paragraph 7, that whilst a copy contract annexed to the affidavit of Mr Lee did not refer to any attached terms and conditions that did not "prevent a document headed `Terms and
Conditions' from being physically attached to and forming part of that contract". He referred to the fact that the terms and conditions, which were attached, referred to arbitration in Hong Kong, and he said that in view of the particular circumstances of that purchase there was no need to require
Sinochem terms and conditions.

He referred to certain other contracts annexed to Mr Lee's affidavit and noted, firstly, that the contracting parties within the Lief Group traded independently from the defendant and, secondly, that the circumstances in which the contracts were entered into were different from those in the contract the subject of these proceedings. One difference was that the purchases were made for the purpose of re-export to South East Asia, whereas, under the contract in issue in these proceedings, the purchase was made for on-sale to the Chinese domestic market.

In paragraph 13 he put forward a submission, and the paragraph was read on that basis, as to how he considered the construction issue should be approached. In paragraph 14 he posed the question as to what constituted the
Sinochem standard contract. He agreed the terms of the contracts annexed to Mr
Lee's affidavit were not "identical" and he said that Sinochem terms and conditions, as known in the fertiliser trade, have evolved and been in use over many years since the founding of China. Mr Ouyang said he was employed by
Sinochem from January 1977 until October 1981 as an English translator concerned with the translation of communications to overseas parties and of trade agreements and documents. In paragraph 17 he continued:- "Indeed, there are a number of versions of Sinochem contracts for the sale and purchase of fertilisers. The versions differ because of different sets of trading circumstances. However, the core terms and conditions of the Sinochem contract have never been substantially varied. Those core terms and conditions include those relating to inspection, as set out in clause 7 of the terms and conditions attached to contract number CFC-97U of 3 December 1996 (annexure "D" to Mr Lee's affidavit) and those which relate to arbitration, as set out in clause 10 of the terms and conditions attached to contract number CFC-97U of 3 December 1996 .." (My emphasis.) 
In paragraph 18 he said that the only comparable contract to that of 24
February 1997 is annexure "D" to Mr Lee's affidavit, which related to the importation of fertilisers into China. Clause 14 of that contract provided: "Other terms: See the attached terms and conditions which shall form an integral part of this contract". That provided for arbitration in clause 10 in the terms I have stated. Other contracts relate to other trading circumstances.

In paragraph 21 he said that in his experience a Sinochem standard contract, regardless of the version in which it appears, always contains an arbitration clause which is the same or substantially the same as clause 10.

In paragraph 24 he said:- "The Sinochem terms and conditions relating to dispute resolution are equally applicable in the case of a sale ex-warehouse as in the context of a sale involving ocean carriage of goods, and are definitely desirable by reason of the difficulties which would arise if the dispute were litigated in Australia rather than arbitrated in China, such difficulties having been set out in the affidavit sworn by Mr Yu .. on 20 June 1997." 
In paragraph 27 he said:- "I am therefore of the view that standard Sinochem contract is appropriate for sales ex-warehouse, at least in so far as the method of dispute resolution is concerned." (My emphasis.) 
This was an important piece of evidence, because when consideration is given to all the terms and conditions, which the defendant contended were the standard terms and conditions, most of them were not relevant to a sale ex- warehouse, but rather to sea transportation. Thus, many of those terms and conditions were quite irrelevant to this contract, which involved a sale ex- warehouse. Accordingly, Dr Bell posed the question as to why the plaintiff would require the incorporation of terms and conditions, which were essentially irrelevant.

At Tp.67, in the context of being asked whether a written contract was usually obtained by the group, Mr Ouyang said that the Lief companies normally ensured that a document was obtained for the purposes "of cargo" signed by both parties.

The Evidence Of Mr Lee 
Mr David Kang Lee, who is the Deputy General Manager of Canagra International (Hong Kong) Limited, made two affidavits on 14 July and 4 September 1997. In the first affidavit he said, after annexing a copy of the contract of 24
February 1997, that following negotiations between Madam Ku and himself, on behalf of the plaintiff, and Mr Yu, he notified the plaintiff of the terms and the contract was prepared. In paragraph 5 he said that it was not the standard practice of the plaintiff to annex Sinochem terms and conditions and, thereafter, he referred to various contracts, two of which made reference to "the attached terms and conditions which shall form an integral part of this contract" and both containing an attachment headed "terms and conditions". He noted differences between them, including where arbitration was to take place.
He referred to annexure "E", which referred to terms and conditions, although none were attached.

In paragraph 9 Mr Lee referred to annexure "D", being the contract CFC-97U dated 3 December 1996, as to which Mr Yu had said the terms and conditions were "Sinochem standard contract terms and conditions". He said that was not the case having regard to other contracts annexed to his affidavit.

In his second affidavit Mr Lee referred to certain of the contracts, being annexures "D" and "E" to his first affidavit, and corrected a difficulty which had arisen when the affidavit was physically put together.

In paragraph 6 he referred to paragraphs 5 and 6 of Mr Ouyang's affidavit and "rejected" his assertion that with regard to fertiliser cargo sold ex- warehouse it is customary either to refer to "other terms and conditions as per standard Sinochem terms and conditions" or to attach such terms and conditions. He said that most of the terms and conditions contained in the various versions of the Sinochem standard terms and conditions contemplate and relate to ocean carriage of goods and are not applicable to the sale of goods ex-warehouse.

In his oral evidence in chief, Tp.76, Mr Lee said he did not consider attaching any terms and conditions to the contract of 24 February 1997 because he did not think they were applicable as they covered ocean carriage cargoes and this cargo was already in a bonded warehouse. As I have said many of the terms and conditions, for which the defendant contended, were inappropriate to this sale. His intention was not to attach any printed terms for those reasons. In cross-examination it was put to him that the terms of which he was speaking were "Sinochem's standard terms and conditions", and he said he would not be able "to think of which version to attach".

At Tp.77 Mr Lee said there were no standard terms as every sale is different and changes are made. Although he was pressed as to the terms and conditions, on the basis that he said he was considering annexing the standard terms and conditions, he said that many versions were used "of the so-called Sinochem contract". I think, in fairness, it is necessary to record what Mr Lee said at
Tp.76:- "Q. Did you consider whether or not to attach any terms and conditions to that contract? 
A. I have considered and decided not to.

Q. Why did you decide not to? 
A. Because I do not think those attachments are applicable to the sale.

Q. Why is that? 
A. Because they cover ocean carriage cargoes." 
Accordingly, Mr Lee did not refer to the standard form and his evidence at
Tp.78 has to be appreciated in the light of the evidence he had given earlier.

Mr Lee was cross-examined about the words on the facsimile transmissions of 21
February:- "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's standard contract." 
He agreed there were certain changes between the facsimile transmission received from the defendant and the response.

At Tp.83 I asked Mr Lee what were the documents which comprised "the contract concluded on 21 February 1997" and he replied:- "The contract, the firm bid and our confirmation of the telephone conversations which confirmed the business." 
At Tp.84 he said the contract was the facsimile bid, the confirmation of 21
February 1997 and any discussions with Mr Yu. On the same page he said it was not a mistake, but intentional, that the other terms and conditions as per
Sinochem's standard form contract were not included.

At Tp.93 Mr Lee was cross-examined about disadvantages to the plaintiff in having the present dispute arbitrated in China. He said he had not given the matter too much thought, but he considered that an American company and an
Australian company would find it inappropriate to bring the case in China. He said he was not concerned about the validity of the certificates, nor did he realise, when he sent off the contract on 24 February 1997, that there was a possibility of a dispute about the goods. He was asked:- "Q. You just left out the reference to the Sinochem clause because you didn't want the case arbitrated in China, did you? 
A. Should we have a case we would always, as an American company, not want to have arbitration in a country, for example, like China." 
He agreed that under different circumstances there was agreement to arbitrate in China.

In relation to the standard Sinochem terms and conditions Mr Lee said there was no "single standard Sinochem contract which we used for every contract":
Tp.94. He also said he thought it was inappropriate to attach any of those terms, especially for ex-warehouse cargo: Tp.95, and that terms and conditions would only be attached in circumstances where they reflected "the actual negotiation and agreement": Tp.95.

When Was The Contract Entered Into? 
The first issue is whether the contract was entered into by the exchange of the facsimile transmissions on 21 February 1997, or when the document designated "contract" and dated 24 February 1997 was executed. The defendant submitted, firstly, that the contract was entered into by the exchange of facsimile transmissions on 21 February 1997. The effect was to include a term:- "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's standard contract." 
The defendant's facsimile transmission was a "firm bid" and, as I have noted, the reply contained different terms as to payment and charges. I consider that the exchange of facsimile transmissions constituted the negotiations between the parties, which did not merge into a contract until the document of 24
February 1997 was executed. There are a number of reasons for reaching this conclusion. Firstly, there was no acceptance of the "firm bid" in the second communication of 21 February 1997. It is clear the parties were still negotiating by the fact that the time for payment and the payment of certain charges had not been agreed. In my opinion the evidence makes it clear that the defendant contemplated that it would, as it had done in the past and did so thereafter, enter into a contract in the form of the document, which ultimately bore date 24 February 1997.

Secondly, the defendant regarded the entry into such a contract as a matter of importance and, when the document dated 24 February 1997 was received, Mr Yu read it carefully before he executed it on behalf of the defendant. The evidence of Mr Yu and Mr Ouyang, to which I have referred, satisfies me that the defendant required that there should be a formal contract, and that Mr Yu, in entering into this contract, was complying with that requirement.
Accordingly, he read the document of 24 February 1997 carefully before he executed it. He noted the absence of a reference to the standard Sinochem terms and conditions and to any such document being annexed. In my opinion he, on behalf of the defendant, had no intention of entering into the contract until he signed the document of 24 February 1997.

His evidence was that he expected Sinochem terms and conditions to be affixed to the hard copy of the document notwithstanding the failure to make reference to them. In my opinion the proper interpretation of the evidence, viewed objectively, is that the communications of 21 February 1997 were negotiations leading up to the formation of the contract on 24 February 1997. The reference to the contract having been concluded on 21 February 1997 is, in my view, a reference from the date from which the contract was to operate. The words of the document of 24 February 1997 make it clear that the terms and conditions were contained in that document. For these reasons I am satisfied that the contract was entered into on 24 February 1997. The evidence of Mr Lee, when read in totality and in the light of the preparation of the document of 24
February 1997, supports this conclusion.

Mr King made a further submission. It was that in the Summons the plaintiff had relied on the contract having been entered into on 21 February 1997; that this constituted an admission by the plaintiff that that was the date of entry into the contract; that the amendment was made to avoid the consequence that the standard Sinochem contract was thereby included thus incorporating the arbitration clause; and, therefore, I should find that the contract was entered into on 21 February 1997. There are a number of answers to this submission, in addition to the one that I am satisfied that the contract was entered into on 24 February 1997.

Firstly, the Summons did not unequivocally rely on the documents of 21
February 1997. It relied, inter alia, on the document of 24 February 1997.
Secondly, assertions made in pleadings do not amount to admissions: Laws v
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal [(1990) 176 CLR 70] at p.85.
Thirdly, what Dr Bell is recorded as having said when the amendment was sought to be made, which is only a paraphrase in any event, could not possibly constitute an admission that the arbitration clause otherwise applied. For these reasons that submission must be rejected.

Was There Incorporated In The Contract "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's standard contract"? 
If I had come to the view that the contract was entered into on 21 February , the words "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's standard contract" would have formed part of it. That would still have left open the questions as to what those terms and conditions were, whether the words were sufficiently certain, and whether an arbitration clause could be incorporated by such words. I shall consider each of those matters after I consider the submissions made on the basis that the contract was contained in the document dated 24 February 1997, as I have found it was.

Firstly, Mr King submitted that the term was an express term of the contract.
In my view it was not. To be an express term it would have to be found in it.
It is not, and the express words state that the terms and conditions are "as stipulated below". Secondly, he submitted it was an implied term, the implication flowing from the necessity to give business efficacy to the contract. The term he submitted to be implied was the arbitration clause. In considering the implication of a term it must be remembered that one is dealing with a formal contract and not one where the parties have not attempted to spell out all the terms of the contract, but left most or some of them to be inferred or implied.

Mr King submitted that the plaintiff was well aware that the reason for the purchase of the urea was to sell it into China and that, in those circumstances, the arbitration clause was necessary to give business efficacy to the contract. However, before a term can be implied into a formal contract it is necessary for it to meet a number of tests of which one is to give business efficacy to the agreement. The term must be reasonable and equitable; it must be necessary to give business efficacy to the contract so that it will not be implied if the contract is effective without it; it must be so obvious that "it goes without saying"; it must be capable of clear expression; and it must not contradict any express terms of the contract. In my opinion only the last two tests are met in the present case and, in those circumstances, I do not consider that the term can be implied: BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty
Limited versus Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 at p.283; Codelfa
Construction Pty Limited versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337.] 
Mr King also submitted that it should be implied because it accorded with the prior dealings of the parties. At an evidentiary level this submission struck several insuperable obstacles. Firstly, the evidence does not satisfy me that either as between the parties to this contract or, if the wider view be taken as between companies within the Conagra Group and the Lief Group, any consistent course of business dealings in relation to the incorporation of the asserted standard Sinochem terms and conditions, or the arbitration clause, had been adopted. Rather the evidence was that whether those terms and conditions, including the arbitration clause, were incorporated differed from contract to contract depending on the nature of the contract: e.g. ex- warehouse or ocean carriage, and that in many cases the contract was only "based on" those terms and conditions. Certainly, as between the plaintiff and the defendant, there was no evidence of any customary practice. Nor, in my opinion, was there any course of dealing between the various companies in the groups, which established that practice. Secondly, even if one were only to have regard to the arbitration clause, there is no consistency in the various clauses. Some provided for arbitration in China and some for arbitration in
Hong Kong. Thirdly, there cannot, in a sensible way, be a concentration on one of a number of clauses. If the arbitration clause is part of the standard
Sinochem contract one may, in certain circumstances, ignore other clauses, but one still has to find the basic document which, by a course of dealing, can be said to be incorporated. The evidence satisfies me that each contract was separately negotiated and considered.

Mr King also relied upon the principle in Mackay versus Dick [(1881) 6 App Cas ] at
The principle to be derived from that case is that "as a general rule each party agrees, by implication, to do all such things as are necessary on his part to enable the other party to have the benefit of the contract": per
Griffith CJ in Butt versus M'Donald (1896) 7 QLJ 68 at pp.70-71. Mason J referred to this passage in Secured Income Real Estate (Australia) Limited v
St Martins Investments Pty Limited <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR 596] at p.607, and said:- "It is easy to imply a duty to co-operate in the doing of acts which are necessary to the performance by the parties or by one of the parties of fundamental obligations under the contract. It is not quite so easy to make the implication when the acts in question are necessary to entitle the other contracting party to a benefit under the contract but are not essential to the performance of that party's obligations and are not fundamental to the contract. Then the question arises whether the contract imposes a duty to co-operate on the first party or whether it leaves him at liberty to decide for himself whether the acts shall be done, even if the consequence of his decision is to disentitle the other party to a benefit. In such a case the correct interpretation of the contract depends, as it seems to me, not so much on the application of the general rule of construction as on the intention of the parties as manifested by the contract itself." 
In my opinion there is no basis for asserting, in this case, that an arbitration clause, or indeed the standard Sinochem terms and conditions, were essential to the performance of the plaintiff's obligations. To the contrary it was conceded that many were not necessary for this contract at all. An arbitration clause, either taken with the other terms or alone, does not have, in the circumstances of this case, the element of essentiality. This is the more so when it is recalled that the sub-buyer contracts were not proved. The evidence does not satisfy me that in the nature of this transaction the arbitration clause was, relevantly, essential.

Reference, in this context, was also made to the judgment of Deane J in
Hawkins versus Clayton & Ors (1988) 164 CLR 539. At p.571 his Honour warned that care must be taken to avoid an automatic or rigid application of the ordinary cumulative criteria for determining whether a term should be implied in a written contract "to a case where a contract is oral or partly oral or where it is apparent that the parties have never attempted to reduce their agreement to complete written form". His Honour continued:- "The cases in which those criteria were laid down or accepted as the cumulative ingredients of an overall test were concerned with the question whether a term should be implied in a formal contract which was complete upon its face ... In such cases, the insertion of an additional term effectively involves an alteration to what the parties have formally accepted as the complete written record of the compact between them." 
His Honour stated that the position was different where the parties:- ".. have not attempted to spell out all the terms of their contract but have left most or some of them to be inferred or implied." 
In my view that is not the position in the present case.

The question of an implied term was again considered by the High Court in
Byrne versus Australian Airlines Limited [(1995) 185 CLR 410.] At p.422
Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ said that the implication for which the appellants contended was based upon the presumed or imputed intention of the parties. Their Honours referred to the test laid down in BP Refinery
Pty Limited and to the observations of Deane J in Hospital
Products Limited versus United States Surgical Corporation <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] at p.121 and in Hawkins versus Clayton. They considered what his Honour said in the latter case at p.573, namely:- "The most that can be said consistently with the need for some degree of flexibility is that, in a case where it is apparent that the parties have not attempted to spell out the full terms of their contract, a court should imply a term by reference to the imputed intention of the parties if, but only if, it can be seen that the implication of the particular term is necessary for the reasonable or effective operation of a contract of that nature in the circumstances of the case. That general statement of principle is subject to the qualification that a term may be implied in a contract by established mercantile usage or professional practice or by a past course of dealing between the parties." 
Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ continued:- "That is, we think, the appropriate test to apply in this case and the answer must be that it is not necessary to imply a term in the form of clause 11(a) for the reasonable or effective operation of the contract of employment in all the circumstances. In the absence of any provision in the award and of any express provision in the contract of employment the law would regard it as a legal incident of the contract that it should be terminable upon reasonable notice or summarily for serious breach." 
In the result I am not satisfied that the requirements for the implication of the term laid down in BP Refinery have been satisfied and, having regard to the terms of the contract, I consider that it is the appropriate test. If the other test is appropriate the evidence does not satisfy me that a term should be implied by a past course of dealing between the parties, or because it is an essential term in the sense I have discussed.

Rectification 
Mr King nextly submitted that this was a case in which the contract of 24
February 1997 should be rectified. The cross-claim, relevantly, sought rectification to insert the incorporation clause, or, and this was the submission on which Mr King placed more weight, to append the terms and conditions, for which the defendant contended, to the agreement. He said there was a unilateral mistake on the part of Mr Yu, namely that the Sinochem standard terms and conditions would be annexed to the hard copy of the contract, and that this was not done by Mr Lee deliberately, knowing that Mr
Yu was labouring under a mistake that it would be. Thus, Mr King was really submitting that although Mr Yu signed the document of 24 February 1997 knowing that no terms and conditions were appended, there was to be the further hard copy, which would comprise the contract.

In my opinion this submission must fail at a basic evidentiary level. Mr Yu's evidence was that he received the document of 24 February 1997, read through it carefully, noticed it did not have attached the standard terms and conditions and, none-the-less, signed it. His explanation for doing so was that he expected the standard terms and conditions to be annexed to the hard copy. Mr Lee had done nothing to engender any such belief in Mr Yu, and he did not communicate with Mr Lee to confirm that the standard terms and conditions would be annexed to the hard copy. There was no discussion that any terms and conditions would be annexed and, even if one goes back to the facsimile transmissions of 21 February 1997, they were concerned with the insertion of a clause about terms and conditions, not the physical attachment of them to the final contract.

Dr Bell submitted, correctly, in my opinion, that for rectification to be granted there must be clear and convincing proof that the written document does not embody the final intention of the parties. As Wilson J said in
Pukalus & Anor versus Cameron <case>; [(1980-1981) 180 CLR 447] at p.452:- "The second principle governing the rectification of a contract which is material to this case is that which requires the plaintiff to advance "convincing proof" that the written contract does not embody the final intention of the parties. The omitted ingredient must be capable of such proof in clear and precise terms. The court must not assume for itself the task of making the contract for the parties." 
In Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Carlenka Pty Limited [(1995) 41
NSWLR 329] Mahoney AP said, at p.331:- "In my opinion, the principle upon which rectification is granted involves two things: that the party (in the case of a unilateral transaction) or the parties (in the case of a transaction between parties) had at all relevant times an intention which was to be given effect by the document to be rectified; and that that document does not give effect to that transaction." 
His Honour referred to Pakulas and the necessity for convincing proof at p.322.

Sheller JA referred to the central issue in that case as being whether the
Court would rectify the document:- ".. which contains words the parties or party executing it have previously used under the mistaken belief that the words have a different legal effect": p.336. 
His Honour then noted the distinction between a mistaken belief as to what the document contained, and a mistake as to its effect rather than its contents.

McLelland AJA said, at p.345:- "In general, the remedy of rectification of an instrument is available where it is established by clear and convincing proof that at the time of execution of the instrument the relevant party or parties as the case may be had an actual intention (if more than one party, a common intention) as to the effect which the instrument would have which was inconsistent with the effect which the instrument as executed did have in some clearly identified way. In this context `effect' means the legal and effectual operation of the instrument according to its true construction, but does not include legal or factual consequences of the operation of the instrument of a more remote, or collateral, kind (for example its liability to stamp duty)." 
As I have said I do not consider, on the facts of this case, that there was any misunderstanding by Mr Yu as to what the document of 24 February 1997 stated. Further, it was not his belief that it would include a term in the terms of paragraph 10 of the facsimile transmissions. Therefore, the first basis on which rectification was sought must fail. He said his belief was that there would be annexed to the hard copy the standard terms and conditions.
Thus, even on the case propounded by the defendant, Mr Yu did not expect to find within the document he signed those words. He did not assert that he was led to believe by the plaintiff that they would be there and, when they were not, he realised this and made no complaint. There is no evidence that there was any discussion between Mr Yu and Mr Lee that there would be any such annexation. Finally Mr Lee denied, for reasons I accept, that he ever intended to annex any terms. Thus the necessary agreement to support rectification was not present. In my view the application for rectification must fail.

Unconscionable Conduct 
The fourth basis on which Mr King relied was that it would be unconscionable for the plaintiff to assert that the communications of 21 February 1997 did not reflect the true agreement, when it knew that they did, and to seek to rely on the "formal document" of 24 February 1997. He submitted the negotiated contract contained a representation by the plaintiff that the contract incorporated the Sinochem arbitration clause. Essentially for the reasons to which I have referred already, I do not consider that the facts establish any of the matters for which Mr King contends. It was plain to Mr Yu that there was no reference to those terms and conditions in the document he signed as the contract between the parties. It is equally plain he did not expect to see them, nor was surprised when he did not see them. In these circumstances I see no basis upon which there was any conduct which either misled or deceived Mr
Yu, or was capable of doing so, such as to entitle him to relief on the basis of such conduct.

Were There Standard Sinochem Terms and Conditions? 
The defendant contended that the standard terms and conditions of the Sinochem contract were those found in Exhibit C. Indeed it submitted that this evidence must be accepted as there was none to the contrary. It faced, however, a substantial factual difficulty in making good this submission because the evidence indicated, firstly, that there were various forms of that contract; and, secondly, that there were various adaptations of it depending on the commercial nature of the contract. Thirdly, at an evidentiary level, there was the evidence that certain contracts were "based on" the terms and conditions in the standard Sinochem contract.

Mr Yu said, Tp.24, that the terms and conditions he intended to be included were "based upon" the Sinochem terms and conditions. Mr Ouyang said there were a number of versions "of Sinochem contracts for the sale and purchase of fertilisers", and the evidence established that the terms and conditions differed as circumstances differed and depending on the particular traders within the Lief Groups. I have referred to the evidence, which, in my opinion, makes it abundantly clear that there was no one document, even at any one time, which could be identified as the terms and conditions in the standard
Sinochem contract, nor which incorporated that contract.

The defendant submitted that irrespective of the absence of such a standard document all the Sinochem terms and conditions contained an arbitration clause, although some provided for arbitration in China and some for arbitration in Hong Kong. Whilst I accept that if one can identify the standard terms and conditions to be incorporated into the contract, inconsistent or inappropriate terms can be ignored, the problem for the defendant remained that it must identify a set of standard terms and conditions, which could, either wholly or partially, be incorporated into the contract and which provided the arbitration clause for arbitration in China.
The defendant simply failed to do this to my satisfaction.

Against the background of the various Sinochem terms and conditions Dr Bell submitted that the term "Other terms and conditions as per Sinochem's Standard
Contract" was uncertain: Love & Stewart (Limited) versus S. Instone & Co [(1917) 33 TLR 475] and
Bishop & Baxter Limited versus Anglo-Eastern Trading & Industrial Company
Limited [[1944] 1 KB 12.] In the former case the contract was subject to a "strike clause", but there was no evidence that the parties agreed on the terms of that clause and, as there were many forms of such clause, those words were held to be uncertain. In the latter the contract was "subject to war clause". Such clauses took many forms and it was held that as there was no evidence that the parties had any particular form of clause in mind there was no agreement and, therefore, no concluded contract.

In Tern Minerals NL versus Kalbara Mining NL [[1990] 3 WAR 486] Ipp J had to consider whether one could give certainty to a requirement to incorporate "all reasonable and usual warranties, terms and conditions for a transaction of this nature having regard to investigations which Pan Continental has undertaken". Issue was raised as to whether there were any "usual" warranties, terms and conditions and his Honour, at p.495, accepted that the onus was on the parties asserting that there were to establish by evidence that these stipulations were sufficiently certain to give rise to a contract enforceable at law. He then referred to the evidence and said:- "I conclude from their evidence that while it is unusual for a joint venture agreement of the kind in question in this case to contain provisions relating to particular topics it cannot be said that the wording of any particular clause is `usual'. It seems to me that the wording of clauses in a joint venture agreement is of fundamental importance. It is trite that any change of wording could alter the meaning of any particular clause. A default clause - which would be a usual clause - is a good example of what I mean. Without there being any usual wording I do not think it can be said that there are any `usual warranties, terms and conditions for a transaction of this nature'." 
In these circumstances, and after referring to Love & Stewart and
Bishop & Baxter, his Honour concluded that the provisions were too uncertain to create a binding obligation to enter into a proposed further agreement.

In my opinion, on the evidence before me, there is no sufficient certainty as to "terms and conditions as per Sinochem Standard Contract", so that even if these words had been incorporated into the contract, in one of the ways for which Mr King contended, that would not have led to a concluded contract.

The Incorporation Of An Arbitration Clause 
Dr Bell submitted that, even if all his other submissions failed, the reference to Sinochem's "standard contract" or standard terms and conditions was not enough to incorporate the arbitration clause upon which the defendant relies, or, indeed, any arbitration clause, because there is a long line of authority, which required such a clause to be incorporated by express or specific reference to it. Mr King submitted that this would not avail the plaintiff if the contract was rectified to attach physically the terms and conditions to which he referred. Dr Bell referred, firstly, to the decision of the House of Lords in T.W. Thomas & Co Limited versus Portsea Steamship
Company Limited [[1912] AC 1.] A bill of lading provided that the goods shipped under it should be delivered to the shipper or his assigns, and that: "He" (the shipper) "or they paying freight for the said goods with other conditions as per charterparty". In the margin were written the words:- "Deck load at shipper's risk, and all other terms and exceptions of charter to be as per charterparty, including negligence clause." 
The charterparty provided for arbitration "in respect of any dispute or claim arising out of any of the conditions of this charter". It was held that the arbitration clause was not incorporated in the bill of lading.

Lord Loreburn LC said it was well settled that the printed words in the bill of lading did not incorporate in it the arbitration clause in the charterparty. He considered the handwritten words and said, p.6:- "I do not think that this paragraph brings into the bill of lading the arbitration clause any more than the other. The arbitration clause is not one that governs shipment or carriage or delivery or the terms upon which delivery is to be made or taken; it only governs the way of settling disputes between the parties to the charterparty and disputes arising out of the conditions of the charterparty, not disputes arising out of the bill of lading." 
On a reading of the words in the charterparty that is clearly correct. One would have to vary the words in the arbitration clause to read, for example, "arising out of the bill of lading".

Lord Atkinson came to the same conclusion stating:- "I think it would be a sound rule of construction to adopt that when it is sought to introduce into a document like a bill of lading - a negotiable instrument - a clause such as this arbitration clause, not germane to the receipt, carriage or delivery of the cargo or the payment of freight, - the proper subject matters with which the bill of lading is conversant - this should be done by distinct and specific words, and not by such general words as those written in the margin of the bill of lading in this case." 
His Lordship did not doubt that the clause could be incorporated by "distinct and specific" words. He expressed no concern about the terms of the clause being appropriate for insertion in the bill of lading. Thus, in his Lordship's view, the question was one of construction.

Lord Gorell, at pp.7 and 8, regarded the matter as one of construction in relation to the handwritten words, and he said that he had very serious doubt whether it carried the question "one bit further than the clause which is to be found in the body of the bill". He considered that an earlier authority had established that the words "all other terms and conditions as per charterparty" did not have the effect of incorporating the arbitration clause into the bill of lading. At p.8 he said:- "I think the true view to take of such a clause is that the `terms and conditions' do not really include more than refers to those matters which have to be dealt with by both the ship owner and the consignee in relation to the carriage, discharge and delivery of the cargo. To what extent they include what refers to those matters I do not pause to consider, but I do not see that they expressly in any way deal with the arbitration clause; and, of course, it is sufficient for present purposes to say that they do not; but my view is that what they deal with is no more than what I have already stated." 
I find it difficult, once one leaves the strict question of construction, to understand why one would not expect to find, or not anticipate that one would find, an arbitration clause in a commercial contract relating to the shipping of goods. It is, and was in 1912, a commonly used method of commercial dispute resolution.

His Lordship then considered that a shipper would not have been interested in having a decision by arbitration at any port where a dispute occurred, and that the consignee might find himself in the same difficulty of having to arbitrate at a port of shipment with which he had no further connection. These considerations, presumably, went to the question of the parties' contractual intention. At p.9 he said:- "It therefore seems to me, when one looks at the matter broadly, that the true construction to place upon this clause is what I have already suggested; and that the point may be made still plainer by trying to see what would be the effect produced if this clause of arbitration were actually written into the bill of lading. If it were written in, it would at once be seen that it is not a clause which in its terms is consistent with the bill of lading - it is consistent with disputes arising under a charterparty; and that again leads to the conclusion that it was never intended to be inserted as part of the bill of lading which was to pass from hand to hand as bills of lading, being negotiable instruments, usually do. 
But there is a wide consideration which I think it is important to bear in mind in dealing with this class of case. The effect of deciding to stay this action would be that the bill of lading holder or ship owner (in this case it would be the ship owner, but it might just as well occur where a bill of lading holder is concerned who does not wish for an arbitration,) - that either party is ousted from the jurisdiction of the courts and compelled to decide all questions by means of arbitration. And I think, broadly speaking, that very clear language should be introduced into any contract which is to have that effect, and I am by no means prepared to say that this contract, when studied with care, was ever intended to exclude, or does carry out any intention of excluding, the jurisdiction of the courts in cases between the ship owner and the bill of lading holder. It seems to me that the clause for arbitration ought properly to be confined, as drawn, to disputes arising between the ship owner and the charterers .." 
The first paragraph deals with the question of strict construction. The second is concerned with the contractual intention of the parties having regard, inter alia, to the ouster of the Court's jurisdiction as between the ship owner and the consignee. In saying this I accept that relevant intention impacts on construction.

At p.11 Lord Robson expressed the opinion that as the bill of lading is negotiable any enlargement of obligations of the parties to it and any deprivation of ordinary legal remedies should be explicit and precise. Thus his Lordship was looking to the wider position, but he concluded:- "It is difficult to hold that words which require modification to read as part of the bill of lading and then purport to deal only with disputes arising under a document made between different persons are quite sufficiently explicit for the appellants' purpose." 
In The "Merak" [1964] 2 LLR 527 the English Court of Appeal held that in the circumstances of that case the arbitration clause contained in the charterparty was incorporated into the bills of lading between the plaintiffs and the defendants notwithstanding that there was no express reference to the arbitration clause.

Davies LJ at p.533 said:- "The main contention of the plaintiffs on this point is that the decision of the House of Lords in T.W. Thomas & Co versus Portsea Steamship Company is an authority for the proposition that an arbitration clause in a charterparty cannot be incorporated into a bill of lading in this way. But that case does not, in my judgment, support such a wide proposition." 
His Lordship continued that in that case the arbitration clause, on its face, applied only to disputes between the parties to the charterparty, whereas the present clause applied also to any disputes arising out of any bill of lading.
He therefore considered that Portsea was distinguishable. His Lordship was also of the opinion, p.534, that if the parties used sufficiently wide words of incorporation there could be an incorporation into the bill of lading of an arbitration clause, which expressly applied to disputes arising out of the bill of lading.

Russell LJ considered that Thomas was confined to cases where the arbitration clause referred only to disputes arising under the charterparty and he said, at p.537, that he thought the true view of that case was:- ".. that it shows that clauses which are directly germane to shipment, carriage and delivery may be incorporated by general words though the fact that they are found in a charterparty may involve a degree of verbal manipulation to fit exactly a bill of lading; but that where there is a clause whose subject matter is not thus directly germane, such as an arbitration clause, it is not permissible to construe general words of incorporation as extending to a clause which does not in terms relate to a bill of lading." 
On the facts and circumstances of the case he saw no conflict between his conclusion that the words were wide enough to incorporate the arbitration clause and the decision in Thomas.

In The "Annefield" [1971] 1 LLR 1 it was held that only a clause directly germane to the subject matter of the bill of lading can be incorporated without explicit incorporation by clear words, either in the bill of lading or the charterparty, and that an arbitration clause was not directly germane to the shipment, carriage and delivery of the goods and, therefore, was not incorporated by general words in the bill of lading. Once again I have some difficulty with the concept that a clause providing for a well recognised method of commercial dispute resolution is not, relevantly, "germane".

In Modern Building Wales Limited versus Limner and Trinidad Co Limited [[1975] WLR 1281] the Court of Appeal had no difficulty incorporating by construction terms and conditions, which included an arbitration clause. None of the authorities, to which I have been referred appear to have been relied on or cited.

In The "Varenna" [1983] 1 LLR 416 the charterparty provided for arbitration and the bill of lading provided "all conditions and exceptions of each charterparty including the negligence clause are deemed to be incorporated in" the bill of lading. Hobhouse J held that prima facie only provisions directly germane to the subject matter of the bill were incorporated, and that a charterparty arbitration clause did not fall within that category so that a clear intention to incorporate it had to be found.

His Lordship's decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal: [1983] 2 LLR 592.
Their Lordships held that an incorporation of the "conditions" of the charter did not suffice, as a matter of authority, to incorporate an arbitration clause in the charter; and that such clauses had been construed in a restrictive way for many years.

At p.597 Oliver LJ said:- "What does seem to me important is that the documents so commonly in use and containing familiar expressions which have a well-established meaning - particularly as regards something like an arbitration clause where clarity and certainty are important to both parties - should not be departed from in the absence of compulsive surrounding circumstances or a context which is strongly suggestive of some other meaning." 
In this case their Lordships over-ruled the appealingly robust approach to the issue followed by Staughton J in "The Emmanuel Coloctronis" [1982] 1 LLR
His Lordship's view is one I find more attractive and which, unfettered by authority, I would prefer. I also note that the citation of "The
Varenna" in footnote 74 of the 26th Edition of Scrutton on Charterparties and Bills of Lading is in error. I have set forth the correct reference.

In Pinetop Insurance Co Limited versus Unione Italiana Anglo Saxon Reinsurance Co
Limited [1987] 1 LLR 476 an insurer issued insurance policies and reinsured the excess. The slip, which contained the reinsurance contract, provided, inter alia:- "All terms clauses and conditions as original".

There was a limited arbitration clause in the policies. The question was whether the arbitration clause had been incorporated into the retrocession agreement. Gatehouse J held, at p.481:- "So far as the arbitration clause (clause 15) is concerned, there is no express reference to it in the slip, and, if it is to be incorporated by reason of line 1 of the general conditions, it will not bind the retrocessionaires to arbitrate disputes with the reinsurers. Its wording is quite inappropriate to do so. It would have to be re-written. The changes necessary may be few, but they are vitally important." 
He concluded:- "In any case, I would apply the settled principles of the bills of lading cases and hold that, in the absence of express incorporation in the slip, the arbitration clause in the reinsurance contract is not incorporated into the retrocessionaire contract." 
In The "Federal Bulker" [1989] 1 LLR 103 the charterparty required all disputes to be referred to arbitration. The bills of lading provided:- "All terms conditions and exceptions as per charterparty dated January 20 1986 and any addenda thereto to be considered as fully incorporated herein as if fully written." 
The issue was whether the arbitration clause had been effectively incorporated by reference and it was held that the general language was not sufficient to incorporate an arbitration clause, it being well established that there was a need for certainty in commercial matters, and that the only solution was to adhere to the well established meaning of the words of incorporation which had been used in the bill of lading, namely that they incorporated only terms and conditions and exceptions in accordance with the charterparty as those words were generally understood, and did not import the arbitration clause.

In Access Insurance Co Limited & Anor versus Mander [1997] 2 LLR 119 there was reinsurance, which provided:- "All terms, clauses, conditions and warranties as original and to follow original settlements and/or agreements of the reassureds in all respects." 
The policy contained an arbitration clause. The issue was whether the retrocession incorporated the arbitration clause contained in the treaty. It was held that the use of general words could not have incorporated even a pre- existing arbitration clause, much less one which had not yet been entered into when the retrocession was agreed.

The matter was considered in detail and at length by Ralph Gibson LJ and Sir
John Megaw in Aughton Limited (formerly Aughton Group Limited) versus M.F. Kent
Services Limited [(1991) 57 BLR 6], the issue being whether an arbitration clause in a building sub-contract was incorporated in a sub-sub-contract. At first instance it was held that it was not. The appeal was dismissed, although for different reasons. Ralph Gibson LJ founded upon the statement of Brandon J in The Annefield [[1971] P ] at p.173, where his Lordship said, after referring to various authorities to some of which I have referred:- "Those cases seem to me to establish the following propositions. First, in order to decide whether a clause under a bill of lading incorporates an arbitration clause in a charterparty it is necessary to look at both the precise words in the bill of lading alleged to do the incorporating, and also the precise terms of the arbitration clause in the charterparty alleged to be incorporated. Secondly, it is not necessary, in order to effect incorporation, that the incorporating clause should refer expressly to the arbitration clause. General words may suffice, depending on the terms of the latter clause. Thirdly, when the arbitration clause is, by its terms, applicable only to disputes under the charterparty, general words will not incorporate it into the bill of lading so as to make it applicable to disputes under the contract contained in, or evidenced by, that document. Fourthly, where the arbitration clause by its terms applies both to disputes under the charterparty and to disputes under the bill of lading, general words of incorporation will bring the clause into the bill of lading so as to make it applicable to disputes under that document." 
After a further review of the authorities Ralph Gibson LJ said, at p.20:- "For my part, however, I have no doubt that the propositions stated by Brandon J are authoritative guides to construction in any case where the court is considering whether an arbitration clause has been incorporated by reference. If the particular case is concerned with contracts and circumstances different from those normally found in charterparty/bills of lading cases, the relevant differences will or may affect the answer which the court will be constrained to give, and in particular to the question whether, in the circumstances, the `precise words alleged to do the incorporating' can properly be given the effect contended for as disclosing the intention of the parties. Thus, in this case, in my judgment, the issue turns upon the proper construction of the words of incorporation which, put shortly, were that sub-sub-contract number 2 would be a `sub-sub-contract based on Press/Kent'." 
His Lordship considered that the contractual words were adequate to effect incorporation. However, he was of the view that as arbitration agreements had to be in writing by statute the incorporation by reference on the particular facts of that case was not sufficient to comply with that statutory requirement.

Sir John Megaw took a different approach. He considered that the decision in
Portsea governed the case and, at p.31, after referring to the speeches of
Lord Gorell and Lord Loreburn, he said:- "Hence it follows that the reason for excluding an arbitration clause is certainly not confined to the special features of a charterparty/bill of lading relationship, nor to the fact that the bill of lading is a document of title. It is then necessary to consider what are the reasons which lead to, and justify, this distinction affecting arbitration clauses, as distinct from other types of contractual terms, in cases where incorporation is claimed: and then to consider whether those reasons are or are not equally applicable to engineering sub-contract and sub-sub-contract cases, as in this appeal, as they were in the decision of Thomas versus Portsea. Is there any true distinction in this respect?" 
His Lordship considered there were three important and inter-related factors peculiar to arbitration agreements. Firstly, that such an agreement may preclude the bringing of court proceedings. Secondly, that it has to be a "written agreement". Thirdly, that the status of such an agreement is different from other types of clauses as it constitutes a "self-contained contract collateral or ancillary to" a substantive contract. It may be conceded immediately that these features distinguish arbitration clauses from other types of clause. The question is why they affect the ability of an arbitration clause to be incorporated in a contract if sufficiently certain words are used, and the terms of the arbitration clause cover a dispute under that contract. The third point led him to say, at p.32:- "If this self-contained contract is to be incorporated, it must be expressly referred to in the document which is relied on as the incorporating writing. It is not incorporated by a mere reference to the terms and conditions of the contract to which the arbitration clause constitutes a collateral contract." 
Thus his Lordship accepted that the three distinguishing features to which he referred did not, either in themselves or as a matter of principle, preclude the incorporation of an arbitration clause. The matter is to be decided by considering whether the arbitration clause is "expressly" referred to in the incorporating words. He relied, for the third proposition, upon Bremer
Vulkan versus South India Shipping [[1981] AC 909.] 
The same view of the nature of an arbitration clause was taken by the Court of
Appeal in Ferris & Anor versus Plaister & Anor [(1994) 34 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%2034%20NSWLR%20474 "View LawCiteRecord" ) At p.485 Kirby P said:- "There is no doubt that the trend of legal authority favours the contention that, depending always upon its terms, an arbitration clause will ordinarily, unless the parties intend otherwise, be treated as separate from the main agreement. It is in this way that the arbitration clause will not be affected by a challenge to the main agreement so as to deprive the arbitrator of the jurisdiction to uphold that challenge." 
At p.491 his Honour said:- "It is highly desirable that, in the field of arbitration (both international and national), a common approach should be adopted by the courts." 
Whilst appreciating the basis on which Sir John Megaw came to his view, the matter which troubles me is why the three factors are, in principle, of such significance if, as I think is the case, there is no doubt that an arbitration clause can be incorporated provided the incorporating words are sufficiently precise, and provided that that which is incorporated is relevant to the contract into which it is incorporated. Once that is understood the reasons advanced by his Lordship seem to me, if I may say so with the greatest respect, not to provide a convincing reason for refusing to incorporate an arbitration clause.

Although Kirby P, in speaking of the need for consistency was doing so in a different context, I consider that his Honour's words have a general application.

Dr Bell referred, finally, to Carob Industries Limited (In Liquidation) v
Simto Pty Limited (Supreme Court of Western Australia - Scott J - 17 April - unreported). In that case there was a dispute between a construction contractor and a sub-contractor, which was referred to arbitration. Building and construction contracts almost invariably have an arbitration clause. The first issue was whether there was an arbitration clause in the contract between the parties, the judgment stating that the sub-contract provided:- "The following documents shall be in deed form and be read and construed as part of this agreement, namely; the general conditions of contract as issued by Robe River Mining Co." 
Those general conditions provided that any dispute or difference arising in connection with the contract, which could not be resolved by agreement between the parties, should be submitted to arbitration. Clause 17 of the sub-contract provided:- "Any disputes arising between the sub-contractor and the company must be referred in writing to the company within seven days of the occurrence, so that the matter can be dealt with in a proper manner." 
His Honour posed the question whether the incorporation by reference brought about an incorporation of the arbitration clause, and noted that it was one, "which has involved legal complexity and upon which differing judicial opinions have been expressed". He considered the judgments in Aughton and quoted at length from the judgment of Sir John Megaw at p.31, which I think I have summarised adequately for present purposes. His Honour referred to various authorities after Aughton and to commentary upon them, which indicated that the views expressed by Sir John Megaw were to be preferred.

His Honour accepted that courts have become more liberal in interpreting arbitration clauses and more willing, generally speaking, to permit the resolution of disputes by arbitration. He continued:- "That having been said, however, it is still a matter of construing each individual contract to determine whether or not it was contractually agreed that disputes should be resolved by way of arbitration. In the present case, having considered the terms of the contract and the manner in which the contract purports to incorporate the provisions of the arbitration clause of the principal contract, I am of the view that the parties did not intend to incorporate the arbitration provisions of the contract nor should the sub-contract be read in that way. In my view, had the intention of the parties been to incorporate the arbitration provisions into the sub-contract agreement, the provisions of clause 17 in the sub-contract agreement would have at least referred to the provisions of the arbitration clause in clause 50.4 of the general conditions of contract. No such cross-reference is contained within the sub-contract agreement.

For my part I would prefer the reasoning of Sir John Megaw in Aughton to the approach taken by Lord Justice Ralph Gibson in that case so that in the absence of some express consideration, the arbitration clause should not be read as included in the sub-contract agreement in the present case." 
His Honour, therefore, accepted that the matter was one of construction. In these circumstances a reversion to the reasoning of Sir John Megaw is not, in my respectful opinion, strictly necessary for his Honour's analysis.

Mr King submitted that Portsea concerned a rule of construction only, in respect of a general incorporation clause in a contract for carriage by sea referring to terms and conditions in a discrete, extant contract of hire of the ship between the different parties, and that the incorporation of a standard form arbitration clause, identified by reference to a well known contract (or one capable of being ascertained) in a specific trade, calls for a consideration of different principles of interpretation. He referred, firstly, to the decision of the House of Lords in Adamastos Shipping Co
Limited versus Anglo-Saxon Petroleum [[1959] AC 133.] At pp.178-179
Lord Keith considered the proper approach in construing an incorporated document had been laid down in Thomas versus Portsea. His Lordship said the approach was either to read in all the incorporated clauses and to disregard those which were inconsistent with the incorporating document "as insensible", or only to read in so much of the incorporated document as is not inconsistent with the subject matter of the incorporating document. I do not regard that decision as really touching on the matter presently in issue.

Mr King referred to The Rena K [[1979] 1 QB 377] in which a vessel was chartered, the charterparty containing a clause for dispute resolution by arbitration. Two bills of lading incorporated all the terms, clauses, conditions and exceptions of the charterparty, including, by express description, the arbitration clause. Brandon J held that the express words "including the arbitration clause" showed an intention to provide for arbitration in disputes arising under the bills of lading so that the arbitration clause in the charterparty applied to those disputes despite the need to adapt part of the wording. His Lordship distinguished The
Annefield. In my respectful opinion the express words led to this conclusion. His Lordship said at p.389:- "A long series of authorities has established that, where a charterparty contains an arbitration clause providing for arbitration of disputes arising under it, general words in a bill of lading incorporating into all the terms and conditions, or all the terms, conditions and clauses, of such charterparty, are not sufficient to bring such arbitration clause into the bill of lading so as to make its provisions applicable to disputes arising under that document: Hamilton & Co versus Mackie & Sons [(1889) 5 TLR 677] and The Annefield [1971] 1 Lloyd's Rep p.168.

By contrast it has been held that, where an arbitration clause in a charterparty provides for arbitration of disputes arising not only under the charterparty itself, but also under any bill of lading issued pursuant to it, general words of incorporation in such a bill of lading of the kind referred to above are sufficient to bring in the arbitration clause so as to make it applicable to disputes arising under that bill of lading: The Merak [1965) p.223." (My emphasis.) 
It will be recalled that the fourth proposition suggested by his Lordship in
The Annefield was "where the arbitration clause by its terms applies both to disputes under the charterparty and to disputes under the bill of lading, general words of incorporation will bring the clause into the bill of lading so as to make it applicable to disputes under that document".

Mr King relied upon Bremer versus Rayner [1979] 2 LLR 216, especially at p.218, and the decision of Mason J in Deaves & Anor versus CML Fire and General
Insurance Company Limited <case>; [(1978-1979) 143 CLR 24] at p.65. I do not see that he derives any assistance from Bremer, and the passage to which he referred in Deaves is, as I understand it, merely an acceptance of the basic proposition that if a party has incorporated the terms of an insurance proposal into the policy, those terms will have had contractual force by virtue of the language of the policy. I do not understand that to be a point in issue. The question is whether general words incorporating the terms of another document are sufficient to incorporate the arbitration clause.

Mr King relied upon the decision of the House of Lords in Miramar Maritime
Corporation versus Holborn Oil Trading Limited [[1984] 1 AC 676] in which Lord
Diplock, with whose reasons the other Law Lords agreed, identified the issue as being a short and very simple question of construction of a bill of lading issued pursuant to and in the form annexed to a tanker voyage charterparty, namely whether the provisions in the bill of lading, which purported to incorporate terms of the charterparty, rendered the consignees, as holders of the bill when the cargo was discharged, personally liable to the owners for demurrage payable under the terms of the charterparty.

At p.682 his Lordship referred to the decisions in The Merak and The
Annefield and noted that they were concerned with whether the presence of a clause, expressed to incorporate the terms of the charterparty in the bill of lading annexed, was effective to make the arbitration clause in the charterparty binding upon the holder of the bill of lading other than the charterer himself. At p.683 he said:- "In strictness, what was said by Russell J and Lord Denning MR in The Merak .. and The Annefield was obiter as respects the correct approach to the extent to which incorporation clauses in bills of lading issued in standard forms annexed to charter parties, are effective to impose upon the bill of lading holder personal liability for non-performance of obligations undertaken by the charterer but are contained in clauses in the charterparty, other than an arbitration clause. Nevertheless, those dicta drew a clear distinction as respects incorporation in the bill of lading between an arbitration clause in the charterparty and a clause therein `which is directly germane to the shipment, carriage and delivery of goods'. A clause that falls within this latter category, it was said, is to be treated as incorporated in the bill of lading even though it may involve a degree of `manipulation' of the words in order to fit exactly a bill of lading." 
After considering the particular matter raised his Lordship said, at p.688:- ".. I regard it, however, as more important that this House should take this opportunity of stating unequivocally that, where in a bill of lading there is included a clause which purports to incorporate the terms of a specified charterparty, there is not any rule of construction that clauses in that charterparty which are directly germane to the shipment, carriage or delivery of goods and impose obligations upon the "charterer" under that designation, are presumed to be incorporated in the bill of lading with the substitution of (where there is a cesser clause), or inclusion in (where there is no cesser clause), the designation `charterer', the designation `consignee of the cargo' or `bill of lading holder'." 
Mr King also relied upon Smith versus South Wales Switchgear Limited <case>; [[1978] 1 WLR 165] and Sabah Flour and Feed Mills SDN BHD versus Comfez Limited [1988] 2 LLR 18. I have not, if I may say so with respect, been able to derive from those decisions any support for the proposition for which he contended.
He submitted that many of these authorities were not referred to the Court in
Carob Industries. This may be because the view was taken that they did not reflect upon the position there under consideration.

As Scott J said a number of decisions following Aughton and commentary on the decisions has supported the views expressed by Sir John Megaw. For the reasons he expressed it has been held that the incorporation of an arbitration clause requires specific reference to it. "Specific reference" has been held to be an express reference to the arbitration clause, although Brandon J was not of the view, as I read his reasons, that this was necessarily so. There is no doubt that provided "specific reference" is made an arbitration clause can be incorporated. The question, therefore, becomes one of construction, which is determined by the special nature or characteristics of the arbitration clause.

In my respectful opinion the issue is one of sufficient identification of the terms upon which the parties have agreed. The essential differences between other clauses and an arbitration clause demanding its express incorporation are said to include the role the arbitration clause plays in working out any dispute between the parties and the status of an arbitration clause as a collateral contract giving, for example, the arbitrator the right to decide, if the clause is worded appropriately, whether there is an agreement at all.
This latter comment also throws up for consideration the importance of the arbitration clause in providing the arbitrator with jurisdiction. It may be that as the arbitrator's jurisdiction derives from the parties' agreement, (leaving aside any ad hoc agreement to submit), that provides a further reason why there should be no doubt that the arbitration clause is incorporated.
However, notwithstanding the potential consequences of the clause it does not seem to me that, as a matter of principle, this requires a different approach to the question of construction. In the present case if I had been satisfied that there were terms and conditions of the standard Sinochem contract, which had been adequately identified, and that the words of incorporation for which the defendant contended were part of its contract with the plaintiff, I would have been inclined to the view that as between the two contracting parties there was no reason, as a matter of construction, why the arbitration clause was not incorporated.

Accordingly in my opinion, and this is a view to which I would have given effect if I had felt free to do so, the proper approach is to construe the incorporating and incorporated words in each contract and to see, whether, as a matter of construction, the arbitration clause is part of the contract. That reasonably simple task has been shrouded with some mystique. However, that view is at odds with much authority, which is not only concerned with charterparties and bills of lading, but other types of contracts. There is inconsistency within the authority and there is, certainly in The "Varenna", a suggestion that the approach is too restrictive, a view I respectfully share. None-the-less I consider that the weight of authority and the demand for certainty is too great to enable me, sitting at first instance, to give effect to the view I prefer: Proctor versus Jetway Aviation Pty Limited [[1984] 1 NSWLR 166.] Conformably with authority I hold that the words of incorporation, on which the defendant relies, are insufficient to incorporate the arbitration clause. In coming to that conclusion I am dealing with the words said to incorporate the alleged standard terms and conditions, and not the case based on the appending of the alleged standard terms and conditions.

Fraud Not Amenable To Arbitration 
Dr Bell submitted that if it were held that there was an arbitration clause s.7(2) did not require a stay of the proceedings, "because they involve serious allegations of fraud against the plaintiff and, accordingly, are not capable of settlement by arbitration". He relied on Cunningham-Reid v
Buchanan-Jardine [[1988] 1 WLR 678] and
Cherman Productions Pty Limited versus Prestest Pty Limited (Supreme Court of
Victoria - Cummings J - 20 November 1989 - unreported). Because of the conclusions to which I have come it is not necessary for me to finally decide this point. However, I would be hesitant about adopting any such general proposition. There are many arbitrators, particularly those with extensive legal experience, who would be very well equipped to determine issues of fraud. To require arbitration where fraud is in issue may require an exercise of discretion but, for the reasons I have given, that issue does not arise in this case and, if it did, the evidence would not enable me to determine how the discretion should be exercised.

Onus 
Dr Bell submitted, finally, that the onus was on the defendant to establish the facts which would activate the arbitration clause, and the facts and circumstances which would lead to a finding of forum non conveniens. He referred to The Owners of the Ship "Shin Kobe Maru" versus Emperor Shipping
Company Inc (1994) 181 CLR 404 at p.426, and FAI General Insurance Co
Limited versus Ocean Marine Mutual Protection and Indemnity Association &
Anor [(1997) 41 NSWLR 559] at p.569.
I did not understand Mr King to contest the proposition for which Dr Bell contended.

Forum Non Conveniens 
It is necessary to state with some precision the issue raised by the application for a stay based on forum non conveniens. The defendant's primary submission was that there was an agreement that the proceedings should be arbitrated in China. In my opinion that submission fails. Accordingly there can be no competition between this Court and a Chinese arbitral tribunal, because, in the absence of an agreement, the plaintiff cannot be required to arbitrate. In any event I have real doubt as to whether the principle applies to such a competition, as Mr King submitted it did. Other considerations are applicable when the issue is whether legal proceedings should be stayed because of the presence of an undoubted arbitration clause. Therefore, I must consider whether this Court is a clearly inappropriate forum: Voth v
Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538] and CSR Limited versus Cigna Insurance Australia Limited ALJR 1143. In CSR it was held that before an anti-suit injunction can be granted to prevent the continuance of proceedings in a court of another country, the court considering the grant of such an injunction must decide whether the Australian Court is the appropriate forum in the sense of not being clearly inappropriate.

At pp.1170-1171 the majority said:- "In cases such as the present, where different issues are involved in the local and foreign proceedings, albeit that the different proceedings arise out of the same sub-stratum of fact, the question is not whether the Australian Court is a clearly inappropriate forum for the litigation of the issues involved in the Australian proceedings. Rather, the question must be whether, having regard to the controversy as a whole, the Australian proceedings are vexatious or oppressive in the Voth sense of those terms, namely, that they are `productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment' or `seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging'." 
Footnote 81 refers to the judgment of Deane J in Oceanic Sun Line Special
Shipping Co Inc versus Fay (1988) 165 CLR at p.247 and states:- "... whose test was subsequently adopted by the majority in Voth ..." 
In Oceanic Sun Deane J said, at p.247:- "If the plaintiff is not acting bona fide or in pursuit of a legitimate advantage in pursuing the proceedings in the legal system of this country, that will, of course, make it much easier for a continuation of the proceedings to be characterized as vexatious or oppressive, since there will be little if anything to put into the balance against the inconvenience which would be sustained by the defendant. On that approach, `oppressive' should, in this context, be understood as meaning seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging while `vexatious' should be understood as meaning productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment.

In the light of the foregoing and at the cost of some repetition, it is possible to identify in summary form what I see as the modern content of the traditional principles governing the power of a court in this country to order that proceedings which have been regularly instituted within jurisdiction should be dismissed or stayed on inappropriate forum grounds. That power is a discretionary one in the sense that its exercise involves a subjective balancing process in which the relevant factors will vary and in which both the question of the comparative weight to be given to particular factors in the circumstances of a particular case and the decision whether the power should be exercised are matters for individual judgment and, to a significant extent, matters of impression. The power should only be exercised in a clear case and the onus lies upon the defendant to satisfy the local court in which the particular proceedings have been instituted that it is so inappropriate a forum for their determination that their continuation would be oppressive and vexatious to him. Ordinarily, a defendant will be unable to discharge that onus unless he can identify some appropriate foreign tribunal to whose jurisdiction the defendant is amenable and which would entertain the particular proceedings at the suit of the plaintiff. Otherwise, that onus will ordinarily be discharged by a defendant who applies promptly for a stay or dismissal if he persuades the local court that, having regard to the circumstances of the particular case and the availability of the foreign tribunal, it is a clearly inappropriate forum for the determination of the dispute between the parties. The reason why that is so is that, once it is accepted that the adjectives `oppressive' and `vexatious' are not to be narrowly or rigidly construed and are to be applied in relation to the effect of the continuation of the proceedings rather than the conduct of the plaintiff in continuing them, the continuation of proceedings in a tribunal which is a clearly inappropriate forum would, in the absence of exceptional circumstances being established by the plaintiff (cf. Spiliada Maritime Corp versus Cansulex Ltd [[1987] 1 AC 460], at p.478), be oppressive or vexatious to such a defendant if there is some available and appropriate tribunal in another country. Admittedly, that approach to the `vexatious' and `oppressive' test is less stringent and less rigid than would have been accepted in the nineteenth century. Under it, the applicable test pursuant to traditional principles can, in the ordinary case, properly be seen as an `inappropriate forum' test. It cannot, however, properly be seen as a `more appropriate forum' test since the mere fact that a tribunal in some other country would be a more appropriate forum for the particular proceeding does not necessarily mean that the local court is a clearly inappropriate one." 
In Voth the majority said, at pp.564-5:- "It follows that, subject to the question of onus discussed in the preceding paragraph, the principles to be applied in applications to set aside service and in applications for a stay on inappropriate forum grounds are those stated by Deane J in Oceanic Sun ... In the application of those principles the discussion by Lord Goff in Spiliada .. of relevant `connecting factors' and `a legitimate personal or juridical advantage' provides valuable assistance." 
In CSR the majority held that I was in error in failing to give sufficient weight to the fact that the United States proceedings involved an issue, which apparently, could not be litigated in New South Wales, and in only considering whether New South Wales was an appropriate forum for the litigation of the issues involved in the proceedings in this State:- ".. and not whether, having regard to the controversy as a whole, the NSW proceedings are vexatious or oppressive, in the Voth sense of those terms. In these respects, his Honour was in error." 
Their Honours then found that the central purpose of the institution of the
New South Wales proceedings was to prevent the continuation of the United
States proceedings which, so far as the evidence showed, were regularly instituted in pursuit of remedies available under the laws of the United
States and not all of which could or can be pursued in New South Wales. Their
Honours continued:- "Proceedings which are brought for the dominant purpose of preventing another party from pursuing remedies available in the courts of another country and not available in this country are `seriously and unfairly .. prejudicial (and) damaging'. They are, thus, oppressive in the Voth sense of that word." 
Subsequently, pp.1171-2 their Honours continued:- "The facts indicate that the respondents' dominant purpose in instituting the New South Wales proceedings was to prevent the appellants from pursuing remedies available in the US proceedings but not in the NSW proceedings. It follows that the NSW proceedings are oppressive, in the Voth sense, and should be stayed." 
Mr King submitted that the plaintiff's dominant purpose in instituting the proceedings in New South Wales was to ensure that they were not heard in China and that, accordingly, they were vexatious or oppressive in the Voth and
CSR sense. There is, at the outset, a difficulty with this submission. As
I have said the fundamental submission of the defendant was that the arbitration clause was incorporated into or part of the contract between the parties and that this required arbitration in China. That submission, in my opinion, must fail. The fall back position for the defendant must be, accordingly, that it is appropriate that the proceedings be heard in a Chinese
Court. It seems to me that to make good that submission the defendant must show that New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum and/or that the New
South Wales proceedings are vexatious or oppressive as being productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment, or seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging. To this end Mr King submitted that the institution of the proceedings had, as its dominant purpose, precluding the proceedings being litigated in China. However, as I understand the decision in
CSR, it must be shown, as the majority of the High Court was satisfied it was in that case, that there is something more, namely the dominant purpose of depriving a litigant of rights, which it would otherwise have in the court of another country, but does not have in this Court. In this sense, as I understand it, the view was taken that the respondents must be shown not to have been acting bona fide or in pursuit of a legitimate advantage in pursuing the proceedings in New South Wales.

CSR involved a case where proceedings, claiming specific relief some of which was not available in New South Wales, were already on foot in the United States. The effect of the injunction I granted, albeit on an interlocutory basis, was to preclude the plaintiffs in those proceedings from continuing with them until the final hearing of the injunction and, thereafter, I considered the application by the plaintiffs in the United States to stay the proceedings brought by the defendants to those proceedings, as plaintiffs in this Court, and applied what I thought was the traditional Voth test. I was in error for the reasons the majority of the High Court stated. That, however, seems to me to be a different case from one in which a party, which first institutes proceedings regularly in a court which has jurisdiction, does so bona fide and in pursuit of a legitimate advantage. The defendant seeks to assert that the court in which the proceedings have been instituted are clearly inappropriate both on discretionary grounds relating to matters of convenience, and because the selection of the court in which the proceedings were instituted was brought about so that rights in the courts of another country, which also arguably has jurisdiction, may not be ventilated. I do not read the decision in CSR as going to that length. 
Let it be assumed, for example, that in CSR the respondents had regularly instituted the proceedings in New South Wales for the relief they claimed before any proceedings were regularly instituted in the United States. The decision in CSR would not, I think, go so far as saying that in so far as the institution of those proceedings may preclude proceedings instituted in the United States and claiming relief under the Sherman Act from going forward on the ground of forum non conveniens, the proceedings in New South Wales were vexatious or oppressive in the Voth sense. One can imagine that in many cases, where there is a competition between jurisdictions, the institution of proceedings in the court of one country will mean that legal rights otherwise available by way, for example, of cross-claim, in another country will not be able to be ventilated. It may be that there is evidence that the proceedings were instituted in this country for the purpose of ensuring that such rights could not be raised. Let it be assumed that so much was admitted or established. It would be strange if for that reason alone the proceedings were stayed. It would mean that in every case where there is an application to stay proceedings not only would the court to which that application is brought have to consider the question as to whether it is a clearly inappropriate forum, but also the purpose or dominant purpose, perhaps, for bringing the proceedings in this Court and, whether that was to deprive the defendant of some juridical advantage it would have in another court had it instituted proceedings in that court. The situation I have just set forth was not, of course, the position as it existed in CSR. It was akin to that in Henry versus Henry <case>; [(1995-1996) 185 CLR 571.] At p.591 Dawson, Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow JJ said:- "However, it does follow that the fact that there are or, even, that there may be simultaneous proceedings in different countries with respect to the same controversy is highly relevant to the question whether the local proceedings are oppressive in the sense of `seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging', or, vexatious, in the sense of `productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment'. And it also follows that courts should strive, to the extent that Voth permits, to avoid that situation." 
However, that is not the position which exists in the present case. It seems to me that the principles expounded in CSR, by the majority, apply where the dominant purpose is to prevent the pursuit of remedies available in extant proceedings in another country, not in proceedings which may have been brought in another country if the defendant had instituted proceedings in the first instance. This must be subject to the first proceedings having been regularly instituted in good faith in pursuit of a legitimate advantage. I think that the prima facie assumption, in most cases, will be that this has occurred. It is for the defendant to show that this is not so. That this should be the result is, I think, highlighted by the fact that once the proceedings have been instituted and not stayed on the ground that the Australian Court is a clearly inappropriate forum a cross-claim may not allow the defendant to raise issues, which it could otherwise have been able to raise in a court of another country, which has jurisdiction.

That having been said, it is necessary to note that in the present case, notwithstanding that Mr King made the submission that the dominant purpose was to prevent the proceedings being heard in China, he did not point to any facet of the procedural or substantive law of that country, which would provide a juridical advantage to the defendant, nor to any matter which the defendant will not be able to raise by way of cross-claim to the claim being brought in this country, which would be available to it in a court in China. In Voth,
Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ said, at p.565:- "The fact that the onus of the proof will differ according to whether the application is an application to set aside service effected outside the jurisdiction pursuant to leave or an application to stay the proceedings is inevitable: this flows from the issue to which the test is relevant. In one case, should the court assume jurisdiction? In the other, should the court decline jurisdiction? As Spiliada recognises, there will be a difference in onus regardless of the precise content of what is seen as the appropriate test. The question whether the local court is a clearly inappropriate forum focuses, on both kinds of application, upon the appropriateness of the local court and not the appropriateness or comparative appropriateness of the suggested foreign forum. In practice, the differing onus should raise no real difficulty." 
The suggestion that a judge determining a forum non conveniens application should consider also the potential legal rights in a foreign court, in circumstances where no proceedings have been instituted in a foreign court and there is no suggestion of lack of bona fides or the absence of the pursuit of a legitimate interest, does not fit easily, if I may say so with respect, with the way in which their Honours suggest at p.565 that the task of deciding such applications should be approached. My experience, sitting at first instance, has been that such applications are vigorously fought and, even with the best will in the world to restricting the time a case takes, they do not seem to proceed as their Honours contemplated. The present case, although I appreciate that much of the time was taken considering the appropriateness or applicability of the arbitration clause, took four days. It is also necessary to remember that seeking to truncate the hearing, if that is what is to be done, may lead to the assertion that submissions have not been fully or properly considered, or matters upon which the judgment depends were not argued.

In the result it seems to me that I should approach the present application on the basis of whether this Court is a clearly inappropriate forum. I do not consider that the factual basis has been laid by the defendant for establishing any dominant purpose having the characteristics of the dominant purpose the majority found in CSR. Nor am I satisfied that the regular institution of the proceedings was attended by an absence of good faith or of a desire to pursue improper interests.

The defendant is incorporated in New South Wales and has its head office at
North Sydney. It carries on business in New South Wales. It has entered an unconditional appearance, although this does not mean that it cannot pursue the present application, and it has sought positive relief by way of rectification in this Court, not only for the purpose of including the
Sinochem standard contract terms and conditions, but also to amend the names of the parties. Further, as Dr Bell has submitted, it has failed to nominate an alternative available judicial forum in which the proceedings may be heard.
I shall return to this in a moment.

Mr Yu identified certain matters which, he suggested, would cause difficulty to the defendant if the proceedings were litigated in this Court. Firstly, he relied upon it being necessary to call evidence as to the quality of the urea from witnesses in China, who would include the three sub-buyers and the third party purchaser. He said it would be difficult for such witnesses to obtain exit visas from China and that they may not be prepared to come to Australia and, as I do not think was in issue, they could not be compelled to do so.
However, he had made no enquiries as to whether the witnesses were prepared to come to Australia notwithstanding that there were only three sub-buyers and one additional buyer. Further, the evidence indicated that the purchase by the sub-buyers was organised by Sinochem. Accordingly, there are not a large number of witnesses on this issue and, as the evidence emerged, it became clearer that the difficulty was not necessarily with obtaining exit visas from
China, but entry visas into Australia. There was no evidence before me to suggest that either the Chinese authorities would prevent people leaving that country for the purpose of giving evidence, or that the Australian authorities would prevent people entering this country for that purpose.

Secondly, Mr Yu said that witnesses and other evidence to clarify whether certain certificates are genuine was located in China and, possibly, Hong
Kong. It is not suggested the certificates are conclusive evidence of the state of the urea. Presumably they will be relied upon by the plaintiff to seek to meet the case of defective quality raised by the defendant. The onus will be on the plaintiff to prove the certificates, and they will have to be considered in the light of the defendant's evidence that the urea was defective. Prima facie, if any party is prejudiced in relation to this matter, it is not the defendant.

Thirdly, Mr Yu said that witnesses and other evidence as to market price of urea was in China. However his evidence was that in the position he holds he is aware of market price and maintains records of it.

None of these circumstances, whether considered collectively or individually, satisfies me that this Court is a clearly inappropriate forum. In all cases involving international transactions and where witnesses are invariably overseas, there will be problems about bringing witnesses to this country and it is usual for the complaint to be raised that, for the purposes of the litigation, it is unlikely that witnesses will be prepared to come. However, for that submission to be made good it is essential, so far as I am concerned, for there to be evidence that the witnesses have been spoken to and that they have stated they are reluctant to come to Australia. Further, if the complaint is to be made that the witnesses will be precluded by law either from leaving the country in which they reside, or from entering this country, there should be evidence in an acceptable form to establish that. The onus of proving that this Court is a clearly inappropriate forum rests upon the defendant and, in regard to the matters to which I have referred, it has not established that.

Dr Thomas Chiu, who I accept has expertise in Chinese law, swore an affidavit on 10 July 1997, in paragraph 7 of which he said:- "In my opinion, there is no provision in Chinese law or Chinese Court Rules giving any Chinese Court jurisdiction in respect of any dispute that is between two non-Chinese parties and where there is no Chinese party involved in the dispute." 
He said, Tp.97, that he maintained that was the present position and that the words "involved in a dispute" in that paragraph meant a law suit. He said his opinion still stood even if there was a law suit between two non-Chinese persons involving the conduct of a Chinese authority and:- "Q. So you say even though the conduct of a Chinese authority is in question, that a Chinese Court would not assume jurisdiction simply because the parties to the dispute are foreigners, do you? 
A. That's correct": Tp.98. 
He was then cross-examined in some detail about the law of China relating to arbitrations and he said, Tp.100, that as he understood it:- ".. the Chinese Court, including the arbitration rules, would have no jurisdiction on disputes involving two foreign parties." 
He continued:- "Q.* But that would be a Chinese Court you are talking about? 
A. Yes.

Q.* Not an arbitrator appointed to conduct an arbitration in China? 
A. No.

Q.* Do you agree with that? 
A. No - what I am saying is even for arbitrator appointed by the Chinese Arbitration Tribunal - sorry, in China they are called a Commission.

KING: *Q. For me to understand those last answers you have given to his Honour, are you saying to this Court that there is no provision in Chinese law for the resolution of disputes between foreign parties, either by litigation or by arbitration? 
A. No.

HIS HONOUR: I don't understand that answer. It may mean no there is not, or it may mean he is agreeing with you.

KING: Q. Do you agree with the last proposition I put to you? 
A. Can you repeat that question? 
Questions and answers marked * read.

A. Your Honour, I think, first of all, my response to that question was on the paragraph 2 of Exhibit D. It doesn't represent a true picture because the Foreign Economic Contract Law of China, I refer to the same legislation, have another provision to say that sort of limitation would only apply if one of the parties be a Chinese party, registered in China, and the other party be a foreign party, registered overseas. On that, say for example, a Chinese foreign joint venture registered in China, then the joint venture by itself, because it is registered in China, it will be a Chinese entity. Without putting that sort of statement on that paragraph, I can't answer that question. That's why I make my submission a moment ago and so, to answer the gentleman's questions, I would say it is not clear to that extent because it is two different concepts and the problem for me at the moment is that that portion of the provisions is not or does not represent the whole idea of the legislation." 
In the context it is clear that he was being cross-examined about the position so far as arbitrations are concerned: see Tp.101. At Tp.103 Dr Chiu said there was a distinction drawn in China between court and arbitration proceedings.
Thereafter the cross-examination continued on the basis of the position in relation to arbitration, and, at Tp.111, Dr Chiu agreed that Chinese arbitration awards are enforced in foreign courts. The cross-examination in relation to arbitration continued and, at Tpp.117-118, he was asked whether he knew of any Chinese law which provided that a Chinese Court may not have jurisdiction over foreigners, to which he replied:- "I have to qualify the statement, but a Chinese Court would not have jurisdiction over any foreign matters if that foreign matter is not involving a Chinese corporation registered in China.

Q. What is the law that makes that provision? 
A. Well, that is the court, the judicial laws of China." 
Dr Chiu identified the law to which he said he was referring and he did not agree, Tp.119, that nationality of parties was not the deciding factor in consideration of jurisdiction by Chinese Courts.

At Tp.133 the following admission made by the plaintiff was noted:- "Firstly, CIETAC is authorised under Chinese law, being the Arbitration Law of China and the CIETAC Rules, Exhibit D, to conduct arbitrations between foreign parties, whether or not those parties are registered in China. Secondly, any award of CIETAC is enforceable by the Chinese Courts by registration as a judgment and consequence enforcement. Thirdly, that the New York Convention of 1958 forms part of the law of China." 
Accordingly, if I had come to the view that the matter should be arbitrated,
Chinese law raised no impediment of the type suggested in paragraph 7. Dr Chiu was then asked about that paragraph and he referred to certain cases he considered supported the view in relation to curial litigation.

At Tp.138 Dr Chiu ageed with questions that the court's exercise of jurisdiction would depend on various factors, such as the particular wishes of both parties and the geographic location of the assets of the parties. He continued:- "Q. So that it is absolutely clear, what I am suggesting to you is that that is another factor that will be taken into account by the court, whether or not to assume the conduct of the case before the court. Do you agree with me? 
A. Yes.

Q. And another factor is whether any final judgment of the court would be enforceable in a foreign country; that would be another factor? 
A. Yes." 
Whilst I think a fair reading of this evidence, as to which there was no re- examination, but in the re-examination it was established that Dr Chiu was aware of a doctrine of forum non conveniens in Chinese law, casts doubt upon the assertion that a Chinese Court would not entertain jurisdiction in respect of any dispute between two non-Chinese parties and where no Chinese party was involved in the dispute, it is by no means clear to me that a court in China would necessarily undertake jurisdiction in this dispute. The defendant called no evidence to assert that it would. Nor was the question pursued as to what other factors may have to be taken into account. In all these circumstances the defendant has failed to satisfy me that a Chinese Court would undertake jurisdiction in respect of this particular dispute. In my opinion it was incumbent upon the defendant, if it wished to rely upon the evidence of Dr
Chiu, to establish that in the circumstances of this case, either put generally or with sufficient particularity to indicate precisely to what the question was addressed, that a Chinese Court would undertake jurisdiction.
Merely to put certain matters which the Chinese Court may take into account, without putting all matters or obtaining a concession that there were no other matters which could be relevant, does not go far enough to establish that a
Chinese Court would undertake the hearing of this matter. However, even if the view be taken that Dr Chiu's evidence was sufficient to establish this point,
I am none-the-less not satisfied that it has been established, as I consider it must be on the facts of this case, that New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum.

Orders 
I order that:-
The Amended Notice of Motion filed on 6 August 1997 be dismissed.
The defendant's Cross-Claim filed on 18 September 1997 be dismissed.
The defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the Amended Notice of Motion and of the Cross-Claim.
Exhibits be returned.

I stand the proceedings over to Friday, 31 October 1997 for further directions.
 * * * 
