

Regina versus Spedding Matter No Cca 60758/96 [1997] NSWSC 639 (11 December )
 
Regina versus Andrew Douglas Spedding /96 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Sully J, Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus Andrew Douglas SPEDDING 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: The appellant and a woman named Kylie Johnston came for trial before James J and a jury in the Supreme Court at Coffs Harbour, charged with the murder of Daryl Fearn. They were also charged with two offences of wilfully concealing a dead body. They pleaded guilty to the concealment charges, and were sentenced. The appellant was convicted of murder. Kylie Johnston was acquitted. The appellant was sentenced, for the murder, to penal servitude of fifteen years, made up of a minimum term of eleven years and an additional term of four years. He appeals against the conviction and seeks leave to appeal against the sentence. 
By the time the evidence at the trial concluded, it was common ground that, on March 1995, the appellant had shot and killed Fearn. The shooting occurred in the Pilliga East State Forest near Gwabegar.

It is convenient to begin an account of the facts by referring to some matters that were ultimately not in dispute.

In early 1995 a group of four people spent several weeks travelling, and living, in each other's company. The members of that group were the appellant, who was aged twenty, Kylie Johnston, who was aged twenty-four, Rhonda Beck, who was aged sixteen, and the deceased, Daryl Fearn, who was aged thirty. They were all substantially unemployed, although it appears that from time to time some of them had engaged in part time rural work. Rhonda Beck had joined the group in early 1995, when she met the appellant at a caravan park. She and her parents were living in a caravan at the park, and the appellant, Fearn and
Johnston were also living there at the time. Beck left her parents to join the other three. They travelled to South Australia for a time, and ultimately went to a property named Binyara, near Gwabegar, in north-western New South Wales.
The four were living there in late February 1995.

The lifestyle of the members of the group might fairly be described as casual.
They appear to have devoted a good deal of time to the consumption of alcohol and drugs, and lived partly off social security benefits. For a time Beck and the appellant had a sexual relationship. Johnston had a minor criminal record.
Fearn had a significant criminal history. He was, in February 1995, awaiting trial on serious charges.

On Friday 24 February 1995 the group spent several hours at a hotel in
Gwabegar, where they were joined by another friend. They were all drinking except Beck, who abstained because she still had a hangover from the previous night. They had travelled from Binyara to Gwabegar in a vehicle to which
Johnston had regular access. They had spoken of the possibility of going pig shooting after they finished their drinking at Gwabegar, and they had with them a number of dogs. They also had with them a sawn off .22 rifle, for which the appellant had purchased ammunition, and a substantial knife.

The group left the hotel late in the afternoon, but whilst it was still light.
They took with them two flagons of port to drink on the way home. They dropped the friend who had joined them at her home, and then headed for Binyara.
Johnston was driving.

On the way home the group called at a place known as Ben's Dam. They got out of the car. There was some unpleasantness, apparently precipitated by unwelcome physical advances made by Fearn to Johnston. At that time, and apparently throughout the remainder of the relevant part of the evening, the appellant was in possession of the .22 rifle. At Ben's Dam, all four smoked marijuana.

After they left the dam area, the car was involved in a minor accident, which resulted from the excessive speed at which Johnston was driving. This led to further arguments and, in particular, recriminations from Fearn. By that time they had finished one of the bottles of port, and had started drinking the other.

After the accident the appellant got out of the car, carrying the firearm, which was by that time loaded. Fearn and Johnston also got out of the car.
Fearn abused Johnston for having nearly killed them. The appellant told Fearn to shut up. Fearn began walking towards him. The appellant hit Fearn in the face with the butt of the gun. Fearn did not physically retaliate, but threatened that if the appellant ever did that again he would kill the appellant.

A little later the appellant, without any apparent provocation from Fearn, fired four gun shots into the air, evidently for the purpose of frightening
Fearn.

By this time it was quite dark. Later, and still at the scene of the accident, all four members of the group were seated in the vehicle. Beck and the appellant were in the front seat. The rear seat of the vehicle was down. It was a hatchback, and, because of damage to the rear doors, entry to the rear seat was gained by crawling through the back. Fearn and Johnston were in the rear seat. Fearn was continuing to make unwelcome physical contact with
Johnston. There were also continuing recriminations about the accident.
Shortly afterwards, in circumstances that will require detailed examination below, the appellant shot Fearn, once in the arm and twice in the head, killing him.

After the shooting, the appellant moved the body of Fearn away from the vehicle. The three surviving members of the group spent the night in the vehicle. Next morning, they dragged the body into the bush and covered it.
They collected some belongings in the vehicle and set off walking. They arranged for Johnson's mother to collect them in a car. The following day, the appellant and Johnston returned to where the body was located and dragged it to another place in the bush, once again attempting to cover it. Neither the appellant nor Johnston reported what had happened to Fearn. Subsequently, on a number of occasions, they withdrew money from a bank account belonging to
Fearn. A witness named Daniel Platt, who was an old friend of the appellant, gave evidence that in March 1995 he spoke to the appellant and Johnston in
Sydney. The appellant and Johnston told him that they had been involved in a murder and that they had the deceased's credit card. The appellant asked him to use the card to withdraw money from a bank account. The appellant told
Platt that there had been a car accident, that the deceased "went crazy" and "spat his dummy" and that there had been a fight. In cross-examination Platt at first reiterated that the occurrence had been described to him as murder, but later he said that the appellant told him he had shot someone.

In March 1995 Rhonda Beck told the authorities about the shooting, and was interviewed by police. On 23 March 1995 the appellant and Johnston were arrested and taken into custody. Beck was give an immunity from prosecution.
She was called as a Crown witness at the trial. The appellant and Johnston exercised their right to silence up until the time of the trial, and until they gave evidence as part of the defence case, or at least until the defence case was put to Beck in cross-examination, it was not known what their defence would be.

Although Beck did not claim actually to have seen the shooting, if her account of the movements of the other three members of the group, and of what was said between them, were accepted, then it was clear that it was the appellant who had killed Fearn. Ultimately that was not denied by the appellant. The Crown case against Johnston, which depended upon certain disputed evidence of Beck, was that the shooting of Fearn by the appellant was done pursuant to an agreement between Johnston and the appellant, which had been made no later than 23 February 1995, and which was put into effect by the appellant on 24
February 1995.

The defence of Johnston was that no such agreement had ever been made and that, in any event, the killing of Fearn by the appellant did not amount to murder.

The primary case for the appellant was one of self-defence. There was also a defence of provocation, and the jury were instructed about manslaughter.
However, the defence case of provocation was thin. What follows is of principal relevance to the ground of appeal which contends that the verdict was unsafe or unsatisfactory, and will not be repeated when that ground is considered. It is convenient to deal with the facts relevant to the defence case at this stage.

The appellant's case of self-defence was based on his account of the circumstances in which he came to shoot and kill Fearn. There were important differences between his account, and the account of Beck, of the events immediately before the shooting. However, there were problems with the self- defence argument, quite apart from the evidence of Beck.

Beck's evidence may be summarised as follows. She said that on 23 February the appellant spoke to her at Binyara in the presence of Johnston and told her that they had decided to shoot Fearn. Later that night, she said, Johnston told her that they were intending to take Fearn out pig shooting on the following day and shoot him. Acceptance of that evidence was critical to the
Crown case against Johnston, but it was not critical to the Crown case against the appellant. There were some problems about the evidence, especially concerning the first conversation. At one stage Beck said it had taken place early in the afternoon, and at another stage she said it had taken place late in the morning. There was also documentary material which contradicted some aspects of her evidence of her movements of 23 February. When James J ultimately came to sentence the appellant he found the facts upon the basis that the evidence of Beck about those two conversations was not to be accepted beyond reasonable doubt. He thought that was the probable reason, (although not necessarily the only possibility), as to why the jury had acquitted
Johnston.

In relation to the events immediately leading up to the shooting of Fearn, it is convenient to take up the story at the point where the four people were in the motor vehicle, the appellant and Beck in the front seat, and Fearn and
Johnston in the rear seat. Beck said that she heard an argument between
Johnston and Fearn. Thereupon the appellant said to Beck, "Sorry, Rhonda, I've got to do it". The appellant got out of the car and then Beck heard a gun shot. She heard the appellant say, "He's not dead". She heard Johnston say, "They do that when they're dead, it's just body twitches." She heard the appellant say, "This one's to make sure". She heard three gun shots in all.
Johnston then said to the appellant, "Just drag the body behind the car and we'll bury him in the morning". Soon afterwards she saw the appellant with blood on his hands.

The account given by the appellant, which was supported by Johnston, was as follows. He referred to the encounter in which he had struck Fearn in the face with the butt of his gun, and to the firing of shots in the air. Later, he said, he and Beck were seated in the front seat of the vehicle and Fearn and
Johnston were in the rear seat. Fearn and Johnston started arguing. The appellant said he got out of the car for the purpose of stopping the argument.
He went to the rear of the car. By that time Fearn was outside the car standing up facing the rear of the car. Johnston was seated on the tailgate of the car. The appellant saw the two of them arguing. He saw Johnston attempt to stand up, whereupon Fearn pushed her, and she ended up in the back of the car.
She saw Fearn move towards Johnston. The appellant said, "I saw something in his hand and I shot him". He said he thought that what was in Fearn's right hand was the knife. He said that he was aiming for Fearn's arm. He said that at the time the back of the car was at his left at a 45 degree angle. Fearn was side on to him. He said "Daryl Fearn's arm moved so I thought I shot him in the arm. He turned and then he's just gone for me. I stepped out of the way, just kept shooting, I stepped towards my right, Daryl Fearn was turning to his left". He agreed that he shot Fearn three times in all. He said that there would have been only a few seconds between the first and third shots.

As James J pointed out in his remarks on sentence, there was difficulty in reconciling the appellant's account of events with forensic evidence as to the wounds suffered by Fearn.

A pathologist, Dr Botterill, made a post mortem examination of the body after it was discovered in late March. He said there were three gun shot wounds. He was unable to tell the order in which the wounds had been inflicted. One wound was to the side of the head, over the left temporal skin, the track of the bullet being from left to right, slightly from the back towards the front, and slightly downwards. The second gunshot wound was from behind the left ear again from left to right, from the back towards the front and slightly downwards and was embedded in a region which is the bone protecting the inner ear on the right side. The third gunshot wound was a wound to the front and inner aspect of the distal right arm. The bullet had perforated the biceps muscle of the arm. It was the wounds to the head which were potentially fatal.

In his remarks on sentence, James J said: "I do not consider that I can accept the prisoner's account of the shooting.
 ...........................

My principal reasons for not accepting the prisoner's account, not necessarily in order of importance are as follows.

At the time of the shooting, the prisoner was heavily intoxicated with alcohol and had also recently smoked marijuana and I consider that these matters affect his reliability as a witness.

I am satisfied that it was extremely dark that night in the Pilliga State
Forest and I am unable to accept that the prisoner was able to see all he claims to have seen including all he claims to have seen of the movement of
Daryl Fearn. Kylie Johnston by comparison said that she became aware of the presence of Daryl Fearn's body alongside her after he had been shot, only by feeling his body and not by seeing it.

Even taking into account the concessions made by Dr Botterill in cross- examination and the difficulties inherent in determining the relative position of a person shooting a firearm and a person who is shot with a projectile from that firearm and in determining the track of a bullet inside a gunshot victim's head, it is difficult to reconcile the prisoner's account of how any of the shots were fired with Dr Botterill's evidence of the entry site and track of each of the wounds.

On the prisoner's account the wound to the upper arm was caused when the victim was side on to the prisoner and moving towards the back of the vehicle into which Kylie Johnston had been pushed. Yet, the entry wound, according to
Dr Botterill's evidence, is to the front of the victim's upper arm and Dr
Botterill considered that the wound track didn't deflect to the left or to the right. The two head wounds are to the left side of the victim's head; wound number one close to the ear and wound number two behind the ear and a part of each wound was at least slightly from the back of the head towards the front.
If the victim was shot in the head while going for the prisoner who was standing at an angle to the rear of the vehicle as the prisoner alleges, it is difficult to see how the victim's body immediately after he was shot, could have ended up lying at least partly inside the tray of the station wagon." 
It was, of course, not necessary for the jury to reason in the same manner as the trial judge, but his Honour's remarks express a line of reasoning that was open to the jury and was potentially damaging to the defence case, quite apart from any acceptance of the evidence of Rhonda Beck and, in particular, her evidence about the alleged pre-arrangement to kill Fearn.

We turn now to the grounds of appeal.

Ground 1 "His Honour erred in not directing the jury that it would be dangerous to act upon the evidence of Rhonda Beck where it was uncorroborated to convict the accused, Andrew Spedding, or alternatively failed to adequately warn the jury as to the reliability of the evidence of Rhonda Beck." 
Before coming to the substance of this ground it should be mentioned that
James J, without any complaint by counsel for the appellant, gave the jury the customary direction that it was open to them to accept or reject, in whole or in part, a witness's evidence. He said: "In the case of any witness you may, if you see fit, accept part and reject part of the same witness's evidence. You are not obliged, if you do not accept part of a witness's evidence, to reject all the rest of the witness's evidence. You may reject part but think that other parts, and perhaps the whole of the rest of the witness's evidence, is worthy of acceptance. You may, if you think fit, reject the whole of a witness's evidence." 
When Beck first told her story to the police in March 1995, and later when she came to give her evidence at the trial, she did not know what part or parts of her account would be challenged. As things turned out, a large part of her evidence was ultimately not in dispute. In particular, it was not disputed that the appellant had shot and killed Fearn. Nor was there any dispute of the attempt to conceal the body. Ultimately, the portions of the evidence of Beck that were the subject of challenge were her evidence about the conversations concerning an agreement to kill Fearn, and her evidence about the precise detail of the respective movements of the appellant and the deceased in the seconds immediately before the shooting of the deceased.

One of the arguments put by defence counsel to the jury was that if the jury did not accept one part of Beck's evidence, such as her evidence about the conversations concerning the pre-arrangement to kill Fearn, there was no reason why they should accept any other part of her evidence. In evaluating that submission the jury would presumably have taken into account the fact that substantial parts of the evidence of Beck were not disputed. It was common ground that she was telling the truth about a good deal of what occurred on the day and evening in question. On the other hand, there were a number of reasons why her evidence might have been regarded as unreliable, and, accordingly, pursuant to the provisions of [s165](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) James J gave the jury certain warnings. In a number of respects the warnings were repeated, and added to, in the course of the summing-up.

Early in the summing-up James J directed the jury, accurately, that it was essential to proof of the Crown case against Johnston that the jury should be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that an agreement to kill Fearn had been made between Johnston and the appellant, that that agreement was subsisting at the time of the shooting of Fearn, and that the shooting was pursuant to that agreement. On the other hand, the existence of such an agreement was not an essential element of the Crown case against the appellant. Having said that,
James J went on immediately to point out the following: "However, whether you consider that there was such an agreement could clearly be relevant to whether the Crown has proved some element or elements of the crime charged against Mr Spedding, for example, that he had an intent to kill or that the act causing death was an unlawful act, that is an act not done in self-defence and not done under provocation. If there was such an agreement, that might strengthen the Crown case that the accused Mr Spedding had an intent to kill and did not act in self-defence or under provocation. If there was no such agreement the Crown case on such issues would, you might think not be as strong as it would have been, if there had been such an agreement." 
James J gave a substantial warning in relation to the evidence of Rhonda Beck.
The warning extended over a number of pages of transcript, and, was repeated and supplemented at later stages of the summing-up.

His Honour began by saying: "There are a number of matters concerning Rhonda Beck as a witness which might cause her evidence to be unreliable and which require me to give you some special directions about her evidence." 
Having dealt with certain matters, he then said: "Because of the matters affecting Miss Beck as a witness, I warn you in the trial of both accused that her evidence may be unreliable and you must exercise caution in determining whether to accept her evidence and in determining what weight you should give to such of her evidence as you accept.
 ...........................

In both trials you can, if you see fit, accept evidence by Rhonda Beck, but you could only do that after paying heed to the warning I have given you. I have given you this warning about the evidence of Rhonda Beck, not because I have formed any conclusion one way or the other about the reliability of
Rhonda Beck's evidence but because a trial judge is required to give such a warning and the jury is required to heed such a warning in all trials in which evidence si given by a witness such as Rhonda Beck." 
The matters to which the judge drew attention as affecting the reliability of
Beck were specific. The judge referred to her age. He pointed out that even on her own evidence she was implicated in the death of Fearn in that she was present when he died. She assisted in concealing his body. For a time, she remained silent about his death. She had an interest in seeking to ensure that responsibility for his death was attributed to others and not to her. There was some evidence that on 20 February at Binyara she had recommended that
Johnston and the appellant should shoot Fearn. That was an additional reason why she might wish to exculpate herself and implicate others. She had received an indemnity against prosecution, although that indemnity was conditional upon her evidence being truthful and frank. It was possible that, to ensure that she retained the benefit of that indemnity and was not charged with an offence, she might adhere to the version she had first given to the police even if that were untrue. There was evidence of frequent drug taking by her.
There were aspects of her evidence that were open to criticism. She was at least confused about some aspects of the events of 23 February, and some things she had said about what occurred on that day had been shown to be incorrect. A little later the judge reminded the jury of evidence that Beck had stolen a pair of cowboy boots in Adelaide. She had told an officer of the
South Australian Legal Aid Commission that she was unaware that anything like shooting was going to happen before it happened. Later again, prompted by counsel, James J reminded the jury that another matter that might have rendered Beck's evidence unreliable was that it might have been affected by some antipathy to the appellant arising out of their former sexual relationship.

Later again, in response to a request from counsel James J said: "Another matter which would require you to exercise caution in deciding whether to accept the evidence of Rhonda Beck and in deciding what weight you should give to such parts of her evidence as you accept, is that there is no confirmation from any independent source of her evidence of the alleged conversations with Kylie Johnston on Thursday 23 February and there is evidence from a number of other sources inconsistent with Rhonda Beck's evidence." 
Further, following an application by counsel, James J said: "If you do not accept Rhonda Beck's evidence about the alleged conversations on 23 February, that would be relevant to your assessment of whether you should accept her evidence of the events which she said happened on 24
February, including the events in the forest." 
In Bromley versus The Queen <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 315] at 319, Gibbs CJ, referring to warnings about unreliable witnesses, said: "The warning should be clear and, in a case in which a lay juror might not understand why the evidence of the witness was potentially unreliable, it should be explained to the jury why that is so. There is no particular formula that must be used; the words used must depend on the circumstances of the case." 
At the trial counsel pressed James J to use the words "danger" and "dangerous" in his warnings, but the judge declined. There was no reason why he was obliged to use those particular words.

The following observations were made by Lord Diplock in Director of Public
Prosecutions versus Hester [[1973] AC 296] at 327-328: "My Lords, to incorporate in the summing up a general disquisition on the law of corroboration in the sort of language used by lawyers may make the summing up immune to appeal on a point of law, but it is calculated to confuse a jury of laymen and, if it does not pass so far over their heads that when they reach the jury room they simply rely on their native common sense, may, I believe, as respects the weight to be attached to evidence requiring corroboration, have the contrary effect to a sensible warning couched in ordinary language directed to the facts of the particular case." 
We note, also, the following observations of Dickson J in Vetrovec versus The
Queen [1982] 67 Canadian Criminal Cases (2d) 1 at 17: "Because of the infinite range of circumstance which will arise in the criminal trial process it is not sensible to attempt to compress into a rule, a formula or a direction the concept of the need for prudent scrutiny of the testimony of any witness. What may be appropriate, however, in some circumstances, is a clear and sharp warning to attract the attention of the juror to the risks of adopting, without more, the evidence of the witness.
There is no magic in the word corroboration, or indeed in any other comparable expression such as confirmation and support. " 
In our opinion, [ss164](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s164.html) and [165](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/)  themselves seek to express and to give practical application to those common sense propositions.

In our view the warnings and directions given to the jury in relation to the evidence of Rhonda Beck were appropriate and adequate to the circumstances of the case.

It was argued at the trial, and on this appeal, that even if, as a matter of legal technicality, it was correct for James J to distinguish between the cases of each accused by pointing out that proof beyond reasonable doubt of the pre-arrangement was essential to the Crown case against Johnston but not essential to the case against the appellant, nevertheless, for all practical purposes, such proof was necessary to establish the Crown case against the appellant. The trial judge rejected that submission, and he was correct to do so. Indeed, when he came to sentence the appellant, he did so on the basis of findings of fact which did not include a finding of pre-arrangement.

It has already been observed that no objection was taken by trial counsel to the direction that it was open to the jury to accept only part of the evidence of any witness, and that direction included Rhonda Beck. Although there were undoubtedly questions of the reliability of her evidence, most of what she originally told the police turned out to be not in dispute. Furthermore, there were serious problems about the defences of self-defence and provocation, quite apart from the evidence of Beck.

This ground of appeal has not been made out.

Ground 2 "The trial judge did not properly or adequately direct the jury as to the basis upon which the Crown alleged that the appellant was liable for murder." 
Ground 3 "The trial judge failed to adequately direct the jury as to the significance of the alleged agreement between the appellant and his co-accused as to the liability of the appellant for murder." 
It is appropriate to consider grounds 2 and 3 together. They were so argued at the hearing of the written submissions.

It is not submitted that the trial judge did not correctly summarise for the benefit of the jury the essential ingredients of the Crown case against the appellant on the charge of murder. This he clearly and carefully did. Nor is it submitted that the trial judge did not similarly explain correctly the essential elements of the Crown against Ms Johnston on the charge of murder.
This, also, he clearly and carefully did.

As part of that latter exposition his Honour told the jury, correctly, that in the trial of the charge against Kylie Johnston the jury would "have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that those conversations (on Thursday 23
February) occurred as alleged by Rhonda Beck" before the jury could find her guilty.

His Honour immediately followed this direction with the following direction concerning the case against the appellant: "In the trial of the charge against Andrew Spedding, whether you are satisfied that those conversations occurred as alleged by Rhonda Beck is a matter you must take into account in deciding whether you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the elements of the offence charged against Mr.
Spedding." 
It is appropriate to observe that his Honour had previously directed the jury, in the following terms: "I told you that the Crown has alleged that Mr. Fearn was murdered pursuant to an agreement made between the two accused. I told you that such an agreement was an essential element of the crime charged against Kylie
Johnston. I told you that such an agreement is not an essential element of the crime charged against Mr. Spedding. However, I said that whether or not you consider that there was such an agreement, could be relevant to whether the
Crown has proved some element of the crime charged against Mr. Spedding.

If there was such an agreement that might strengthen the Crown case against
Mr. Spedding that he had the intent to kill, or that he did not act in self- defence, or that he did not act under provocation. I told you that if there was no such agreement the Crown case on such issues would not be as strong as it would have been, if there had been such an agreement. Another way in which
I would put it, is if there was no such agreement or you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there was such an agreement, the Crown case on the issues arising in relation to Mr. Spedding's case would be weaker than it would have been if there had been such an agreement." 
His Honour again repeated the substance of his directions in the following terms: "The Crown Prosecutor accepted that proof by the Crown of a plan between the two accused that Daryl Fearn should be killed by shooting him is an essential part of the Crown case against Kylie Johnston, so that if you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there was such a plan you will have to find Kylie Johnston not guilty. As part of the Crown case against Andrew
Spedding the Crown asserts that there was such a plan. It was put if the Crown succeeds in establishing such a plan you might think that the existence of a previously formed plan to shoot Daryl Fearn strengthens the Crown case that in shooting Daryl Fearn, Andrew Spedding did not act in self-defence or in defence of Kylie Johnston and that he acted with an intention to kill.

If the Crown does not succeed in establishing such a plan, you might think that the Crown case that in shooting Daryl Fearn, Andrew Spedding did not act in self-defence or in defence of Kylie Johnston is not as strong as if the
Crown had proved such a plan. However, the Crown submits that even in the absence of proof of such a plan you would still be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused Andrew Spedding, in shooting Daryl Fearn, acted with an intention to kill and did not act in self-defence or in defence of Kylie
Johnston." 
Against this background, in the absence of the jury and towards the conclusion of the summing up, the following exchange took place: "Norrish: The second matter concerned, your Honour said that we submitted that if you are not satisfied of existence of agreement based upon Rhonda
Beck's evidence that we submit that places a pall generally over her evidence.
I did make a specific submission that in our submission casts a doubt over the truthfulness of her account of the circumstances of the shooting.

His Honour: I used the word "pall".

Norrish: That was my word, pall. The point I am making it wasn't submitted per se that it cast a pall generally over her evidence. I was making specific submission. There may be parts of her evidence which are acceptable because everything agrees, certainly things happened.

His Honour: What do you want me to say? 
Norrish: Simply the submission was put that the unreliability, if the jury found that her evidence as to the alleged conversations with Kylie
Johnston was either unreliable or untruthful, our submission that is relevant to the assessment of the truthfulness of her account of the shooting. It is a submission I appreciate as a matter of logic it may or may not be correct.
That was a specific submission I put." 
The upshot was that his Honour gave immediately thereafter, a number of brief directions including the following: "If you do not accept Rhonda Beck's evidence about the alleged conversations on 23 February, that would be relevant to your assessment of whether you should accept her evidence of the events which she says happened on the twenty fourth of February, including the events in the forest." 
In our opinion this further direction gave to the jury the substance of the direction that counsel for the appellant had thus thought. No further direction was sought.

The thrust of grounds 2 and 3 is summarised as follows in the written submissions put in by the appellant: "It is submitted that his Honour erred by not directing the jury in respect of the appellant's case in the same way as he did in respect of the case of Ms
Johnston concerning the significance of agreement.

It is submitted that the desirability of giving the direction sought was strengthened by the fact that Ms Johnston's account significantly supported the appellant's account. For example, their evidence as to what the deceased was doing to Ms Johnston immediately before the shooting, clearly contradicted
Ms Beck's account as it related to statements made by the appellant between shots being fired. She contradicted herself as to events immediately before the shooting. Their account was strengthened by a body of other evidence available relating to the conduct of the deceased when affected by alcohol and his background of violence as demonstrated by his criminal record (Exhibits 6, ), the material revealed in the brief of evidence relating to the matters for which Mr. Fearn was on bail at the time of his death (Exhibit 8) and the statements made by the deceased to Ms Beck, the appellant and Ms Johnston about acts of violence in the past." 
In our opinion these submissions have not been made good. James J adequately and fairly directed the jury on the matters referred to in the grounds.
Grounds 2 and 3 therefore fail.

Ground 4 "The verdict of guilty of murder was unsafe and unsatisfactory." 
The conclusions to which we have come in respect of grounds 1, 2 and 3 dispose of many of the particular propositions advanced in the appellant's written submissions, and oral argument, as to ground 4.

The jury were correctly charged as to the essential elements in the Crown case against the appellant; and as to the caution with which the jury should assess the evidence of Rhonda Beck. The relevant legal principles governing this ground are well established and need not be set out in detail. (See M versus The
Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487).] 
We have considered for ourselves the entirety of the Crown case against the appellant. As we have pointed out earlier, we are of the opinion that, although the reliability of Rhonda Beck's evidence undoubtedly required cautious and careful consideration, most of what she originally told the police turned out not to be in dispute. Furthermore, there were also, and quite apart from the evidence of Rhonda Beck, serious problems about the defences of self-defence and provocation. These have been considered earlier in these reasons.

In argument for the appellant particular reference was made to the acquittal of Kylie Johnston, the absence of corroboration of some aspects of the evidence of Rhonda Beck, the apparent absence of evidence of motive, the evidence of the deceased's violent propensities, aspects of the physical evidence, and the indications of possible violent behaviour by the deceased.

In the introductory part of these reasons, and also in dealing with ground 1, we have analysed what appear to us to be important aspects of the evidence, and we have expressed our views on the lack of strength of the defence case on the issues of self-defence and provocation. In doing so, we have had regard to the matters emphasised in argument on behalf of the appellant.

In our opinion it has not been demonstrated that the verdict of guilty was unsafe or unsatisfactory.

Ground 4 accordingly fails.

Ground 5 "The judge in recognising special circumstances failed to adequately adjust the relationship between the minimum and additional terms." 
This is the only complaint made concerning the sentence.

The submissions put forward by the appellant, reason as follows. Had the judge not found special circumstances, he could not have fixed a greater minimum term than eleven years and three months; the finding of special circumstances enabled the judge to reduce the minimum term below eleven years and three months, and to increase proportionately the additional term; but the judge only reduced the minimum term by three months to a minimum term of eleven years, increasing the additional term by only three months from three years and nine months to four years; and this adjustment is on its face so minute as to indicate that the judge did not give adequate effect to his finding of "special circumstances".

We do not accept this reasoning. The premise on which it is based, that absent a finding of special circumstances the judge would have set a minimum term of eleven years and three months, is not established. The submission overlooks the fact that we do not know what his Honour would have done in the absence of special circumstances. All that can be said is that his Honour, if not minded to find special circumstances, could not have fixed, within an overall sentence of fifteen years, an additional term greater than three years and nine months. But his Honour could have apportioned the overall sentence by fixing, for example, a minimum term of twelve years and an additional term of three years.

There were favourable subjective considerations which the appellant was entitled to have taken into consideration, and which James J took into account. However, we are not persuaded that a lesser minimum term should have been imposed.

There is nothing to indicate that his Honour erred in any way in his understanding on application of the relevant sentencing principles.

Orders 
We make the following orders: Appeal against conviction dismissed.
 Leave to appeal against sentence granted.
 Appeal against sentence dismissed.

REGINA versus Andrew Douglas SPEDDING 
CRIMINAL LAW - MURDER - ACCOMPLICE WARNINGS - the appellant was convicted, and a co-accused acquitted, of murder - the principal evidence against both was that of an accomplice - it was argued that inadequate accomplice warnings were given and that the failure to accept the accomplice's evidence against the co-accused rendered the conviction of the appellant unsafe - HELD - adequate accomplice warnings were given - the conviction was not unsafe. 
O R D E R S Appeal against conviction dismissed.  Leave to appeal against sentence granted.
 Appeal against sentence dismissed.
 * * * 
