

The Law Society of New South Wales versus Hawkins Matter No 14260/96 [1998]
NSWSC 418 (28 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES versus HAWKINS /96 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 24 October 1996. The process propounds a monetary claim (in the sum of $54,484.95) together with interest. 
The defendant had been a practicing solicitor. On 31 May 1996, Jean Sayer was appointed Receiver of all property held by him pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/s92.html) of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the
Act). The plaintiff paid her the sum of $54,484.95 as being remuneration for her services and expenses incurred in the course of the receivership. The receivership came to an end on 30 June 1996. The plaintiff now seeks to recover these moneys (Receiver's fees) from the defendant as a debt due under section 110(2) of the Act.

A Defence was filed on 25 November 1996. It does not admit any of the allegations made in the Statement of Claim. Further, it says that, if the plaintiff is entitled to any amount, then the amount claimed is excessive.

On 24 January 1997, the defendant caused the issue of a Subpoena for
Production of documents. It was served on Jean Sayer. The Schedule to the
Subpoena (as amended) required the production of the following documents:- "1. All letters and/or copies of letters between Jean Sayer and The Law
Society of NSW in relation to Anthony George Hawkins between the period 25 May and 30 June 1996.
All letters and/or copies of letters and correspondence between Jean Sayer and the various persons and/or corporations other than the Law Society referred to in a `Memorandum of Professional Costs' issued by Jean Sayer and addressed to The Law Society of NSW and dated 5 August 1996.
All work sheets, time sheets, and diaries of the practice of Jean Sayer
Chartered Accountant for the period 25 May 1996 to 30 June 1996.
All wages records of the practice of Jean Sayer Chartered Accountant for the period 31 May 1996 and 30 June 1996.
All postage books, and photocopy record books of the practice of Jean
Sayer Chartered Accountant for the period 31 May 1996 to 30 June 1996.
All correspondence and/or copies of correspondence, receipts, and invoices in relation to redirection of mail, purchase of archive boxes, and photocopying services of the practice of Jean Sayer Chartered Accountant for the period 1 January 1996 to 30 June 1996.
All fee agreements, or copies of fee agreements, or correspondence or copies of correspondence passing between Jean Sayer and The Law Society of NSW in relation to the fees to be charged by Jean Sayer as a Receiver for the period 1 July 1994 to 30 June 1996.
The fee book of the practice of Jean Sayer Chartered Accountant for the period 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996." 
On 11 February 1997, Jean Sayer filed a Notice of Motion. It sought an order that the Subpoena be set aside.

The application was heard by Registrar Irwin. On 24 December 1997, he published his decision. It has been reduced to writing. He ordered that the
Subpoena be set aside in part. The written decision contained the following:- "Paragraphs 1, 3 other than copies of sheets and pages relating to this matter with irrelevant entries deleted, 5 other than copies of pages relevant to this matter with irrelevant notations deleted, 6 other than copies of entries relating to this matter from 31 May to 30 June 1996.

I note there are no documents answering the description of the material required in paragraphs 7 and 8." 
On 6 March 1998, Jean Sayer filed a further Notice of Motion. It seeks a review of the Registrar's decision. Although it in fact seeks an order that the whole of the Subpoena be set aside, the challenge was restricted to paragraphs 2 and 4.

The review took place on 25 August 1998. The order made by the Registrar remains in force unless grounds are shown for disturbing his decision.

The Court was taken to documentary material that had been placed before the
Registrar. There was the Memorandum of Fees dated 5 August 1996. There was a page document which provided further detail of the work carried out by Jean
Sayer. There were the three affidavits that had been sworn by her.

The Memorandum contains material which identifies the work that had been done.
Apart from disbursements, it specifies the hours of work performed and the hourly rate at which the fees had been calculated. The rate varies according to the status of the performer of the work.

The power to set aside a subpoena may be found in Part 37 rule 8 of the
Supreme Court Rules. The relevant law is well settled. Relief is given, inter alia, where there has been an abuse of process and/or the required production is oppressive and/or fishing in nature.

It is convenient to first turn to the dispute concerning paragraph 4. It is sought to justify this requirement on the ground that access to this material may enable the defendant to demonstrate that the fees are excessive.

It needs to be observed that this paragraph requires production of, "All wages records of the practice". Leaving aside questions of, inter alia, relevance, it seems to me that this requirement is clearly too wide.

The material demonstrates that the fees have not been calculated having regard to the wages of those persons involved in the performance of the services. The fees have been calculated having regard to scale fees allowed by the Court in insolvency matters. This approach seems to be in accordance with well established practice. It is the basis on which the plaintiff's claim is put.

It seems to me that paragraph 4 should be set aside. In my view, there are a number of grounds which lead the Court to that result. For present purposes, it is not necessary to further elaborate on these grounds.

I now turn to paragraph 2. The Memorandum of Fees contains many references to correspondence. The fees have been calculated having regard, inter alia, to what has been done by the Receiver in relation to this correspondence. I bear in mind that the correspondence referred to in the Memorandum may constitute a significant volume of material. The defendant wants access to this material for the purposes of testing whether or not the number of hours and/or the hourly rate claimed by the Receiver can be justified.

The material throws up a number of grounds of objection to producing this material (including grounds founded on section 96 of the Act). These seem to me to be matters which may well justify the refusal of leave to the defendant to inspect all or some of this material. However, I do not see them as being determinative of the question which presently concerns the Court.

Accordingly, I do not set aside paragraph 2. The question of leave to inspect is yet to be determined. It can be pursued before the Registrar.

I vary the orders made by the Registrar to the extent of setting aside paragraph 4 of the Subpoena. The respondent is to pay the costs of the review which relate to the issues concerning that paragraph. The applicant is to pay the costs of the review which relate to the issues concerning paragraph 2.
 * * * 
