

Pracdes Pty Limited versus Stanilite Electronics Pty Limited No: 3324/85
Patents [1995] NSWSC 55 (30 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
WINDEYER J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 16 June 1995 #DATE 30:6:1995 #ADD 25:8:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff:    A.J.L. Bannon 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff:   Vardanega Roberts 
Counsel for the Defendant:
J.M. Ireland QC 
Solicitors for the Defendant:   Blessington Judd Freeman
Lazarus
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
Background
WINDEYER J  On 17 February 1995 I gave judgment on the plaintiff's claim for infringement of its patent No 524310 by the defendant and the cross claim of the defendant for revocation. I found infringement established but held that the patent should be revoked on the grounds of lack of utility and false suggestion. Put shortly, the patent is for invention of a control circuit for gas discharge lamps. The relevant part of the specification is as follows: "These prior art systems suffer from the following disadvantages:-
A need for power factor correction
Humming of ballast
The weight of fittings
The size of the base to house the control equipment
Heat generated in the ballast
A comparatively high cost 
The present invention seeks to eliminate the conventional form of inductive ballast, the replaceable starter switch, the starter socket, and the capacitor used for power factor correction to overcome the lagging effect of the current due to the inductive ballast, and thereby largely avoid the above disadvantages."
I found that the invention was not useful as it did not achieve one of the promised results so that there was a partial failure of consideration; and I also found that the patent had been obtained on a false suggestion as to avoidance of heat generated in the ballast. At the request of the plaintiff
I delayed the making of any orders so that an application for amendment could be made and so that I could hear argument on costs.
By notice of motion filed on 21 February 1995 the plaintiff sought amendment of the patent. This judgment deals with that application and the question of costs.
I should say at the outset that there were certain procedural problems with the application for amendment as the plaintiff had not complied with the requirements of [s105](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1990109/s105.html) (2) of the [Patents Act, 1990](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/pa1990109/) (Cth) as to service on the
Commissioner and subsequently had not complied with the rules as to advertisement. All those procedural problems have been overcome with the assistance of the Commissioner, who in the long run stated that he did not wish to appear, but did put certain material before the court. Other procedural problems have in the main been overcome by specific orders and the only one remaining as to the hearing being completed before the time for objections to the amendment had expired, will be dealt with in my final orders.
 
AMENDMENT
The amendment sought is to delete the words at the end of the quoted part of the specification "and thereby largely avoid the above disadvantages" and insert in lieu the words "and thereby largely avoid most, if not all, of the above disadvantages". The motion in addition seeks declarations that upon such amendment being made: the patent is valid; the plaintiff is entitled to damages in respect of the patent prior to the date of amendment; and consequential relief by way of injunction.
I am satisfied that, if the specification is amended in the manner sought, the patent would be valid. In other words the claim for improvement based upon largely avoiding the disadvantage of heat generated in the ballast was not essential to the maintenance of the claim for an invention. The amendment wording may not be wording which I would have chosen, but that is often the case with specification wording in the minds of judges. When read with the rest of the specification, which makes it clear that some heat generation and power loss problems still remain, and having regard to the fact that the addressee would understand the other improvements would result from elimination of the inductor if that were done, I consider the amendment satisfactory.
The next question is whether or not the amendment should be allowed. No application was made for amendment until the main decision was given. In
Particulars of Invalidity filed in court on 26 November 1987 there was raised under the grounds of "Lack of Utility" and "False Suggestion" the claim that the invention would lead to heating problems. This was raised in more appropriate and detailed form in the Amended Defence and Cross Claim filed on May 1994 and in the final document of 26 July 1994 filed in response to the
Amended Statement of Claim of 22 July 1994, filed during the hearing. These are factors relevant also to the determination of the effective date of any amendment allowed.
The application for amendment is made under s105 of the Patents Act, 1900.
Any order may be made "subject to such terms (if any) as to costs, advertisements or otherwise as the Court thinks fit".
I am satisfied that there was no deliberate attempt to mislead the
Commissioner. If one traces the final wording of the complete specification through from the provisional document, and notes the changes in wording, it is clear enough that the references to "ballast" in the earlier documents generally refer to inductive ballasts, and I accept the evidence of Mr
Rootsey, an employee of the patent attorneys, as to how the changes in wording came about. On the other hand it was Mr McKie who introduced into the provisional document some words which did, on any basis, make it misleading.
It was there claimed that the invention had an advantage over existing circuits in that there is: "4. No heat generated in the ballast therefore reduced fire hazard".

While I am satisfied that there "ballast" meant inductor, it was Mr McKie who suggested the words "therefore reduced fire hazard" be added, which could only be misleading if the heat generated in the circuit was much the same irrespective of whether it came from a ballast, namely an inductor, or from a
capacitor and resistor, whether or not those components were together considered by Mr McKie to be a ballast. These matters in any event go only to intention. I have already held the specification was misleading but Mr McKie endeavoured to explain this by saying that in the invention at its date of lodgment of complete specification there was no recognition of a combination of capacitor and resistor as a ballast so that the word "ballast" could have referred only to an inductor or perhaps a capacitor.
I do not accept that evidence. It is contrary to all other evidence in the action and contrary to the plain wording of the specification which was changed from the wording of the provisional specification. Thus, while I think it clear enough the expressed disadvantage of "heat generated in the ballast" refers to inductive ballast, that does not mean, nor is it sensible to suggest, that in the invention the capacitor alone is the ballast, nor is it correct to suggest, that even if it were so the disadvantage of heat from an inductor ballast is largely avoided if heat is generated from circuit components whatever they are called. However I think Mr McKie's evidence should be read and considered in the light of his strong views about his invention and his views about its infringement. In other words I find that there was no intention to deceive although Mr McKie does not accept that failure in the circuits was caused by heat generated in the ballast.
The conclusion I have come to is that the specification was worded as it was because Mr McKie believed that it was true; in other words he has never accepted that the lamp failures were caused by heat problems from the ballast, or that the ballast in itself did generate heat to anything like the extent of an inductive ballast. It is no doubt correct to say that in the case of deliberate deception giving rise to false suggestion an amendment should not be allowed; and deliberate deception surrounding the making of the application, for example, as to inventor or as to prior art as opposed to its contents should prevent amendment. See the discussion in Blanco White 4th
Edition 7-124. But there is no rule that a finding of false suggestion means that no amendment can be allowed; it is a serious matter to be taken into account on the exercise of discretion. See Parry Husband's Application [(1965)
RPC 382] at
The false suggestion in question here arises from and overlaps the inutility ground of revocation and is not in the same class as deliberate deceit.
The lateness of the application for amendment should not of itself mean that amendment must be refused. This is not an amendment sought after a case has gone the whole way to the High Court as was the case in Raleigh Cycle Co
Ltd versus H. Miller and Co Ltd [(1950) 67 RPC 226] (that being to the House of
Lords); and while the ground for revocation might have been flagged in 1987 there is no evidence to suggest that the defendant relied upon it in infringing the patent as it stood. If it relied on anything at all it was on nominal rather than actual values to claim there was no infringement and prior to that it blatantly infringed by purchasing from a non-licensed supplier. I consider amendment should be allowed.
 
DAMAGES AND ACCOUNT OF PROFITS - Patents Act s115
If good faith in the circumstances means no intention to mislead then this requirement of s115(1)(a) is made out. However I am not satisfied the specification was framed with reasonable skill and knowledge. On the crucial question, even if the evidence of Mr McKie were accepted that the phrase "heat generated in the ballast" referred to inductive ballast, and this was compared with a capacitive ballast only, then the statement as to largely avoiding the disadvantages of heat generated would be quite true but the invention would be useless without the resistor and the heat produced by that resistor. As I have said I cannot accept the evidence about the capacitor but as Mr McKie took part in the discussions on the wording of the specification I do not consider it was drafted with reasonable skill and knowledge. Mr Rootsey, in saying that in using the expression "largely avoid the above disadvantages" he intended to refer to the group as a whole and not to each of them, said he was careful in drafting not to make specific promises and this was a rolled up way in which to describe the advantages of the new circuit. That evidence does not sit well with his evidence about the capacitor being the principal ballast component but in any event I do not think it is possible in this case involving false suggestion by a particular choice of words to determine without further evidence that issue in favour of the plaintiff and it is for the plaintiff to establish that issue.
In so far as the decision in General Tire and Rubber Co v Firestone Tyre and Rubber Company [(1973) FSR 79] at 120 is to the contrary I do not think it is correct and I do not follow it. It follows that an order under s115 should not be made.
 
TERMS
Had I been wrong in that I would in any event have considered this a matter where a term of the amendment would have been that there would be no right of action for infringement before the date of the order for amendment.
An order of that kind was made in Mullard Radio Valve Co Ltd versus British Belmont
Radio Ltd [(1938) 55 RPC 197], and in my opinion s105 allows an order to be made subject to such a term even if the requirements of s115 are met. I have taken account of the decision in Hallen Co versus Brabantia (UK) Ltd [(1990) FSR 134] particularly at p148; I consider however that there is a difference between a defect in a claim and a defect in the general body of the specification when disclosure of the invention, and in the case of improvements, of the improvements over prior systems is the consideration for the granting of the patent. This is so particularly when it was suspected from the start that heat caused the problems; that this was known before the action commenced although not accepted by the plaintiff; that it was raised in the Particulars of
Invalidity as early as 1987 and was never withdrawn; yet no application for amendment was made to cure what I have held to be a false suggestion.
 
COSTS
The plaintiff should pay the costs of the amendment application it being the party seeking the indulgence and the application not being improperly contested. I turn to the costs of the main proceedings.
Leaving aside the question of validity the plaintiff succeeded on the question of infringement. A considerable amount of time in the ten days of hearing and no doubt in the preparation was devoted to this. On the question of validity and the claim for revocation the defendant raised all possible issues and succeeded only on parts of two. Three claims were made under s40 of the Patents Act 1952 and all failed. Claims of selection rather than invention, obviousness and lack of novelty all failed. Of three claims for lack of utility only one succeeded and one was abandoned although the one abandoned took a lot of time. One out of two claims for false suggestion succeeded being the same as that which was successful under the lack of usefulness claim.
I have given consideration to the judgment on costs of Waddell J in
Windsurfing International Inc versus Petit (unreported 12 July, 1984) and to Pt52 r21B (now Pt52A r28) of the court rules, which rule was promulgated after the judgment referred to. The effect of that rule is that for the defendant to have costs on any revocation issue which failed the court must certify the objections have been reasonable and proper. That is I suppose an indication that it would be unusual to award costs to the successful party on such unsuccessful issues although the discretion to do so would remain. I consider that in this case the discretion should be exercised for the costs involved on the issues of obviousness and lack of novelty which were in essence abandoned at least as to novelty as being without foundation. The defendant should pay the costs of those issues. I was not formally asked to certify on the other issues on which the defendant failed on its revocation claim. However to avoid any further argument I state that I would not have done so. All these matters require a balance; the time spent on what was described as the "peak factor" was very considerable yet in the long run the claim for revocation on that ground was abandoned.
The defendant will of course be entitled to the costs on the issues of heat made out under "Utility" and "False Suggestion", those grounds of course overlapping and no additional evidence required for either ground.
During the hearing I said that I would order the plaintiff to pay the costs occasioned by allowing the affidavit of Mr Winstanley to be read which related to the heat question but the defendant succeeded on that matter in any event.
A further problem arises on the action for infringement. The defendant only succeeded because its claim for invalidity succeeded. It could, at the same time as denying validity, have admitted the infringements.
A great deal of time was spent on the infringement issues on which the plaintiff succeeded.
The defendant through Mr Nicholas went to some lengths, not only to suggest that a particular infringing article was not of its manufacture, but at least to give the impression that the extent of the infringement was far less than it really was in respect of circuits which were on any basis within the ratio claimed under the patent. Thus while on the proceedings as they originally stood the defendant has succeeded, this is because it established the invalidity claim. Other than the general costs of the action I do not consider it should have costs of the infringement claim. The defences to that claim based on the circuitry question and on the values question were entirely separate from the validity claims as is often the case in patent matters and as I have said a great deal of the time involved in the hearing was devoted to those matters.
It is not possible to be precise but I have concluded that the costs of the sole issue on which the defendant succeeded, namely that of heat making out grounds for revocation of inutility and false suggestion, and the costs of the issues of obviousness and lack of novelty would be much the same. Those balance each other out, and it is my view that the defendant should not be allowed costs on the issues of infringement on which it failed, and which took up such an amount of the time. The result is that I consider the defendant should have only what are usually called the general costs of the claim and the cross claim, it having succeeded on both. That is the second type of general costs order referred to in Jenkins versus Jackson [(1891) 1 Ch 89] at 92. It is highly undesirable that any unnecessarily complicated assessment be required; most of the costs must have related to specific issues. In the circumstances I consider that a proper order is that the plaintiff pay 10% of the defendant's costs up to February 1995 and the whole of the costs of the defendant since that date, those costs being the costs relating to the notice of motion for amendment. 
Proposed Orders
ORDER that Australian Letters Patent No 524310 be amended by substituting for the words on page 2 "and thereby largely avoid the above disadvantages" the words "and thereby largely avoid most, if not all, of the above disadvantages. 
ORDER that if the Commissioner receives any notice of opposition to the amendment by 6 July 1995 then any hearing of opposition proceedings should take place as if order one had not been made, the onus remaining on the patentee to establish the right to amendment. 
ORDER that the Defendant be restrained from infringing Patent No 524310. 
ORDER that the Plaintiff pay the Defendant's costs of the Notice of Motion of 21 February 1995. 
ORDER that the Plaintiff pay 10% of the Defendant's costs of the proceedings other than the costs of the notice of motion. 
Exhibits may be returned. 
Order that further proceedings on the 2nd cross claim be adjourned; that leave be given to restore the cross claim to the list for directions on 7 days notice prior to 30 September 1995; and that if not so restored by that date the 2nd cross claim stand dismissed.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/55.html  
