

State of New South Wales versus Hackney [1996] NSWSC 453 (26 September 1996) 
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES versus HACKNEY /94; DC 9431/91 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, HANDLEY JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - FAILURE OF EMPLOYER TO PROVIDE A REASONABLY SAFE MEANS OF ACCESS TO PLACE OF WORK.

ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES - INACCURATE HISTORY IN MEDICAL REPORT - CHALLENGE ON
APPEAL WHEN MEDICAL EXPERTS DID NOT GIVE ORAL EVIDENCE.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED WITH COSTS 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: The respondent was injured at about 6am on 12 August 1986 shortly after she had signed on for work as a youth worker at the Worimi Juvenile Justice Detention Centre. She brought a claim for damages in respect of that injury claiming, in short, that her employer, the appellant, had failed to provide reasonably safe means of access for her to her place of work and that she consequently suffered her injury. The case was heard by Craigie DCJ and took a number of days. 
On 7 April 1994 his Honour gave judgment for the respondent and awarded her $101,617. That award took account of two deductions. The first was a deduction resulting from his Honour's finding that the respondent had been guilty of contributory negligence and that her contribution should be assessed at 10 per cent. In the second place his Honour made a deduction in respect of payments made under the Workers Compensation Act 1926.

The employer has appealed and in its amended notice of appeal has raised 8 grounds. However in it's written submissions it restricted itself to two challenges to the award made by the trial judge. Although there has been no formal abandonment of the other grounds, I have taken it from the written submissions and in the way the case has been argued that the other grounds have indeed been abandoned. Accordingly in this judgment I am concerned only with the two grounds which were pressed.

The first of those grounds challenges his Honour's conclusion that the respondent's contribution should be assessed at 10 per cent. In the written submissions counsel submitted that the evidence supported the finding that the damages should be reduced by up to 80 per cent. In oral argument, that rather extravagant claim was reduced to one in which it was said that the damages should be reduced by 50 per cent.

The submissions require an examination of the evidence in the light of his
Honour's findings. As I have earlier indicated, the respondent worked at the
Worimi Centre. On the occasion in question she was obliged to proceed to an office described in evidence as the chief's office. There is a sketch plan which indicates that the most direct route from the entrance to the chief's office was through a gymnasium which at the time was being restored.

What is perhaps even more important is that when the respondent entered the premises she was required to turn to her right and then her left in order to reach a point described as the "sign on point". At that position she was immediately outside the door of the gymnasium. By proceeding through that door and exiting from another door at the other end of the gymnasium she brought herself to a point almost directly opposite the chief's office.

She did have an alternative way available of proceeding to that office. She could, once she had signed on, have retraced her steps to the entrance and then proceeded some significant distance away from the sign on area before making a right hand turn into a yard area from which she could proceed in a diagonal direction to a hallway off which the chief's office ran. The evidence was that if she proceeded by the alternative means she would take about two minutes longer to get to the chief's office.

On the occasion in question she signed on at about the same time as two other employees. The first, a Mr Jones, immediately after signing on, opened the door to the gymnasium with a key which he had and proceeded through that door.
He was followed by the respondent and the other employee. All three then walked towards the exit from the gymnasium in order to reach the chief's office. However, while the respondent was walking through she stubbed her foot on a plank secured to the floor and fell to the ground sustaining the injuries which have led to the present claim.

The gymnasium was in relative darkness and obstacles on the floor were hard to see. In those circumstances, her claim that the means of access provided was not reasonably safe is readily comprehensible. She also led evidence, which in my understanding was not contradicted by the appellant, that many staff used the pathway through the gymnasium, that it was in everyday use by employees.
His Honour found that the particular route followed by the respondent on that morning was one which was in everyday use by all manner of people who were working there, with the exception of the detainees.

His Honour also found there was no instruction not to use it, despite the clear understanding that it was out of bounds to the detainees. His Honour also found that the positioning of the signing on board encouraged people to use the gymnasium as an access way when reporting to the chief's office and that that practice continued despite the renovation of the gymnasium. On top of all that, his Honour found that the appellant knew that the gymnasium was used as an access way by employees.

None of these factual findings has been challenged in this appeal. At first instance the appellant denied that it had been negligent. It is somewhat difficult to comprehend the basis upon which that denial was made, but having regard to the findings made by his Honour, the decision that negligence had been made out has not been challenged. What is said is that the availability of the alternative delaying and lengthier route to the chief's office not only established that the respondent was guilty of contributory negligence, but that her negligence was of a high order.

For my part, a mere referral back to the findings of his Honour disposes of the complaint. I say that having regard to the evidence and findings that not only was the gymnasium the most convenient and most direct route to the chief's office, but that it was in everyday use by employees. This finding satisfies me that such negligence as the respondent was guilty of was very modest indeed. The appellant recognised that there is a heavy onus on a party seeking to displace an apportionment made by a trial judge, but submitted that in the particular facts of this case that onus has been satisfied. I would emphatically reject that submission. In my opinion a discount from the verdict of 10 per cent on the grounds of contributory negligence was if anything generous to the appellant. I reject that ground of appeal.

The second ground of appeal related to the assessment of damages. It was submitted that his Honour had failed to pay regard to the considerable weight of evidence in favour of the view that the consequences of the respondent's injuries were very limited, and had erroneously given great weight to a medical report which was based on a faulty premise in the sense that there had been no mention to that doctor of the respondent's pre-accident back problems.
Nor had there been mention of post-accident incidents which involved the respondent's back.

The case which the respondent made at the trial was that she had a degenerative back condition which had from time to time given her problems before the accident, but which had given her almost continuous problems since the accident. It was her claim that the events on the momentous day had aggravated her back condition and led to permanent and increasing disability in her back. Although it was not part of her claim, she recognised that some events subsequent to the injury had caused temporary but significant problems.
Overall she contended that her real difficulties found their source in the injury the subject of the present claim. That case was supported by the evidence of a number of doctors provided in the form of medical reports. It was challenged by the evidence of a number of other doctors whose reports were tendered by the appellant.

No medical experts gave oral evidence. The parties were content to leave it to the judge to unravel the difficult causation questions on the written documentation tendered in the case. There was, however, one other piece of evidence upon which the appellant relied in an effort to obtain a finding that the respondent was an unreliable historian who had, in one respect at least, misled the Court. That piece of evidence was a video recording of a dance which the respondent attended. His Honour saw that recording, as he says, on a number of occasions and at the end did not consider that it affected the respondent's credibility one jot.

In essence, the case depended upon whether the trial judge accepted the picture painted by the respondent of continuing problems since the accident in question. It is true that the substantial report accepted by his Honour omitted reference to some of the respondent's pre-accident problems, but it is almost impossible for a court to measure the significance of those omissions when the doctor who gave the opinion in a written report was not challenged upon the basis that one or more of those pre-accident events, or even the post-accident events, might have led him to change his or her opinion.

Nonetheless counsel for the appellant submits that as the bare facts are that the respondent's doctors omitted reference to some events the Court should, almost automatically as it were, prefer the appellant's doctor's reports. I would reject that submission. The case depended in large measure upon the acceptability of the respondent. Her evidence was accepted and upon the broad thrust of that evidence the medical reports which she tendered suggested that the decision should be found in the way that the Judge did find it.

The fact that other reports told to the contrary and might have contained more detailed histories was, no doubt, an important matter for consideration by the trial judge. Once, however, he determined, in the light of his impression of the respondent, to accept the evidence in the reports tendered on her behalf and once it is recognised that those reports were not challenged in the way I have indicated, it seems to me that the basis for the challenge mounted by the appellant disappears.

In saying that, I do not mean to suggest that there will not be cases where the inaccuracy of a history will enable an appellate court to reverse a trial
Judge's findings on issues such as those presented here. What I do say, however, is that in the particular circumstances of this case the inaccuracies to which our attention has been directed are inadequate to lead to that conclusion. In the circumstances, in my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

HANDLEY JA: I agree.

COLE JA: I also agree.
 * * * 
