

Regina versus Krg Matter No Cca 60761/96 [1997] NSWSC 442 (29 September 1997) 
Regina versus KRG /96 September 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Meagher JA, Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
Catchwords: 
CRIMINAL LAW - SEXUAL ASSAULT - victim was stepdaughter of appellant - appellant claims verdict unsafe or unsatisfactory - HELD - Verdict not unsafe or unsatisfactory. 
Orders 
Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus K R G 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The appellant came for trial before his Honour Judge Christie QC and a jury, at the Taree District Court, charged with six offences involving sexual abuse of a complainant, S, who was the daughter of his de facto wife. The first five of the alleged offences were said to have occurred at Gilgandra, four of them during 1994, and one of them during 1995. The sixth alleged offence was said to have occurred in November 1995, at Tuncurry. The offences were all reported to the authorities by the complainant in March 1996, and the appellant came for trial in November 1996. 
The appellant was convicted of the first five alleged offences, and acquitted of the sixth. The effect of the sentences imposed was that he is subject to penal servitude for a total of four years and six months, involving a minimum term of two years and three months, and an additional term of two years and three months.

The appellant appeals against his convictions. No complaint is made about the sentences.

The sole ground of appeal is that the convictions were unsafe or unsatisfactory.

The complainant, S, was born in September 1981. She has an older brother, who gave evidence at the trial. Her parents separated when she was young. The complainant and her brother lived with their father until she was about 12 years of age. They then went to live with their mother who had, in the meantime, formed a de facto relationship with the appellant.

Between October 1993 and October 1995 the appellant, his de facto wife, and her two children lived at Gilgandra. In late September 1995, the family moved to Tuncurry, where they lived at a caravan park. In March 1996, in circumstances that will be described in more detail below, the complainant moved out of the caravan park and went to live with a friend. At about the same time she reported the appellant's alleged sexual misbehaviour to the welfare authorities and the police. Before that time, however, she had made allegations against the complainant to friends, and ultimately to her mother.

The nature and circumstances of the various complaints made by S against the appellant require close examination. It is convenient, however, to begin with the account given by S at the trial of the events the subject of six charges against the appellant.

The evidence showed that the appellant and the complainant's mother were both keen golfers. The first count related to an occasion, in about March 1994, when the complainant's mother was away on a golfing trip. At this time S was aged 12, and had been living with her mother and the appellant for about six months. According to the complainant, she was getting ready for school, and the appellant was still in bed. He persuaded her to lie on the bed with him and he began touching her breasts. Ultimately, he removed her clothes, got on top of her, and engaged in vaginal intercourse. S said that she was crying, and eventually the appellant stopped.

The second count related to an event said to have occurred between July and
September 1994. S's mother was having a shower in the family home in
Gilgandra. The appellant approached S and forced her to commit an act of fellatio. This came to an end when the shower stopped running.

The third count related to an occasion which was later than the subject of the second count, but which was before December 1994. The complainant said that she went into the loungeroom of the house at Gilgandra, after having had a shower. The appellant was lying on the floor. He asked her to sit near him.
She complied and he began to touch her indecently. Ultimately, vaginal intercourse occurred. Immediately afterwards the appellant followed the complainant into her bedroom and masturbated in her presence. That was the subject of the fourth count. The fifth count concerned an occasion in July
While the mother was at work, the appellant allegedly took the complainant into a garden shed and masturbated in front of her.

All of the above events were said to have occurred at Gilgandra. The jury convicted the appellant in respect of each of the first five counts.

The sixth count in the indictment related to what the complainant told the authorities, when she complained in March 1996, was the last occasion on which the appellant had indecently assaulted her. According to the evidence of the complainant at the trial, this occurred after the family had moved from
Gilgandra to Tuncurry. The complainant said she was unsure of the month in which the event occurred, but indicated, rather tentatively, that it was in
November 1995.

According to the evidence of S at the trial, what occurred in relation to the matter the subject of the sixth count was as follows. At about 7.30 one morning the appellant and S's mother were lying in their bed in the caravan.
The mother was still asleep. S was wearing a night-dress. She was preparing to get ready for school. S sat on the bed and was talking to the appellant. The appellant put his hand up through the sleeve of her night-dress and began fondling her breast. According to S, she got up and walked away. The mother remained asleep.

As will appear, there was some confusion as to exactly when this incident occurred in relation to certain other events. What is significant, however, is that when S complained to the authorities, including the police, about sexual abuse by the appellant, she described that as the last occasion on which such abuse had occurred. The evidence of an officer of the Department of Community
Services who interviewed S at the Forster Police Station on 16 March 1996, was that she gave an account of that incident which was, in one significant respect, different from the evidence she gave at the trial. According to that officer, Ms Lenskyj, S told the authorities that her mother was not present when the appellant fondled her breast.

The jury acquitted the appellant of the sixth charge. It is not clear why that might have happened. It may be, for example, that the jury took note of the confusion in the evidence relating to the sequence of relevant events after the family moved to Tuncurry. On the other hand, it may be that the jury attached significance to the discrepancy concerning the presence of the mother. That discrepancy is strongly relied upon by counsel for the appellant as indicating the complainant's unreliability.

Following the complainant's approach to the authorities in March 1996, the appellant was interviewed by the police. He denied the allegations against him. He gave evidence at his trial, and once again denied all the allegations against him. The complainant's mother and brother, although called at the trial as witnesses in the Crown case, made it clear that they were supportive of the appellant, rather than the complainant, and they both gave evidence relied upon by the defence.

I turn now to the various complaints made by S.

While S was living at Gilgandra, probably in mid 1995, she told two school friends that the appellant "has been touching me and he has also raped me." 
M, a former boyfriend of S, who met S after she came to live at Tuncurry, said that S complained to him that the appellant "was touching me on the tits". As a result M confronted the appellant. The only other person present was M's friend D, who was the complainant's current boyfriend at the time of the trial. M told the appellant that he had heard that the appellant had been "touching (S) up on the tits". The appellant appeared to be surprised, and denied the allegation. According to M, that confrontation occurred in about
October 1995.

D gave evidence that S had made a similar complaint to him, but he did not give evidence of the confrontation between M and the appellant. The appellant, on the other hand, gave an account of the confrontation, including the denial, which was similar to that given by M.

Both the complainant and her mother gave evidence of an occasion, in about
October or November 1995, when the two of them were together in the caravan, and the appellant was out playing golf. According to both the complainant and her mother, that was the first occasion on which S ever told her mother that the appellant had sexually abused her. It was common ground that the mother became very upset, and went out to the golf club to take the matter up with the appellant. It also appears to have been common ground at the trial that after this incident the appellant left the caravan park for several days, as did the mother. According to the evidence, this incident gave rise to a noisy and emotional argument concerning S's allegations against the appellant.
Whether that was the only such argument at the caravan park was not clear. M and D gave evidence of having overheard a similar argument, which appears to have occurred on a later occasion.

Although there was agreement between S and her mother that S told her mother about the alleged sexual abuse by the appellant, there was a conflict of evidence between them as to what S said. According to S, the mother asked her why she hated the appellant so much, and pressed her to give an explanation.
The mother said, "Has he been touching you?" and S said, "yes". According to the mother S said that she hated the appellant. The mother asked her why. S said, "Because he touched me". The mother said, "Where did he touch you?". S said, "On the breast". The mother said, "Did he ever have an erection or try to have intercourse with you?". S said, "No, don't be disgusting". The mother said, "Let's go and make a report to the police or see a counsellor about it", and S said that she didn't want anyone to know about the matter, and that it should be dropped.

One of the aspects of confusion relating to the sequence of events at Tuncurry is that some of the evidence, if taken literally, might have suggested that this discussion between S and her mother, and the subsequent immediate confrontation between the mother and the appellant, took place in October
It seems extremely unlikely that the incident the subject of the sixth count in the indictment would have occurred at some later time; yet the complainant said, albeit with some hesitation, that incident occurred in
November.

The evidence of M and D about overhearing a later family quarrel concerning the allegations made by S against the appellant is of significance, not because of what M said about it, but because of what D said about it. What D said about it constituted the only evidence capable of being regarded by the jury as corroboration of S's complaints. D said that he and M were near a caravan on an occasion when they heard an argument in which there was acrimonious discussion of the allegations being made by S against the appellant. According to D the appellant said, "You're just a little girl, you don't know what you are on about". However, according to D, S was yelling at the appellant, and telling him to admit to her mother what the appellant had done. The appellant responded by saying, "Yeah, all right, I done it".

The evidence of M was that he was also in the vicinity of the caravan and heard the quarrel, but he did not claim to have heard the statement just mentioned. However, the evidence of both M and D was that they were not just standing there listening, and that M was riding around on his bicycle. It would have been possible for D to have heard something that M did not hear.

There seems to have been little doubt that the complainant, whilst living with the appellant and her mother, strongly rebelled against discipline. The complainant's older brother gave evidence that the complainant regularly stayed out until the early hours of the morning, and that this was a source of constant argument in the family. Those arguments were accompanied by threats that if the complainant did not alter her behaviour she would have to leave the home. The brother said that the complainant told him that if the appellant and the mother "tried to kick her out", she would make up stories about the appellant.

It is impossible for an appellate court to know what kind of impression would have been made upon the jury by the various characters involved in the events as they unfolded at the trial. A great deal would have turned upon the jury's assessment of the credibility of the witnesses and, in particular, of their assessment of the appellant, the complainant, and the complainant's mother.

One of the witnesses called in the defence case was a female school friend of the complainant with whom the complainant went to live after she left home in
March 1996. That witness gave evidence of a number of conversations she had with the complainant, all at a time after the complainant had made allegations against the appellant to the welfare authorities, and to the police. Her evidence was that the complaints made by S kept changing, and that, ultimately, the complainant said that the appellant had raped her "heaps and heaps of times". That evidence was of some significance because the complainant, in her evidence at the trial, said that there was no occasion on which anything happened between herself and the appellant at Gilgandra, apart from the occasions the subject of counts 1-5 inclusive. It was also the evidence of this witness that the complainant had told her that the incident involving fellatio, whilst the mother was in the shower, occurred at Tuncurry, not Gilgandra.

Depending upon exactly what evidence was accepted by the jury, there was a good deal of material indicating discrepancies in complaints made by S, from time to time, against the appellant. For example, according to the complainant's mother, the complainant specifically denied that sexual intercourse had taken place between S and the appellant. On the other hand, the complainant's evidence at the trial included evidence of such intercourse.
In that respect it should also be noted that the officer of the Department of
Community Services who interviewed S at Forster Police Station on 16 March , asked S whether there was any intercourse with the appellant, and S answered in the negative. The officer also said that she specifically asked S questions to ensure that she understood the meaning of the word "intercourse".

Counsel for the appellant has advanced seven reasons which, considered either separately or in combination, are said to require a conclusion that the verdicts on counts 1-5 were unsafe or unsatisfactory. Those reasons may be summarised as follows:
The evidence of the complainant was uncorroborated save for the admission attributed to the appellant by the witness D, and the evidence concerning that alleged admission was such as to render the corroboration negligible.
There was a substantial body of evidence, and in particular the evidence of the complainant's mother and brother, which showed that she was strongly antagonistic towards, and resentful of the appellant, and had a motive to tell lies about him.
There were serious discrepancies, the most important of which have been referred to above, in the complaints made to various people, at various times by the appellant.
The history of the complaints made by the appellant reflects an increasing embellishment of her allegations. This history culminated in her assertion, after the matter was in the hands of the police, that the appellant had raped her "heaps and heaps of times".
The account given by S of the events involved in the incident of fellatio, said to have occurred whilst the mother was in the shower, a short distance away, for about three or four minutes, is implausible.
There is a serious discrepancy, in relation to count 6, between the evidence given by S at the trial, and the information she gave the officer of the Department of Community Services. In her evidence S said her mother was lying alongside the appellant, in bed, when the alleged indecent assault occurred. On the other hand, the evidence of the officer of the Department of
Community Services was that S said her mother was not present at the time.
This, it may be noted, was not some event that had occurred in the distant past. This was, according to S, the last occasion on which the appellant sexually abused her, and it occurred only a few months before S went to the authorities. The appellant argues that, whilst the jury acquitted the appellant on this count, if they were acting reasonably, they should also have treated this discrepancy as of importance in evaluating the credibility of the complainant in relation to all the counts.
The appellant, from the time he was confronted with these allegations from the authorities, has constantly denied them. His sworn evidence at the trial was not shaken in cross-examination. He came before the jury as a person of previous good character.

The legal principles to be applied in resolving an issue such as arises in the present appeal are set out in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] 
A major difficulty which confronts an appellate court in many of these cases is that so much is likely to have depended upon the jury's assessment of witnesses whom we have not seen. As Brennan J said in M (at 508): "On a matter as difficult as child sexual abuse where the focus of the trial must be on the veracity of the child and where both child and alleged aggressor give evidence, an assessment of evidence by an appellate court is a poor substitute for the assessment made by the jury".

Nevertheless, an appellate court must do its best to make an independent evaluation of the evidence for the purpose of applying the relevant principles. The seven reasons advanced by counsel and summarised above provide a convenient focus for that exercise.

As to the first reason, the weight to be attached to the alleged admission by the appellant would have depended a lot upon the jury's assessment of the witness who gave evidence of the admission. At the time of the trial D was aged 17. He said that he was on reasonably good terms with the appellant, and the appellant agreed. He gave evidence of hearing a family quarrel, in which
S's mother was very upset and crying, and S was shouting at the appellant, demanding that he admit to her mother what he had done to her. Ultimately, according to D, the appellant said the words quoted earlier in these reasons.

Counsel for the appellant drew this court's attention to one aspect of the cross-examination of D which was said to reflect adversely on his credit.
However, the jury might reasonably have regarded the incident as either significant or trivial.

As to the second reason, what is said is correct, as far as it goes. There is, however, a danger in speculating as to the motivation of a child who alleges sexual abuse.

The third and fourth propositions are important, but so also is the fact that
S complained to so many people about the appellant. It is possible that when she complained to her boyfriend, as she undoubtedly did, that the appellant was inappropriately touching her, and provoked a confrontation between her boyfriend and the appellant, she wanted the appellant to desist, whilst at the same time being unwilling to reveal to her boyfriend the full extent of the previous sexual activity. A close reading of S's evidence, in chief and in cross-examination, suggests that, while she complained to a number of people about the appellant's behaviour, she often described his conduct in terms that were understated and somewhat evasive. A jury may have thought this understandable.

As to the fifth proposition, consent, or absence of consent, was not an issue in the case. The appellant's appreciation of the risk of disclosure is difficult to evaluate. There was a good deal in the evidence to suggest that S was physically mature at an early age, and sexually precocious. The appellant gave an account (which S denied) of an attempt by her to seduce him. On S's account of events, there must have been a good deal of sexual tension in the home. It is true that, if the appellant had expected S to protest, his conduct was risky. He had no reason to expect anything other than a strong adverse reaction from S's mother if she found out about his alleged behaviour. It is one thing to have engaged in such behaviour while the mother was away on a golfing trip. It is another thing to have done so while she was having a brief shower nearby. However, if the appellant did the other things alleged by S, he was obviously willing to take risks. How would he have known S would not tell her mother about what went on while she was at golf; as, indeed, she finally did? 
The sixth point is significant. The allegation that the appellant sexually assaulted S while S's mother was lying alongside him in bed seems to involve attributing to the appellant a propensity to take risks which goes beyond that mentioned above. Moreover, the presence or absence of the mother was an important circumstance in the alleged offence the subject of the sixth charge.
It is hard to accept that it is a matter about which S could have been mistaken, especially as the events were fairly recent when S went to the authorities. It is hard to know how much was made at the trial of the discrepancy between what S said in her evidence and what she apparently told the counsellor. In an otherwise very long and repetitive cross-examination, this matter was touched on only briefly. The matter was not mentioned in the summing-up. Essentially, it went to S's reliability in relation to all the counts. How it was relied upon by defence counsel in address does not appear.

The seventh proposition is true, but the matters mentioned are aspects, albeit important aspects, of the way in which the jury assessed the appellant. They obviously decided that he was lying to them; why that is so is a matter we cannot fully know.

It is impossible to escape the conclusion that the outcome of this trial turned principally upon the jury's assessment of the complainant, the appellant, the complainant's mother, and the witness whose evidence was relied upon by the Crown as corroboration. There were aspects of the case which reflected adversely on the complainant's credit. However, there was also evidence which the jury were entitled to regard as significant corroboration.
The jury, acting reasonably, and considering the whole of the evidence, were entitled to be convinced of the complainant's truthfulness, and to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about the charges on which they convicted.

I am not persuaded that the verdicts were unsafe or unsatisfactory.

The appeal should be dismissed.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with Gleeson CJ. 
GROVE J: I agree with Gleeson CJ. * * * 
