

Regina versus Hans Peter Stenschke [1997] NSWSC 174 (5 May 1997) 
REGINA versus HANS PETER STENSCHKE 
REGINA versus JON LYNDON MURRAY /96 60658/96 
Monday 5 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Gleeson CJ, Grove J, Sperling J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW & PROCEDURE - EVIDENCE OF IDENTIFICATION - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING [EVIDENCE ACT 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) - FIRST ACT OF IDENTIFICATION BY WITNESS - POSSESSION OF STOLEN WALLET SHORTLY AFTER OFFENCE - JURY REJECTS EXPLANATION FOR POSSESSION - POSSESSION CAPABLE OF CONFIRMING CORRECTNESS OF EYEWITNESS IDENTIFICATION 
RESULT: Appeals dismissed. Convictions and sentences confirmed 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Grove J to give the first judgment.
 
GROVE J: The two appellants were tried before Flannery DCJ and a jury at the Sydney District Court where they were convicted after being jointly indicted on a count of robbery in company. The victim Peter Hansson was walking in Hughes Street, Potts Point on the evening of 3 May 1995 when he was accosted by a group of four men who became his assailants. The attack was witnessed by Mr Robert James who was an employee of the Wayside Chapel outside of which the incident occurred and he confirmed that the group consisted of four men whom he estimated to be young, placing them in their twenties. He observed the men were all of Islander appearance and his own intervention to aid the victim was met with threats including a remark passed by one of the men "don't fuck with us. We're the coconuts". 
A resident of Hughes Street, Mr Adam Thompson came to his window to investigate the commotion. He saw the victim being set upon by four men. Mr
Thompson called out and then went down the stairs and upon emerging from his residence he saw three of the attackers walk off, and a fourth man take the victim's bag. Like Mr James he noted that the four men were of Islander appearance. He continued to follow this group of men into the Kings Cross area until he was himself near the Kings Cross Railway Station where he made contact with a police officer to whom he pointed out the men. Unsurprisingly, they were starting to be mingled with other pedestrians and the group was no longer a separated four and some police officers estimated the group at numbers up to six. More police assembled in the area and it was noted that from the group two pairs of men proceeded on their way. The appellant Murray and a man called Roy Marte went into Playbirds Nightclub and the appellant
Stenschke and another male walked south in Darlinghurst Road.

The latter separated at Bayswater Road where the appellant Stenschke proceeded but was apprehended by uniformed police. As he was being placed into a police vehicle he said "Hang on I've got someone else's wallet" and removed a wallet from his jacket pocket. This wallet had been taken from the victim Peter
Hansson. It contained identifying material relating to Mr Hansson but a sum of money was missing. No sum equivalent to the missing money was found upon the appellant Stenschke. In a record of interview he told police that he was given the wallet at the Boomerang (a place in Kings Cross near the Westpac Bank) and asked to give it to a man called Jim at the Kiwi Bar. He did not know the name of the person who gave him the wallet but he provided a description and said that he had seen this man speaking to his friend Jim in the past.

Police entered the Playbirds Nightclub where the appellant Murray and the man
Marte were arrested. Marte was not subsequently charged.

Murray appeals against conviction. Stenschke appeals against conviction and in the event that his appeal is unsuccessful seeks leave to appeal against sentence.

I deal with the appeal of Murray. Two grounds are raised, the first complaining of a direction by the trial judge concerning the right to silence and the second asserting that the conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The complaint about the direction in the summing up is derived from a long passage of his Honour's charge to the jury and can be understood by reference to its own context which I set out: "I now want to tell you something about another legal doctrine called the right to silence which is a right which all citizens have. Mr Murray declined to answer questions put to him by a police officer at the time of his arrest.
Everyone has that right, except in certain circumstances which are nothing to do with this case, everybody has a right to refuse to answer questions put to them by police officers. You will recall the police caution which is to this effect, `that I'm going to ask you some questions, you are not bound to answer those questions', and that means what it says, people are not bound to answer questions of police generally speaking, certainly in cases such as this. There is an exception in certain traffic matters but not robbery cases, not serious matters. Now ladies and gentlemen if you thought of this, if any inference, that is any conclusion adverse to an accused could be drawn from his exercising his legal right not to answer questions, in other words if you could hold that against him, then that right would very soon cease to exist, so it is very important that you bear in mind that no inference adverse to an accused, Mr Murray in this case, can be drawn from the fact that he took note of the caution administered by the police officers and chose to remain silent.

An allied subject is this, each of the accused, Mr Murray and Mr Stenschke did not give evidence and there are a number of matters, some which will be repetitive which I must mention in relation to that fact. An accused person may always give evidence in his trial but he is under no obligation to do so.
The Crown bears the onus of satisfying you beyond reasonable doubt that he is guilty of the offence with which he has been charged. Of course when I say he
I mean in this instance they. Neither of the accused bears any onus, he is presumed to be innocent until you have been satisfied by the Crown that he is guilty beyond reasonable doubt. Each accused is entitled to elect to say nothing and to make the Crown prove his guilt. I will not repeat the caution, but you will recall it, they were told they weren't bound to answer questions of the police. That is the law. A person who is questioned by the police has the right to remain silent. He retains that right ladies and gentlemen to remain silent even when he is on trial, that is the right which each has exercised here. Because each accused has merely exercised the right which belongs to every citizen, you must not conclude that he has elected not to give evidence, and I will put it again, you must not conclude that they or either of them have elected not to give evidence because he or they is guilty of the offence charged. Such a conclusion from the exercise of the accused or the exercise by the accused of that right to remain silent would be completely wrong, his silence must not be viewed by you as an admission of guilt on his part. There are many reasons why an accused person may not want to give evidence. He may fear that he will be confused by cross-examination or he may simply be content to rely upon any weaknesses which exist in the Crown case.
There are no doubt other valid reasons. You must not speculate as to why each accused has not given evidence." 
No complaint about these directions was made at trial and leave pursuant to rule 4 is required.

The argument developed by counsel (who did not appear at trial) is based upon the evidence given by police which showed that the appellant Murray did not remain silent at all times but, to the contrary, on two occasions the appellant asserted positively that he had nothing to do with the offence. The appellant had, of course, chosen to remain silent in the sense that he did not give evidence at trial. It is inconceivable that counsel for the appellant at trial would not have drawn the jury's attention to his client's immediate denial of involvement when taken to the police station and his further assertion of it when told that he was to be charged. It would be astonishing if such was not emphasized to the jury in the course of defence counsel's closing address more than once. That the circumstances were well before the jury is powerfully confirmed by the pointed absence of any complaint about the passage in the summing up which I have reproduced.

Counsel for the appellant is not in a position to dispute that his client's denial was canvassed before the jury and in the whole of the circumstances, that is to say the nature of the evidence, the context of the charge to the jury and the absence of complaint I am positively satisfied that no miscarriage of justice resulted. Although we have received argument in substance I would apply Rule 4 and refuse leave to argue this ground.

The second ground asserts that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory.
The duty of this Court to read and assess the evidence for itself is well established. The central issue in the trial of the appellant Murray (as indeed was the case in relation to both appellants) was identification. It is noteworthy that no complaint is made about the adequacy of the cautions which the learned trial judge gave to the jury concerning the potential unreliability of identification evidence.

The Court has been greatly assisted by a detailed analysis of the alleged defects in the evidence of Mr Thompson whose testimony was essential to support any conviction. It shines clearly from his evidence that he was outraged by the cowardly attack which he had witnessed and he was deliberately following the assailant group with a view to having them brought to justice.
He followed them - prudently seeking to keep his own presence disguised from time to time - until he was able to acquire police assistance. Analytical criticism of the detail of his transcribed testimony shows an absence of perfection but it leaves me with no feeling of doubt about the reliability of his evidence and the consequent identification of the appellant Murray. I am unable to conclude that the jury ought to have a reasonable doubt about his guilt and the appeal should be dismissed.

I turn to the appeal by Stenschke. Three grounds of appeal are raised. The first complains of the admission of certain evidence in relation to the identification of the appellant: the second complains of a direction by his
Honour concerning the possession of the victim's wallet as above described and the third asserts that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The first complaint relates to evidence given by Mr Thompson that he had recognized the appellant Stenschke as one of the four men when he saw him at the Bidura Children's Court on 27 May 1996 and later at the District Court on September 1996. On the lastmentioned occasion a voir dire was held in relation to the admissibility of particular identification evidence. In a long written submission much criticism is made of the quality of this evidence but the issue raised by the ground is the correctness of his Honour's ruling that it was admissible. The submission was that the evidence could not have been admitted unless it complied with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s114.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). His Honour held that the evidence was not excluded by that section because transitional arrangements available from the Evidence (Consequential and Other Provisions)
Act operated in a case where identification was made for the first time before the principal Act came into effect. The issue which his Honour determined was that there had been a first identification on 3 May 1995 (before the Act) when the witness Mr Thompson pointed out the appellant with others to police officers in the Kings Cross area. I consider that his Honour's conclusion that this was an act of identification was correct. His Honour proceeded to make appropriate assessment as to whether the case was one in which he should make an exclusionary order in the exercise of discretion and I am unable to perceive any miscarriage in that exercise. It might be noted in passing that it was acknowledged at trial that if the argument now being pressed (which was then also pressed on behalf of the appellant Murray) were to be correct then it inevitably followed that there was no case to go to a jury in respect of
Murray. I would not sustain this ground.

The argument in support of the second ground was developed to assert that a direction ought to have been given to the effect that the appellant's recent possession of the stolen wallet could not be used to bolster evidence of the purported identification of him. In written submissions on behalf of the appellant it was stated that as far as investigating police were concerned, by the time he was charged they regarded him as connected with the crime principally because of his possession of the wallet. What weight the police then gave to the oral identification by Mr Thompson is unknown but of course it was considerable enough to provoke the police into stopping and consequently arresting him. Commonsense would suggest that the correctness of that identification was considerably fortified by the possession by the arrested person of the property of the victim so recently attacked.

Attention was drawn to an application at the end of his Honour's charge to the jury to direct them in terms that there was no independent evidence that the explanation by Stenschke of his possession of the wallet (receiving it from the unidentified friend of Jim conveying it to him) was false unless the jury was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Thompson's evidence of identification was correct. This was developed on the appeal into a refinement that the jury ought to have been told that they could not convict if they thought the explanation may have been true, and, even if they rejected it in its entirety they had to independently assess and accept Mr Thompson's evidence beyond reasonable doubt before convicting. The application for direction at trial was not resisted by the Crown Prosecutor but it does not appear that the matter was again adverted to. The submission was at the time made together with a large number of submissions concerning what was obviously the central issue of identification. The jury were brought back and given further directions but nothing was said about this specific matter. There was no complaint about his Honour's apparently overlooking it.

The evidence concerning the possession of the wallet was not evidence of identification but it was available to confirm the correctness of the evidence of identification given by Mr Thompson. A reading of the whole of the summing up shows that that was the basis upon which the issue was left to the jury. I detect no error in his Honour's omission to formulate the issue in the fashion requested.

The final ground alleges that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory. It has been observed that the identification evidence against the appellant
Stenschke was far more powerful than that against the appellant Murray. Taking into account the possession of the wallet this must be so. It is notable that the appellant Stenschke was under the observation of Mr Thompson and then the police substantially even if not absolutely completely during transit from
Hughes Street to his arrest in Bayswater Road. It is true that he was not, when arrested, in possession of the green sports bag taken from the victim and no evidence was given suggesting that he was seen to be disposing of such an item. This matter was pointed out by him in his record of interview which was before the jury. By the same token there was no evidence that he was seen in consultation with any man of the description given near the Boomerang who might have passed the empty wallet. There was no explanation why he should have been chosen as a messenger for this bizarre transfer and the jury were abundantly entitled to conclude that the story was a matter of invention apparently representing the limit of the appellant's ingenuity, given the shortness of time between the attack on Mr Hanson and the appellant's arrest.
A reading of the evidence leads me to that view and I have no feeling of unease about the verdict of guilty.

The appellant seeks leave to appeal against the severity of sentence.

He is but nineteen years of age. His record includes an appearance before the
Children's Court in March 1996 for a subsequent offence of assault and robbery. The trial judge recognized this and looked at it for the purpose of determining whether the appellant was at he put it, "deserving of lenient treatment". He was younger than his then co-accused Murray and the sentences imposed upon them as to total term were the same, namely three years penal servitude. In each case his Honour found there were special circumstances but he did not specify what they were. As his division operated to the benefit of the appellant that matter can be set to one side. A specific application was made that his Honour not exercise power to have the appellant serve any portion of his sentence in a detention centre and that request was acceded to.
His Honour divided the total term into a minimum term of fifteen months and an additional term of twenty one months.

I am unable to detect any error in his Honour's assessment or approach and, given the seriousness of the offence and his Honour's observation of its prevalence at the time and the need for general deterrence, it stands within the mild range available for offences of this sort.

I propose the following orders: 
In the appeal of Murray - that the appeal be dismissed and the conviction and sentence confirmed.

In the appeal of Stenschke - that the appeal be dismissed and the conviction confirmed. That application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted but the appeal dismissed and that sentence also confirmed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

SPERLING J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court are as proposed by Grove J.
 * * * 
