

Appo versus District Court of New South Wales and Anor No. Ca 40138/95 and Dc /94 Criminal Law and Procedure - Prerogative Relief [1995] NSWSC 20 (1
September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), MEAGHER(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 24:3:1995 #ADD 1:9:1995 
Counsel for the Claimant:   M A Churchill (Solr) 
Solicitor for the Claimant:  Martin Churchill 
Counsel for the 1st Opponent (District Court):
C Ludlow (Solr) (submitting) 
Solicitor for the 1st Opponent (District Court):
I V Knight, State Crown Solicitor 
Counsel for the 2nd Opponent (DPP): 
P G Berman 
Solicitor for the 2nd Opponent (DPP):
S E O'Connor, Solicitor for Public
Prosecutions
ORDER
Summons dismissed but without prejudice to the claimant's right to relist the summons for orders upon 1 hour's notice to the second defendant (Director of Public Prosecutions) on Monday 27 March 1995.
Such summons to be heard, if necessary, in the motions list of the Court of Appeal.* * Note: On Monday 27 March 1995 in the District
Court of Sydney, Court DCJ adjourned the trial of Vernon Leonard Appo to be relisted for 14 August 1995.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P:  In Ex parte Corbishley; re Locke [(1967) 67 SR 396 (CA)] at 400 there is a memorable description by Holmes JA, of proceedings in the Court of
Petty Sessions affecting Mr Corbishley. His
Honour said: "The picture is one which shows how the poor, sick and friendless are still oppressed by the machinery of justice in ways which would need a Fielding or a Dickens to describe in words and a Hogarth to portray pictorially. What happened that day to the applicant was only the beginning of the terrors which were to confront him....."
In my opinion, and with every respect, much the same could be said of the predicament which faced Mr Appo in the present case. As disclosed by an affidavit of his solicitor, Mr Martin Churchill, read without objection before tile Court today, Mr Appo is an Australian Aboriginal. He is described as an itinerant, thirty-eight year old man who suffers from chronic alcoholism. He has already, recently, been before the courts of this State on serious charges, of which he was acquitted. He is at present in custody.
The circumstances which bring
Mr Appo's case before this Court today arise out of a refusal by Court DCJ to vacate an order advancing the hearing date of a second criminal trial affecting Mr Appo. It will be necessary to describe what occured. It is a story with features that seem, in some ways, as extraordinary as those described in Ex parte Corbishley (above). The Court was in the middle of the hearing of an appeal when, for urgency, it permitted the parties to interrupt proceedings to move the Court on the summons filed by Mr
Appo an hour earlier.
 
An Aboriginal accused is acquitted but required to face a further charge.
The process before the Court is a summons for Judicial review. In the summons, the District Court of New South Wales is named as the first defendant. It has appeared and submitted to the orders of the Court and has been excused. The second defendant is the Director of Public Prosecutions ("DPP"). The DPP has no quarrel with the relief which Mr Appo seeks from the
Court. To that extent the Court has not had before it a contradictor to the relief that is sought. That fact makes it all the more important that the
Court should examine carefully the relief claimed and the application of its provision in the circumstances of the present case.
The summons has been dealt with as a matter of urgency because it affects a criminal trial which, if the orders of the District Court are not disturbed, is to proceed in Sydney on Monday, 27 March .
The evidence before the Court in Mr Churchill's affidavit discloses that
Mr Appo was earlier the defendant in a criminal trial which commenced in the
District Court on 20 March 1995. For his representation at that trial, he was granted legal aid. Mr
Churchill retained Mr Wasilenia of counsel on Mr Appo's behalf The trial concerned five allegations of sexual assault without consent in circumstances of aggravation. The alleged victim of the sexual assaults, the subject of that trial, was a daughter of Mr Appo, whom I shall call "Ja".
The trial was called on. A jury was empanelled. Application was unsuccessfully made to the presiding
Judge, Court DCJ, to vacate the hearing date. One of the bases for the application was the late discovery by Mr Appo's representatives that "Ja" had been convicted and sentenced as an accessory to a murder which had occurred in 1993. Another basis of that application was that a witness for the defence, Mrs Baxter, otherwise known as Mrs Stanley, of
Wellington, was too ill to travel to court. Court
DCJ refused the applications to vacate the hearing. He insisted that the first trial should proceed. So it did.
The trial continued on 21 March and 22 March 1995. On 22 March 1995, Mr
Wasilenia renewed an application for an adjournment. Once again, his Honour refused to grant the application. He 'insisted that the trial should proceed to conclusion. So it did.
On 22 March 1995 addresses to the jury were concluded. His Honour charged the jury. The jury left the court to consider their verdicts at 1 pm. At 2 pm, they returned, acquitting Mr Appo of all five counts of aggravated sexual assault.
Following this acquittal, Court DCJ inquired as to the reason why Mr Appo remained in custody, His Honour was informed by the Crown and defence counsel that Mr Appo was awaiting trial on another charge. That trial was listed to commence on 14 August 1995 in the District Court at Sydney. The charge involved in that trial was also one of sexual assault without consent in circumstances of aggravation. The assault was alleged to have been made against another daughter of the applicant, whom I shall describe as "Ju".
Mr Appo did not immediately apply for bail in respect of that trial. Both the Crown and defence counsel advised his Honour that they were not then immediately able to deal with a foreshadowed future application for bail.
Thereupon, his Honour remanded Mr Appo in custody until 2 pm on 23 March 1995.
So far as the representatives of the DPP and of Mr Appo were aware, this was for the purpose, and only for the purpose, of the determination, of the bail application on behalf of Mr Appo.
 
The trial judge proposes advancing the second trial by five months.
At 2 pm on 23 March 1995 the matter was returned before Court DCJ. Mr
Wasilenia was again instructed by Mr Churchill to appear on behalf of Mr Appo on the bail application.
Counsel appeared for the DPP. According to Mr
Churchill's affidavit, which has been confirmed by the solicitor for the DPP as being accurate in this respect, Court DCJ immediately inquired of Mr
Wasilenia if there was any reason why Mr Appo's second trial could not commence for hearing on Monday, 27 March 1995.
It is inferred that his Honour took this course because the first trial had concluded in a time much shorter than anticipated and set aside, for that trial. His Honour had time available in which to deal with Mr Appo's second trial. He indicated that he was minded to use that time to dispose of the second trial and was inclined to advance the hearing date and fix the hearing to commence on 27 March 1995.
 
The accused objects.
Mr Wasilenia submitted to
Court DCJ that such a course would not be fair to Mr Appo. He said that the defence would not be ready to commence the trial on the proposed date for a number of reasons. The solicitor for Mr Appo had only then recently received a grant of legal aid for the defence of Mr Appo in the second trial. Before receiving that grant of legal aid he was not in a position to retain counsel and to receive advice and take full instructions, as would be normal once the grant of legal aid was provided.
Mr Appo's solicitor had also only then recently received the committal depositions. Indeed, he had only received them one hour before the bail application was listed before Court DCJ. Mr Wasilenia, whom Mr Appo wished to represent him, and who had successfully represented him on the first trial, was unavailable to appear on the succeeding Monday, having accepted a brief for that day in the interim.
The solicitor, through Mr Wasilenia, informed his Honour that there would be considerable difficulty at such short notice in finding other suitable counsel able to present the trial. As well, there was insufficient time to prepare and conduct inquiries and to locate potential witnesses on behalf of
Mr Appo so that his case could be fairly presented. It is clear that Mr Appo's position as an itinerant Aboriginal
Australian was relevant to this point.
Court DCJ was informed that witnesses were likely to be in a similar position as Mr Appo previously was and to be scattered throughout New South Wales and
Queensland. Securing their attendances at court in Sydney in the space of less than four days would be unreasonable and probably impossible.
Court DCJ heard these submissions. However, according to the affidavit of
Mr Churchill, his Honour indicated that the courts were reluctant to "grant adjournments of trials", and this even if the Crown and the defence both consented. This Court does not have the actual transcript of the statements of his Honour, assuming that one was kept. In the short time available it has not proved possible to procure the transcript to place it before the Court.
However, as there is no objection to the record which is contained in the affidavit of the solicitor for Mr Appo, I am prepared, for present purposes, to proceed, in the exigencies, on the basis that the solicitor accurately states what occurred. The affidavit proceeds: "I heard Mr Wasilenia submit that the defence were not asking for an adjournment of the trial, were willing to have the matter proceed on 14 August, 1995 as originally listed.
However, Mr Wasilenia further submitted that he was sure that
Mr Appo would not object to his trial being disposed of earlier than 14 August 1995, so long as there was sufficient time to prepare his defence, which could not be done" (by
Monday 27 March 1995) 
The Crown also objects and proposes a different earlier date.
Court DCJ then asked for the attitude of the DPP on behalf of the Crown, to the bringing forward the hearing date.
Mr Churchill deposes that he heard the Crown submit that it would not be in a position to proceed with the trial on Monday 27 March
The Crown had been unable to contact the informant police officer. The Crown did not believe that, at such short notice, it would be in a position to assemble its witnesses for the trial. There were many prosecutions witnesses, including witnesses from interstate, namely witnesses in Bundaberg and Harvey Bay in Queensland. Many of the witnesses were
Aboriginal Australians. Some did not have ready access to telephones.
Communication with certain of them would have to be through community liaison officers. It does not take too much imagination to understand that making contact with such witnesses and arranging for them to be brought to Sydney to give evidence in a trial would take some considerable time.
The Crown also informed his Honour that a Junior police officer involved in the investigation of the subject charge had advised the Crown that the police had not been in contact with the witnesses for some considerable time.
Police were uncertain as to the precise whereabouts of some of them, According to Mr Churchill's affidavit he then heard his Honour say words to the effect: "You" - (meaning thereby the Crown) - "have got all Friday (24
March 1995) to find them."
The Crown then made an application for the trial to be listed in the week commencing 7 April 1995. This would have involved an advancement of several months of the hearing of the charges against Mr Appo. I remind myself that that trial was originally fixed for 14 August 1995. However, his Honour declined that application.
 
The Judge's order and the summons to the Court of Appeal.
Court DCJ listed the trial of Mr Appo upon the sexual assault charge involving "Ju" to commence on Monday 27 March
In the interim, he refused
Mr Appo ball. He remanded him in custody until 27 March 1995, when he was required to stand his trial. His Honour did not ask the representative of Mr
Appo whether he wished to present any material in support of a ball application.
It was in these circumstances that Mr Appo, by his solicitor, approached this Court.
When the matter came on before us the positions of Mr Appo and of the DPP were substantially repeated, much as they are recorded as having been stated before Court DCJ.
Counsel for the DPP indicated that the Crown did not wish to proceed with the trial of Mr Appo on Monday 27 March 1995. He would be in a very difficult position to marshall the prosecution witnesses. The Crown had both the right and the duty to present its case on behalf of the community in a proper way. In his judgment that could not be done on the succeeding Monday as his Honour had ordered.
Yet, if on that day his Honour requested the DPP to present the indictment, the DPP would be obliged to do so.
For Mr Appo, too, much the same material was placed before this Court by way of submissions as that had been placed before Court DCJ. Mr Churchill indicated from the Bar table, and I see no reason to doubt it, that he had been endeavouring, against the prospect that the trial would be required to proceed on Monday next, to secure available counsel. His efforts had not, so far, been successful. He informed the Court that he might himself be forced to represent Mr Appo at the trial. He said that he had appeared in trials in the
Local
Court but had not appeared in a jury trial in the District Court. He did not consider that the trial could safely and fairly proceed on Monday 27 March , although if required to do so he would naturally do his best. He submitted that neither he, nor more importantly
Mr Appo (or for that matter the Crown), should be placed in such a position in a court of this State.
Least of all should this occur in a serious criminal trial which had long since been fixed for hearing in August 1995 and peremptorily advanced by unilateral action of his Honour without the request or consent of the Crown or of the accused and against their opposition.
 
Relevant principles of restraint.
In approaching the summons, this Court must keep in mind a number of principles. The first is that interference in criminal proceedings by way of orders prerogative in nature, is granted by the Court only in the most exceptional of cases. This is out of deference to the control of criminal trials by the judges of the trial. It is also out of recognition of the fact that, if the trial proceeds and goes awry, it is always open to the accused, if he or she be convicted, to raise in contest of the conviction any alleged departure by the trial judge from the rules of procedural fairness, of the kind which this Court would protect by an order for Judicial review:cf Watson v Attorney General for New South Wales [(1987) 8 NSWLR 685 (CA)], 694,712f,.
Secondly, the refusal by Court DCJ, in effect, to vacate the peremptory order fixing the advanced date of trial is an order of a procedural character.
This Court, and other appellate courts, have said many times that such an order will only be disturbed in the most exceptional circumstances where it appears that the discretion has miscarried and, unless repaired, will occasion serious injustice: cf GSA Industrial Pty Limited versus NT Gas Ltd (1990) 24 NSWLR . Decisions upon procedural disputes have to be made every hour of the day in this, and other, courts. This Court cannot possibly supervise, nor should it endeavour to do so, all such orders made in respect of such procedural matters.
 
The requirements of procedural fairness.
Nonetheless, this
Court, as the supevisory court of the State, has the responsibility of ensuring that trials throughout the State conform to the law.
That includes the law relating to procedural fairness: Reischauer v
Knoblanche [(1987) 10 NSWLR 40 (CA)], 713; Kopuz versus District Court of New South Wales [(1992) 28 NSWLR 232 (CA)], 245f The Court, for that purpose, imposes obligations on all public office holders, including Judges of the
District Court and the
DPP himself. No party suggested that this Court lacked jurisdiction to provide relief. On the contrary, both Mr Appo and the DPP asserted the jurisdiction of this Court and invited its exercise.
On the material placed before this Court today, it is plain to me that if the second trial of Mr Appo were to proceed on Monday 27 March 1995, as Court
DCJ has indicated it must, procedural fairness would have been denied. It would be denied to the DPP as the representative of the Crown and, in turn, to the people, to ensure that the trial proceeded with the available relevant evidence, upon which the accusation is made and the indictment foreshadowed, against Mr Appo.
It would also be denied to Mr Appo in that he would be forced to contemplate a trial without proper counsel, without proper preparation, without proper investigation of witnesses, and without the usual careful regard to the defence of a person who faces a charge which the Court has been informed would carry, upon conviction, a maximum penalty of twenty years imprisonment.
If one looks at the reasons which are said to be those given by Court DCJ for requiring that the trial should proceed on Monday next, they include his
Honour's statement that he would be reluctant to "grant an adjournment" of the trial and that, even if the
Crown and the defence both consented. With every respect to his Honour, who is a most experienced trial judge, that was an irrelevant consideration to the exercise of his discretion.
In issue before him was not the grant of an adjournment of a trial, as such.
It was whether an order should be made bringing forward, to a date in
March 1995, the date of a trial which had been long fixed for hearing in
August 1995. Moreover, it was whether such an order should be made when neither tile Crown nor the defence consented to it, when each protested about it and when each had informed his Honour that they believed that it would prevent the fair presentation of the Crown case and the fair trial of the accused.
A difficulty is presented by the relief which is sought. Mr Appo seeks orders prohibiting both of tile defendants from commencing or undertaking the trial on 27 March 1995. The second defendant, the DPP, does not wish to proceed with the trial on 27 March 1995, To that extent it right be said that an order prohibiting him from doing that which it does not wish to do, is unnecessary. I shall return to that sugestion.
The second order sought is that Court
DCJ's order listing the trial for hearing on 27 March 1995 should be quashed and an order made that the trial date of 14 August 1995 should be restored. This Court would normally withhold relief of that kind until it was clearly and indisputably required. It is always possible that Court DCJ might alter his opinion and provide relief on
Monday 27 March 1995. I recognise that adopting that view will present very substantial practical difficulties to the Crown, Mr Appo and others. The jury in waiting will have been summoned.
The matter will otherwise be before the
District Court to proceed on that day. The Crown would be required, at much cost and expense, to endeavour to round up witnesses in distant parts of this country to be present against the chance that Court DCJ required the matter to proceed and this Court declined to intervene. Worst of all, Mr Appo would be subjected to the unnecessary stress of a forced preparation for trial on a most serious charge by hastily engaged legal representatives without the opportunity of proper preparation as would be usual for such an important case.
Although the DPP does not object to an order prohibiting him from presenting an indictment against Mr Appo, it seems to me that the appropriate course to adopt is to provide relief addressed to the DPP. If such relief is given that will prohibit the DPP from proceeding to present an indictment against Mr Appo, until further order. Such relief would have the practical effect of restraining the commencement of a trial on 27 March 1995. That is a result which I consider that procedural fairness demands in this case.
 
Relief should not be delayed. It should be granted.
I have given thought as to whether the provision of relief should be withheld until Monday 27 March 1995 in order to permit one last application to be made before his Honour on that day. The reason that I do not consider that to be the correct course is that a fair contemplation of the evidence that has been placed before this Court, in the affidavit of Mr Churchill, makes it clear that, despite what appears to be overwhelming, even incontestable, reasons why the matter should not proceed to trial on Monday 27 March 1995, despite the submissions to that effect, both for Mr Appo and for the Crown, his Honour has indicated his determination that the matter should indeed proceed.
Apparently this resolve is in order to fill a gap in his Honour's calender, which may have been presented by the abbreviated first trial involving Mr Appo or some other unknown cause.
If the matter did commence on Monday 27 March 1995, the prospect would then have to be faced that his Honour might require the DPP to present an indictment against Mr Appo. The Director would then be obliged to do so. There would be little, or no, time for Mr Appo to approach this Court and to secure this Court's relief whilst his criminal trial was proceeding. The availability of the protection of this Court might then, effectively, be frustrated.
 .
There is another and more fundamental reason why I would not deny relief to Mr Appo. No person should have to face a serious criminal trial in a Court of this State under the pressure of events such as I have described. A criminal trial is a solemn and serious accusation by the community, in the name of the Crown, against an accused person. No person and, I should say, ill the light of history, least of all an Aboriginal Australian, should have to face the prospect of preparing for such a trial on a most serious charge, effectively over a weekend, when his solicitor says that the matter cannot be properly prepared and when the Crown, which has its own duties to the courts, has informed this Court that it agrees that that is the case.
Reflect for a moment upon what denial of relief will require. The anxious search for counsel available, effectively, with only a weekend to prepare. The hurried consultations with
Mr Appo at prison. The rush to gather Crown and
Defence witnesses. The differentiated preparation of the case depending on the witnesses who can be rounded up in such time. The people, in remote parts of
Australia, being searched for, their ordinary lives disrupted with virtually no notice and obliged to travel to Sydney for the trial. Expense, inconvenience and stress to many. What would those many think of our system of justice? What would they think if, some having been gathered to Sydney against the possible order that the trial must proceed, they are then sent away after the judge, at the last, has second thoughts about the course which he has set in train? This Court should not contemplate, it should not permit, such a charade of justice to occur in this State. It should fashion appropriate orders to relieve the parties and the public from such a spectacle.
Specifically, this Court should not withhold that relief against the possibility that Court DCJ might, on Monday 27 March 1995, change his mind.
Against the risk that he might not do so, and that a most serious charge would then be pressed to a hearing before its due and expected date, this Court should not stay its hand. Efficiency in the administration of Justice, including criminal justice, is an important attribute of a modern legal system. But efficiency cannot be bought at the loss of justice itself
Court DCJ's motives in advancing Mr Appo's second trial were doubtless most laudable. But, in the circumstances disclosed, such a sudden alteration of the trial date would involve a serious injustice not only to Mr Appo but also to the community which the DPP, representing the Crown, safeguards.
 
Orders.
.
The orders which I, therefore, propose are that an order issue from this
Court, directed to the second defendant, the Director of
Public Prosecutions, , until further order, prohibiting the DPP from commencing the trial or from presenting an indictment against
Vernon Leonard Appo in the charges which are foreshadowed against Mr Appo, and which are currently listed for hearing in the District
Court on Monday, 27 March 1995. I would reserve the question of costs. I would also reserve liberty to the parties to return to the
Court for further orders, should they prove necessary.
The order of the Court is, by majority, that the relief claimed in the summons is refused at this stage. The Court will give leave to the claimant, if the need arises, to move the Court, upon one hour's notice to the Crown, on
Monday morning, 27 March 1995. The Court will receive any such application in its motion list, should that be required.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA: A trial for aggravated sexual assault was listed for hearing in the District Court on Monday March 1995 before Court DCJ. There is now before us an application for some sort of prerogative relief because, so it is alleged, neither the prosecution nor the defence is ready to proceed on
Monday.
Granting or refusing an application is a matter for the trial judge. In the present case there is no reason why an application should not be made on
Monday before his Honour for an adjournment, and it would be monstrous for us to assume that his Honour would not act properly in adjudicating on such application, were it made.
Even were an application to be made is improperly refused and that results in an unjust conviction, the remedy is an appeal to the Court of Criminal
Appeal after a trial has been concluded, not an application to the Court of
Appeal for prerogative relief before the trial has commenced.
I would dismiss the application with costs.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA:  I regret to say that the actions which have been taken by Court
DCJ and which have given rise to this application, and the statements attributed to his
Honour when dealing with the proceedings that were before him yesterday, are matters which have, for me, given rise to considerable disquiet and if, on Monday next, faced with a joint application by the Crown
Prosecutor and counsel or the solicitor for Mr Appo, his Honour were to decline to vacate the fixture so peremptorily ordered yesterday, the virtual certainty is that justice would be denied to the Crown and to the community if the Crown Prosecutor were required then to present an indictment, and to Mr
Appo, if he were required then to stand his trial.
Nonetheless, the fact that his Honour has thus far declined to vacate the fixture on Monday next does not preclude the renewal of the application by Mr
Appo and by the Crown Prosecutor. This being so it seems to me that the present application is premature and, as the President has indicated, the orders sought are, in any event, inappropriate.
For my part I would hope that, having had the opportunity to reconsider the matter, his Honour, in the event supposed, would not be guilty of a denial of justice such as I have foreshadowed. I think his Honour ought to have the opportunity of a locus penitentiae, and, for that reason, I, too, would decline, at this stage, the relief sought, but without prejudice to Mr Appo's right to renew the application for such relief as he may be advised to seek in the event his Honour declines to vacate the fixture.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/20.html  
