

Leslie John Kirkwood versus Government Insurance Office of NSW [1997] NSWSC 103 (2 April 1997) 
Leslie John KIRKWOOD versus GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE OF NSW /86 
Friday 21 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
TEMBY AJ 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff sues for personal injuries incurred in a motor vehicle accident on 1 May, 1986. He was born on 5 March, 1950, and was accordingly nearly 36 years of age when injured. The accident occurred nearly 11 years ago. In the intervening period, Mr Kirkwood has been in three hospitals, seen at least 30 health professionals, for treatment or assessment, been through a trial which lasted for 27 days spread over nearly 12 months, and taken the matter to the Court of Appeal, which set aside the judgment -- made well after the trial -- and ordered a re-trial. An application by the defendant for special leave to appeal to the High Court failed.

Liability is not in issue.

During the evening of the day in question, the plaintiff was driving a car on the Hume highway north of Yass, near Gunning. His car was in the course of passing a semi-trailer when it collided with another semi-trailer coming in the opposite direction, which had crossed the double white lines, leaving him no available course of evasive action. Whether the plaintiff remembers the actual impact is not clear on the evidence, but certainly he knew it was imminent, and was terrified -- he thought he was going to die. He lost consciousness in the accident, although only briefly.

The plaintiff was taken by ambulance to the Yass District Hospital, where he remained for a short period, before being transferred the same night by ambulance to the Royal Canberra Hospital. He spent about a week there. On admission, a form was filled out containing basic information, of which he was doubtless the source. One piece of pertinent information was "Pt drinks approximately 15 middies of beer a day". I was informed by counsel that a middy contains ten fluid ounces of beer, and the consumption of about six large bottles of that alcoholic drink each and every day would be detrimental to health. Another entry, contained in "patient progress" notes dated 1 May, , and therefore made within hours of the accident, reads "Alcohol -- 15 beers ++ / day for 18 years". An anaesthetic record dated 3 May, 1986 lists a single pre-operation factor, namely "alcoholic", and there is a like entry in a pathology request form dated 1 May, 1986.

The plaintiff denies he ever drank as much as is recorded, at least on a regular basis, or that he is an alcoholic, or has ever seen himself as such. I believe him, and so find. At the time of his admission to the hospital in
Canberra, he could well have been somewhat disorientated, through concussion or shock or both. I say that despite notes made by the ambulance officer that the plaintiff was "speaking sensibly" about 20 minutes after the accident, and that on admission he was "alert and answering when asked questions". How good an observer the author of that latter note was I do not know. It is likely that something Mr Kirkwood said as to alcohol which was the inaccurate product of his then state of confusion, or true for a particular day but recorded as a general proposition, has been elevated well beyond its true significance. The entries as to the plaintiff being an alcoholic are probably based upon no more than the recorded alcohol consumption. In making the above finding I have borne in mind the evidence generally, including that concerning liver function and other tests, and the fact the plaintiff had a blood alcohol reading of .06% about 1.5 hours after the accident. Further, he denied having consumed alcohol on the day of the accident, and clearly he is wrong as to that.
However, the reading did not become available until three months afterwards, by which time incorrect information or lack of recollection could well have turned into belief in the mind of the plaintiff. According to the evidence, Mr
Kirkwood never lost a day's work by reason of alcohol consumption, which is inconsistent with alcoholism in a man who had been drinking for some eighteen years, and in my view inconsistent with a regular daily consumption of the amount shown in the Canberra hospital notes. Having said that, I accept that the plaintiff habitually drank nearly every day at the time of the accident, at a rate of two or three bottles of beer a day, and that for a period afterwards he drank more heavily.

The most severe injuries sustained were a broken right ulna, and a scalping injury to the head. Mr Kirkwood said, and I accept, that his entire upper body hurt after the accident. He has been left with a propensity for severe headaches and slight occasional neck discomfort, together with severe scarring of the head and visible scarring of the right arm, all of which are permanent.
However, the claim largely revolves around the consequences of the accident in terms of the plaintiff's psychiatric state and ability to work. According to him, he has had no gainful employment for something like six or seven years, and is chronically depressed, often agitated, generally impatient, and has poor memory and concentration.

The evidence establishes that before the accident Mr Kirkwood was a happy man living an active and happy life. He was married, lived with and loved his wife and children, and was employed in selling cladding for timber and fibro cottages. He was a natural salesman and a big spender. He was also resilient, not having been personally flattened by the collapse of his business a couple of years before the accident and consequential bankruptcy and forced sale of the family home. Had it not been for the accident, the plaintiff would have continued as he had throughout his adult life, with ups and downs, but relishing his existence and valuing himself.

The position now is in marked contrast. That emerges from the testimony of the plaintiff, his wife, his father, his sister, and various of his friends and acquaintances, even when allowance is made for a degree of nostalgic exaggeration between the golden days of yore and the grim present. Mr Kirkwood is now an unhappy man with low self-esteem. Most of the time he is depressed, and there are occasional outbreaks of extreme irritability which have on occasions led to physical violence. He has assaulted his father once and his wife a number of times. His conduct is sometimes embarrassing, indeed acutely so, to himself as well as others. An example given was when he and a group of business acquaintances had to be asked to leave a restaurant they frequented because he became loudly furious at a waitress about nothing much. He flies off the handle at the slightest social provocation. He always apologises after these occasions, and is deeply ashamed of the assaults in particular. Many people are not interested in having much to do with such a man. Because he knows he is not much fun to live with, but not at her request, he was at the time of the hearing living apart from his wife, and had done so for varying periods of days or weeks on many occasions during preceding years. I am quite convinced that all of this conduct was genuine. Mr Kirkwood would not and does not feign social misbehaviour towards his family and friends in order to boost his claim. I specifically find that he has lost most of his enjoyment of life at most times since the accident, and that is something -- economic loss apart -- for which significant compensation is appropriate.

What of the future? In my judgment there is about an even chance that after the conclusion of this litigation Mr and Mrs Kirkwood will become reconciled, thus enabling him to resume a reasonably contented life with his family. It would be foolish to imagine that that marriage and that life will ever be as satisfactory as they might well have been apart from the accident. Much of Mr
Kirkwood's anger stems from the litigation, and when it is over he will become less distressed and more socially competent, but in all likelihood he will not get back to the level of social functioning he enjoyed before the accident.

The plaintiff was a difficult and unsatisfactory witness. He tended to resort to generalities, and there were many particular questions he could not or would not answer. Mostly he was simply forgetful, but he also presented as angry and sometimes disdainful. Generally, he did his case no favours. He was as much an advocate for his cause as he was a witness, and therefore bad at both. Mr Shore of Counsel for the defendant demonstrated various discrepancies between his evidence at the first trial and that he gave before me. Mr
Kirkwood has grown to distrust the legal system, just as he distrusts many doctors, particularly those he sees as being in the other camp. He cannot deal well with those he trusts, for example family and friends, and it is hardly surprising he deals badly with those he actively distrusts. In all likelihood, his performance as a witness involved some acting out and exaggeration, as did his performance on the last occasion he saw Dr Sydney Smith, the main psychiatric witness for the defence.

Mr Kirkwood gave evidence, as did Mr Geoffrey Buchanan, that for a few months about 4.5 years after the accident, the two of them worked together selling cladding with Mr Buchanan as the principal and the plaintiff as a barely remunerated offsider, teaching his friend the ropes. Mr Buchanan was an uncompelling witness, as was the plaintiff. The evidence given by Mr Bruce
Harris was clearly preferable. He was a householder to whom a cladding contract was sold by the plaintiff. Mr Buchanan was marginally involved, but did not play a speaking role, and incidentally stayed inside to keep away from the household dog when the Harris residence was being measured up. Similar comments (the dog apart) could be made concerning the evidence of Mrs Margaret
Pratt. I find that the plaintiff earned the commission from the Harris and
Pratt jobs, and it is likely he earned the other commissions attributed to Mr
Buchanan, with a small share only going to the latter. These findings make it impossible for me to conclude that since the accident the plaintiff has earned and been able to earn only to the extent he claims.

It does not follow that the other extreme is the correct view, and I do not accept the case put for the defendant, namely that there has been no or little loss of earning capacity since a few weeks or months after the accident, or at least since 1989 or 1990 at latest. I accept, as Mr Terracini S.C. of Counsel for the plaintiff urged, that he would not have become the mendicant he is, reliant for the survival of himself and his family upon the charity of some, loans from others, and advances from the defendant, if he had an unimpaired earning capacity from some early stage. One reason he has not worked is because he is convinced there is something wrong inside his head. That belief is genuine. At least one effort, when he was supposed to record bus movements on behalf of Mr Sewell, was an embarrassing failure although the job was simple enough. On the other hand the plaintiff has not mitigated his damages.
As I do not believe that he did not earn the money attributed to Mr Buchanan,
I cannot accept his testimony that he had no other earnings. Further, he did not try for light labouring work because he considered it to be beneath him.
Perhaps he would not have succeeded, but the effort was not made. Doing the best I can, and on the basis that the plaintiff's condition has fluctuated considerably, I conclude that the amount he would have earned from the accident to date has been about halved. I do that bearing in mind that there were periods of months at a time when he worked and earned at something like the pre-accident rate. The medical evidence persuades me that at other times he was sufficiently sick to have no earning capacity.

The defendant contends that the plaintiff's present state is due, not to the accident, but to an intervening cause, namely the effect of a large and delayed taxation assessment which caught up with him, or the fact he was caught out lying at the first trial, or a combination of those two factors. My conclusion is otherwise. The accident has, I find, had a continuing although fluctuating effect upon the plaintiff, and his present condition is due to it.
I say that not because I believe all the evidence which the plaintiff gave, but rather on the basis of the testimony of his relatives who were distinctly impressive witnesses and the medical evidence, particularly that given by Dr
Milton.

As for the future, I conclude that the plaintiff has some income earning capacity at present, although it has been permanently reduced. He is well able to do light labouring, or pamphlet delivery, or jobs of those sorts. They might of course be difficult to find, as Mr Kirkwood is now 47 years of age and has barely worked for several years now. However when the litigation is over he is likely to improve substantially. The plaintiff is worse than he has been at most times in the last 11 years, but he is likely to get rather better, perhaps substantially so. Again doing the best I can, I conclude that he has lost about half of his earning capacity between now and the end of his normal working life.

A considerable number of medical and like reports were put into evidence by consent, and I have paid regard to all of them. Some only of the authors were called to give evidence. Naturally they and their views have loomed largest in my consideration of the matter, because I had an opportunity to assess them and be enlightened by them. Dr Koller was in my view a partisan witness affected by sympathy for his patient's position, and Dr Wolfenden was mostly questioned about matters beyond his field of special expertise. Dr Milton, Dr
Langeluddecke (a clinical psychologist), Dr Shnier and Dr Sydney Smith were particularly impressive witnesses, although it is clear to me that the doctor last mentioned attached too much significance to the plaintiff's alcohol intake.

If the plaintiff had damage to his brain, which was caused by the accident, and which led to behavioural consequences, that would be of real significance.
But at each point there is much doubt. As to whether there is organic brain damage, a relatively new scanning technique called magnetic resonance imaging was utilised by three radiologists of expertise and experience, namely Dr
Houang, Dr Ho and Dr Shnier. Each took his own series of images, but it appears those images did not differ greatly. The interpretations placed upon them were distinctly different. Dr Shnier said there was nothing abnormal disclosed. Drs Houang and Ho said there was abnormality, but they did not agree as to its nature. In any event, nobody can say that the damage, if it existed, was caused by the accident. If there is gliosis or scarring of the brain tissue, then the technique used cannot date it, and hence it could have been present from birth or have been caused in some other accident, although the evidence does not satisfy me that any known traumatic incident was sufficiently severe to make it a likely candidate. Relatively minor brain damage, of the sort which is contended to be present, may well produce no symptoms at all. It would be false reasoning to conclude that the considerable and negative changes in the plaintiff's conduct are due to brain damage because there is another available explanation, namely reaction on the part of this individual to the shock of the accident, the injuries, and the consequences such as unemployment. I am not aided in deciding this issue by the plaintiff's protestations that there is something wrong inside his head.
He certainly believes that to be the case, and that belief is of significance, but it does not make the belief true. The considerations just mentioned relate also to the third part of the proposition under examination, namely that there have been behavioural consequences of accident-caused brain damage. That has not been proved.

It is therefore unnecessary to deal at length with an issue which took up time at the hearing, namely if there was brain damage, it was due to excessive alcohol consumption. The answer is in the negative, in any event. I add that
Mr Kirkwood now uses alcohol moderately.

My conclusion is that brain damage is irrelevant. Mr Kirkwood is distinctly unwell, but I cannot conclude that his ill-health stems from brain damage incurred in the accident. In a sense it hardly matters, because the ill-health is in my view due to the accident and the consequences of the accident. When the medical evidence is carefully examined, there is little doubt in that respect. There was some debate as to whether particular labels were apposite, as for example, post-concussional syndrome. Again those labels hardly matter.

Mr Kirkwood returned to work fairly soon after the accident, with his head still bandaged, and unable to drive. Perhaps he went back to work too soon. He would work for a while, then find it was all too much for him, and give up. My assessment is that each time he found the resumption more difficult and less rewarding, and with the passage of time, the confidence that is so important to a salesman deteriorated. He also began to suffer from depression. I find that it was due to the accident and nothing else. When Dr Sydney Smith saw him .5 years after the accident, in November 1988, the plaintiff's condition caused him such concern that a referral to a psychiatrist was proffered and made. Dr Sydney Smith said in evidence that it is something that he rarely does. Since that time the plaintiff has been seen at appropriate intervals by
Dr Koller, who is a responsible treating psychiatrist, and who has prescribed for him anti-depressants, strong pain-killers and sedatives. Drs Sydney Smith and Koller would not have acted as they did unless the plaintiff was and continued to be a sick man.

He is also sorry for himself, but that is hardly surprising. Time spent in doctors' surgeries, undergoing psychometric testing, seeing solicitors, and involved in a most extended court battle, is not conducive to either pleasure or ease of mind. The litigation has had a significant exacerbating effect upon the plaintiff's condition. The present trial involved 16 days of hearing spread over six weeks. The plaintiff obviously found it an ordeal.

The plaintiff's supposed alcoholism was said to be relevant in another way than brain damage. Dr Sydney Smith's view was that it established or indicated that he had a vulnerable personality pre-accident, and the accident and its consequences impacted upon that personality in an exaggerated way. Perhaps that is so. If so, it does no harm to the plaintiff's case, as the defendant must take Mr Kirkwood as he in fact is, not as a notional average person may be. There is no need to seek such a cause. In his report of 14 March, 1992, Dr
Milton said: "The accident was terrifying and shocking. He remembered enough of it to be exceedingly distressed by it. I believe the shock of the accident, the associated injuries, the change in appearance, and general physical and emotional effects, caused a severe reactive depressive illness. He showed a positive response to treatment for a time but later slipped back." 
In my view, this remains valid, although Dr Milton proceeded on the basis that the plaintiff's brain was damaged in the accident. See also his report of 13
December, 1996. When giving evidence he said his view was the same even if there was no brain damage.

I find that the accident has had significant and lasting adverse effects, that the plaintiff suffered depression in consequence of it, together with loss of confidence and impaired powers of concentration and memory. He thus lost the capacity to sell, over time he worked less and less, and a vicious cycle was created. He also feels, in relation to the litigation process, troubled, angry and impotent. To say he is outraged, as Dr Milton does in the last report mentioned, is to go too far, bearing in mind that findings which reflected adversely upon the plaintiff's credit were made at the first trial and are made in this judgment. Support for the conclusion that Mr Kirkwood functions less well now than before the accident in certain intellectual and cognitive respects is found in the report and testimony of Dr Langeluddecke.

There are various views as to prognosis, to all of which I have given consideration, and my conclusion is as stated already.

As to the exacerbating effects of the litigation, in the circumstances of this case upon this particular individual, they are relevant and compensable. See
James -v- Woodall Duckham Construction Co. Ltd. [[1969] 2 All E.R.
](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1969%5d%202%20All%20ER%20794 "View LawCiteRecord" ) and Marziale -v- Hathazi [(1975) 13 S.A.S.R. 150.] Those cases establish the entitlement and also that the plaintiff must mitigate his damages by bringing proceedings promptly and pursuing them expeditiously once litigation neurosis is apprehended. However, it is not established that there has been delay in this case for which the plaintiff bears responsibility.
Perhaps, as is so often the case, contributions were made by each party and by the court system. I simply do not know, and cannot conclude that the plaintiff would have made a substantial recovery by a given earlier date had he pressed on in a forceful fashion. Indeed it is by no means clear that he will make a substantial recovery at all.

I assess general damages for pain and suffering, scarring, and loss of enjoyment of life in the sum of $105,000.

As to past economic loss, I do not accept that the plaintiff would have continued to earn for the 11 years after the accident, had it not occurred, at the rate he was earning for the preceding year or two. The calling he was following is a fickle one, dependent upon general economic conditions remaining good. That was not the case for a deal of the period under consideration.

Average weekly earnings for the period from the accident to date and on a net basis total about $280,000. However the plaintiff was a better than average performer. To recognise that fact I have added ten percent to the figure just stated, and then halved that total, so that the figure for past economic loss comes to $154,000.

As to future economic loss, the current average weekly earnings are $610 per week net, to which it must be added ten percent producing a figure of $670.
The parties are agreed that the appropriate multiplier, on the assumption the plaintiff would have worked until he was 65, is 625. As I have concluded that the residual capacity to work is half what it would have been, that figure must be applied to $335 per week which gives a total of $209,375. In my view the appropriate discount for contingencies is a little higher than normal, namely 20 percent, because Mr Kirkwood's past history shows he is prone to accident and incident -- I have in mind both what happened on 1 May 1986, and his bankruptcy -- and he was the sort of man who might well have retired somewhat early. The resultant figure is $167,500.

Out of pocket expenses were agreed at $15,803.55, of which $1,158.19 has been paid by the plaintiff and $14,645.36 remains outstanding. There will be future out of pocket expenses incurred, for medical treatment and medication. The plaintiff suggests a figure of about $35,500 on the basis that psychiatric treatment by Dr Koller and medication as at present -- six sinequan, two ducene and two panadeine forte daily -- will be necessary for the whole of life. I have assessed the prospects more positively, and calculated a total of $7,500 based on a continuation of the present regime until the end of 1998, half that for about four years, and then no continuing need.

For a period after the accident, which the plaintiff's claim puts at a month, he was very largely dependant upon his wife who had to help him dress, eat, bathe, go to the toilet and so on. On the basis that several hours were involved each and every day, and allowing an hourly rate of $10, the appropriate allowance for the amount the plaintiff should pay his wife is $1200 -- Griffiths -v- Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 C.L.R. 161.] 
The total is therefore as follows: 
General Damages  $105,000.00  ---  
Past Economic Loss  ,000.00  
Future Economic Loss  ,500.00  
Out of Pocket Expenses  ,803.55  
Future Out of Pocket Expenses  ,500.00  
Griffiths -v- Kerkemeyer Damages  ,200.00  
Total  $451,003.55  
There must be added interest on so much of the out of pocket expenses as were paid by the plaintiff ($1,158.19) and on the past economic loss figure ($154,000), less agreed amounts of $77,611 paid by the Department of Social
Security and $60,000 advanced by the defendant. The net figure is $17,547.19, and the parties are agreed that I should simply pick an appropriate interest figure and apply half of it for the period since the accident because the losses were incurred gradually. Half of 15 percent is 7.5 percent, which for something more than 10.5 years gives a multiplier of 80 percent, resulting in an interest figure of $14,037.75.

I therefore award the plaintiff $465,041.30 in total. I will hear Counsel as to costs.

Leslie John KIRKWOOD versus GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE OF NSW /86 
Wednesday 2 April 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
TEMBY AJ 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: After reasons for decision were delivered on 21 March, three further matters were raised by counsel for consideration. 
Interest 
It was submitted by Mr Stitz of junior counsel for the plaintiff that I should award an extra $34,896.24 by way of interest, this on the basis that the payments made by the defendant to the plaintiff by way of advance were made at particular times several years ago, and there was a full entitlement to interest until that time. The application was made under the "slip rule" --
Pt.20 r.10. That could be resorted to if there was a mathematical mistake which required correction, but the actual calculations are not complained of.
The submission rather is that I should have calculated some of the interest from an earlier date than I did. As the judgment has not been extracted, I can recall for correction any order made. The question is not one of power, but whether I should do as has been submitted.

The position is that during the course of closing submissions I was told that interest should be calculated upon the total of past economic loss and out of pocket expenses actually met by the plaintiff less amounts paid to the plaintiff by the Department of Social Security and amounts advanced by the defendant. There was a debate about interest rates, but I was told that I could and should simply apply half the appropriate interest rate for the purpose of calculation, this because the relevant payments were made at various stages during the long period under consideration. It is true that there was evidence before me as to just when the advances were paid, but no point was taken as to that during the course of closing submissions. I did as the parties had suggested I should.

I look upon the present submission as opportunistic. It was explained to me that if the plaintiff was awarded anything in excess of $475,000, he would be entitled to indemnity costs because of a formal settlement offer made pursuant to the Rules by the plaintiff some years ago. See in that regard Pt.22 and
Pt.52A r.22(4), and note the latter is conditional -- "unless the Court otherwise orders". The contention may well not be correct. It seems to me that even if $475,000 including interest was awarded now, that would hardly be equivalent to the offer made, first because with the passage of time interest increases markedly, and secondly because until fairly recently money dropped in value by up to 5% per annum.

However that may be, in my view no sufficient ground has been made out for me to vary the interest calculation, and accordingly the amount awarded under that head, and I decline to do so.

Costs 
The plaintiff sought costs of the hearing before me, which was not opposed by the defendant, and of the hearing before Master McLaughlin. The defendant sought the costs of the hearing before the learned Master less so much of it -- and it was not much -- as related to liability, or alternatively an order that each party bear their own costs. The latter would accord with the final order that the learned Master actually made. Put simply, the submission was that the case as argued at the first trial concentrated very largely upon the issue of brain damage, it was on that issue alone that the plaintiff won his appeal, and he has lost on that issue before me.

In his reasons for decision dated 10 December 1993, the learned Master proposed an order for costs in favour of the plaintiff, to whom he awarded nearly $80,000. Then certain formal offers under the Rules made by the defendant were drawn to his attention, the last being in the sum of $250,000.
In those circumstances he could have ordered the plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs, but in the end each party was left to bear his or its own costs: see his reasons dated 14 December 1993. The position now is that following successful appeal and re-trial, the plaintiff has been awarded more than the highest offer made. The plaintiff therefore says he should have his costs.

I agree. The case as fought at the first hearing was no doubt somewhat different than at the hearing before me, which would necessarily be the case simply because different counsel were involved on both sides. However the plaintiff's particulars of injury related to depression and personality change as well as the head injury and contended for brain damage, and the reports dealt with all those aspects, as did the evidence at both hearings. The question of brain damage certainly loomed large at the first hearing, and it was an issue of significance before me, but Mr Terracini S.C. opened the case on the basis that whether or not there was brain damage the plaintiff had certainly suffered a severe personality change such that he could not work or was entitled to substantial damages. In my view the circumstances are not so special as to take the case out of the general run. The plaintiff would have got his costs following the first trial had it not been for the settlement offer, he has before me obtained an award well in excess of that offer, and in my view he should receive his costs of both hearings.

Lien 
At the first hearing the plaintiff was represented by G.J. Sharah Henville & Co., Solicitors. Mr Elkaim of Counsel for that firm appeared before me when judgment was delivered and sought a declaration that the solicitors have a charge to the extent of their costs over such monies as are payable to the plaintiff under the order for costs made in respect of the hearing before
Master McLaughlin. Mr Shore of Counsel for the defendant had nothing to say on that application. Mr Terracini S.C. queried power, but was content that I should deal with the matter as if a formal application was before me, and made clear that the matter was not of high significance to his client so long as the application was limited to the amount awarded by way of costs in relation to the first hearing, which is the limited basis upon which the application is made.

I am satisfied that such an order can, and in the circumstances of the case, should be made. See Ex parte Patience; Makinson and The Minister (1940) 40
S.R.(N.S.W). and Akki Pty Ltd -v- Martin Hall Pty Ltd [(1994) 35
N.S.W.L.R. 470.] In the former case s.39A of the Legal Practitioners Act was relied upon in argument, but not in the decision which recognised an equitable right in the solicitor to receive his costs, when taxed, and the inherent jurisdiction of the court to preserve that right by an appropriate order. The orders made in the latter case likewise did not rely upon statute.
Windeyer J. said at 473: "Solicitors are entitled to the assistance of the court to protect their claim for costs where property has been recovered as a result of their exertions and that property extends to an order for costs: Re Sullivan versus Pearson; Ex parte
Morrison [(1868) LR 4 QB 153];
Campbell versus Campbell and Lewis [[1941] 1 All ER 274.] It is not necessary that the fund should have come into the hands of the solicitor or the client and indeed the purpose of this lien is to prevent the solicitor from suffering because the property is unlikely to come to his hands." 
This case is similar, although I do not conclude that the plaintiff would not pay his former solicitors if no order was made in their favour. He might or might not. As his counsel raises no objection, simply querying jurisdiction which I am satisfied exists, the order will be made. I can find nothing in the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) which has a precluding effect.

Accordingly the Court: 
Declares that G.J. Sharah Henville & Co, Solicitors, are entitled to a charge for their unpaid costs in the proceedings before Master McLaughlin to the extent of the certificate of taxation of those costs when issued, and without prejudice to the claim of any other chargees over such costs.

Grants liberty to apply generally on three days' notice.
 * * * 
