

R versus Zongas Matter No 60302/97 [1997] NSWSC 533 (31 October 1997) 
Regina versus Nikki Zongas /97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Meagher JA, Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 97 REGINA versus Nikki ZONGAS 
SENTENCING - MEDIFRAUD - CROWN APPEAL - respondent optometrist, over a period of two years defrauded Commonwealth of $61,000 by submitting more than one thousand false and forged claims - given non-custodial sentence - HELD - sentencing judge gave undue weight to subjective considerations and insufficient weight to objective seriousness of offence - custodial sentence required - respondent sentenced to 9 months to be served by way of periodic detention. 
ORDERS Crown appeal allowed.
 Respondent re-sentenced to imprisonment for 9 months to be served by way of periodic detention.

REGINA versus Nikki ZONGAS 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a Crown appeal against a sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Armitage in the District Court in May of this year. The respondent pleaded guilty to a charge that she between 5 May 1994 and 10 July 1996 defrauded the Health Insurance Commission by fraudulently procuring the payment of medical benefits in the total sum of $61,749, being payments for Medicare services which had in fact not been rendered to patients as claimed. The maximum penalty provided for that offence is a fine of $100,000 and/or imprisonment for ten years. 
Although the respondent was charged with a single offence, the offence arose out of activity over a period of more than two years involving the lodging with the Health Insurance Commission of 1128 bogus assignment forms in respect of services which had not in truth been rendered. In each case, the respondent, who was practising as an optometrist, forged the signature of the patient who supposedly received the services in question. She subsequently submitted the forms for payment.

It appears that the matter came to light because computer records disclosed some apparent irregularities and an investigation into the activities of the respondent was commenced in October 1995. A number of her patients were interviewed, and it came to the notice of the respondent that she was under investigation. In July 1996 she in effect gave herself up to the Health
Insurance Commission and made full admissions. The respondent was, of course, entitled on sentencing to credit for her plea of guilty.

Armitage DCJ dealt with the respondent as follows: Without passing sentence, he ordered that she be released upon giving security by way of recognizance in the sum of $2,000. She was also required to comply with a number of conditions. She was to be of good behaviour for a period of three years, and during that period she was to be subjected to supervision by the Probation and
Parole Service. The purpose of that supervision was evidently related to matters concerning the medical condition of the respondent, to which I will return. It was directed that throughout the period of supervision the respondent keep the Probation and Parole Service notified of her place of residence and nature and place of employment and that she carry out instructions given to her by officers of the Service. She was required to comply with certain reporting conditions.

Armitage DCJ made an order under s21B of the Commonwealth [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) obliging the respondent to make reparation to the Commonwealth by repayment of the amount of $61,749. There is no appeal against that order and whatever the outcome of the present appeal that order will stand. The respondent was given a period of twelve months to pay. In addition, it was a condition of the recognizance that the respondent pay a fine of $5,000. She was given six months to pay the fine, and we have been informed that the fine has been paid.

A large part of the remarks on sentence of Armitage DCJ were taken up with certain matters concerning the subjective features of the respondent, and it will be necessary to come to those in due course. One of the submissions made on behalf of the Crown, and in my view correctly made, is that the reasons for sentence of Armitage DCJ appear to give insufficient weight to the objective seriousness of the offence of the respondent, and, in particular, to the importance of considerations of general deterrence in relation to offences of this kind. Social Security systems, which are established for the benefit of the community, in large measure operate upon the basis of trust. The general availability to the community of the important welfare services provided by those systems is undermined by people who abuse that trust.

I repeat what was said in the case of R versus Annechinn, Court of Criminal
Appeal, unreported, 24 April 1996: "It is generally the fact that considerations of general deterrence are of importance to dealings with Social Security fraud. One of the reasons for that is that conduct such as that engaged in by the present appellant is difficult to detect, indeed it is probably detected in a relatively small proportion of cases, and when it is detected it is appropriate that other people in the community who might be tempted to engage in such conduct should understand the penal consequences that attach to it. Indeed, questions of public morale become involved if those in the community come to think that people who practise fraud of this kind upon the Commonwealth can get away with it or if apprehended will be dealt with leniently." 
It was also submitted, once again in my view correctly, on the part of the
Crown, that the remarks on sentence of Armitage DCJ demonstrate that his
Honour gave undue weight to the undoubtedly significant subjective circumstances of the respondent. These subjective circumstances concerned both her medical condition which ante-dated the offences that she committed, and her present and ongoing medical condition, which is relevant to the effect upon her of any penalty that is imposed.

There was a good deal of psychiatric evidence before Armitage DCJ. In particular, there was a report of Dr Jolly which contained the following information. Dr Jolly said: "Miss Zongas exhibits a marked emotional disturbance probably amounting to conspicuous psychiatric illness and this disturbance is of long-standing, ante-dating the subject offence by some years. There is substantial evidence of mood disorder and eating disorder as well. Miss Zongas' weight has fluctuated markedly in recent years and alternatively she appears to have binged and starved herself. There was an overdose of tablets in the last quarter of 1996, very possibly taken with true suicidal intent." 
Armitage DCJ also cited in his reasons for judgment a report of Mr Reece and
Ms Barter. He said in his remarks on sentence that he broadly accepted the evidence of Ms Barter, Mr Reece and Dr Jolly.

There was another piece of evidence that was before Armitage DCJ that is not made the subject of any specific finding of fact but that was the subject of great emphasis in the submissions advanced in this court on behalf of the respondent. The author of a pre-sentence report, Mr Sprague, who is the probation officer at the Bondi Junction District Office said this: "While the court may consider that gaol is an appropriate measure, I would seek to reiterate my concerns for her survival or self-harm in either the case of a full time custodial or periodic detention sentence." 
Mr Sprague gave oral evidence and was questioned about that observation. He said in re-examination that it was not based on anything that Miss Zongas had said to him but was a "purely personal view that I evolved". The correctness of that view of Mr Sprague was not the subject of any finding by Armitage DCJ.
His Honour specifically said that he accepted the evidence of Ms Barter, Mr
Reece and Dr Jolly. He did not say that in relation to the evidence of Mr
Sprague to which I have just referred.

It is correct to say, as has been submitted on behalf of the respondent, that there is no absolute and inflexible rule that requires that a person found to have committed Social Security fraud of this nature must, regardless of the other circumstances, be sentenced to a term of imprisonment. It is true that the authorities on this subject, whilst enunciating a general rule to the effect that ordinarily crimes of this kind call for custodial sentences, recognise the existence of exceptional cases which might justify the exercise of a discretion in favour of a non-custodial sentence. It is, however, also true that the reason for that general rule, which lies in considerations of general deterrence of the kind I have already mentioned, is a matter that was not apparently given attention, or sufficient attention, in the reasons of
Armitage DCJ in sentencing in the present case.

I regard as inescapable the conclusion that his Honour fell into the error of attaching insufficient importance to the objective seriousness of the case and giving undue emphasis to the subjective circumstances of the respondent.

The respondent is a woman now aged 32, who before the commission of these offences, was of good character. Unquestionably, it is tragic for her and for her family that she finds herself in her present situation. Unquestionably also, allowance has to be made for the medical disorder from which she suffered at the time these offences were committed and from which she still suffers. But the even-handed administration of justice and observance of the important consideration of general deterrence involved in sentencing for offences of this kind require that this court should intervene. When we do that, the respondent is entitled to the benefit of the consideration that there is an element of double jeopardy involved in re-sentencing a person following a Crown appeal.

In my view, in the present case, the respondent should have been sentenced at first instance to a period of full time custody; however, I do not think it is appropriate for this court to sentence her to a full time custodial sentence.
The appropriate sentencing option for this court to adopt, in my view, is to sentence her to a relatively brief term of imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention. The period that I consider is appropriate is a period of nine months to be served by way of periodic detention.

We have been told that facilities to receive the respondent are available at the Emu Plains Detention Centre, and her counsel has told us that she would need about six weeks in order to order her affairs. I see no reason why she should not be given that time. The orders that I would propose are as follows.

The Crown appeal should be allowed. Save for the order made under [s21B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s21b.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) of the
Commonwealth, the orders made by Armitage DCJ should be quashed. In lieu thereof, the respondent should be sentenced to imprisonment for a term of nine months, such imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention, and the term to commence on Friday 12 December 1997. The Court should order that the respondent is to report to the Emu Plains Periodic Detention Centre at 4.00 pm on that day.

MEAGHER J: I agree. 
ABADEE J: I agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court are as proposed.
 * * * 
