

Regina versus Barbara Matter No Cca 60517/97 [1998] NSWSC 318 (14 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
REGINA versus FRANK ANTHONY BARBARA 
CCA 60517/97 July 1998 
Smart J, Grove J, McInerney J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Kirkham DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60517/97 
DELIVERED: Tuesday 14 July 1998 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday 14 July 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus FRANK ANTHONY BARBARA 
JUDGMENT OF: Smart J, Grove J, McInerney J 
COUNSEL 
APPELLANT: M R Ramage, QC 
RESPONDENT: M Latham 
SOLICITORS 
APPELLANT: Murphy's Lawyers Inc 
RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal allowed. New trial ordered 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - CULPABLE DRIVING - CLAIM THAT DEATH NOT IN ANY
WAY ATTRIBUTABLE TO ELEMENTS OF DANGEROUS DRIVING - ALTERNATIVE ELEMENTS -
CHARGE TO JURY REQUIRING INSTRUCTION CONCERNING EACH - CRIMES ACT <case> -
EXPERT EVIDENCE - FAILURE TO SUMMARIZE CASE BEING ADVANCED BY ACCUSED 
NO OF PAGES: 8 
REGINA versus FRANK ANTHONY BARBARA 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an appeal following a trial before Kirkham DCJ and a jury at Gosford District Court. The appellant was presented for trial upon an indictment containing two counts in the alternative. Each count charged dangerous driving occasioning death contrary to <case>of the Crimes Act, the first count alleging that the appellant was driving in the relevant circumstances whilst under the influence of intoxicating liquor and the second count alleging that he was driving in a manner dangerous to another person or persons, those alternatives being made available pursuant to ss 52A(1)(a) and 52A(1)(c) respectively. Both counts were based upon the identical incident and the ingredients of charge differed only in the respect that I have mentioned. 
The jury convicted the appellant on the first count. He was subsequently sentenced, the Judge taking into account at the time an offence of driving whilst disqualified, to a total of six years imprisonment divided into minimum and additional terms of three years each.

In directing the jury as to the elements of the first count in the indictment the learned trial Judge charged them as follows: "The first element of the first count on the indictment is as follows. First that the accused was the driver at the relevant time. Second is that he was driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or in the alternative driving in a manner dangerous to another person or persons. Third that whilst he was so driving there was an impact between the vehicle he was driving and another vehicle and fourth that as a result of that impact the death of Darcas
Kelly Burton occurred." 
As is apparent in instructing the jury as to the second element his Honour was necessarily making reference to the second count. Upon the advice of counsel the appellant formally admitted that the victim died as a result of injury sustained in a motor vehicle collision and that he was the driver of the vehicle in which she was travelling when she sustained those injuries.
Therefore his Honour was able to direct the jury (so far as the Crown case required proof) that they were involved in deciding the single element in the alternative setting of the charges, either that the appellant was driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or was driving in a manner dangerous to a person or persons. It was accurate for his Honour to tell the jury that that was the heart of their task.

Directions were given to the jury as to the meaning of under the influence of intoxicating liquor. Those directions were accurate and appropriate to the occasion and no complaint is now made about them.

It is important to note that, separating the alternative count from present consideration, the sole question for the jury to answer in order to determine that the Crown had discharged its onus of proof on the first count was whether it had proved beyond reasonable doubt that at the time the appellant was driving whilst under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The evidence in this regard was that the collision occurred at about 1.50 a.m. on 25 April and that a blood sample taken from the appellant at 3.20 a.m. on that day returned a reading of blood alcohol concentration not less than 0.113 grams in millilitres of blood. Expert evidence from Dr Perl, a pharmacologist, was that based upon that reading the appellant would at the time of collision have had within his blood a range of between 0.105 grams per 100 millilitres and .152 grams were 100 millilitres, the most likely level being 0.135 grams in millilitres of blood. She gave evidence that a blood alcohol concentration of 0.105 grams in 100 millilitres or above would cause all people to be under the influence of alcohol to the extent that driving ability would be significantly impaired. That evidence was not the subject of significant contest.

Assuming then the proof of all the necessary ingredients of the Crown case the appellant was entitled to rely upon the defence provided by <case> which is in these terms: "DEFENCES 
It is a defence to any charge under this section if the death ... occasioned by the impact was not in any way attributable (as relevant): to the fact that the person charged was under the influence of intoxicating liquor .... or ......
 to the manner in which the vehicle was driven." 
I have omitted the irrelevant portions of the legislation.

So far as the first count was concerned the defence was available to the appellant in terms of subsection (a). The onus of proof of this defence lay upon the appellant to the standard of the balance of probabilities. The appellant did not give evidence himself but called Mr Grant Johnston, a consulting engineer with Jameson Foley & Associates. He had considerable experience in road safety studies including traffic accident investigation and analysis.

The first ground of appeal is a formal statement that the trial miscarried.
The second ground complains that the trial Judge failed to put the defence case properly or adequately.

It was a relatively short trial. As I have indicated the real matter of contest was the issue raised pursuant to subsection (8), a matter upon which the appellant bore the onus of proof. In his charge to the jury his Honour frequently made reference to the alternatives without entirely separating the concepts upon which the jury had to deliberate. However, when he came to give directions on the sub-section his Honour commenced with these words: "If the Crown does prove each of these matters" and this was a reference to the elements of the alternative count "the accused can still escape liability if he can establish a particular statutory defence. That is a defence provided by the Act of Parliament. What is provided is that even if the driving is dangerous an accused is to be found not guilty where he is able to persuade you that the death was in no way attributable to his manner of driving." 
As is apparent that language is appropriate to an issue which could arise under the second or alternative count in the indictment. I have already pointed out the appellant was in fact convicted on the first count.

After giving the directions which I have recited his Honour continued with further directions which remained appropriate to that second count. He then continued with an observation commencing with the words: "I mentioned to you a little while ago about the evidence of Judith Perl. It is appropriate for me to remind you of that evidence and in her report or statement to you, which is an exhibit in the proceedings, she told you of her expertise ... " 
A circumstance that a driver is under the influence of intoxicating liquor is potentially relevant to a charge of driving in a manner dangerous to a person or persons but it was never indicated to this jury whether that observation was being made in connection with the alternative count or whether it bore some relationship to the first count of which a specific ingredient was that the applicant was driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor.

As I have pointed out the reference to Dr Perl's evidence appears in the summing-up immediately following directions which in their terms were obviously related to the second count. His Honour indicated to counsel that he had concluded the directions he had proposed to give to the jury in relation to these matters and sought application for further direction. In the absence of the jury Mr Tipple, who was appearing for the appellant at trial, drew attention to the circumstance that although his Honour had given directions concerning the statutory defence, (which was understood as a reference to subsection 8), he had not amplified that to the point that he should tell the jury it was also available on the charge "being under the influence of intoxicating liquor". His Honour responded to that application. However, the entirety of what he said relevant to that application was as follows: he said, after referring to the ingredients which the Crown had to prove: "However, if the Crown does prove each of these matters the accused can still escape liability if he can establish a particular statutory defence which I have referred to before, that is a defence which is provided by the Act of
Parliament and what is provided is that even if the driving is dangerous or even if the accused was under the influence of intoxicating liquor an accused is to be found not guilty where he is able to persuade you that the death was in no way attributable to his manner of driving or in the alternative in no way attributable to the fact that he was under the influence of liquor at the time.

Now it is only if you find he was driving in a manner dangerous to a person or persons or that he was under the influence of intoxicating liquor at the time that you need to consider this question and if you do so find it then you must consider it." 
His Honour then went on to remind them of the civil standard of the onus of proof. There was at no time any instruction given to the jury as to the content of the defence upon which the appellant was then relying. The evidence of the expert, Mr Johnston, had referred to matters such as the road conditions, the likely encounter of the vehicle with a bump, the turbo charge in the particular vehicle which had been borrowed by the appellant, and the condition of the tyres. He had frequently said that the cause of the accident was the loss of traction by the vehicle on the road. If I may comment, that much is self-evident, but the real issue would concern what was antecedent to that loss of traction.

Be that as it may, I have concluded that the jury was really given no assistance in understanding what the defence being advanced by the appellant was. In essence the summing-up did no more in relation to the defence on the first count than recite to the jury the content of subsection 8. It can be said that the Crown case insofar as onus was cast upon it was overwhelming and, as I have observed, the onus of proof in relation to the proviso in subsection 8 rested upon the appellant. Nevertheless, he was entitled to have his case summarised for the jury and, importantly, the jury should have been instructed as to how they should approach their deliberations separately in respect of each of the counts charged in the indictment. As the recitation of extracts from the charge to the jury shows this was not undertaken. That it did not occur is understandable in the sense that if one reads the evidence of
Mr Johnston it was, to say the least, circumlocutory and somewhat unfocussed.
Nevertheless, it is the requirement of the law that there be a trial which is fair in the sense that there be a reasonable explanation given to the jury of the issues upon which they need to deliberate. The duty of the presiding Judge was not discharged simply by drawing to the jury's attention the provisions of the Act of Parliament without elaboration. Perhaps there may be an occasion where that might suffice but it is difficult to contemplate.

The appellant advances other grounds of appeal. Senior counsel who appears, who did not appear at the trial, has conceded that in the light of the issues, the fifth ground (which asserts that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory) cannot effectively be pursued. The consequence of the findings that I have made in relation to the inadequacy of the charge to the jury provokes an order for a new trial. I see no reason why the discretion of this court should not be exercised to so order.

I propose the following orders: that the appeal be allowed, conviction and sentence quashed, a new trial ordered.

SMART J: The appellant Frank Anthony Barbara was convicted of driving a vehicle whilst under the influence of intoxicating liquor whereby the vehicle was involved in an impact and as a result of which the death of Darcas Kelly Burton was occasioned. It was plain on the evidence that all the elements of the charge had been made out and that in truth the appellant was under the influence of liquor. His defence was that the death occasioned by the impact was not in any way attributable to the fact that he was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
The defendant's case was never put to the jury. That case was that the vehicle he was driving lost traction because of a combination of (a) water on the road, (b) worn rear tyres, (c) hitting a bump on Plymouth Drive at Hilltop
Road and (d) the turbo charged engine with its burst of power tending to propel the vehicle forward.

There was expert evidence that it made no difference whether the accused was sober or under the influence. That of course was a question of fact for the jury and it was much litigated at the trial. The difficulty is that the defendant's case as I have summarised it was never put to the jury and that was important in a case where the expert's evidence was discursive.

For those reasons I am of the opinion there must be an order for a new trial.

McINERNEY: I agree with the orders proposed. 
SMART J: The orders proposed by Grove J will be the order of the Court. * * * 
