

C H J Killick versus P L Killick [1996] NSWSC 621 (17 December 1996) * GROUNDS OF APPEAL * ORDERS SOUGHT * RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND * The Appellants Case * Error of law in taking into account a separation agreement? * The Respondents Infidelity * SUMMATION * COSTS * CONCLUSION * * * 
CLAUDE HENRY JAMES KILLICK versus PAULINE LESLEY KILLICK /94, EQ 1322/93 
Tuesday, 17 December 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, HANDLEY JA, SANTOW AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Error of Law - Master did not err in law in taking into account an unenforceable alleged separation agreement/contract. He was not entitled to take it into account (as he did) under s47(2) of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984 but he was entitled to take it into account as bearing upon the matters specified in Part 3 and in particular s20 or as embodying mutual informal admissions as regards the matters there to be taken into account.

Costs - Master's discretion did not miscarry in awarding indemnity costs.

Entitlement - not excessive or contrary to law -- due weight given to financial and homemaking contribution of Appellant 
Separation Agreement - Whether an alleged unenforceable separation agreement/contract comes within the terms of s47(2) of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984 [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) 
De Facto Relationships Act 1984 , Part 3 Div 2 ss17, 20; ss44(1), 46, (1) (2) [Family Law Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cth) [s79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s79.html) 
Interpretation Act 1987, s35 
Statute of Frauds [(s23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) 
Supreme Court Rules Part 52, r17(4) 
Black versus Black [(1991) 15 Fam LR 109] 
Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 27 NSWLR 728] 
Eggler versus Mitchelmore (Court of Appeal, 11 November 1993, unreported) 
Fisher versus Fisher [(1990) FLC 92-127] 
Re Jacob Morris <case>; [(1943) 43 SR 352](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=%281943%29%2043%20SR%20%28NSW%29%20352 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Green versus Robinson <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [[1922] SASR 299] 
Sheedy versus Sheedy (1979) FLC 90-719 
Theodoropoulos versus Theodosiou [(1995) 38 NSWLR 424] 
Tickell versus Triflesken Pty Ltd [1990 25 NSWLR 353] 
Wallis versus Stanford [(1995) 37 NSWLR 1] 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: I agree with Santow AJA that no sufficient basis has been established for disturbing the Master's exercise of discretion. I do wish, however, to make some observations on the subject of a separation agreement.

The respondent argued at the trial that the parties had reached an oral agreement that her claim for a financial settlement would be settled on the basis that the appellant paid her $50,000.00. The appellant did not pay her that sum but, according to the respondent, he prevaricated for about twelve months. There was then a further discussion when, according to the respondent, the appellant agreed to pay her $65,000.00. The discussion was said to have ended with the appellant saying "I will do the best I can to raise the money".

The Master accepted the respondent's version of the events but declined to find that a binding agreement had been concluded on the ground that the parties intended that an agreement came into existence only when the parties' solicitors had approved a written agreement. For my part I think the Master was correct in reaching that conclusion. Indeed the contrary was not argued. I would, however, prefer the view that the appellant was indicating no more than his provisional agreement to the proposal that he pay the respondent $65,000.00 and wished, or indicated that he wished, to secure the approval of his solicitor before binding himself. Whether the Master's view or mine is the correct one is a matter of little moment. Whichever is correct there was no agreement binding, at common law, between the parties.

It seems to me to follow that there was no separation agreement to which the court could have regard pursuant to <case> of the De Facto Relationships
Act (1984) ("the Act"). This is because when the Act (s 44) speaks of an agreement it is, in my opinion, speaking of an agreement binding at common law. Any doubt that I might have entertained on that issue is set at rest by s .

The learned Master referred to <case> in terms which indicate his view that the provisional agreement of the parties fell within its terms. I take a different view but this does not mean that the Master's order should not stand. In Black versus Black [(1991) 15 Fam LR 109], at , it was pointed out that in deciding an application under <case> of the Act the Court, while bound to take the matters enumerated in that section into account, is exercising a discretion which may well involve a consideration of other factors. The fact that <case> permits a court to take into account a separation agreement of the nature described in the sub-section does not mean, in my opinion, that the court is bound to disregard the discussions of the parties (provided they are not strictly `without prejudice'). They will, or may, fall within the circumstances of the case which bear on the exercise of the judicial discretion. In this case I do no see why it is not permissible to accept that the discussions indicated the consensus of the parties as to an appropriate financial adjustment and to take that consensus into account. In short the course followed by the Master did not, in my opinion, mean that he made an error of the type discussed in House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499], at 504-5.

I agree with the orders proposed.
 
HANDLEY JA: In this appeal I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Clarke JA and Santow AJA. Santow AJA has set out the facts, the history of the proceedings, and the relevant provisions of the Act, and there is no need for me to repeat these matters.

The appellant challenged the use made by the Master of the informal arrangement between the parties as to the division of their property, the amount of the order, and the order for indemnity costs. I agree generally with the other judgments, but will add some additional observations of my own on the relevance of the informal arrangement.

The Master held that an arrangement was entered into by the parties in
September 1990 for the appellant to pay the respondent $65,000 in settlement of her rights under the Act. An enforceable agreement between the parties to this effect would be a separation agreement within the definition of that expression in <case>. However, the Master held that the arrangement fell within the third class in Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353], because the parties intended it to be embodied in a formal agreement executed by them, and this had not been done.

I agree with Clarke JA that a separation agreement or arrangement which is not legally enforceable for such a reason is not a separation agreement within s (2). This follows from <case>, which provides that separation agreements are subject to the law of contract.

However this did not mean that the informal arrangement was irrelevant to the determination of what, if any, property adjustment order would be just and equitable between these parties. The arrangement could be viewed as embodying mutual admissions by the parties as to their entitlements under the Act.
Section 47 (2) entitles the court to have regard to a separation agreement which does not comply with <case> (1), but this does not prohibit the court from having regard to informal admissions made by the parties, including those made in unenforceable preliminary agreements which are not binding under the rules in Masters versus Cameron.

The Master was therefore entitled to have regard to the arrangement between the parties in deciding what was just and equitable under <case> (1). Compare
Re Jacob Morris <case>; [(1943) 43 SR 352] at 358-9, 365; and Lieberman versus Morris <case>; [(1944) 69 CLR 69] at 84, 88, 95. Although, with respect, his reasons cannot be fully supported, in the result there was no appealable error.

The appeal therefore should be dismissed with costs.
 
SANTOW AJA: # GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
This is an appeal from the determination of a claim under the De Facto Relationships Act 1984 ("the Act") made by Master Macready on 9 March 1994 pursuant to s20 of that Act. By that determination, he acceded to the claim for $75,000 of the Plaintiff, by ordering the Defendant/Appellant to pay the Plaintiff/Respondent $75,000. He also ordered the Defendant/Appellant "to pay the Plaintiff's costs on a party and party basis to and including 28 July 1993 and on an indemnity basis from and including 29 July 1993". The latter order was made having regard to the Respondent's offer of compromise of $65,000, made on 28 July 1993; see AB, 153.

The grounds of appeal were contained in a Further Amended Notice of Appeal filed at the hearing of the appeal by the Appellant. The ground of that appeal is that "the Master erred in his discretion, in that he applied the wrong principle and/or took an irrelevant matter into consideration, namely an alleged unenforceable separation agreement/contract under s47(2) of the De
Facto Relationships Act 1984".

A second ground of appeal is that the assessment of the Master of the
Respondent's entitlement was excessive and contrary to law.

In support of those grounds, the Further Amended Notice of Appeal contends that the Master failed to give any, or any sufficient weight, to: financial contribution made by the Appellant, or the homemaking contribution of the Appellant.

There is a further ground of appeal in relation to costs, namely that in awarding indemnity costs the Master's discretion miscarried.
 # ORDERS SOUGHT 
In consequence of the foregoing, orders are sought by the Appellant as follows:
For adjustment of property interest pursuant to s20 of the Act be made in favour of the Respondent for the sum of $10,000, and
That the cost orders made by Master Macready on 9 March 1994 ordering the
Appellant to pay the Respondent's costs on a party and party basis up until 28
July 1993 and then on an indemnity basis until Judgment on 9 March 1994 be dismissed.
 # RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
The Appellant, the male de facto partner, was born in 1939 and the Respondent, the female de facto partner in 1949.

In 1964 the Appellant purchased land at Condell Park and in 1969 caused a house to be constructed on that land. The Appellant commenced residing in the
Condell Park property in 1970. It is not disputed that the Respondent made no financial contribution either to the purchase of the land or the construction of the house on the land. Indeed the parties did not commence residing in the
Condell Park property until April/May 1977 and their co-habitation can be taken to have commenced from that time.

The Respondent's children, Joanna and Anthony were aged respectively 3 and 7 at the commencement of the relationship and lived with the parties for the whole of the relationship. They were accepted as members of the household constituted by the parties and the children. There was one child of the de facto relationship, namely Lisa Gaye Killick, born 7 March 1978 who likewise became a member of the household. All three children continued to live with the Appellant after the break-up of the de facto relationship in November
The Respondent's evidence, when pressed about the Appellant's competence as a homemaker, is that when the relationship broke up, she had "no accommodation ... no assets ... no money to provide for their care", AB, P to X, and thus had no choice but to leave them with him. By the time of the hearing in 1994, she acknowledged that "the situation is vastly different to-day"; though there were no arrangements beyond one week per month for Lisa to live with the Respondent, see AB, 100 F to M and 104M to O.

The Appellant relied on this evidence and other evidence as to his homemaking contribution (that he did vacuuming and some gardening and would from time to time bathe and read to the children, AB, 79) to seek to substantiate his contention that the Master had given insufficient weight to his contribution as a homemaker and parent. The Master's conclusion is as follows (AB, 171-2): "I turn to the facts in respect of the homemaker and parenting contribution.
This was a family where both parents worked except for a year when the plaintiff's child, Lisa, was born. The defendant, for a substantial period, worked shiftwork and also as the opportunities arose he worked overtime. At times this meant that he was spending up to twelve hours a day at work. The plaintiff, on the other hand, had secretarial positions close by and her jobs were usually 9 am to 5 pm which allowed her to shop and look after the children.

Basically the plaintiff did most of the cooking and the defendant concedes that the parenting was all done by the plaintiff. Other household matters such as cleaning were attended to by both parties. The defendant did the vacuuming and the plaintiff the rest of the cleaning although from 1980 to 1981 the parties had a cleaner for some period. So far as outside tasks are concerned, there was an employee who did the lawns for the parties in 1977 to 1978 and the children apparently, along with the plaintiff, did this work after that period. The defendant occupied himself working on cars and other such matters.

The circumstances I find are that a substantial part of the homemaker role was fulfilled by the plaintiff and she did substantially all the parenting.
There was some help to the defendant in this area as it was a case where the defendant was able to work long hours because of the fact that he had the benefit of these contributions by the plaintiff." 
It will be apparent from the foregoing that the Master did give some weight to the Appellant's homemaking contribution during the relationship, though clearly it was secondary to the substantial role played by the
Respondent.

I conclude that finding was open to the Master. I do not consider it incompatible with the earlier evidence I have cited for the Respondent's reason for leaving her children with the Appellant after the break up of the relationship and more recently. This particularly related to the youngest,
Lisa (the older two having already left School by 1994). The Respondent's case was that "he could do those tasks when he chose to" (AB, 79 F) meaning household tasks) but that he did not do "those tasks throughout the course of the relationship when he was not doing his shift work" (AB, 79 F-H). There can be no doubt that his shift work of up to 12 hours per day, as found by the
Master curtailed the time he had to do so. The Respondent also disputed that he used the bulk of his leisure time in homemaking (AB, 78 X-Y). While the
Master made no specific finding as to that, his overall findings treat his role as secondary, this being a finding clearly open to him on the evidence.

The house at Condell Park in which the parties resided was brought into the relationship by the Appellant at a value of $55,000 and was unencumbered. At the time of the hearing (March 1994) the Condell Park property was worth $195,000 having been worth $210,000 in November 1989. That is to say the property increased in value by $140,000 during the relationship.

Apart from bringing into the relationship the unencumbered property, the
Appellant at the date of commencement of the co-habitation had assets consisting of a truck, a car, wages, furniture and a boat.

The Respondent brought a Chrysler Galant worth $7,000 which was paid off in the sum of $5,000 over the first four years of co-habitation (plus some items of furniture which she had in her premises before she moved in with the
Appellant). She worked in secretarial positions close by and her jobs were usually 9 am to 5 pm which allowed her to shop and look after the children (AB, 171).

At the date of cessation of co-habitation, that is to say November 1989, the
Appellant's assets and liabilities were as follows: he retained the property unencumbered at Condell Park (valued at $210,000 but at the time of the hearing valued at $195,000), a car, as at 9 February 1994 an interest in the Qantas Superannuation Scheme having a termination benefit of $32,669.63, $2,000 owed to the Credit Union as at November 1989, the Appellant sold on 28 April 1989 the boat he owned at the commencement of co-habitation for $5,000. The proceeds of sale were deposited into the
Appellant's loan account with the Credit Union to reduce the debt. All monies borrowed in respect of the Credit Union were used for the costs of the relationship, that is to say private school fees and the like.

The Respondent's only asset was a Chrysler Valiant Charger which had been purchased in 1978 for approximately $8,000 and paid off over a period of years after its purchase, plus an interest in the AGC Group Staff Retirement Fund.
The latter as at 30 June 1993 showed a withdrawal benefit due to the
Respondent of $10,333. The Respondent was also paying off a debt to the
Department of Social Security as a result of action taken against her for fraudulently claiming a pension.

I should note that the Appellant's interest in the Qantas Superannuation
Scheme substantially accrued during the period of the relationship.

The Appellants Case 
The Appellant's case is essentially that the Master either had no basis for the order in favour of the Respondent for $75,000 and thus it must be on a basis outside the Act, or was otherwise excessive such that the order made is so apparently erroneous as to indicate that an error has occurred in the exercise of the Court's discretion; see Eggler versus Mitchelmore (Court of Appeal, 11 November 1993, unreported) per Sheller JA (at 10) cited in Green versus Robinson [(1955) 36 NSWLR 96] at 100 per Kirby P (as he then was). 
Error of law in taking into account a separation agreement? 
In the present case, the Appellant also contends that the Master committed an error of law in taking into account the terms of a separation agreement or arrangement reached by the parties. It is convenient that I deal with that first. That arose in the circumstances described by the Master at pages 7-8 of his Judgment; Appeal Book, 162-3 which I quote below: "She says that in September 1990 she met with the defendant for the purpose of discussing a resolution of their property matters. In that meeting she gives an account of the following conversations:- `23. In or about September 1990, the defendant and I met at the Condell Park property for the purpose of discussing and attempting to reach a final resolution of the matter. I cannot recall the precise terms of our conversations, but to the best of my recollection, it was to the following effect: 
The defendant said: "I have seen my solicitor and I am prepared to offer you $50,000. My solicitor is drawing up a contract which you will have to sign. The contract will state that the $50,000 is the total amount that I will pay you and that you will be unable to proceed against me for any additional funds." 
I said: "I agree on both the amount and the form of the contract but if you renege on the agreement, I will fight you." 
He said: 
If you take that line and take me to Court, I will sue you for maintenance."' 
She then says the discussions continued for a period of 12 months on the phone and that in response to her endeavours to have the matter finalised the defendant said that he would contact his solicitors. On one occasion he wanted his mother to see the agreement before it was presented to the plaintiff.
Following this period of indecision the plaintiff says that she invited the defendant to come to her place for dinner to discuss it and they had a discussion about additional liabilities that she had incurred. After discussing payment for holidays and a loan from AGC she says that they had the following conversation:- `The defendant said: "I see that makes nearly $15,000 extra." 
I said: That's right. Do you realise that now makes the amount of settlement $65,000 not $50,000 as we had previously agreed?" 
He said: "Yes. I understand." 
I said: "You will need to see your Credit Union or the bank to arrange a loan." 
He said: "I will do the best I can to raise the money."' 
In the events that happened, as found by the Master, the Appellant on 15
October 1992, abandoned these arrangements; see Judgment, AB, 163-4. Thus the agreement, if it were one, was never proceeded with, as the Appellant, having first procrastinated, then declined to proceed in the circumstances elaborated in the Judgement; AB, 8-9.

The Master's reasoning was as follows. He first concluded that there was a "separation agreement", as defined in s44(1) of the Act; AB, 174.
"Separation Agreement" is defined by s44(1) as follows: "separation agreement means an agreement between a man and a woman, whether or not there are other parties to the agreement: which is made (whether before, on or after the appointed day): except as provided by subsection (2), in contemplation of the termination of a de facto relationship that exists between them, or after the termination of a de facto relationship that existed between them, and which makes provision with respect to financial matters, whether or not it also makes provision with respect to other matters.

And includes such an agreement which varies an earlier cohabitation agreement or separation agreement." 
It will be apparent from the foregoing that the definition is otherwise an exclusive one, and is not expressed to be subject to contrary intention.

Second, the Master concluded that the relevant agreement or arrangement was unenforceable. Section 46 of the Act provides that a separation agreement "shall be subject to and enforceable in accordance with the law of contract, including without limiting the generality of the section, the [Contracts
Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) ". He concluded that it was unenforceable because it fell within the category of being "completely conditional upon the due drawing up and execution of the document" (AB, 20). This brought it within the third class of case in Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] at 360, namely where "the intention of the parties is not to make a concluded bargain at all, unless and until they execute a formal contract". However, he treated the agreement or arrangement as relevant, and a useful pointer to help quantify the type of adjustment appropriate, in the following terms (AB, 19): "A separation agreement is defined in terms which would include the present agreement. It seems fairly clear that the fact of this agreement is something which is relevant because the parties at the time of making such agreement, admittedly without the benefit of legal advice, were aware themselves of what the parties respective contributions have been to the relationship. They would also have a general understanding of the value of the property with which they were dealing. It is a useful pointer to help quantify the type of adjustment appropriate. It is of course now some 18 months since the plaintiff gave a deadline of 31 August 1992 for payment and she has had to wait for her money while this litigation has taken its course." 
The Master then invoked s47(2) of the Act, quoted below, concluding that an unenforceable separation agreement nonetheless came within its terms. Sections (1) and (2) provide as follows: "47. Effect of agreements in certain proceedings 
Where, on an application by a de facto partner for an order under Part 3, a court is satisfied: that there is a cohabitation agreement or separation agreement between the de facto partners, that the agreement is in writing, that the agreement is signed by the partner against whom it is sought to be enforced, that each partner was, before the time at which the agreement was signed by him or her, as the case may be, furnished with a certificate in or to the effect of the prescribed form by a solicitor which states that, before that time, the solicitor advised that partner, independently of the other partner, as to the following matters: the effect of the agreement on the rights of the partners to apply for an order under Part 3, whether or not, at that time, it was to the advantage, financially or otherwise, of that partner to enter into the agreement, whether or not, at that time, it was prudent for that partner to enter into the agreement.
 whether or not, at that time and in the light of such circumstances as were, at that time, reasonably foreseeable, the provisions of the agreement were fair and reasonable, and that the certificates referred to in paragraph (d) are endorsed on or annexed to or otherwise accompany the agreement, the court shall not, except as provided by sections 49 and 50, make an order under Part 3 in so far as the order would be inconsistent with the terms of the agreement.

Where, on an application by a de facto partner for an order under Part 3, a court is satisfied that there is a cohabitation agreement or separation agreement between the de facto partners, but the court is not satisfied as to any one or more of the matters referred to in subsection (1)(b), (c), (d) or , the court may make such order as it could have made if there were no cohabitation agreement or separation agreement between the partners, but in making its order, the court, in addition to the matters to which it is required to have regard under Part 3, may have regard to the terms of the cohabitation agreement or separation agreement." 
The Appellant contends that such an unenforceable agreement or arrangement could not be relied upon by the Master, even as "a useful pointer to help quantify the type of adjustment appropriate". The premise to that argument is that the Master needed to rely on s47(2) of the Act so to use it, and that such an unenforceable arrangement was not a "separation agreement", as defined, so as to come within its terms.

However, s47(2) is only applicable or needed where the court has regard to the terms of the separation agreement "in addition to the matters to which it is required to have regard under Part 3" of the Act. Here the Master was not doing that. Rather he was drawing upon the separation agreement only as bearing upon matters specified in Part 3, and then only as relevant in the limited sense identified by him. In an analogous way in Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 27 NSWLR 728], a luxurious life style provided by the defendant for the partners "also indicates his assessment at the time of the value that he placed on the plaintiff's contribution to his welfare", per Handley JA at .

Part 3 relevantly includes sections 17 and 20, the latter being in the following terms: "20 Application for adjustment 
On an application by a de facto partner for an order under this Part to adjust interests with respect to the property of the de facto partners or either of them, a court may make such order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property as to it seems just and equitable having regard to: the financial and non-financial contributions made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of the de facto partners to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the partners or either of them or to the financial resources of the partners or either of them, and the contributions, including any contributions made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, made by either of the de facto partners to the welfare of the other de facto partners and one or more of the following, namely: a child of the partners, a child accepted by the partners or either of them into the household of the partners, whether or not the child is a child of either of the partners." 
Part 3 is headed "Proceedings for Financial Adjustment". It finds its principal provision in s20. Section 20 is contained in Division 2 which is in turn headed "Adjustment of interests with respect to property". The relevant matters a court may take into account are there comprehensively set out (though reference is also to be made to s17). The headings to a Part or
Division of an Act of Parliament are, of course, part of the Act: see
Interpretation Act 1987, s35. The principles applicable to their use in interpretation are well established: "(i) If the language of the sections is clear and is actually inconsistent with the headings, the headings must give way.

If the language of the sections is clear, but, although more general, is not inconsistent with the headings, the sections must be read subject to the headings.

If the language of the sections is doubtful or ambiguous, the meaning which is consistent with the headings must be adopted." 
See Ragless versus District Council of Prospect <case>; [[1922] SASR 299] at 311, per Murray CJ.

The headings to Part 3 and to Division 2 are clearly not inconsistent with the language of s20. Rather they reinforce the primacy of Part 3 as a code for the matters to be taken into account in financial and property adjustments between de facto partners. It sets these matters out comprehensively and exhaustively, save to the limited extent provided by s47 of the Act.

As I have said, the Master had regard to the terms of the relevant arrangement, not to introduce additional matters outside Part 3. Rather he used it to show that the parties "were aware themselves of what the parties' respective contributions have been to the relationship" and "... would also have a general understanding of the value of the property with which they were dealing" He thus used it, recognising it was without legal advice, "as a useful pointer" to help quantify the type of adjustment appropriate. He did so solely in terms of the matters specified in paras (a) and (b) of s20(1).

Given that conclusion, it is unnecessary for me to reach any conclusion as to whether s47(2) of the Act would embrace as a "separation agreement" the informal and unenforceable arrangement for a $65,000 financial adjustment, itself expressly subject to raising the necessary finance. It is by no means clear that the result of such informal arrangements even constitute an "agreement". The Appellant had responded to the Respondent's requirement to go from $50,000 to $65,000 with the equivocal words "Yes I understand". A more apt description would be "informal arrangement" dependent on formalisation for legal efficacy.

But even if there were an agreement, though unenforceable, and assuming for a moment it otherwise complied with s47(1) (by being in writing, etc.) it would produce absurd consequences were s47(1) to use the expression "separation agreement" so as to embrace an unenforceable agreement. In particular such an interpretation would produce the consequence of mandatorily precluding any inconsistent order under Part 3, because s47(1) so requires. This absurdity would be compounded, if one were to conceive of a separation agreement invalidated pursuant to the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) .
The Act would thereby give paramountcy to an unenforceable separation agreement over the comprehensive code for property and financial adjustments in Part 3. An interpretation which produced such absurdity, when not compelled by the language of the statute, is clearly to be avoided. Here the juxtaposition of the definition of "separation agreement" in s44 of the Act, with the further explication in s46 that such an agreement is "subject to ...
the law of contract" and enforceable accordingly, allows the latter provision to be read with the former so as to be in truth definitional.

While s47(2), in contrast, merely permits the court in making its order to have regard to the terms of a separation agreement, that permission still has a far-reaching consequence. It is that the Court "may" thereby have regard to matters additional to those provided by the code in Part 3. "May" is clearly used in its permissive sense. It is true s47(2) permits such an agreement to be oral, unsigned and without the necessary certificate of independent advice. But it does not follow that this contemplates that the agreement might be unenforceable -- though it is true lack of writing may, where land is dealt with, produce the consequence of unenforceability under the Statute of Frauds [(s23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) ).

I prefer the view that an unenforceable separation arrangement, consistently with its exclusion from [s47(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s47.html), likewise does not come within the terms of [s47(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s47.html), properly construed. Otherwise, it would constitute a substantial derogation from the comprehensive code for financial and property adjustment in [Part .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/index.html#p3)
To the extent [s47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s47.html) derogates from that code by adding additional matters to be taken into account, one would expect the derogation to be precisely and not expansively delimited. Furthermore, it is hardly to be thought that "separation agreement" should have a wider ambit in [s47(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s47.html) than [s47(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s47.html)
This is especially when the definition of that term is not expressed to be subject to contrary intention, even were one to be found in [s47(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s47.html), contrary to the view I have expressed.

It follows that while the Master was in error in relying upon s47(2) of the
Act in making the limited use he did of the informal separation arrangement, he had no need to rely upon s47(2) for such use at all. This is because he was not thereby having regard to matters outside the code in Part 3 for financial and property adjustment between de facto partners. Rather he was using the separation arrangement simply as a pointer in relation to the matters specified in s20 of Part 3. Section 47 could not be exhaustive of the evidentiary use to which an unenforceable separation agreement may be put, in relation to matters within Part 3. That he unnecessarily called in aid s47(2) thus in no way invalidates the Master's limited use of the informal separation arrangement in relation to Part 3 matters.
 # The Respondents Infidelity 
The remaining matter relied upon by the Appellant is that the four relationships or incidents of infidelity by the Respondent were not taken into account by the Master as detracting from the contribution by the Respondent as a homemaker or parent, and should have been.

There was a conflict of evidence as to whether this occurred with the
Appellant's knowledge or as to whether he gave his encouragement and approval; see Judgment, AB, 169. The Master correctly put these issues aside as not affecting the orders made by the Court. He points out that there was no claim based on an expectation interest in marriage -- assuming that could otherwise be taken into account following Dwyer versus Kaljo (supra) at 744 per Handley JA.
I do not therefore need to deal in this context with the dissent of Mahoney JA and the subsequent conflict of authority on whether the words "just and equitable", in s20 are to be read as having regard only to the matters in and (b) which follow, or whether they may as in Dwyer versus Kaljo, introduce equitable principles or concepts by analogy; compare Green versus Robinson [(1994-95) 36 NSWLR 96], Wallis versus Stanford [(1995) 37 NSWLR 1] and
Theodoropoulos versus Theodosiou [(1995) 38 NSWLR 424.] 
The Appellant argued that the amount awarded should have been discounted so as to take into account the Respondent's infidelity. In addressing this submission, guidance may be drawn from applications made pursuant to [s79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s79.html) of the [Family Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cth) for orders altering the property interests between the parties to a marriage.
In deciding whether to make such an order, the Court is required to take into account, inter alia[cedilla] "the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker and parent" [(s79(4)(c)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s79.html) 
It is well established in the marital context that the parties' behaviour towards each other is not per se relevant in assessing the contribution made as a homemaker or parent: Sheedy versus Sheedy (1979) FLC 90-719; Fisher v
Fisher [(1990) FLC 92-127.] In Sheedy (supra), Nygh J stated that the contribution of a spouse in the capacity as a homemaker or parent referred only to "the contribution to the home and the children, not to the fulfilment of conjugal responsibilities" (at 78,872). In that case, allegations that a husband maltreated his wife and was unfaithful to her were, in the circumstances, irrelevant when assessing his contribution as a homemaker and/or parent. In order for such conduct to be relevant, His Honour concluded that "the applicant must show that, for reasons of misconduct or any other reason, the contribution of the respondent as a homemaker and parent to the maintenance and preservation of the matrimonial home ... was materially lessened and that her contribution, accordingly, was materially increased" (at 78,872). In Fisher (supra), claims that a husband had assaulted his wife on several occasions were found to be irrelevant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s79.html) proceedings because, in the circumstances, there was no allegation that the husband's misconduct had any effect on the wife's contribution as homemaker.

There is no reason to conclude that this principle should not be applied to the circumstances of a de facto relationship such as the present case. It has previously been held that in assessing contributions made as homemaker and parent, there is no reason to distinguish between the approach taken in de facto relationships legislation and that used in applications under [s79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s79.html) of the [Family Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cth):
Linich versus Gatland [(1992) 15 Fam LR 596] at 610 per Renaud J; Black versus Black [(1991) 15 Fam LR 109] at 113 per Clarke JA. In the present case, there was no evidence led that the
Respondent's infidelity interfered at any time with the quality of the homemaking and/or parenting contribution made by her.

I conclude that there is no basis in the present circumstances, for the
Respondent's infidelity to be taken into account when assessing her role as a homemaker and parent.
 # SUMMATION 
I have dealt with each of the factors which the Appellant contends should have been, but were not, given weight by the Master in determining an appropriate adjustment of interests between the parties. In my judgment no sufficient basis has been advanced for disturbing the Master's orders, or disturbing the exercise of his discretion, applying the principles of appellate review of such discretion.

The Master was entitled to give the contribution of the Respondent as a homemaker and parent a substantial and not token weight, in no way to be regarded as inferior to that of a wife; Black versus Black [(1991) 15 Fam LR ], per Clarke JA at 113-4, 117; Mallett versus Mallett <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 605.] While it is true that the Appellant brought almost all the assets into the relationship and no material assets were acquired (though the house appreciated) during the period of the relationship, nonetheless the
Master was entitled to value the respective contributions as he did, with no discount for admitted infidelities by the Respondent.

I should note that the Master expressly took account of the future needs in respect of the child of the relationship Lisa (AB, 170, 174). There is no basis for altering the Master's orders on that account. Indeed if there be doubt as to whether a court may look beyond the date of break up of the relationship, in determining appropriate orders, such doubt was resolved by the Master in favour of the Appellant; see Wallace versus Stanford (supra) per
Mahoney JA at 9.
 # COSTS 
The Order for Costs made by the Master applied Supreme Court Rules Part 52, r17(4). This was by ordering costs on an indemnity basis from and including 29 July 1993, following the Respondent's Offer of Compromise of $65,000 made the previous day. There is nothing apparent in the circumstances to suggest that this Offer of Compromise was other than bona fide; compare Tickell versus Triflesken Pty Ltd [1990 25 NSWLR 353] at 355. It was $10,000 less than the adjustment ordered in the Respondent's favour. Given that the figure ordered in a case such as this is ultimately at large, though determined by reference to the criteria in s20 of the Act, it is difficult to see how such an offer of compromise could be attacked as not genuine. It was indeed the figure the subject of the informal arrangement.

The scope for appellate review of cost orders is very limited in any event.
There is nothing in the present circumstances to suggest that the appellate court should disturb that of the Master.
 # CONCLUSION 
I propose the following orders: 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
