

Estate of Laura Angius; Angius versus Angius [2013] NSWSC 1895 (17 December )

Last Updated: 24 January 2014 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Estate of Laura Angius; Angius versus Angius  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Decision Date: December 2013  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Hallen J  
Decision: 
The Court:  
Declares that it is satisfied that the undated document purports to state the testamentary intentions of the deceased, and that it has not been executed in accordance with [Part .1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/index.html#p2.1) of the [Succession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/).  
Declares that it is satisfied that the undated document forms the deceased's Will and that the deceased intended it to form her Will.  
Orders, subject to compliance with the rules of Court, that Letters of
Administration with the undated document annexed, in solemn form, be granted to Gordon A Salier. (The Registrar may be satisfied to make the grant of the agreed copy until the Commissioner of Police releases the original.)  
Orders that the matter be remitted to the Registrar to complete the grant.  
Orders that the administration bond be dispensed with.  
Orders that the balance of the further amended Statement of Claim and the
Cross-Claim be dismissed.  
Orders the argument about costs of the proceedings be stood over to a suitable date to the parties and the Court.  
Catchwords: 
WILLS, PROBATE AND ADMINISTRATION - informal testamentary document - no dispute that undated document not executed in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s6.html) [Succession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) - No dispute that the undated document purports to state the testamentary intentions of a deceased - Deceased familiar with the formal requirements for the making of a valid will - Whether Court satisfied that the deceased intended the undated document to form a Will - Consideration of circumstances in which the document was made - No dispute that if Court not satisfied should be grant of Letters of Administration with formal 2007 Will annexed to independent solicitor agreed to by the parties  
JUDGMENT 
The Claims
HIS HONOUR: This judgment relates to contested Probate proceedings in which the Plaintiff, Robert Angius, initially, sought probate in common form of a duly executed Will made on 27 April 2007 ("the 2007 Will") (Ex. G) made by his mother, Laura Angius ("the deceased"), and, in the alternative, a declaration that a document, being an undated part of a book, described as an "Exercise Book" ("the undated document"), forms the Will of the deceased, and that letters of administration with the undated document annexed, be granted to him. He also sought an order that the costs of the application be paid from the estate of the deceased.
The Defendant named in the Statement of Claim is Gianna (also known as "Jenny") Angius, the only other child of the deceased and the sister of the Plaintiff. She is a beneficiary named in the 2007 Will but not in the undated document. She filed a Defence and Cross-Claim in which she opposed the grant of administration of the undated document, but sought Probate, to her alone, of the 2007 Will. In the alternative, she sought a grant of letters of administration to an independent third party, Mr Gordon Salier AM, Solicitor, who has consented to being appointed. 
Relevantly, the Plaintiff filed a further amended Statement of Claim on 6 August 2013, pursuant to leave granted by the Court, in which he sought a declaration under [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) of the [Succession Act 2006](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/)") that the undated document forms the deceased's Will. In the alternative, he sought an order that probate in solemn form of the 2007 Will be granted to him, with leave reserved to the Defendant to come in and apply for a grant. 
The Defendant did not oppose the Plaintiff's application to file the further amended Statement of Claim (which principally changed the priority of the relief sought) and leave was granted for him to do so. It is the relief referred to therein that is now sought by him.
It was unnecessary, in the circumstances, for the Defendant to file an amended Defence to the further amended Statement of Claim and she has relied upon the Defence filed on 12 October 2012 and Cross-Claim filed by her on 24 July 2013.
During the course of the hearing, without objection from the Defendant, the Plaintiff filed a Defence to the Cross-Claim.
Even though the Plaintiff and the Defendant agreed that they are incapable, together, of performing their duties as joint executors in the event that the 2007 Will is found to be the last valid Will of the deceased, initially, the Plaintiff did not agree to Mr Salier, or, it seemed, any other independent person, being appointed as the administrator of the deceased's estate. He acknowledged, in one of his affidavits read in the proceedings, however, that he and the Defendant do not have a good relationship and that "there is deep animosity and mistrust between us". 
On the morning of the second last day of the hearing, his new Counsel, Mr C Vindin, said that the Plaintiff nominated Mr G Heckenberg, solicitor, as the independent person to whom a grant of administration may be made, and that Mr Heckenberg had consented to that appointment. 
On the last day of the hearing, the parties were able to agree that whatever the result of the proceedings, as there is likely to be other litigation involving the estate of the deceased (to which I shall refer), it would be more beneficial to its administration if someone independent were appointed. The parties agreed to the appointment of Mr Salier as the administrator of the deceased's estate with whichever testamentary document the Court determines is the last valid Will of the deceased annexed. I agree that such an order should be made, as the due and proper administration of the estate requires it.
(I should mention that during the hearing, there was a change in the Plaintiff's legal representation. New solicitors were retained, and counsel briefed, for the last two days of the hearing, which followed the adjournment of the matter, part heard, because it did not conclude within the time allotted. The change of representation occurred prior to the cross-examination of the Defendant.) 
Other Proceedings
There are currently other proceedings, in this Court, commenced by the Defendant, in which she seeks a family provision order out of the estate or notional estate of the deceased. Those proceedings, which I shall describe as "the family provision proceedings", have not advanced past the stage of a Summons being filed.
It is clear that the family provision proceedings cannot proceed until the determination of these proceedings. If the Plaintiff is unsuccessful in his principal claim for relief, with the result that the 2007 Will is held to be the last valid Will of the deceased, the family provision proceedings will not continue.
The deceased's husband, John, also has commenced separate proceedings. Those proceedings (which I shall call "the husband's proceedings"), also, have not advanced past the stage of a Summons having been filed. (I shall refer to these proceedings briefly later in these reasons.)
In each of the other proceedings, no Defendant has been named. It is only on the appointment of the administrator of the estate of the deceased that the proper Defendant can be named. In the events that have happened, Mr Salier, no doubt, will be named as the Defendant.
Mr Anderson, solicitor, appeared for John in the husband's proceedings, at the commencement of the hearing of the Probate proceedings (because those proceedings were listed for directions). He submitted that the husband's proceedings could not continue until there was a proper Defendant.
This aspect of the matter was not resolved and whilst it was hoped that directions for the further conduct of those proceedings could be made in order to avoid further delay in having them heard, the parties were unable to come to any agreement about, and did not seek, such directions.
On the second last day of the hearing, Mr Anderson, again, appeared, but indicated that there was some question about whether his firm was to continue to act for John in the husband's proceedings. In those circumstances, it seemed to me that it was not possible to make any directions. I indicated that those proceedings would be listed at the time that these reasons for judgment were to be delivered or at such other mutually convenient time.
Similarly, the family provision proceedings will be listed on the date when I am to deliver these reasons for judgment so that appropriate orders and directions may be made or at such other mutually convenient time. 
Preliminary Matter
There is no dispute that the deceased was found dead at the bottom of the stairs of her home on 4 January 2012. The deceased's Death Certificate, registered under the [Births Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bdamra1995383/), does not reveal the cause(s) of death, but relevantly states "[T]he finding of the Coroner has not yet been received ...".
The circumstances that led to the involvement of the Coroner are that, although initially the deceased's death was reported to the Coroner as non-suspicious, on 15 March 2012, the Plaintiff wrote to the Registrar alleging that the deceased's death was not an accident. On 3 April 2012, a Coronial brief was ordered, and on 22 May 2012, the Coroner requested that the Sergeant Assisting obtain further information regarding any family domestic violence reports to police, any historical apprehended violence orders between the deceased and the Defendant, and a copy of the deceased's Will.
On 3 October 2012, a detective senior constable was allocated the investigation into the death of the deceased. 
A coronial inquest into the circumstances of the deceased's death was conducted for six days in March, April and May 2013. The Coroner handed down an open finding and referred the matter to the unsolved homicide squad for review. The unsolved homicide squad is to undertake a review of the evidence in due course.
As I have stated above, the undated document is to be found in what has been described by the parties as the Exercise Book. Also relevant is what the parties have described as the "Telephone Book". On 27 July 2012, the Plaintiff handed to the Police the original Exercise Book and the original Telephone Book. (The circumstances in which each of these came into the Plaintiff's possession will be dealt with later in these reasons.) They have remained in the possession of the Police since then. 
During the course of pre-trial directions, I ordered that the original Exercise Book and Telephone Book be produced to the Court for inspection. The Commissioner of Police took the view that the Exercise Book and the Telephone Book may have evidentiary value in respect of the investigations being conducted. He sought, by amended Notice of Motion filed 19 July 2013, that the order for production be vacated. 
At the hearing of the amended Notice of Motion on 5 August 2013, the Commissioner of Police, represented by Mr Bhalla of counsel, and the parties, each of whom was also represented by counsel who appeared at the first four days of the hearing, agreed to orders and notations in regard to the production of the Exercise Book and the Telephone Book, which orders and notations were subsequently made.
In accordance with the orders and notations made on 5 August 2013, on the first day of the hearing, Ms Crawford, solicitor, appeared for the Commissioner of Police. Detective Sergeant Ricky Hennessy of the NSW Police, Eastern Beaches Local Area Command attended and presented the original Exercise Book and Telephone Book for inspection, and each was formally tendered (Ex. A and Ex. B respectively) in the proceedings.
Prior to commencing the hearing, the parties, in the presence of Detective Sergeant Hennessy, had the opportunity to inspect the original Exercise Book and the Telephone Book. At the commencement of the hearing, I also had that opportunity.
I should mention that because of concerns regarding the evidentiary value of the Exercise Book and the Telephone Book, the handling procedures required by the Police were followed during the inspection. Latex gloves were worn by Detective Sergeant Hennessy and changed between the handling of the different documents. (In fact, whilst in Court, only Detective Sergeant Hennessy handled the documents.)
Upon the undertaking given to the Court to produce the original of each document to the Court, if, and when, it was required, the Exercise Book and the Telephone Book were returned to the possession of the Police. At all times thereafter, during the hearing, the parties have, and the Court has, relied upon a copy of each of those documents and the matters noted and agreed set out below.
An agreed copy of the relevant part of the Exercise Book was marked Ex. C and the copy of the relevant part of the Telephone Book was marked as Ex. D. 
Following the inspection, and before Detective Sergeant Hennessey left the Court, the following matters were noted, and agreed between the parties, about Ex. A: 
It is a standard A4 exercise book typically used by school children.

The front cover and the back cover of the Exercise Book appear to have a shiny finish, whilst the reverse side of each cover and each of the lined pages does not. (It looks like there is a plastic protective coating on the front cover and the back cover, which does not exist on the reverse side of each cover.) 
The cover of the Exercise Book is thicker than the individual lined pages within the cover.

The texture of the lined pages is different to the front and back cover.

There are lined pages in the original Exercise Book that contain no handwriting and these pages have not been copied and do not form part of Ex.
C (to which I shall refer).

There appear to be different inks and perhaps, pressure, used on the pages after the lined page that has "figlio" as the last word.

Not all of the handwriting in the Exercise Book is that of the deceased.
In addition, some of the numbers on page 2 of the part of the Exercise Book relied upon by the Plaintiff (2697.38 and 1347.31) are not in the deceased's handwriting.

The contents of the Exercise Book are for the most part written in the
Italian language.

The Plaintiff relies only on the first three pages of the Exercise Book as comprising the undated document, excluding the top part on the second page commencing with "7-7-11" and ending with "1347.31" and noting that the first page is written on the back of the front cover of the Exercise Book.

The contents of these pages, containing the handwriting of the deceased, may be regarded as testamentary in nature, but when these pages were written is not disclosed on the pages.

The pages at the back of the copy of the Exercise Book that were tendered, which appear to have been inverted, are as they appear in the Exercise Book.

The outside cover of the Exercise Book was fluorescent lime green in colour.
The parties also agreed, subsequently, that: 
The undated document appears to have been written with the same pen.

All the writing on the undated document is that of the deceased.

The writing on the undated document discloses a similar font size, pressure and slant.

The undated document is not signed by the deceased, or by some other person in the presence, and at the direction, of the deceased.

There are no other signatures on the undated document.

The undated document does not contain a revocation clause. However, it cannot stand consistently with the 2007 Will. (It was accepted that the Court, if satisfied of the other necessary matters, would be also be satisfied that the deceased intended to revoke the 2007 Will. An implied revocation may arise where the deceased has executed two testamentary documents and the later one does not contain an express revocation clause. It then becomes a question of construction to determine whether the later document has impliedly revoked the earlier will: In the Estate of Gall (Deceased)  <case>, per Gray J at [24].) 
The undated document does not nominate any executor. (In view of the agreement of the parties in relation to the appointment of Mr Salier, it is not necessary to address any question about the appointment of executors in the 2007 Will and whether the deceased intended to revoke their appointment.) 
In the undated document, the person referred to as "Roby" is the
Plaintiff; "Shon" is the deceased's grandson, Sean; "Jack" or "Jacqui" is Ms
Varela; "Gabrielle" is the deceased's granddaughter, Gabrielle; and The
Children's Hospital, is the "Children's Hospital at Randwick".

What is written in the Exercise Book on the pages following the undated document appears to have been written at different times, and, apparently, not in any particular sequence.
Although it was not specifically agreed, there does not seem to be any real dispute that the deceased is likely to have written the undated document at some time between 6 September 2011 and 15 December 2011. Amongst other things leading to this conclusion, there appears to be a reference to the ages of the deceased's grandchildren, which ages suggest that the earliest date that the deceased could have written the document was 6 September 2011. Also, there is no dispute that the deceased had the Exercise Book with her when she saw the solicitor, Mr Vlahakis, which was on 15 December 2011.
Ultimately, I do not think that the precise date on which the deceased wrote the undated document is of great significance. However, in view of the above conclusion, I am satisfied that she wrote it shortly before her death.
There is also no dispute that the undated document is not a valid Will because it is not signed by the deceased or by some other person in the presence of, and at the direction of, the deceased: [s 6(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s6.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/). It is for this reason that the Plaintiff seeks the declaration and consequential orders under [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/). I shall return to the circumstances of the creation of the undated document later in these reasons.
Because parts of the contents of the Exercise Book were written in Italian, a copy of the agreed translation, from Italian into English, of the whole of that part of the contents of the Exercise Book in Italian was tendered as Ex. E and the agreed translation of the last two pages of 'Notes' in the Telephone Book, which also had been written in Italian, was marked as Ex. F.
I take the following from the agreed translation of the undated document: "1) [illegible word] of the Flat ) xx Jonh [sic] and [illegible name] tenat [sic] in common ) The sale xx Denning Street ½ [illegible name] and ½ Jon [sic] because there are problems with the Bank ) 10,000 to the Children's Hospital in Randwick every year in memory of the mother 
All properties to Roby Angius at my death the rent to go immediately to Roby
Angius if Roby wants to take some properties first he has to give his father a choice 
Flat 24 to Gabriella Angius 
Flat 19 [to] Shon [sic] Bates but if Jenny Angius attacks her brother Roby
Angius the flat must be sold and the proceeds thereof are to go to the Cildre [possible italianised version of the word "Children"] Hospital in Randwick 
After my death the rent from 19 must be put aside for him at 18 years [of age] to take what is in the bank both for his studies and whatever else he needs.
Roby Angius will look after Shon's interest at 25 years [of age] the Flat will be his -7-11 
Ray Wit [possible Italianised version of the word "White"] -25 
C Han [illegible word] 30,000 [?] 
Infiniti 2697-38 -31 
I don't want Jenny Angius to come to my funeral after she bashed me up for years [?] but to work no [sic] 
The debt on 46 my share is to go to Roby Angius 
Flat 8 and the architect's office to Roby Angius 
Xx Wild St [to] Roby Angius [illegible name] NEW Alby [illegible word] Galo [illegible name] St Coogee Bay Road 
Rosebery [?] Dowling [?] St 
To go to Roby Angius [at] my death Roby may God bless you and try to forgive your father and your sister for all the harm they have caused you pray for your mother and remember that money is not everything do good wherever you can 
To you Jack [?] who treated me like a daughter I want Roby to give you wages so that you can spend them for yourself and your children [?] try to teach the girls that love in our midst is the most beautiful thing.

As for you Jenny shame is all I feel I hope God will not let your children do to you what you did to your mother [illegible word] to the point of breaking her spine after she had given you everything remember that the house you live in is partly mine and where you sleep and sit was [all] left to me by my father if you don't remember it was 675000 I gave you everything I did for
Gabriella what no one would have done and you denied me to see the little boy and you knew how much I loved him live with the remorse for depriving Shon [sic] of his grandmother if you are honest tell your son the truth 
Remove the mogichi [possible Italianised version of the word "mortgage"] [illegible word] 
Sell the house million [illegible word] to the Bank the remainder ½ each the furniture ½ each the caravan ½ each 
I give my scera [possible Italianised version of the word "share"] to
Gabriella [illegible word] will Flat and the sciop [possible Italianised version of the words "shops"] divided 
John [sic] to have the [illegible word] 
LAURA to have [?] the furniture pictures ornaments books photos in other words anything that may be removed without causing any damage 
To guarantee the account with DAG 
Jon [sic] to have 300000 [illegible word] 
LAURA int. [sic] - 6 - 19 - 24 
LAURA scop [possible Italianised version of the word "shop"] architect [?] 
When I go in on the 24th I will pay the rait [possible italianised version of the word "rates"] BEFORE the Company used to pay them 
To [or at] [illegible word] take the 24 [illegible word] is to stay 2 years and when the house is ready the rent [will be] 1 dollar per week 
As regards Flat xx I receive [or he/she receives] 50% 
The money is to be paid into the chi [possible italianised version of the word "key"] card /3 of 36 to Gabriella in [illegible word] to have 6 months to sell xx Denning St and buy it [sic] 2.2 million 
Balconies 
Front door in glass 
White kitchen 
All downlights [?] 
Ston [possible Italianised version of the word "stone"] bench tops - WINDOWS NATURAL ADONISED - FULLY INTEGRATED DISHWASHER - A/C - FLYscreens - PIETRA GREY - WALL COVER VIVID WHITE"
The parties were unable to agree on the meaning, or effect, of the undated document (even though they agreed on its translation as set out above). Counsel for the Defendant submitted "part of the position we put ... is that the lack of precision instances where there is ambiguity or lack of certainty in the informal document of itself is relevant to [the] determination as to whether or not the deceased intended it to operate as her will". He also submitted that the undated document did not contain a residuary clause. 
They agreed, however, that it is not necessary for the Court, in these proceedings, to construe the undated document. (It is thought that in any construction suit, notice will need to be given to the deceased's husband, John, so that, if necessary, he can appear.)
Following the inspection, and before Detective Sergeant Hennessey left the Court, the following matters were noted about the Telephone Book (Ex. B): 
It has a black plastic cover with a telephone motif on the front.

It has A to Z listings. (There are no entries in the Telephone Book between "T" to "Z". Those pages have not been copied and do not form part of
Ex. D) 
After the "Z" listing there is provision for notes.

The handwriting on the last two pages is that of the deceased. The handwriting is in black ink and blue ink and the colour of the black ink on the last two pages does not appear to be the same.

The contents of the last two pages, containing the handwriting of the deceased, may be regarded as testamentary in nature, but when those pages were written is not disclosed on them.

The Background Facts
The following facts are uncontroversial or they have been clearly established by the evidence.
The deceased died on 4 January 2012, aged 79 years.
The deceased was born in Italy in about 1933. The Plaintiff described her as "sharp, very sharp" and "... In her head she was very sure about what she wanted to always. If she wanted to do something she was stubborn, very stubborn. If she wanted to do it a certain way or go down a certain path, she would do that no matter what, regardless ... She wouldn't change her mind for anything" and that "... if she was determined to do it a certain way she wouldn't change her mind".
The deceased had no difficulty reading the English language. She could write in the English language, but it would be in "broken English". She preferred to write in the Italian language and was more comfortable doing so.
The deceased was also described as, generally, being a happy person, who changed, towards the end of her life, into a very anxious and concerned person. The Defendant said that towards the end of the deceased's life, she thought that the deceased was depressed. 
The deceased died leaving property in New South Wales. 
The deceased was married to John, who is the father of the parties, in September 1958. They came to Australia together in about 1958. They purchased the former matrimonial home, at Coogee, as joint tenants, in approximately 1991. It was transmitted to John, following the deceased's death, in about May 2012.
The Plaintiff was born, in Australia, in 1961 and is currently 52 years of age. The Defendant was born, in Italy, in 1964, the deceased and her husband having returned to Italy, but they subsequently returned to Australia, where the Defendant was raised. The Defendant is currently 49 years of age.
It appears that the deceased and her husband separated in September 2010, and, thereafter, lived apart with no likelihood of cohabitation being resumed. Apparently, at about this time, John moved out of the Coogee property and moved into one of the units that he and the deceased owned at Waterloo.
The Plaintiff believed that John continued to have a key to the Coogee property, the locks of which the deceased did not change. (He also said that neither he, nor, he believed, the Defendant, held a key to the Coogee property.)
No divorce order had been made at the date of the deceased's death.
Between 2008 and about 2010, John commenced and completed a residential strata redevelopment of land at Allen Street Waterloo. 
The relationship between the deceased and John was volatile, it would seem, from about 2005. In March 2007, the deceased reported an attack on her by John at their home at Coogee, following which she attended the Prince of Wales Hospital at Randwick. Following this incident, an AVO against John, in favour of the deceased, was granted.
During 2010 and 2011, there were further attendances by the Police at the Coogee property due to arguments between the deceased and John.
Despite these events, the deceased and John entered into three different Separation Agreements, dated 10 May 2011, 6 October 2011 and 15 November 2011, respectively, each dealing with the division of their various assets. The proceedings to which I have referred earlier, commenced by John, and which will involve the deceased's estate, relate to these Separation Agreements.
There were, also, proceedings in this Court, commenced by the deceased in September 2011 (2011/290751), against John, in which proceedings, the Defendant was named as the first Defendant and John was named as the second Defendant. Those proceedings related to the two properties at Coogee, one of which was the former matrimonial home, and the other, the property in which the Defendant lived. The 2011 proceedings were resolved by a Deed dated 15 November 2011. Final orders determining the 2011 proceedings were made, by consent, on 18 November 2011.
Pursuant to the final Orders made by the Court, John, by 15 January 2012, was required to either pay the deceased $2,200,000 and discharge the debt of $3,200,000, which was secured by mortgage registered on the title to the matrimonial home at Coogee, or place the property on the market for sale by public auction.
 (In the 2011 proceedings, the deceased and John was each separately legally represented.) (The parties agreed to an order for the discontinuance of the proceedings involving the current Defendant with no order as to costs. A copy of the form of Consent Order filed in those proceedings, signed by each of the parties, forms part of the evidence in these proceedings.)
Other than appearing by his solicitor to deal with the other proceedings to which I have earlier referred, John did not play any part in the present proceedings.
The Plaintiff 'sided' with the deceased and the Defendant 'sided' with John in their somewhat acrimonious separation. In addition, the same family dynamics existed in relation to disputes concerning the renovation of the Plaintiff's home at Maroubra and in relation to other family matters. I shall return to this aspect later in these reasons.
The Plaintiff has 6 children, four with his first wife, Sylvana Salvatore. They are Stephanie (born in 1985), Melissa (born in 1987), Natalie (born in 1990) and Jacqueline (born in 1991). He has two children with his partner, Jacqueline Varela, namely Laura Roberta (born in January 2003) and Carly Marie (born in September 2005).
The Defendant has two children, one with her first husband, Anthony de Palo, being Gabrielle Angius (born in August 1990) and the second with her partner, Kevin Batten, being Sean Batten Angius (born in April 2004).
The deceased's estate, at the date of death, according to Inventory of Property lodged by the Plaintiff, had an estimated gross value of $17,746,250. The estate is said to consist of real estate at Waterloo ($750,000), moneys in bank ($1,396,250), and shares in companies ($15,600,000). (There appears to be a typographical or mathematical error in the Inventory of Property in that the estate is said to have a value of $27,746,250.)
In the Inventory of Property, the Plaintiff also refers to various parcels of real estate in Coogee, Waterloo and Rosebery, held in joint tenancy with John. (There may be an issue about whether there has been a severance of the joint tenancy, but that dispute is not relevant to these proceedings.) In any event, the parties agree that the value of the deceased's estate is very substantial. 
The Plaintiff also says that he does not know what liabilities the deceased had at the time of her death.
There are no issues raised by the Defendant concerning a lack of testamentary capacity, or lack of knowledge and approval, of the deceased, or undue influence, at the time, or times, she wrote the undated document. Nor does the evidence suggest any such issues. The sole basis of the Defendant's opposition is that the Court should not be satisfied that the deceased intended the undated document to form her Will.

Other Formal Matters
On 1 September 2012, the Plaintiff caused notice of his intended application to be published in the Sydney Morning Herald, which is a newspaper circulating in the district where the deceased resided at the date of her death. However, the notice is slightly different to the relief sought by the Plaintiff in that the notice refers to "an application for Probate in solemn form of draft Wills of 2010 and 2011 in conjunction with the 2007 Will" of the deceased.
Division 6 of Part 78 of the Supreme Court Rules ("SCR") "applies to proceedings on an application for the grant of probate or administration in relation to a will that comprises or includes an informal testamentary document". "Informal testamentary document" is defined in Part 78 rule 1 SCR, as meaning "a document that (together with any amendments to it) purports to embody a deceased person's testamentary intentions, being a document that has not been duly executed".
Part 78 rule 42 SCR provides: "(1) The plaintiff must serve notice of the application ("a prescribed notice") on each person whose interests may be affected by the Court's decision as to the deceased's intentions in relation to the informal testamentary document.

Subrule (1) does not require a prescribed notice to be served: on the caveator under any caveat in force in respect of the informal testamentary document, or on any person who has consented to the grant of probate or administration to the plaintiff.

Any consent referred to in subrule (2) (b) must be filed by the plaintiff.

If the person whose interests are affected is a person under legal incapacity: subrule (2) (b) does not apply, and if the person has no tutor, service of a prescribed notice does not take effect until a tutor is appointed.

The Court may dispense with compliance with subrule (1) on any of the following grounds: that the person affected cannot readily be ascertained, that the person affected, though ascertained, cannot readily be found, that it would be expedient to do so (having regard to all the circumstances, including the amount at stake and the degree of difficulty of the point to be determined) so as to save expense."
The prescribed notice was not served on persons whose interests may be affected by the Court's decision as to the deceased's intentions in relation to the undated document. However, Ms Varela and Gabrielle, each gave evidence, by affidavit, and was cross-examined during the hearing. Both attended the hearing at other times following their cross-examination. Accordingly, I am satisfied that each was well aware of the proceedings.
Sean, who is the deceased's grandson, is aged 9 years. He is referred to as a devisee of a home unit in the undated document. There have been discussions between the Defendant's solicitor and Sean's father (who could be appointed his tutor if that were necessary), but the prescribed notice has not been provided to him. 
Similarly, the prescribed notice has not been served on the Children's Hospital at Randwick. It is a beneficiary named in the undated document also. There is no evidence that it is aware of the proceedings. 
I am prepared to dispense with compliance with sub-rule (1) on Sean and on the Children's Hospital Randwick, on the ground that it would be expedient to do so in order to save further expense. I am satisfied that there has been proper representation throughout the proceedings and that the case for, and against, the making of the principal order sought by the Plaintiff, has been comprehensively argued. It is unlikely that anything more could be added to the submissions made in writing (a copy of which will be retained with the Court papers) and orally.
In the circumstances, each of the persons identified is bound by the decision made in relation to the informal testamentary document to the same extent as if he, she, or it had been a party to the proceedings concerned when the decision was made: Part 78 rule 45(2) SCR.

Events involving the deceased and Solicitors
I am satisfied that the evidence establishes the following facts.
Anthony Ross Bennett, a solicitor conducting practice in Albury in 2006, has sworn an affidavit, upon which he was not cross-examined, in which he states that he "accepted instructions from [the deceased] and her husband John Angius in relation to various Angius Family interests in a number of matters in 2006". He says that, initially, he received instructions, on about 2 May 2006, on behalf of the deceased and John, from Doug May, who, he "was aware was the Managing Agent for various Angius Family Interests". He goes on to state that he prepared a draft Will for the deceased but that she did not execute it. He says, and correspondence addressed to the deceased and her husband confirms, that he required further instructions and additional information from them. He had further conversations with Mr May on 18 May and 25 May 2006.
It was agreed that Mr Bennett neither saw, nor obtained instructions directly from, the deceased either in 2006 or 2007 or in relation to the alleged testamentary disposition in 2011. He never spoke to the deceased about her testamentary intentions at any time. 
In about February 2007, the deceased asked the Defendant to write out, in English, the instructions for her Will.
Cathie Blanchfield, a solicitor in the firm of solicitors, Blanchfield Nicholls Partners Family Law, in an affidavit sworn on 8 March 2013, deposed that the original of the 2007 Will was prepared by her following instructions from the deceased, at a conference on 10 April 2007, at her office (at which the Defendant attended with the deceased). She states that the deceased gave her a handwritten document, headed "Will" which contained her instructions. (It was this document that had been written out by the Defendant at the request of the deceased.)
Ms Blanchfield had a discussion with the deceased and prepared a typed draft Will for her immediately. The deceased took the original of the document prepared by Ms Blanchfield with her.
Ms Blanchfield conferred, again, with the deceased, on 27 April 2007, when she was given the original draft Will that had been typed and provided to the deceased, with what appeared to be the deceased's signature on it, as well as the signatures of two other persons, Phillip Walsh and Lynette Donovan, each of whom had signed the original as an attesting witness, on the second page. That document bore the date 13 April 2007.
It appears that the deceased, herself, had arranged for the execution of the original draft Will, which bore the date 13 April 2007. Ms Blanchfield thought that each page of the original draft Will bearing the date 13 April 2007, should be signed, so she printed out another original of that Will, which the deceased then signed on 27 April 2007. Ms Blanchfield and her secretary, Katy Muscat, then each attested the deceased's signature on that Will, which was then dated 27 April 2007. It is that Will which is propounded and which is Ex. G in the proceedings.
An affidavit sworn 6 August 2013, by Ms Muscat, was also read in the proceedings. She deposed that the 2007 Will was signed by the deceased in her presence and in the presence of Ms Blanchfield, both of whom were present at the same time, and who attested and subscribed the deceased's signature on the 2007 Will in the presence of the deceased and in the presence of each other.
In the 2007 Will, the deceased appointed the Plaintiff and the Defendant to be the executors and trustees. After the payment of just debts, funeral and testamentary expenses, the deceased left the residue of the estate to them as tenants in common in equal shares.
In this case, as stated, each of the attesting witnesses to the deceased's signature on the 2007 Will has given evidence. Neither Ms Blanchfield, nor Ms Muscat, was cross-examined. There is no reason to disbelieve her evidence.
(I mention that the Defendant had affidavit evidence from Philip Walsh, one of the attesting witnesses to the Will signed by the deceased on 13 April 2007. Whilst he identifies his signature and the handwriting that appears under the name of each of the attesting witnesses as his own and acknowledges that Lynette Donovan has been one of his employees for approximately 8 years, he states that he does "not know any woman by the name of Laura Angius" and that "[s]o far as I am aware, she was not a regular client of mine". He was not cross-examined.)
There is no dispute about the validity of the 2007 Will and the parties agree, in the event that the undated document is not found to form the Will of the deceased, that the 2007 Will is the last valid Will of the deceased. As stated earlier, there is no longer any question, if it is the last valid Will of the deceased, to whom administration should be granted.
Following the deceased executing the 2007 Will, she provided a copy to the Defendant, requested her to keep it in a safe place and told her that the solicitor has retained the original. At about this time, the deceased told the Plaintiff that she had made a Will; that she had given a copy of it to the Defendant; and that she had left half of her estate to him. However, she did not, then, provide a copy of the 2007 Will to him.
In 2010 and 2011, the deceased retained the firm of solicitors, Kydon Segal Lawyers, which firm conducts practice at Eastgardens (a suburb of Sydney). 
In 2011, the firm had acted for the deceased in relation to various disputes involving the deceased and her husband in relation to the settlement of their matrimonial property, and on the sale of property by them. On other occasions, the firm acted for them in certain conveyancing transactions.
Different files had been created for each property transaction and for the deceased's settlement of matrimonial property. 
On 15 December 2011, the deceased conferred with George Vlahakis, the sole principal of the firm Kydon Segal Lawyers. Usually, however, the deceased dealt with Ms Fiona Giannakopoulos, an employed solicitor at the firm.
Despite a written request made in a letter, dated 21 November 2012, to the firm of solicitors, Kydon Segal Lawyers, to have Mr Vlahakis and Ms Giannakopoulos, meet with the legal representatives of the Plaintiff in order to prepare an affidavit dealing with the matters with which he, she or they, was or were, involved, as well as making an offer to pay the reasonable professional costs of so doing, neither was prepared to do so.
In a letter dated 28 November 2012, from Kydon Segal Lawyers, the Plaintiff's solicitors were informed "neither Mr Vlahakis nor Ms Giannakopoulos wish to be involved in the proceedings". No reason(s) for not wishing to be "involved in the proceedings" was (were) provided and any difficulties associated therewith were not ascertained.
It appears that neither solicitor was aware of [s 12](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s12.html) of the [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), which provides that, except as otherwise provided, every person is competent to give evidence, and a person who is competent to give evidence about a fact is compellable to give that evidence. Accordingly, each was compellable.
In the events that happened, Mr Vlahakis gave oral evidence but Ms Giannakopoulos did not.
This is not a case, particularly in relation to the events involving the deceased, where the solicitor's acts, or omissions, are an integral part of any complaint, or where his, or her, advice is effectively in issue. Nor is it a case in which he, or she, appears to have a personal interest in the outcome of the action. Rather, he was, and she might have been, a material witness to at least one factual event, which is of some significance to the determination of the proceedings. Importantly, the disclosure of what occurred when he, and she, met the deceased in December 2011, would have exposed to the parties, and have exposed to the Court, prior to the hearing, what the deceased had said to each of them.
The unco-operative approach until the hearing evidenced by the letter from the firm of solicitors has increased the time and costs of the proceedings, since it was necessary for Mr Vlahakis to be called and to give his evidence orally. He played a role in the aspect to which I have referred and also in the events of 5 January 2012, each of which is significant, and this should have been obvious to him.
It appears that no subpoena to give evidence was served upon Ms Giannakopoulos and neither party called her to give oral evidence. It seems to me that she may have been able to provide some evidence of matters in issue, particularly since the oral evidence of Mr Vlahakis was that she had been the solicitor who was encouraging the deceased to make another Will and because she had seen, and spoken to, the deceased immediately before, and immediately after, the deceased had conferred with Mr Vlahakis on 15 December 2011. 
I should say that upon attending to giving evidence, Mr Vlahakis endeavoured to assist the Court to the best of his ability. He answered the questions carefully, and acknowledged when he did not have a recollection of the events about which he was asked. However, it was clear that his recollection was not precise, and it improved when, during cross-examination, certain matters were put to him.
A subpoena to produce documents was served upon the firm, Kydon Segal Lawyers, and there was produced a handwritten diary note dated "15/12", which is in the following form: "Conference Laura Angius - instructions re new Will 
Executors - Doug May & George Vlahakis - Understands will charge - include charging clause $10,000 to Randwick Children's Hospital $5,000 to RCH per year for 20 years - 
Robert Angius (son) to be trustee -&gt; Mortgage on xx Denning Coogee to Robert Angius -&gt; xx/xx Allen Street Waterloo to Gabrielle Angius (grand/daughter). -&gt; xx/xx Allen St Waterloo to Sean Bates (g/s until 25 y.o.) trustee Robert Angius) but if my daughter Jenny Angius challenges my Will the property is to be sold and the proceeds to Randwick Children's Hospital.
 -&gt; xx/xx Allen St W/loo to Carly Angius & Laura Angius when 25 y.o with my son Robert as trustee.
 -&gt; $400 per week to Jackie Verila for as long as she lives with my trustees to set up a trust fund with sufficient funds for that purpose at their discretion ... rest & residue to my son Robert Angius.
 -&gt; draft to be prepared & signed 26/1 with FG."
Mr Vlahakis acknowledged that he had written out the original diary note on 15 December 2011, whilst in the conference with the deceased. From his evidence, I am satisfied about the following matters: 
There are four employed solicitors in the firm, one of whom is Ms
Giannakopoulos. She has been employed in the firm, continuously, since 2008.

Mr Vlahakis, Ms Giannakopoulos, and the other employed solicitors at the firm cannot speak, read, or write in the Italian language.

In about 2010, Ms Giannakopoulos, at her initial conference in relation to family law matters, raised with the deceased, the need to reconsider her Will.
Thereafter, there were discussions between them, and possibly with Mr May, who was the real estate agent who handled some of the affairs of, and provided advice to, the deceased and John. Mr Vlahakis does not recollect any specific discussions that he had with Mr May.

Mr Vlahakis read an email sent by Mr May to Ms Giannakopoulos but could not remember when he had first read it. He believed that it was in the firm's
Will file for the deceased at the time of the conference on 15 December 2011.
He recognised all of the handwriting on the copy document as being that of Ms
Giannakopoulos. (The original email was not located on the firm's computer system and an enquiry made of Ms Giannakopoulous by Mr Vlahakis did not reveal when it had been received.) The email was in the following terms: "RE: LAURA'S WILL 
POWER OF ATTORNEY- PERSONAL- Robert Angius 
BUSINESS- Douglas John May/Fiona #Kiewa St 
Albury NSW 2640 
EXECUTOR- Doug/Fiona 
The balance held in any of Laura's bank accounts shall pass to son Robert
Angius.
 xx Denning St- tenants in common? Coogee 
Laura's 1/3 share of xx Denning St to go to Robert in his will until such time as she can sort this out with Jenny after the dust settles with John.

The share of Laura's rental income, after expenses, from the following properties shall upon her death either go immediately to Robert Angius or be held in trust for him until the will is settled. Her interest in the properties shall also pass to Robert Angius:- 
Laura's 50% share in Alfreda St % share in Coogee Bay Rd % share in xxx Botany Rd % share in the N A Hotel % share in the F Hotel % share in xxx George St 
Laura's share in xx Wild St, Maroubra shall pass to Robert and in the event of
Robert's death, then in turn in equal shares to Laura and Carly (Robert's daughters).

But firstly, $10,000 to go to the Children's Hospital, Randwick in memory of
Laura Angius 
And $5,000 each year thereafter whilst any of the properties are held.

The share of Laura's rental income, after expenses, from the following property shall go to Gabriel Angius or be held in trust for her until she reaches the age of 25. Laura's interest in this property shall pass to
Gabriel:- 
Laura's 50% share in S# Hotel - all Lauren's share to Gabriel 
Robert Angius shall be the nominated Trustee.

If Robert or Gabrielle decide to sell their interest then they shall offer
John Angius first right of refusal. She would like John to do the same? 
Unit 5, xxx Allen St, and any net rental proceeds shall be left in trust to
Laura Angius, Robert's daughter, until the age of 25.

Unit 6, xxx Allen St shall be left to Carly Angius, Robert's daughter (as above) 
Unit 19, xxx Allen St shall be left to Sean Batas (sic), Jenny's son (as above) 
Unit 24, xxx Allen St shall be left to Gabriel Angius, Jenny's daughter (as above) 
Robert Angius shall be the nominated Trustee in all cases.

In the event of the death of any of the abovementioned grandchildren prior to them attaining the age of 25 then their inheritance shall pass to their sibling on the same circumstances.

Should Jenny Angius dispute any part of Laura's will then any inheritance bequeathed to Jenny Angius' children shall be withdrawn and the rental income and interest in the properties left to the Children's Hospital, Randwick." 
There may have been discussions between the deceased and Mr Vlahakis about her Will, but the only occasion on which he conferred with her, that he specifically remembers in any detail, is the conference on 15 December 2011, which took place at his office at Eastgardens.

As only he and the deceased were present during the conference, he is the only direct source of evidence about what occurred then. Otherwise, the Court is left to the evidence of what the deceased is said to have reported to others about that conference.

The Will file relating to the deceased was opened, apparently, on 3 August
Mr Vlahakis believes that he was to confer with the deceased on that date, but that she did not attend.

It was Ms Giannakopoulos who arranged for the deceased to see Mr Vlahakis on 15 December 2011. In fact, before and after she conferred with him, the deceased spoke with Ms Giannakopoulos.

Prior to conferring with the deceased, Mr Vlahakis was told that the deceased had wanted Ms Giannakopoulos to be her executor, but that Ms
Giannakopoulos refused, and remained unwilling, to be appointed as the executrix.

The deceased's instructions to Mr Vlahakis were conveyed orally. However, he could see that the deceased had with her an "exercise book" to which she was referring. He could see handwriting in the "exercise book" but was unable to discern the words in it. The deceased did not show him the "exercise book".
He could not remember whether she had other documents with her, but thought that it was quite possible that she did.

Although he could not precisely remember the size or colour of the exercise book to which he referred, I am satisfied from his, and other, evidence, that it was the Exercise Book.

His diary note of 15 December 2011 reflected the deceased's instructions to him.

The date 26 January 2012 was chosen as the date the deceased was to next confer with Ms Giannakopoulos. He believed that by that date, John's obligations under the last Separation Agreement that they had signed would be completed. He said that the deceased wanted to discuss a draft Will to be prepared with Ms Giannakopoulos on that date when she would sign it.

Mr Vlahakis did not prepare a draft Will for the deceased.

Mr Vlahakis thought that the deceased was very clear in her instructions in terms of what she wanted in her Will; who the trustees should be; what specific bequests she wanted to make; which grandchildren should receive what property; and that the rest and residue should go to her son, the Plaintiff.
In answer to some questions from the Bench, Mr Vlahakis also gave this evidence: "Q ...Ms Culkoff suggested to you that in your conversations with The
Plaintiff after the death of the deceased you said to him "Your mother brought the book in and I wrote her wishes out in English". You said you didn't say those words but you said something similar? 
A. Yes.

Q. I wonder if you could remember to the best of your recollection what you said about that? 
A. What I would have said was 
Q. Not what you would have said. Do you have a recollection of what you said? 
A. "Your mother had a book with her which she referred to and she gave me instructions to make her will".

Q. There is no reference in what you have just told me to, in effect, translation from one language into English which seems to be what you agreed with Ms Culkoff? 
A. No there was no translation. In the conference she didn't translate into
English as far as I know what was in the book. It was more conversational, her dictating into English what she had written in Italian.
 ...

Q. Did the deceased tell you when she saw you on the 15 December that she had written out something in Italian? 
A. I think she did, yes.

Q. Do you remember what she said about that? 
A. I recall we had a conversation about her background and the fact she was born, she said she was as clever as a Jew because she grew up in the Jewish quarter in Rome and she was very street smart but not very educated and that she had written out or she had made notes or written out what she wanted in her will.

Q. In Italian? 
A. In Italian, yes."
Another important matter about which Mr Vlahakis gave evidence related to his attendance, with the Plaintiff, at the deceased's home on 5 January 2012, the day after her death. He remembered that the Plaintiff told him (whether when he arrived at the deceased's home or before he had arrived), that the deceased had written a Will in a book and that one purpose for being there was to locate that book. He also recalled that the Plaintiff went to the white cupboard in the garage and searched for the Exercise Book. He could not say "with a hundred percent confidence" that the Plaintiff located the Exercise Book in the white cupboard but he believed the search of the white cupboard to have been one of the first things that they found and they discussed.
After the search of the whole house, the items retrieved were placed in a box. He and the Plaintiff returned to his office, where one of the other employees of the practice, one Mr Wong, completed an inventory. Mr Vlahakis did not participate in this task, which he left to Mr Wong. He did not doubt, however, that the Plaintiff was present whilst Mr Wong completed the inventory.
There was one piece of the evidence of Mr Vlahakis upon which the Defendant relied: "Q. Do you agree then that your best recollection is that you had that Doug
May file note with you at the conference then? 
A. I had looked at it either at the conference or before the conference. I had a general understanding of what Laura had said to Fiona she wanted in her will. Laura had been adamant she did not want to make a will until the property matter with John, her husband, had been finalised. (my emphasis) 
One of the reasons that the appointment with Fiona was made for late January was from memory that there was a court date prior to that or there was something that was supposed to have happened in the property settlement matter before her conference on the 26 January and the principal purpose of the conference with Fiona on the 26th was not to sign the will, it was to deal with this other property matter. Laura had always been adamant she would not make a will until everything was finalised with John." (my emphasis)
It was submitted that this evidence supported the proposition that the deceased did not intend the undated document to form her Will because, at the time it was written everything had not been finalised with John.
I have considered this evidence very carefully, but I am satisfied that the deceased was referring to the Will that was to be prepared by the solicitors and not what she had drafted. Meantime, she had prepared a Will, in the Italian language, with which she was satisfied. Her repeated references to "my Will" in her conversation with various people support this conclusion. (I shall return to this topic later in these reasons.) 
The Parties and Other Witnesses
So far, I have referred to matters that, for the most part, unless otherwise indicated, were not the subject of any real dispute. I shall now turn to the evidence that was the subject of dispute between the parties, and the parties and other witnesses who gave evidence.
The Court read, and heard, evidence from a number of witnesses. There were the parties and associated family members, as well as others, to whom the deceased had spoken about the undated document, who were cross-examined. Others (the witnesses involved with the preparation and/or execution of the 2007 Will, or to whom the deceased, or others on her behalf, gave instruction) were not cross-examined. There was a sustained attack, by the Defendant, upon the evidence of a number of the witnesses (to which I shall return).
Much of the evidence concerned the deceased's conversation with the deponent of the affidavit being read, which deponent recounted the conversation. Neither party took objection to the evidence of the conversations, which, generally, was recorded in direct speech. 
It is clear, as will be read, that [s 8(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) makes admissible statements by the deceased as to the existence, and content, of any alleged testamentary intention, that is, both an intention to dispose of the deceased's property in a specified way by Will and the details of the nature of the dispositions intended. It also permits evidence of relevant statements of other persons. Thus, the evidence, relied upon by the Plaintiff, of conversations that the deceased had with him, and with others, is admissible and material.
However, evidence in that form is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact that it can reasonably be supposed that the person intended to assert by the fact unless falling within an exception to the hearsay rule: [s 59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s59.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). (Neither party made any submissions concerning the applicability of any exceptions e.g. [s 63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s63.html) (the deceased not available to give evidence about an asserted fact) or [s 66A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66a.html) (contemporaneous representations about her health, feelings, sensations, knowledge or state of mind) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).)
It is necessary to bear in mind the inherent shortcomings of hearsay evidence. I have borne in mind that the Court must exercise caution in determining whether to accept the evidence, and, if accepted, carefully consider the weight to be attached to it. Also, the version of events spoken of by the deceased to the deponent cannot be tested by cross-examination.
I bear in mind, also, the need for careful scrutiny to which evidence should be subjected in such circumstances (Plunkett versus Bull <case>; [(1915) 19 CLR 544], at [22], referred to the difficulties in assessing evidence, in such circumstances, stating: "An important matter which may arise in these kinds of cases is the difficulty of assessing evidence concerning things allegedly said by a person who is dead. The court can never be certain it knows all the circumstances, and more often than not one may be sure that the court knows few of them. It is impossible to hear what the other party to the conversation, the deceased, says about it. There is a significant risk of reconstruction. There are dangers in relying on evidence of what may have been a casual observation made to a person who at the time had no reason to remember the exact words used. In the light of these concerns, a substantial burden is placed upon an applicant whose case relies upon such evidence. Such evidence must be very carefully examined."
I also remember what was said by Emmett J (as his Honour then was) in Warner versus Hung, in the matter of Bellpac Pty Limited (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (In Liquidation) (No 2)  <case>; [(2011) 297 ALR 56:] "48 ... When proof of any fact is required, the Court must feel an actual persuasion of the occurrence or existence of that fact before it can be found.
Mere mechanical comparison of probabilities, independent of any belief in reality, cannot justify the finding of a fact. Actual persuasion is achieved where the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the Court. However, reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or established independently of the nature and consequences of the fact to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, and the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations that must affect whether the fact has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the Court. Reasonable satisfaction should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect inferences (see
Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] at 361-2)."
The credibility of a witness and his, or her, veracity may be tested by reference to the objective facts proved independently of the testimony given, in particular by reference to the documents in the case, by paying particular regard to his, or her, motives, and to the overall probabilities: Armagas Ltd versus Mundogas S.A. (The "Ocean Frost") [1985] 1 Ll.R. 1, per Robert Goff LJ at 57.
I have also found what Lord Pearce, in his dissenting speech in Onassis versus Vergottis [[1968] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 403], at 431, useful: "Credibility involves wider problems than mere "demeanour" which is mostly concerned with whether the witness appears to be telling the truth as he now believes it to be. Credibility covers the following problems. First, is the witness a truthful or untruthful person? Secondly, is he, though a truthful person, telling something less than the truth on this issue, or, though an untruthful person, telling the truth on this issue? Thirdly, though he is a truthful person telling the truth as he sees it, did he register the intentions of the conversation correctly and, if so, has his memory correctly retained them? Also, has his recollection been subsequently altered by unconscious bias or wishful thinking or by overmuch discussion of it with others? Witnesses, especially those who are emotional, who think that they are morally in the right, tend very easily and unconsciously to conjure up a legal right that did not exist. It is a truism, often used in accident cases, that with every day that passes the memory becomes fainter and the imagination becomes more active. For that reason a witness, however honest, rarely persuades a Judge that his present recollection is preferable to that which was taken down in writing immediately after the accident occurred. Therefore, contemporary documents are always of the utmost importance. and lastly, although the honest witness believes he heard or saw this or that, is it so improbable that it is on balance more likely that he was mistaken? On this point it is essential that the balance of probability is put correctly into the scales in weighing the credibility of a witness, and motive is one aspect of probability. All these problems compendiously are entailed when a Judge assesses the credibility of a witness; they are all part of one judicial process and in the process contemporary documents and admitted or incontrovertible facts and probabilities must play their proper part."
Finally, I refer to what McLelland CJ in Eq said in Watson versus Foxman [(1995) 49 NSWLR 315], at 319: "Furthermore, human memory of what was said in a conversation is fallible for a variety of reasons, and ordinarily the degree of fallibility increases with the passage of time, particularly where disputes or litigation intervene, and the processes of memory are overlaid, often subconsciously, by perceptions of self-interest as well as conscious consideration of what should have been said or could have been said. All too often what is actually remembered is little more than an impression from which plausible details are then, again often subconsciously, constructed. All this is a matter of ordinary human experience."
With these principles in mind, I turn to the evidence of specific witnesses.
The Plaintiff was cross-examined for over three days at different times. (By agreement, the Plaintiff's evidence was interrupted with the interposition of other witnesses. He was not present whilst any witness who was interposed gave evidence.) The Defendant was cross-examined for much less, and at one, time (about 3 hours).
Overall, whilst the Plaintiff had great difficulty answering many of the questions concisely, and at times, responsively, I am satisfied that he did endeavour, throughout his cross-examination, to answer truthfully. He did not depart, in any significant way, in his oral evidence, from the account, given in his affidavits, or otherwise (other than in respect of one matter to which I shall refer).
Importantly, a significant part of his evidence, like many of the other witnesses, consisted of repeating conversations with the deceased, at most of which, no one else was present.
Furthermore, the evidence of other witnesses to whom, as well as contemporaneous and other documents to which, I shall refer, corroborates much of the factual content of the conversations that he said he had with the deceased and which he repeated. I shall refer to the other witnesses who gave evidence of similar conversations with the deceased.
In addition, the fundamental facts in a number of the conversations with the deceased, concerning the undated document, were corroborated by the very existence of the Exercise Book and the terms of the undated document contained in it. In summary, and as the deceased told the Plaintiff, there was a document contained in a book, written by her, in the Italian language, which set out what she wanted to do with her estate, or part of it, which intentions, broadly speaking, appear to have been that each of two identified grandchildren was to receive a unit in Waterloo, that the Plaintiff was to receive the bulk of the remainder of the estate (I say this subject to what is determined in any construction suit), and that the Defendant was to receive no part of the deceased's estate.
Importantly, I do not find that any of the evidence given by the Defendant and her daughter, Gabrielle, materially undermines the Plaintiff's account of the events that occurred in relation to the undated document or his evidence more generally. (In a number of respects, Gabrielle's evidence relating to her conversations with the deceased corroborates some of the Plaintiff's evidence.) 
Overall, I consider the Plaintiff to be a truthful and reliable witness. In particular, I am satisfied that he gave truthful evidence about the following matters: 
His conversations with the deceased about the Exercise Book.

His conversations with the deceased about events that had happened with the Defendant. (This does not mean, however, that what the deceased told him about the Defendant's conduct was true.) 
His own observations of the deceased's relationship with the Defendant.

His attendance at the office of Mr Vlahakis following the death of the deceased and the preparation of the inventory with Mr Wong, a solicitor to whom Mr Vlahakis had entrusted the task.
There was one aspect of the Plaintiff's evidence that, initially, I found troubling. That evidence related to the circumstances in which the Plaintiff located the Exercise Book in the Coogee property.
The Plaintiff stated, more than once, in his evidence, that the deceased had told him where the Exercise Book was located, namely in between two books located in the white cupboard in the garage. 
He maintained, when asked in cross-examination, that he had gone to the deceased's home, with Mr Vlahakis, after being told by the Police that it was a crime scene, and that he had found the Exercise Book, where the deceased had told him she had left it. He said he did so, on the day following the deceased's death, and before the Defendant and the deceased's husband could find it.
He also gave evidence that he went to the garage first, located the Exercise Book, but then looked throughout the Coogee property in order to retrieve various other documents and effects. Those items, when retrieved, were immediately placed in a plastic box that he had found in the cellar (also described as "the little room off the garage") of the Coogee property. These items, including the Exercise Book, were then identified in the inventory created at the office of Mr Vlahakis. 
The Plaintiff had sworn an affidavit on 20 September 2012, in support of his application for the grant of administration (which affidavit was not read in the proceedings). In cross-examination, he was referred to Paragraph 40 of that affidavit in which he had said: "In my mother's plastic box ... I found a further testamentary handwritten statement of my mother".
The "testamentary handwritten statement" was identified by page numbers of Ex. H1, which was the Exercise Book.
Importantly, the Plaintiff in his affidavit of 20 September 2012, did not refer to having located the Exercise Book in the white cupboard in the deceased's garage, but rather stated that he had found it in "my mother's plastic box".
The Plaintiff was also cross-examined on a record of interview in which he participated with the NSW Police Service on 1 November 2012 upon the basis that what he had then said, on this topic, was a prior inconsistent statement. The part of the E.R.I.S.P Transcript, relating to what he had found at the deceased's home on 5 January 2012, was subsequently tendered (Ex. 5) without objection. Having referred to attending the Coogee property, with Mr Vlahakis, the following questions and answers were then recorded in the Transcript: "Q So then you went downstairs and let George in through the garage.

A Yeah.

Q And then what did you do? 
A Well, I went to the places that me mum usually keeps the stuff and told me where she keeps them.

Q And what places were they? 
A Well, the first one was obviously the garage, which was her favourite. She has a cupboard in the garage there where she keeps stuff and that's where I found, I found a fair bit of stuff.

Q When you say stuff, what do you mean? 
A Books, documents, her purse, her bag, I didn't bring it with me, her bag was
Q No, that's O.K.

A I've still got that.

Q All right. So you went to the cupboard in the garage, then where did you go? 
A Ah, we checked on the table there, we checked generally in the garage, then we went upstairs. Um, I checked into the kitchen especially in the kitchen cupboards. I checked everywhere but I checked the kitchen um, but there wasn't anything in the drawers in the kitchen, there wasn't anything there. Checked the laundry 'cause she had stuff in the laundry. I found her jewellery, expensive jewellery was in the laundry but I didn't, I didn't touch it, I didn't touch it, I only took what was, was necessary. I found um, a photo album up in one of the bedrooms with all our pictures in it. I wanted to take that but I said, well, no, I can't, it's not relevant at the moment and the authorities, I cant start taking personal stuff.

Q Mmm.

A Um, in her bedroom I found in a large dressing table, I found documents in a dressing table, I found them. Um, I came back downstairs, I went in a little room out just off the garage. That's where the box was and I found the box 'cause I knew, she told me she'd left everything, she kept everything. The exercise book, she'd put that in between two, she told me about that she made a thing and she'd put it in, in between a couple of books.

Q So she'd hidden it? 
A yeah, she told me she wrote things down, she told me, she did, it was common, she told me that she'd wrote a new will she told a lot of people that, that she wrote a new will."
When Mr Vlahakis gave evidence, he stated: "Q. And when you arrived at the property on 5 January Robert said to you, did he not, words to the effect that "my mother has written a will in a book"? 
A. Yes. Well I don't recall whether it was when I got there or in the conversations I had with him prior to meeting there.

Q. But on the 5th? 
A. On the 5th or prior, immediately prior to going there, yes.

Q. And he said to you "I am looking for that book, she told me she wrote it down in a book and it's in here"? 
A. Yes.

Q. "She said she left everything to me and I want to find it before Jenny and my father find it"? 
A. Yes I think so, yes.
 ...

Q. Do you recall that when you entered the garage Robert went directly to a white cupboard and searched? 
A. In the garage? 
Q. In the garage a white cupboard on the other side of the lounge room in the sitting area and searched 
A. On the same level? 
Q. Yes and searched for books? 
A. Yes.

Q. Do you recall that? 
A. I do recall that, yes.

Q. Do you recall Robert searching in that white cupboard and locating a book tucked in between other books? 
A. I can't say with a hundred percent confidence that I recall that.

Q. Do you recall Robert flicking through the book and saying "This looks like it. I think this is it. I think this is what I'm looking for"? 
A. I recall him saying that and I recall that I don't recall when he said that but I recall he said that when he found, or words to that effect, when he found a book or document but I don't know now if it was immediately after we entered into the garage.

From memory Laura had a living area that she may have lived on that level or she lived on a lower level even though her bedroom was on an upper level but I don't recall if that white cupboard and that conversation was in the garage or off the garage or above the garage.

Q. But it could have been 
A. It was one of the first things that we 
Q. One of the first things 
A. I think so, yes.

Q. that you located and discussed? 
A. I think so.

Q. You then went through the remainder of the house? 
A. Yes."
It seems to me that Mr Vlahakis corroborated the Plaintiff's version of the events that had occurred the day after the deceased's death and that he and the Plaintiff had located the Exercise Book reasonably promptly after entering the Coogee property. Certainly, the answers given by the Plaintiff in the record of interview suggest that the deceased had hidden the book that the Plaintiff located between two books in the white cupboard.
The evidence, overall, satisfies me that the deceased did tell the Plaintiff where she had hidden the Exercise Book (in the white cupboard between two books) and that he located it on 5 January 2012. I am also satisfied that the Plaintiff's principal purpose for going to the Coogee property on 5 January 2012 was to locate the Exercise Book and that he did so because of what the deceased had told him. There can be little doubt that he wished to retrieve the Exercise Book as soon as possible and before any opportunity was given to any other person to do so.
Because it was raised by counsel for the Defendant as a matter of significance, I have carefully read the cross-examination of the Plaintiff about when he had the first conversation with the deceased about changing her Will. He maintained that it was at some time between mid 2010 and late 2010. However, he could not remember whether her statement, at that time, was that she had written a new Will (using the past tense) or whether she was going to write a new Will (using the present tense). This is hardly surprising as the conversation took place about three years before the Plaintiff was cross-examined.
The Plaintiff was also cross-examined about where different conversations about the same topic had occurred. Counsel for the Defendant suggested to the Plaintiff, and he agreed, that it was 8 to 12 times that the deceased had said words to the effect "I have left everything to you".
He was asked about the evidence, given in one of his affidavits, that one such conversation took place in Albury. He conceded that it might not have been in Albury as he had stated in the affidavit. He said, in my view, unsurprisingly, that he could not say, "for sure it was Albury, or whether it was back in Coogee".
However, throughout the cross-examination, he maintained that he had been told by the deceased, at various times, that she had written her Will in a book. (He denied that he knew in what sort of book she had written and said that he was not even aware of what the book looked like.)
I also accept that the deceased, initially told him that she was leaving the bulk of her estate to him and that he was "to look after all the children", and that later, she stated to him that she was going to leave each of Gabrielle and Sean one home unit and that he should look after his own children and Jacqui, to the latter of whom he must give "wages". 
I accept the Plaintiff's evidence that the first time he saw the Exercise Book was on 5 January 2012, the day after the deceased died, although the deceased had told him where it could be located. He did not ask to see the Exercise Book at the time, and the deceased did not show it to him when she discussed what she had done or where she had placed it.
Similarly, although he was aware, from what the deceased told him, that the deceased made a Will in 2007 and that he was to receive one half of her estate, he had not, at the date of the deceased's death, seen the 2007 Will. Again, he did not ask to see the 2007 Will and the deceased did not show it to him when she discussed it with him.
I also accept the Plaintiff's evidence that "if [the deceased] wrote something down in Italian, she would go to someone and speak in English basically. She doesn't have any trouble speaking in English. And she doesn't have any trouble writing in Italian and saying it English. She has trouble actually writing it in English, in the actual writing of the words.". The deceased often made notes for herself so that she could go to meetings with people and refer to those notes, and then speak to a person in English after reading her Italian notes.
Ms Varela, who is in a close personal relationship with the Plaintiff, gave evidence also and was cross-examined. I am satisfied that she had a very close relationship with the deceased for a number of years before the deceased's death, although the relationship "grew even closer towards the end".
Ms Varela saw the deceased almost every day in the last three years of the deceased's life. She would take the deceased shopping, otherwise do her shopping for her, take her to medical appointments, and would cook for her. The deceased appeared to trust Ms Varela and clearly expressed positive feelings towards her.
The deceased had spoken to Ms Varela about the 2007 Will and its contents, although she could not remember when that conversation had occurred. That was the first occasion that the deceased discussed her Will.
It was not until "pretty close to her death" that the deceased again discussed a Will with Ms Varela. However, in early 2011, the deceased told her that she was thinking of changing her Will, but did not provide any details of the changes she proposed to make. Nor did Ms Varela raise the topic with the deceased. She said she would "listen if she tells me something, but I will never ask, or insist on anything of her decisions".
Ms Varela gave the following evidence in her affidavit: "42. ... Sometime in December, 2011, [the deceased] said to me: "I trust you very much. I have changed my will. I wrote it in my own language so no one can deny it. I have also read it to Doug May and he is writing it in
English for me. I have left all my money and property to Robert because he is the only one who cares for me. I have also left something for my grandchildren. And I have made sure you are looked after. I also want my solicitor to write it in English for me and keep a copy."
I recall that on 15 December I dropped the children off at St Michael's school Daceyville at about 9.30 am. Then, I went to pick up Laura at ...
Coogee and we went to Eastgardens. When I picked her up she showed me an exercise book saying, "Look, I got the will here" and she laughed. We parked on the top level, and had a coffee. She told me to wait in the car or come back and pick her up in one hour.
Approximately one hour later, I met the Deceased as arranged.
When she got in the car, she said to me: "I read my will out to the Solicitor. He has all the information now. He will write it in English. I will pick up a copy after the Christmas break."
We then went to Coles so she could do some shopping and here she also bought a bottle of wine. She used a trolley. When we were finished, we left
Coles, and when we were walking outside, I saw Laura move towards and start talking with Yvonne and Kevin Smyth, both of whom were known to us from the school, St Michael's at Daceyville.
I heard Laura say to them: "I have just been to the Solicitor about my will. I wrote it in Italian and he does not understand Italian. I wrote it myself and I read it to him in English and he took some notes. My husband and daughter want to kill me for the money.
I have left everything to my son and grandchildren."
I took Laura back home and assisted her to take the shopping in as I normally did and then she said to me: "Lets go to the pizza place for dinner".

Laura brought the bottle of wine with her.

We drove to my mother's place to pick up the kids and then after went to
Lino's Pizza in Kingsford for dinner."
She was asked, in cross-examination, about some of what she had deposed to in her affidavit. Her oral evidence about the events of 15 December 2011 was: "Q. Now Madam, you have said that when you took Laura to the solicitor's office on 15 December, she showed you an exercise book saying: "Look, I got the will here"? 
A. Yes, that's what she did.

Q. Why do you describe the book as an exercise book? 
A. Because it was a little book like the ones the kids use to write things.
Like school kids use those exercise books to write.

Q. You remember what colour it was? 
A. It was white with some colour, some green colour.

Q. Was that the first time you had ever seen that book? 
A. No, she used to have these book in other locations, because I used to take her out to shopping for the house she was building, and then I saw her writing measurements and like granite, and what floor she wanted, she wanted in the kitchen, what she wanted in the patio. She wrote things for the house.

Q. She would sometimes take it with her would she when you went shopping for things for the house? 
A. Yes, yes she took it with her. She would look at what she was looking for, or what kind of material or things. I don't know what she was there, but in
Italian she wrote it herself.

Q. Madam, the occasion when she said, "Look, I got the will here", she just showed you the front of book I take it? 
A. Yes, she showed me only the front. I never look inside.

Q. She didn't show you inside either, did she? 
A. No she didn't, she only show me the book itself, yes.

Q. And you say when she said that to you that she laughed when she said it? 
A. Yes, she had smiled at me.

Q. You said laughed in your affidavit? 
A. Well for me it's the same as smile, or I express as a laugh. She smile.
Like she gave me a smile face.

Q. On this occasion she didn't tell you what was in the book? 
A. No she didn't tell me until later in the day. She only showed me the book and told me this is my will, and then we went to East Gardens.

Q. And you picked her up about one hour later; is that correct? 
A. Yes, one hour, or one hour and a bit. She told me to meet her later, so I went to the solicitor's office about an hour and a bit after. And then we came back to do the shopping, she stopped to pick up her bags, because she always had spare bags to put her shopping in from the car. And then we went to do the shopping, and then we went in the car is when she told me that she went to the solicitors. What else she told me ... she told me that she went to the solicitor.

Q. And she didn't tell you what she told the solicitor, did she? 
A. Yes she told me I think she told me, yeah, what she told me that she wanted to leave some money to the children's hospital, some money to the grand kids, and most of her money to The Plaintiff.

Q. Was that after she had been to see the solicitor that she told you? 
A. Yes after when she came out, yes.
 ...

Q. And on that occasion when you came back when you say that you had a discussion with her afterwards, and I'm looking at page 421 of the court book you say that Laura Angius said to you, "I will pick up a copy after the
Christmas break"? 
A. Yes, she told me that.

Q. Did she tell you what date it was to be picked up? 
A. No, I don't remember the date, after Christmas break.

Q. And, Madam, did she shows (sic) you or refer to the exercise book again after she came away from the solicitor's appointment? 
A. Yes, she told me, "I read it to the solicitor. He was asking information.
And then he is writing it in English for me and I come back after Christmas breat to pick that up." But I didn't see the exercise book. After that she had it in her bag, I think.

Q. And did you see it again at any time before she died, the exercise book? 
A. No, I don't think so, I don't think so."
Although Ms Varela was criticised by the Defendant for taking the deceased to meet with Justin Webb (to whose evidence I shall return), I am satisfied that she had no motive for so doing other than to assist the deceased who seemed, to Ms Varela, to be more and more troubled. 
I have no hesitation in accepting Ms Varela's evidence. Whilst there were some difficulties of language, I am satisfied that she was endeavouring to tell the truth. I reject any suggestion that her evidence, particularly about what the deceased told her concerning the Defendant's conduct, was motivated by this case, or by any desire, on Ms Varela's part, to paint the Defendant in a bad light.
Nor do I consider that Ms Varela was assisting the deceased in order to ingratiate herself and for the purpose of trying to alienate the Defendant from the deceased. The evidence appears to be that whilst she and the deceased became closer in the last years of the deceased's life, they had been close before that time and at the time the deceased made the 2007 Will. 
Furthermore, other evidence that I accept (to some of which I shall refer in more detail) corroborates Ms Varela's evidence of the conversations to which she referred. As I have stated earlier, perhaps the most important piece of corroboration, is the existence of the Exercise Book itself and its contents.
Another example of the corroboration of Ms Varela's evidence about the deceased having read something to Mr May and that he was writing it in English for the deceased, is the email referred to by Mr Vlahakis to which reference has been made. Yet another example relates to the events of 15 December 2011, namely taking the deceased to the solicitors, then taking her to Eastgardens shopping and then to dinner, each of which individual events is corroborated by another witness or witnesses. 
I found the Defendant to be a witness whose evidence was, at least in part, coloured by the bitterness of this dispute, her relationship with the Plaintiff, and, as importantly, with Ms Varela. I also found that her evidence was far from dispassionate. Clearly, she feels very strongly about certain things, and her evidence, at times, reflected her emotion. 
Furthermore, her attitude to some of the evidence given by other witnesses in the case diminished her credit. She did not shrink from characterising some witnesses as "lying"; others she thought had been misled by what he, or she, had been told, particularly by Ms Varela, which, she asserted, affected the evidence given. It seemed that she left no room for the possibility that each was truthfully repeating his, or her, recollection of the events. I have taken into account the emotion to which I have referred. 
For example, in relation to the Plaintiff, the following evidence was given by her: "Q. Just going to your brother's evidence. He has given evidence of a number of occasions when he says that you spoke very harshly to your mother, if I can just put it in that fairly neutral term? 
A. Well, he would say that, wouldn't he?"
This was despite her admission that she and the deceased had arguments and that each "yelled" at the other. She also accepted that she had been the subject of an apprehended violence order (for three months commencing in September 2010) and several applications for an apprehended violence order in favour of the deceased that she said did not proceed. 
The Plaintiff had also given evidence, which I accept, that on two occasions he saw the Defendant physically assault the deceased by punching and kicking her and screaming at her: "I'm going to kill you, you fucking bitch". On each of these occasions, he had to physically pull the Defendant away from the deceased and drag her away.
In relation to Ms O'Hehir and Ms Garces, the following passages of the cross-examination of the Defendant are instructive: "Q. You heard your counsel ask two of them, Rocio Garces and Rayeleene
O'Hehir, if they had been promised money in exchange for giving evidence in the plaintiff's case? 
A. I believe he did ask that.
 ...

HIS HONOUR 
Q. I think the question you were asked was, in relation to the two witnesses, did you have any basis for the belief that they had been offered any incentive to give their evidence? 
A. Well, both are friends of Jackie well, one has admitted she's a friend of
Jackie, a close friend of Jackie. The other lady was receiving cash from my mother to clean her house and now she wouldn't have money anymore. So I think it's possible they may have been offered inducements.

Q. You do, do you? 
A. I think it's possible.
 ...

Q. However, in the case of Rayeleene O'Hehir and Rocio Garces, that direct question was put to them. They were asked whether they were telling the truth in their evidence; you would have heard that too? 
A. Yes.

Q. With respect to Ms Garces, the basis upon which you don't accept that she's telling the truth is that she is friendly with Jackie Varela; is that it? 
A. That's probably most of it.
There was no reasonable basis for her belief and, in my view, the suggestion that each may have been offered an inducement should not have been made or persisted with.
In relation to Mr Abrams and Ms O'Hehir, the Defendant said that each had given inconsistent evidence at the inquest. However, her counsel had not put to either of the witnesses any alleged inconsistencies. Her counsel fairly conceded that he "didn't ask any questions of any witness ... suggesting that the evidence that they gave at the inquest was inconsistent with the evidence given in these proceedings" but the Defendant did say that the transcript of evidence from the inquest had only been recently received. 
Despite these matters, in relation to Mr Abrams, whilst accepting that her counsel had not suggested that he had been lying, the Defendant asserted that it should have been put to him that he had done so. 
In relation to Mr Webb, the Defendant said that she doubted the truthfulness of his evidence: "Q. He described what you said to him, "although not threatening" he was diligent to say that "quite forceful". Were you quite forceful in what you were saying to him? 
A. I was upset that people like people like Jackie Varela were insinuating that I had a hand in my mother's death.

Q. This man didn't take any part in the inquest, did he? 
A. No, but I think he had she has circulated this belief among witnesses that my mother's death was suspicious. And she's not being truthful to him. Plus I let him know that his evidence was inconsistent with her evidence. He said she lived around the corner at xx Wild Street. She says in her affidavit she's never lived there at all.

Q. That was a reason to suggest to him that he should not give evidence as to statements that he says were made to him by your mother? 
A. I made him understand this was a will dispute. It was not about my mother's death."
In relation to Mr Webb and other witnesses, there had been no suggestion, made in cross-examination, that he, or she, had been misled as to the nature of these proceedings, or that each was giving evidence based upon a mistaken understanding of the nature of the case being presented by the Plaintiff. In any event, as the Defendant accepted, "as a result of the Coroner's open finding, investigations about the suspicious nature of [the deceased's] death were in fact taking place with the police".
In relation to Ms Varela, the Defendant said: "I don't know what my mother was telling to Jackie. I wouldn't believe anything that came out of Jackie's mouth."
The Defendant also accused the deceased of lying to Mr Abrams as to the cause of the bruising that she had shown to him.
Of course, the Defendant had not been present during the deceased's conversations about the Exercise Book and the deceased's intention to make a new Will or that she had done do.
The Defendant denied any abusive conduct towards the deceased. However, there does seem to be evidence, in Police reports, that raises questions about the truth of her denial. Similarly, there is the evidence of the Plaintiff and Ms Varela about his, and her, observations. However, I shall not, in these proceedings, express any view about the veracity of the Defendant's denial. 
The Defendant's daughter, Gabrielle Angius swore an affidavit and was cross-examined. She was aware of the police being called to the deceased's home and that on some of these occasions there were allegations of violence made against the Defendant, and on other occasions, because of allegations made by the Defendant about the deceased.
Gabrielle also gave the following evidence: "Q. Now, in 2011 you recall a number of instances where your grandmother had made statements to you about changing her will? 
A. Yes.

Q. On one occasion in 2011 you recall where your grandmother said to you, I think I am going to change my will to Robbie, no one is going to disinherit him, I think I will leave your share and Shaun (sic)? 
A. On one occasion she did say that to me.
 ...

Q. There were other instances again when your grandmother on another occasion, you say at paragraph 15, when she again said to you, "I am going to change my will and leave nothing to your mother and I am going to leave Robbie everything." Do you recall that conversation? 
A. Yes.

Q. And what did you say to your grandmother on that occasion, if anything? 
A. I don't recall, she often would change her mind.

Q. You said you don't recall. On another occasion again in 2011, this is a separate vindication (sic), you recall when your grandmother said to you, "If your mother does not move I will change my will and leave her nothing." Recall that conversation? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. What I am suggesting to you is that after those three incidents or conversations you had with your grandmother where she told you that she was going to change her will, that your grandmother on at least one of those occasions or another occasion in 2011 indicated to you that she had, in fact, changed her will? 
A. Yes, and would, those times she told me what you just told me, the three occasions, she would change her mind and say something different to me.

HIS HONOUR 
Q. Sorry, I just want to understand, so after the three conversations that you mentioned in your affidavit, she did actually tell you that she changed her will? 
A. No, no, no, she never said she had changed her will, no, never.

Q. I noticed that the deceased indicated that she had changed the will. I thought you said in answer to Ms Culkoff, the question, that she told you that she had changed her will? 
A. No, she never said to me she had changed her will, never said that to me, only gave me her thoughts, what she was going to do with it. That would change literally from week to week.

CULKOFF 
Q. I suggest to you, that the answer you gave a short while ago that she had told you that she had, in fact, changed her will is correct and that the answer that you are giving now is not true? 
A. No, she, on my life, never said to me I have changed my will, never.
 ...

Q. When she told you that she was leaving everything to Robbie, because grandfather would disinherit, you said it was not fair to you or your brother? 
A. I did not feel it was fair, I felt, so like they were, they were trying to control my grandmother. They already tried to get power of attorney, I felt in a confident woman, you know, they were manipulating her, I didn't like it.

HIS HONOUR 
Q. I think the question you were asked was relating to whether or not you told your grandmother in response to her statement that she was going to change the will.

A. Yes.

CULKOFF 
Q. That it was unfair? 
A. I did say it was unfair, I did.

Q. And your grandmother told you that she feared that her grandfather would leave everything to your mother? 
A. She had that fear, yes.

Q. And she told you that she feared that Robbie would get nothing in those circumstances? 
A. Yes, she told me that."
The part of the evidence quoted that I have some difficulty accepting is Gabrielle's denial that the deceased had told her that she had changed her Will. Otherwise, Gabrielle's evidence seems to be consistent with the other evidence in the case. It is quite possible, of course, that the conversations Gabrielle had with the deceased took place before 6 September 2011, that is before the deceased had written the undated document. (This possibility receives some support from Ms O'Hehir, to whose evidence I shall shortly refer.) 
The Other Witnesses
The other witnesses to whose evidence I shall now refer are not members of the deceased's family.
The weight of the evidence given by each of the parties and the question of his, or her, credibility, of course, has to be considered in the context of the evidence as a whole. A number of witnesses from different walks of life, gave evidence about conversations with the deceased and about other matters. Nearly all were cross-examined.
I accept the evidence of each of these witnesses of his, and her, conversations with the deceased and, in the case of Mr Abrams, his observations of bruising on the deceased. Each of the witnesses to whom I shall refer, had a reasonably good recollection about the events, and his, and her, demeanour, respectively, was careful and considered. I have confidence in the accuracy of his, and her, recollections. 
I also have no reason to doubt that each of these witnesses was attempting to give a truthful version of the events involving the deceased with which she, or he, was involved. In my view, each was a reliable witness whose evidence I should, and do, accept.
It is important to note that the conversations with the deceased stated by each of the witnesses, whilst consistent in theme, were not materially identical. Cross-examination did not affect her, and his, evidence. Of course, the question whether what the deceased said to each was factually entirely accurate, does not have to be determined.
Yet, some of the evidence given by a number of these witnesses is supported by the objective facts, which, at least in part, cannot be disputed.
Because the conversations relating to her testamentary intentions are important, and because it is necessary to consider them in the context of the case being advanced by one party or the other, I shall set out the conversations that the deceased had with each of these witnesses verbatim.
Rayeleene O'Hehir, who from about 2006, was engaged to carry out domestic duties for the deceased at her home in Coogee. She attended the deceased's home from 7:30 a.m. until 11:30 a.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. She did not have a key to the Coogee property and when she arrived, she would come through the garage door, which the deceased had opened. (She confirmed that to her knowledge only the deceased and John had a key.)
She gave evidence that whilst she was working, in the "early years", she saw Gabrielle, visit regularly, sometimes with her brother, Sean. However, in the years closer to the deceased's death, Gabrielle visited less and less. She observed that the Plaintiff visited also, and that his visits increased over time until the deceased's death.
Whilst Ms O'Hehir had met the Defendant on a social occasion, she only recollects seeing her on two other occasions at the Coogee home, on one of which occasions, she describes the Defendant as "yelling and screaming and shouting at her mother". I accept this evidence which, at least in part, is consistent with what the Defendant said.
She accepted that she did not ever see the Defendant touch, shove, or push, the deceased, and that she had repeated, in her affidavit, what she had been told by the deceased about the Defendant's conduct.
Ms O'Hehir says that she "occasionally" saw the deceased's husband at the Coogee property and describes some of these occasions.
Ms O'Hehir also gave the following evidence: "23. In the months closer to the Deceased's death I observed she had become more agitated and talkative. She would, from time to time, say words to the effect: "I need to fix things up straight because I am worried about Robby." and "I can't believe she [the Defendant] is my daughter. She is always wanting money; she yells and screams at me and becomes violent when she does not get what she wants. I am sick of paying her bills all the time."
At around this time, I came across the Deceased in the garage. She was writing in a book. I found this unusual because most of the time she would be cleaning the house, reading or watching TV. At the time she was writing in this book, I recall the Deceased said to me words to the effect: "I have to put this down right. I've got to do this. I've got to do this for
Robby. They will not look after him. If I don't do anything Robby will get nothing".
Sometime later when the Deceased and I were having a coffee, I recollect her saying words to the following effect: "I have changed my will. I've looked after Robbie and my grandchildren."
Ms O'Hehir, when cross-examined, said that her best recollection was that the conversation with the deceased regarding having "to fix up her Will" occurred about three months before the deceased's death.
She was also asked about seeing an 'exercise book' in which the deceased was writing. She said that she had described it as such because it was like "a book that my daughter used to use at school; an exercise book. That they always said it was an exercise book. And that was the very book that she used". ("They" in the passage I have quoted referred to "the children at school, and my life, as my daughter was growing up".)
Although it was put to Ms O'Hehir that she had not seen the deceased writing in what she described as the exercise book, she maintained that she had done so and that this had happened in September or October 2011. There is no reason to doubt her evidence on this topic.
I do not accept the criticism of Ms O'Hehir made by the Defendant.
Jacques Sader, the owner of a local restaurant at which the deceased, Ms Varela and the deceased's grandchildren would regularly attend, from about 2007, says that having observed what Ms Varela did for the deceased, he said to the deceased: "I hope you put her in your bloody Will".
Mr Sader, in cross-examination, admitted that this statement was said jokingly, but he maintained that the statement was made "once or twice".
Mr Sader was also asked questions about his conversation with the deceased about her children. He says that the deceased told him that she had a son and a daughter, but that it was Ms Varela "who is the one who looks after me". 
Mr Sader also gave the following evidence in his affidavit: "8. On a day that I believe was in December, 2011 I recall the Deceased,
Jacqui, and the children came in as they usually did. I remember seeing the
Deceased place a bottle of wine on the table. This was unusual as they usually just had soft drinks or water with their meals. They had not been in for some time and I was pleased to see them.

I said: "What's the celebration for?" 
The Deceased replied: "I have re-written my will. I wrote it out in a book, and I took it to the
Solicitor today to translate it." 
I replied: "It's about bloody time." 
The Deceased said: "That's it now. I am very glad I am finished.""
In cross-examination, Mr Sader maintained that the conversation in his affidavit referred to, which I have quoted above, took place around Christmas 2011, as he remembered wishing the deceased a merry Christmas, to which she replied that she hoped that it would be so. He particularly remembered the occasion because the deceased had a bottle of wine, something that was unique in his observations of her. (This corroborated Ms Varela's evidence that she observed the deceased buying a bottle of wine on 15 December 2011 whilst they were together at Eastgardens following the deceased having seen Mr Vlahakis.)
It is clear, from other evidence, that the date the deceased saw Mr Vlahakis was 15 December 2011, which broadly corroborates the date of the conversation between Mr Sader and the deceased. Counsel for the Defendant, not unnaturally, acknowledged that if the Court accepted that the conversation had occurred, then the conversation occurred on the evening of 15 December 2011.
I accept that Mr Sader had never discussed the contents of his affidavit and the proceedings with either the Plaintiff or Ms Varela.
Ian Abrams, who practised as the pharmacist, at the pharmacy which the deceased had attended for about 5 or 6 years prior to her death, and who says that he regarded the deceased as "a friend", even though their relationship was purely professional, gave the following evidence about conversations he had with her about a Will: "16. During the last 2 to 3 years before her death, the Deceased said to me words to the following effect: "I have to change my will. I want to leave my property to Robert. We are building a house together. It will have a self contained unit for me. I helped design it. I will live there with Robert and Jaqui and the grandchildren.
Robert is a good family man. He and Jaqui will look after me. John and Jenny keep threatening me. Jenny said she will kill me first before she lets me build the house. I have to change my will to protect Robert's future. John will not take care or make any provision for him".
We had a number of discussions about the Deceased's will and what she wanted to do. I recall on one occasion she said to me words to the following effect "I have changed my will. Robert will be looked after." 
I said: "Have you had it properly notarised by a solicitor?" 
She replied: "It is watertight. I have put it away for someone to find it after my death." 
She say [sic] she had written it in Italian and would be seeing a lawyer to put it in English.

I then said: "You need to make sure the will is noted with a solicitor."
I cannot precisely remember when this conversation took place, but I believe it was within 12 months prior to her death."
Mr Abrams acknowledged that he did not record the chronology of events that had occurred or take notes of the conversations that he had with the deceased. This is hardly surprising.
Mr Abrams was asked questions about the medication (about which he had given some evidence) that the deceased had taken. It was suggested to him that a side effect of the medication was that the deceased sustained the bruising that she showed him. Mr Abrams thought that the bruising, that he observed, was inconsistent with it being a side effect of such medication. (Ms Varela gives evidence of the deceased showing her bruising as well.)
Finally, Mr Abrams gave evidence that he had gone to the deceased's home on different occasions, and had been into her garage on many occasions. He described what was in the garage including the white cupboard about which the Plaintiff had given evidence and in which the Plaintiff said he had found the Exercise Book. (Mr Abrams gave no evidence of having been told where "the deceased had put it away for someone to find after her death").
Justin Ronald Webb, a friend of Ms Varela, who had met the deceased on occasions, had a conversation with Ms Varela and the deceased, which he believes took place between Christmas and New Year 2011: "5. ... I recall Jaqui said to me: "Laura is worried. I trust you (meaning me). I need someone outside the family to know about it. I want you to hear what she is going through." 
Then Laura said: "I have written my will in my own language and put it for safekeeping in my home because I have been subject to physical violence from my husband. Jenny has made threats to me. I have been assaulted by John, and had to go to hospital. He has hit me around my kidneys. The hospital has the records." 
When she spoke, she appeared upset. She also spoke in an agitated manner, and her English was broken, as it was not her first language.

She continued: "I am worried something is going to happen to me. I wanted to make provision for Robert and the kids and Jaqui to see they will be looked after, especially the girls. I don't want someone to know I am in trouble and have done something about it."
I have earlier referred to Mr Webb's evidence of having been contacted by the Defendant a short time after he had sworn his affidavit. I accept Mr Webb's evidence where it conflicts with the Defendant's evidence about the event.
Yvonne Smyth, also a friend of Ms Varela, had known the deceased since about 2010. She had known Ms Varela since 2009. She did not know the Plaintiff until about 2010.
She had not been helped to prepare her affidavit but had simply spoken to the Plaintiff's solicitor, who had informed her where to come. She explained to the solicitor what had happened and he took notes and subsequently submitted an affidavit to her.
Mrs Smyth gives evidence of a conversation that she had with the deceased on 15 December 2011: "6. When we were outside Coles Liquor Shop at Eastgardens, we saw Laura, and
Jaqui. We said hello to each other. I did notice that Laura looked anxious, and was pale and drawn in the face. I noticed this as she was usually happy. I said to her: "What's the matter with you?" 
She replied: "I have just been to the Solicitor. I wrote a new will in Italian. I went to the Solicitor to read it to him. He took notes in English when I read it. I am very concerned as my daughter and my husband have been threatening me. I have had death threats. I am scared. I want to leave everything to my son and grandchildren. My son has been very nice to me. My son and grandchildren look after me. I had to change my will in case anything happened".

I said: "You should go to the Police." 
She replied: "It's happened before and I have gone to the police.""
Although she was cross-examined about the date of the conversation, which she had specified, she maintained that she remembered the date because of what the deceased had told her and considered that it was an important date to remember. She accepted that she had never before 15 December 2011, had a conversation with the deceased about the deceased's Will.
(After the death of the deceased, Mrs Smyth wrote the event down in a 2011 calendar diary. However, the diary was not produced.)
Again, the date of this conversation, as stated by Ms Smyth, is confirmed by the date the deceased saw Mr Vlahakis. 
Mrs Smyth's husband, Kevin Smyth, who was present during the conversation with the deceased stated above, gives evidence of having heard the conversation with the deceased. The conversation he alleges was in slightly different terms to that of his wife, but not in any material way.
Mr Smyth, too, confirmed that the date of the conversation was 15 December 2011. 
He also gave evidence, in cross-examination, that Ms Varela had asked him and Mrs Smyth to provide an affidavit. He said that when the solicitor interviewed them about what was to go into the affidavits, he spoke to them separately. He stated that he and his wife did not prepare the affidavits that they had sworn, together.
Mr Smyth also said that he had never had any discussion with the deceased, prior to 15 December 2011 about the topics of the conversation with her on that date.
Ms Rocio Garces, a friend of Ms Varela, met the deceased in about 2002 at the Plaintiff's home. They saw each other, thereafter, regularly, and became friends. She gives the following evidence of a conversation with the deceased: "5. Towards the end of December 2011, I recall going to Robert's apartment in
Waterloo. I cannot remember the exact date, but I believe it was close to
Christmas. I took my granddaughter Isabella with me. She used to play with
Jaqui's two children as they were about the same age. Laura Angius was there.
She seemed upset as she was going in and out of the unit onto the balcony to smoke. I said to her: "What's wrong with you, Laura?" 
She said: "My family is divided. My husband John and my daughter are against me and
Robert. They are very angry with me because I am building a house for me and
Robert. They want me to stop it. I want to give this house to Robert. Look how
Jenny kicked me." 
She showed me bruises on her leg. I looked at the bruises.

Laura continued: "They are going to kill me if I don't stop building the house. I did write my will already in Italian and I am leaving everything to Robert. My daughter is going to receive from her father."
In cross-examination, Ms Garces said that Ms Varela had asked whether she remembered what the deceased had said and whether she could be a witness. Ms Varela had not told her what to say other than "to tell the truth".
Ms Garces said that a solicitor, whose name she could not remember, had come to her home and had spoken to her.
I reject the criticism of Ms Garces made by the Defendant.
I was favourably impressed by each of these witnesses. In particular, I detected no partisanship in his, and her, evidence even though it was clear that most knew, and were friendly with Ms Varela. 
Although a question was asked of some of these witnesses, whether the Plaintiff, or Ms Varela, had offered him, or her, an inducement for giving the evidence, each of the witnesses who was asked, denied this. I accept that denial unequivocally.
As stated, I have no hesitation in accepting the evidence of the conversations with the deceased to which each refers and which I have set out above. Significantly, the theme expressed by the deceased to each of these individual witnesses, at different time, and in different circumstances, was consistent. It would suggest a conspiracy of great proportions to conclude that the evidence from such a variety of witnesses, with each of whom the deceased had a different type of relationship, could concoct the evidence that he and she has given in the proceedings.
I reject completely, any submission by the Defendant, that I should not believe the evidence of these witnesses. 
Motivation for Writing the Undated Document
It is not in issue that from about 2005 the relationship between the deceased and John had begun to deteriorate. There is also no dispute that it continued to deteriorate to the point that they separated, finally, in September 2010, and that they acknowledged, subsequently, in writing, that there was no likelihood of their reconciliation. There were, then, legal proceedings in this Court between them, and involving the Defendant, which were not resolved until late November 2011.
The Plaintiff's relationship with his father was also such that there was some basis for the deceased's belief that no provision would be made for the Plaintiff by John, and that it was necessary for her to make provision for the Plaintiff out of her estate.
There is also no dispute that the relationship between the deceased and the Defendant had deteriorated from about mid-2007, whilst her relationship with the Plaintiff and Ms Varela continued as it had, with each providing the deceased with assistance and support.
The Defendant admitted that between September 2010 and the date of the deceased's death, she saw the deceased on two occasions only, but that she spoke to her on the telephone. One occasion was in December 2011, which led to Ms Varela obtaining an apprehended violence order.
It is unnecessary, in these proceedings, for me to determine whether all of the allegations repeated by the deceased against each of John and the Defendant are true. What is important, on this issue, is that the deceased spoke to different people about incidents involving the Defendant and involving John. In this regard, her complaints about the Defendant were consistent and they provide some of the reasons why the deceased wrote the undated document.
There has been no suggestion made in the pleadings, or otherwise, that the deceased was suffering from a delusion, or what may be described as an overvalued idea, or even a mistaken belief, about these matters. Rather, the Defendant said, at least as to some of the things that the deceased had complained about "I believe my mother was lying". 
It is also clear that by 2010, the family had fragmented into two factions: the Defendant sided with John and the Plaintiff with the deceased. The Plaintiff appears to have had very little contact with John. According to the deceased, her own contact with John and the Defendant were not happy occasions but were filled with arguments, disharmony, and at times, some violence.
In part, it was because of the deceased's relationship with the Plaintiff that the deceased's relationship with John and with the Defendant fractured even further. When, in 2011, the plans for the redesign of the Plaintiff's property at Maroubra, with an estimated cost of $1.3 million to build what had been designed, were completed and being put into effect, each of the deceased's husband and the Defendant expressed significant disagreement. They simply did not want that amount of money to be spent because John believed it was overcapitalising the Plaintiff's property.
That this is so is demonstrated by what the deceased told Ms Varela on the day before her death: "I have been looking for John because he has to give me a cheque. I haven't been able to find him. He has threatened me again. He told me to stop building the house in Maroubra. He also told me not to live with Rob and that I should get The Defendant to look after me instead of you. If I live under The
Defendant I will need a body guard. The Defendant will be punching me if I don't do what she says":
Furthermore, the Defendant has not called John to give evidence in this case. There is no reason, therefore, to reject the Plaintiff's evidence that he has not had a good relationship with his father for some time and the evidence of his belief that he is unlikely to be named as a beneficiary in John's Will.
The fact that the deceased stated that threats had been made against her and that she was fearful, as evidenced by the anxiety that she displayed to a number of people, is significant and is credible on the issue of providing another reason for writing out the undated document. So, too, is her desire to benefit the Plaintiff, being the child who she believed had "sided" with her. 
The Law
Although I have set out some of what I state hereunder in other cases, in view of the importance of this case to the parties, I shall repeat the principles. It is important that they are able to follow the reasoning and for each to be satisfied that I have considered the evidence and the submissions.
Wills can be proved in two ways; being a grant in common form or in solemn form. A grant is a judicial act, and becomes an order of the Court: Kuhl versus Liebcheschel <case>; [[1933] SASR 394]
In the case of a grant in solemn form, (with exceptions concerning fraud, discovery of a later Will, or mistake in making the original grant) the grant of probate is irrevocable. Or as was put in Tobin versus Ezekiel <case>, by Campbell JA, at [7]: "The situation is rather that a grant in solemn form is binding on the parties to the probate suit in which it was granted, on anyone who has been cited to see the proceedings, and also on anyone of full capacity who has an interest and knows of the proceedings but chooses not to intervene: Osborne versus Smith <case>; [(1960) 105 CLR 153]; Williams,
Mortimer and Sunnucks, op cit p 270."
As stated, the Plaintiff now seeks the grant, in the alternative, but in each case, in solemn form.
As the deceased died in January 2012, these proceedings are governed by the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/), [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html), rather than the [Probate and Administration Act 1898](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/), <case>. Section 8 applies to wills whether made before, on, or after 1 March 2008, if the deceased died on, or after, that date: Schedule 1, Clause 3(3) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/).
[Section 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) provides: "(1) This section applies to a document, or part of a document, that: purports to state the testamentary intentions of a deceased person, and has not been executed in accordance with this Part.

The document, or part of the document, forms: the deceased person's will - if the Court is satisfied that the person intended it to form his or her will, or an alteration to the deceased person's will - if the Court is satisfied that the person intended it to form an alteration to his or her will, or a full or partial revocation of the deceased person's will - if the Court is satisfied that the person intended it to be a full or partial revocation of his or her will.

In making a decision under subsection (2), the Court may, in addition to the document or part, have regard to: any evidence relating to the manner in which the document or part was executed, and any evidence of the testamentary intentions of the deceased person, including evidence of statements made by the deceased person.

Subsection (3) does not limit the matters that the Court may have regard to in making a decision under subsection (2).

This section applies to a document whether it came into existence within or outside the State."
The [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) does not comprehensively define a Will. [Section 3(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s3.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) simply defines "will" as including "a codicil and any other testamentary disposition". It is not necessary that the document said to be a Will should assume any particular form, or be couched in language technically appropriate to its testamentary character. It is sufficient if it is intended to dispose of property, or of rights of the deceased, in a disposition that is to take effect upon death, but until then is not to take effect but is to be revocable. Although usual, it is not legally essential to find a clear statement identifying the document as a Will: Romano versus Romano  <case>, per Bryson J, at [6] - [8]. 
It has recently been noted by Slattery J in Yazbek versus Yazbek [[2012] NSWSC 594:](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2012/594.html "View Case" ) "[77] There is no substantive difference between [Succession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) and its legislative predecessor [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) , s
A. Since the commencement of [Succession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) this
Court has continued to apply the cases considering the requirements of [Probate and Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) , s18A: cf Bell versus Crewes <case> at <case> per
White J; Stone & Drabsch versus Pinniger <case> per Nicholas J; National Australia Trustees Ltd versus Fazey; The Estate of Nancy
Elaine Lees <case> at <case> - [17] per Windeyer AJ; Vincent Zang versus Deborah Middleton  <case>;
The Estate of Keith Joseph Cook <case> at <case> per
Slattery J; Cornish versus O'Dell; In the Estate of O'Dell  <case> per Slattery J; Estate of Johnston <case> at <case> per
Slattery J.
 [78] The requirements for execution under [Probate and Administration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/), <case> and therefore [Succession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) are well established: (a) there must be a document; (b) which purports to state the testamentary intentions of the deceased; and, (c) which the deceased intended to form his will. These principles are discussed in Estate of
Masters <case>, at [56] per Powell JA and the cases described in the previous paragraph."
In Re Estate of Masters (decd); Hill versus Plummer [(1994) 33 NSWLR 446], Mahoney JA, at 462, wrote: "Secondly, s18A should, as I have indicated, be given a beneficial application. There are, in the history of this branch of the law, many cases in which the intention of the deceased has not been able to be given effect.
That is an evil which should be remedied as far as may be. It may be understood why the legislature decided not to give testamentary effect merely to any statement of testamentary wishes, however casually stated and even if it was not contemplated that legal results would follow. The consequences of that as far as concerns proof and otherwise, can well be imagined. But the benefits of the change should not be withheld by requiring too rigid a manner of proof that what was put in a document should have legal effect. If a document is on its face such as contemplates legal effect, ordinarily it should be given effect unless - as in this case - there are contexts or circumstances that lead to the contrary conclusion." (While Mahoney JA dissented in the result of that case, the majority did not disagree with his Honour's exposition of the law, which seems no different in principle to those propositions of law articulated by the majority.)
Even earlier, in speaking of the similar legislation in Western Australia, Nicholson J, in In the Will of Lobarto Shields versus Caratozzolo [(1991) 6 WAR 1], at 8, observed: "The plain and natural meaning of <case>(32) read in conjunction with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) permits it to be applied (where the evidence permits it) to validate a document unsigned by the testator."
Slattery J in In the estate of O'Dell <case>, wrote at [33], that "[Succession Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) should not be applied with too stringent a requirement of proof that a propounded document otherwise clearly embodying the testamentary intentions of the deceased does constitute his will" citing Kirby P in Re Estate of Masters; Hill versus Plummer, at 452V.
These passages should not be taken to mean, however, that the statutory formalities enshrined in the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) are to be unduly relegated in importance: Belcastro versus Belcastro <case>, at [6]; Estate of Peter Brock <case>; (2007) 1 ASTLR 127, at [20].
In Re Estate of Masters (decd); Hill versus Plummer Priestley JA, at 466, wrote that the particular questions for determination, are "essentially questions of fact".
The burden of proof of all issues relating to [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) is on the Plaintiff and is to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities. In deciding whether it is so satisfied, without limiting the matters that may be taken into account, the Court is required to take into account that these are Probate proceedings (the nature of the cause of action); that the size of the estate is substantial (the nature of the subject matter of the proceeding); and the significant difference between the two documents (the gravity of the matters alleged): [s 140](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s140.html) [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).
In this regard, however, there can be no doubt, and the parties agree, in the present case, that the undated document: 
Is a "document", within the meaning given to the term by [Interpretation
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) , [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s21.html), which includes (a) anything on which there is writing, or (b) anything on which there are marks, figures, symbols or perforations having a meaning for persons qualified to interpret them.

Was not executed, or witnessed, in conformity with the formal requirements of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s6.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/).
Execution "is the validation of a document by going through the formalities required by law for that purpose": Estate of Williams deceased [(1984) 36
SASR 423], at 425.

Purports to state the testamentary intentions of the deceased.
In regard to the last matter, reference should be made to Re Broad; Smith versus Draeger [[1901] 2 Ch 86] at 91 - 92, in which Kekewich J, in dealing with a marriage settlement which provided that property should be disposed of as the wife should direct, or appoint, by deed, will or codicil, or any writing in the nature of or "purporting to be a will" or codicil, said: "What is the meaning of the expression 'purporting to be' a will or codicil? ... [T]he question here is whether a document which is in form and substance a will, but which, because it was not duly executed as such, fails to be a will, in the legal sense, is or is not a document which 'purports', to be a will...
This document... is on the face of it a disposition of property made in contemplation of death, and it only fails to be a will because the maker of it did not comply with the requirement of the [Wills
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/) that the witnesses should be present when she signed it. I think, therefore, that I must hold that this document... is one which 'purports' to be a will."
In Kalamunda Meat Wholesalers Pty Ltd versus Reg Russell & Sons Pty Ltd  <case>; [(1994) 51 FCR 446], at 452, Hill J in dealing with the Corporations Law 1989, said: "The word 'purport' is defined relevantly in the Macquarie Dictionary (2nd Rev
Ed) as:- '1. To profess or claim: 'a document purporting to be official'. 2.
To convey to the mind as the meaning or thing intended; express; imply.'"
In Re The Estate of Masters; Hill versus Plummer, Priestley JA pointed out, at 469, that: "A document in which a person says what that person intends shall be done with [his/her] property upon death seems to me to be a document which embodies the testamentary intentions of that person."
In Yazbek versus Yazbek, Slattery J said, at [83]: "Testamentary intentions are an expression of what a person wants to happen to his or her property upon death: Re Trethewey  <case> at <case> per
Beach J. In the context of informal wills "a document in which a person says what that person intends shall be done with that person's property upon death seems...to be a document which embodies the testamentary intentions of that person": Re Estate of Masters [(1994) 33 NSWLR 446] at 469 per Priestley JA. Furthermore, although dissenting in the decision, Mahoney JA defined testamentary intentions as "how property is to pass or be disposed of after...death": Re Estate of Masters [(1994) 33 NSWLR 446] at 455 per Mahoney JA."
There is an additional element to be established by a Plaintiff. That is, for a document to be declared to be a testamentary instrument pursuant to [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/), it is not sufficient that it purports to state only the deceased's testamentary intentions. Relevantly to this case, the deceased must also have intended the document to form her Will.
Thus, in this case, for the undated document to be admitted to probate, the Plaintiff must establish, on the balance of probabilities, that deceased intended that it operate as her Will; that is, it was intended by her to govern the disposition of her property, or some of it, after her death.
Mahoney JA, in Re Estate of Masters; Hill versus Plummer, at 455, put the matter this way: "Section 18A(1) requires not merely that the document propounded "embody the testamentary intentions of" the deceased but also that the deceased "intended the document to constitute his ... will". For the section to operate, the
Court must be satisfied that the intention was that the document operate, in the sense to which I shall refer, as an actual act in the law.

There is, in principle, a distinction between a document which merely sets out what a person wishes or intends as to the way his property shall pass on his death and a document which, setting out those things, is intended to cause that to come about, that is, to operate as his will. A will, like, for example, a contract, a deed, and a sale, is, as it has been said, "an act in the law". It is something to which the law attaches the legal consequences of that kind of transaction: ... Ordinarily, a transaction will or will not be an act in the law of the particular kind according to whether it was of the relevant form or nature and was intended to operate as such. Thus, a document which is in form a will will not operate as such if it is, for example, a draft or "a trial run", not intended to have a present operation. A person may set down in writing what are his testamentary intentions but not intend that the document be operative as a will. This may occur, for example, in informal circumstances, in a letter or a diary or the like. What is to be determined in respect of a document propounded under <case> is whether, assuming it to embody the testamentary intentions of the deceased, it was intended by the deceased as his testamentary act in the law, that is, to have present operation as a will."
As was recently pointed out by White J in Re Estate of Puruto  <case>, at [28], "... it is sometimes put, the deceased must have intended that without more, the document should have effect as her Will" (my emphasis). (The genesis of the highlighted phrase is taken from a number of judgments of Powell J, including The Application of Kencalo; In the Estate of Buharoff (NSWSC, 23 October 1991, unreported) and The Public Trustee versus Commins; The Estate of Gwendolyn Myrtle Wray (NSWSC, 19 June 1992, unreported). However, in Hatsatouris versus Hatsatouris <case>, at [56], Powell JA, as a member of the Court of Appeal, with whom Priestley and Stein JJA agreed, noted that one of the questions posed in other cases was "did the evidence satisfy the Court that, either, at the time of the subject document being brought into being, or, at some later time, the relevant deceased, by some act or words, demonstrated that it was her, or his, then intention that the subject document should, without more on her, or his, part operate as her, or his, Will".)
In my view, the use of the words "without more on her, or his, part", does not really add anything. What the words do is direct attention to a consideration of the particular document itself, which must purport to "state the testamentary intentions of the deceased person", and then determine whether the Court is satisfied that the deceased person intended that particular document to form his, or her, Will, or to form an alteration to his, or her, Will. Thus, the focus of the section is on the actual testamentary intention of the deceased so far as it relates to the particular document in question. Both elements need to be satisfied.
I also respectfully agree with what White J said in NSW Trustee and Guardian versus Halsey; Estate of Von Skala  <case>, at [15]: "To restate the last requirement, the question is whether the deceased intended the document to be his or her testamentary act, that is, to have present operation as a will (Re Estate of Masters (decd); Hill versus Plummer [(1994) 33 NSWLR 446] at 455; Oreski versus Ikac <case> at <case>- <case>)."
Also, I accept, as Windeyer AJ pointed out in National Australia Trustees Ltd versus Fazey  <case>, at [18], that: "Great care must be taken in determining this question. Many people write out proposals for their wills on pieces of paper headed 'will' but often these are no more than present thoughts not testamentary intentions and certainly not intended to be wills."
In Fry versus Lukas; Brown versus Fry; Estate of Honey; Application of Fry <case>, White J, at [17], noted, also: "Section 8 permits part of a document to form a deceased person's will if it states his or her testamentary intentions and the person intended that part of the document to operate as his will. The intention that the document, or part, form the person's will may, and usually will, exist at the time the document is brought into existence. But the section may also be satisfied if the deceased subsequently forms the intention that the document, or part, have a present operation as the deceased's will. (See Bell versus Crewes <case> at <case> citing Application of Kencalo; In the Estate of Buharoff ; and Mr Justice
Powell, " Recent Developments in New South Wales in the law relating to wills " [(1993) 67 ALJ 25] at [38])."
In Dolan versus Dolan <case>, at [22], I note that Murray J put the matter this way: "... the document will be held to constitute the will of the deceased if the court is satisfied that the deceased intended its terms without more - without any alteration or reservation - to be the manner in which the property of the deceased dealt with in the document was to be disposed of upon his or her death."
In Deeks versus Greenwood <case>, E M Heenan J, referred to the use, in some of the cases, of the phrase "without more". He wrote, at [71] - [73]: "The question of whether or not the document was intended to take effect as the testator's will without more plainly emphasises that it needs to be established that it embodies the final expression of testamentary intentions upon which the testator was at the time resolved, and that it should not be tentative, advisory or prepared in the anticipation that it may need revision, further thought or final confirmation. That is consistent with principle and with the statute but the phrase, not found in the legislation itself, is capable of suggesting that if anything more is required for the paper to take effect as a will it could not be valid even as an informal will . With respect, I am satisfied that this is not what was intended by his Honour's observations in Oreski versus Ikac. ...
 ...

Clearly enough, a will prepared by a solicitor, or any will in conventional form contemplating execution with the formalities and requirements provided for by [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/s8.html) of the [Wills Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/), suggests that formal execution will follow and that the testament will thereupon be the will of the testator unless revoked or amended by a subsequent will or codicil or otherwise. However, this does not necessarily mean that such a document prepared for execution and submitted to the testator is incapable of being accepted as an informal will if it nevertheless embodies the testator's settled testamentary intentions. There are obviously cases, such as Mitchell versus Mitchell, where the evidence establishes that the deceased had formed settled testamentary intentions to be expressed in his will and had adopted a particular document as embodying them notwithstanding that, for some sudden and unexpected reason, the document was not executed or properly executed.

Nevertheless, such cases can present difficulties because if, as is often the case, a proposed will is prepared on instructions given by a testator and then sent by the solicitors to the testator for consideration or, as here, marked plainly with the word 'Draft', that implies that the document may be for consideration, further thought or revision and is still awaiting the expression of the final settled intention of the intended testator. Those are instances in which the document clearly is only a preliminary, tentative or provisional expression of testamentary intention and where it is clearly contemplated that the final decision by the testator whether to adopt its terms or to vary them needs to be made. Those are the features which led to the rejection of the attempt to prove as informal wills the documents being propounded in The Estate of Perriman (dec) and in Oreski versus Ikac."
Recently, Habersberger J considered the authorities on this topic in Fast versus Rockman <case> His Honour concluded, at [113] - [116]: "In many cases where wills that do not comply with statutory formalities are sought to be admitted to probate, the would be testator, especially where a solicitor had been engaged to prepare one, is likely to have been aware that the document in question had to be executed in accordance with those formalities to have legal effect. But this, in my opinion, is only one of the factual circumstance which a court will take into account in assessing what ultimately is a question of fact as to whether the requisite intention existed.

Like Murray J in Dolan versus Dolan, I consider that the words "without more" have been mentioned by way of emphasising that the court must be satisfied that the deceased really did intend the terms of the document - "without any alteration or reservation" - to be the manner in which his or her property was to be disposed of upon his or her death. Or as EM Heenan J put it in Mitchell v Mitchell, the words "without more" were used in Oreski versus Ikac: ... to emphasise the need for the document being propounded for proof as an informal will to express the concluded testamentary intentions and decision of the deceased rather than being some provisional, preliminary or tentative proposal which had not by then received the deceased's full assent.

In my opinion, the insistence by counsel for Mrs Rockman that an unsigned will could never be held to be an informal will under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/s9.html) if a deceased intended to sign a document and thereby to make it his or her will but died before signing it, has rather surprising consequences. Probably the best illustration of this is the following situation. The deceased had read the will prepared by his solicitors on his prior instructions, announced to those present that it was what he wanted in his will and that he was going to sign it, picked up a pen and as he was about to sign collapsed and died from a massive heart attack. The argument by Mrs Rockman's counsel would result in the document about to be signed by the deceased in the above hypothetical situation not being admitted to probate because he still had more to do before it could be recognised as his will. That cannot be correct, in my opinion.

As pointed out by Kirby P in Re Masters, Hill versus Plummer a too rigid insistence on the formalities or other characteristics necessary to constitute a document the deceased's will defeats the purpose of a provision such as [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/s9.html) to allow a document to be admitted to probate as an informal will where the court is satisfied that the deceased intended that document to be his or her will."
Finally, it is important, in this regard, to remember what Wrangham J said in In the Estate of Knibbs, deceased; Flay versus Trueman [[1962] 1 WLR 852], at 855 - 856: "As Salter J said in Beech's case (In the Estate of Beech, deceased [[1923]
P 46] at 57): 'I think that, in order to constitute a will, the words used by the testator must be intended by him, at or after the time when he uses them, to be preserved or remembered so as to form the guide to those who survive in carrying out his wishes.' 
In other words, in order to be a testamentary act there must be a statement of the deceased's wishes for the disposition of his property after his death which is not merely imparted to his audience as a matter of information or interest, but is intended by him to convey to that audience a request, explicit or implicit, to see that his wishes are acted on."
In determining whether the Court is satisfied that the deceased person "intended the document to form his, or her, will", the Court may, in addition to the considering the form and content of the document or part of it, have regard to, amongst any other matter, (a) any evidence relating to the manner in which the document or part was executed, and (b) any evidence of the testamentary intentions of the deceased person, including evidence of statements made by the deceased person. 
It is always difficult to assess the intentions of a person who has left no specific directions, or indications, relating to his, or her, Will. All that the Court can do, in those circumstances, is to look at such facts as are available, in order to determine what was more likely to have been intended by the deceased in respect of the document concerned: In The Estate of Stewart (NSWSC, 12 April 1996, unreported).
In Re Application of Brown; Estate of Springfield [(1991) 23 NSWLR 535], Powell J noted, at 539-540: "4. ... while each case must depend upon its own facts, the greater the departure from compliance with the requirements of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s7.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/), the more difficult will it be for the court to be satisfied that the relevant deceased intended the subject document to be his will.

It will, I think, be apparent from what I have said - and, as well, from the declarations which I have already made in similar matters which have been referred to me since my appointment as Probate Judge - that, in cases where the subject document is either wholly written out, or, being on a will form, has been filled in, in the handwriting of the relevant deceased, and in cases where the subject document bears the signature of, or some mark made by, the relevant deceased indicating his intention to adopt it as his own, I would have little difficulty in finding myself satisfied that it was intended by the relevant deceased that the subject document should constitute his will. Where, however, the subject document was not seen, or read, or written, or in some way authenticated, or adopted, by the relevant deceased, or where the subject document, even if seen, or read, by the relevant deceased, was, in truth, no more than "instructions", or a note of "instructions", for a will (see, eg,
In the Estate of Allan (Needham AJ, 24 September 1990, unreported); Cloonan v Allingham (Needham AJ, 14 December 1990, unreported) I would, I believe, find it very difficult, indeed, to find myself satisfied that it was intended by the relevant deceased that the subject document was intended to be his will."
A signature, placed at the foot of a testamentary document would, in most cases, carry the implication that the testator intended the signature to give testamentary effect to the document: Wood versus Smith [[1993] Ch. 90 (C.A.)]
The document, itself, must also be considered in context (Estate of Gwendoline Myrtle Wray; Public Trustee versus Commins; Masters versus Cameron  <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353]
Additionally, the Court may take into account the existence of prior solicitor-drawn Wills when examining the extent of the failure to comply with formalities. In appropriate circumstances, an inference may be drawn that the deceased was aware of the formalities required for a Will. This may effect the question whether the Court should be satisfied that the deceased intended the informal document to be his, or her, Will or an alteration to his, or her, Will: Estate of Peter Brock, per Hollingworth J, at [34].
In Newman versus Brinkgreve; The Estate of Floris Verzijden  <case>, I set out the principles that apply in respect of instructions and whether instructions for a Will may be admitted to probate. At [112], I wrote: "I gratefully adopt, in this regard, what was recently stated by Philippides J in the Supreme Court of Queensland in Re Gloria May Limpus Deceased [[2013]
QSC 66:](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/qld/QSC/2013/66.html "View Case" ) "[6] In Theobald on Wills, it is stated in respect of "instructions for a will" that: "A duly executed instrument, described as instructions for a will, may have effect as a will, if it appears that it was intended to take effect in the absence of a more formal instrument." [7] On that topic the learned authors of Jarman on Wills state as follows: "Instructions for a will 
A paper merely expressing an intention to instruct a solicitor to prepare a will making a particular disposition of property, will not be admitted to probate in the absence of evidence of intention that such paper should have a testamentary operation. But instruments headed 'Plan of a will', or 'Heads of a will', or 'Sketch of my will', or 'Memorandum of my intended will', or 'Notes of an intended settlement', have been held to operate as valid testamentary dispositions, if duly executed. But probate was refused of an instrument duly executed and attested as a will, but headed 'This is not meant as a legal will, but as a guide'." [8] Likewise, Williams on Wills states: "Instructions for will. These can be admitted only if executed as a will and must be something more than mere heads of instructions." [9] The matters has been considered in New Zealand in the decisions of In re
Gilmour [[1948] NZLR 687] and In re Barnes (Deceased), Public Trustee versus Barnes [[1954] NZLR 714.] [10] In In re Barnes the testator signed, in his solicitor's office, a document headed "Instructions for the will of [the testator]" and the signatures of two witnesses were appended to it. The testator was informed that a will in proper form could be prepared ready for execution the same afternoon by 5.00 pm, but he said he could not wait. He died more than a year later, without having executed any other testamentary document. The evidence showed that, during the last weeks of his life, he intended to make a new final will, and the making of such will would have included the revocation of the "instructions" document.
 [11] Turner J held that, on the evidence, the testator executed the document meaning that it should operate as his effective will unless before his death he should execute in its stead a more formal document, embodying the same provisions, which his solicitor was to prepare. There was no need to rely on the presumption that the document, duly executed, was intended to be a will, as the testator's solicitor's evidence was sufficient to help to convince the court that the testator executed the document intending that it would operate as a will until some more formal document should be prepared and executed.
Having considered the decision of In re Gilmour [[1948] NZLR 687], Turner J said (at 718): "In the present case, like Gresson J [in In re Gilmour], I am put upon inquiry by the use of the term 'instructions for a will', by the lack of form of the document, and by the absence of any words designating it as a final testamentary instrument. Like Gresson J, I listened to such extrinsic evidence as was available as to the circumstances in which the document came to be executed; but, unlike him, I was presented with direct and cogent evidence - that of [the testator's solicitor]. It clearly appears from this evidence that the document was signed so as to operate as a will until a more formal document should be signed." [12] In re Barnes was considered by the Supreme Court of Western Australian in Re Ogley (dec'd); Ex parte The Public Trustee  <case>
In that case, Mr Johnstone, a Wills Manager with the Public Trust Office completed a form headed "Will Instructions" with information provided by Mr
Ogley's wife. The form was a standard form used by the Public Trustee to take down instructions from a testator with the intent that a formal will will be drawn up at a later date. Mr Johnstone then met with Mr Ogley, who was suffering from cancer and expected to have three to six months to live, and read through the instructions and explained to him what was in those instructions in some detail. Mr Ogley confirmed that what was written was in accordance with his wishes. Mr Ogley, Mrs Ogley and Mr Johnstone signed the form at the bottom of the final page and it was dated by Mr Johnstone. The signatures of Mr and Mrs Ogley were then witnessed. The Registrar declined to grant probate in common form because he was not satisfied that the deceased intended the document in question to be his will. An appeal against that decision was allowed and probate in common form was granted.
 [13] In determining the matter, Sanderson M referred to the South Australian decision of Estate of Treloar [(1984) 36 SASR 41], to In re
Barnes, and to some of the early English authorities, and said: "[13] The circumstances in which a Will can be contained in instructions were discussed by Legoe J in the Estate of Treloar [(1984) 36 SASR 41.] His Honour refers to Tristam & Coote, Theobald and Halsbury's Laws of England, in setting out the circumstances when instructions for a Will may have effect as a Will: see pp 43-44. These include: if it can be shown that the instructions represented how the testator intended to dispose of the estate; if the instrument was intended to take effect in the absence of a more formal document; if the document should be depository and operate provisionally until a more formal will was prepared.
 [14] In the Goods of Fisher [(1869) 20 LTR 684], Lord
Penzance directs that a presumption arises when instructions are executed that it is intended will take effect as a Will, even where in future a more regular form is intended. In Re Meynill; Meynill versus Meynill [(1940) WN 273], Barnard J accepts that the presumption arises where formalities have not been complied with. In In re Barnes (Dec) [[1954] NZLR 714] Turner J expressed the view that if the document has been executed animo testandi and the formalities observed, it becomes the last Will and testament of the deceased and was not revoked by any 'mere change of intention'. It is to be noted that the authorities suggest that a Will is not to be regarded as contained in instructions in the absence of evidence of animus testandi: see
Lister versus Smith (1863) 3 Sw & Tr 282; Torre versus Castle (1836) 1 Curt 303;
Whyte versus Pollok [(1882) 7 App Cas 400."] [14] Nevertheless, Sanderson M cautioned: "Having said all of that, it is clear that each case must be decided on its merit 'because so much depends on the particular circumstances': see Hines v
Hines <case> per Owen J at 25. In that same case his Honour pointed out (at 26) that determining whether the document is a testamentary instrument is a less difficult task when independent evidence is available." [15] Sanderson M concluded at [18] that, while the evidence was "thin", he was satisfied that it established that the deceased intended that the signed instructions would be an "interim will". The deceased, by his conduct, had indicated that he had signed a will and was satisfied that what he was signing was consistent with the way he intended to dispose of his property. Sanderson
M further observed at [19]: 'It must be borne in mind in an application such as this that it is the
Court's role to facilitate, rather than hinder a deceased's intention to settle his affairs. That is what Lord O'Hagan said so long ago [in Whyte v
Pollok [(1882) 7 App Cas 400]] and it is as true today as it was then. In my view, there is no justification for coming to any conclusion other than that the signed instructions contain the Will of the deceased.'"
In Currell versus Baldock; Estate of Currell <case>, White J, at [26], wrote: "There is no necessary inconsistency between a person making a will and intending it to be immediately operative as such, and also intending to see a solicitor with a view to discussing its contents or even its validity ...".
I make it clear that I do not intend what I have described as "principles" or "statements in other cases" to be elevated into rules of law. I identify them merely as providing useful assistance in considering the statutory provisions, the terms of which must remain firmly in mind.
As Lindsay J said in Verzar versus Verzar <case>, in another context, but equally apt in this case, at [131]: "Whatever guidance one might draw from analogous cases all analogies, and any guidelines drawn from a pattern of similar cases, must yield to the text of the legislation, the duty of the Court to apply that text to the particular circumstances, and the totality of material circumstances, of each case.
Preconceptions and predispositions, comforting though they may be, can be the source of inadequate consideration of the jurisdiction to be exercised:
Bladwell versus Davis <case> at <case> and [18]-[19]." 
Determination
As stated above, [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) is in two parts, one characterising the document and the other the intentions of the deceased. The gateway into the section is by means of "a document". There is no issue in this case that there is a document and that it (a) purports to state the testamentary intentions of the deceased, and (b) has not been executed in accordance with [Part 2.1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/index.html#p2.1) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/).
The sole question for the Court is the status of the undated document - whether the Court is satisfied that the deceased intended the undated document to form her Will. It would not be sufficient if the Court came to the view that the deceased had intended the undated document to record only her instructions for a Will, or to be a draft Will made to assist in the preparation of a final Will by her then solicitors.
Nor is it enough if the Court is only satisfied that the undated document contained the deceased's ideas about her testamentary intentions. The document must be intended to be the legally operative act which purports to dispose of the deceased's property upon her death and be intended by her to have present operation as her Will.
However, as stated previously, the form of the document, whilst necessary to be considered, is, by no means, solely determinative of the result of the proceedings. Furthermore, as long ago as 1882, in Whyte versus Pollok [(1882) 7 AC 400], at 405, Lord Selborne noted "it might happen that something which he did not originally intend to be a testamentary act was converted into a testamentary act by a subsequent and sufficient manifestation of intention on his part ...".
It is also clear that one must resolve the questions in dispute by looking at the probabilities on the totality of the evidence available to the Court, including, but not limited to, evidence relating to the manner in which the undated document was executed, if at all, and any evidence of the testamentary intentions of the deceased, including evidence of statements made by her. Thus, the Court determines, firstly, the objectively discerned nature of the content of the document, and then, subjectively, whether the specific deceased had the necessary intention.
In summary, at least the following facts and circumstances are sufficient, in my view, to weigh the probabilities in favour of finding that the deceased did intend the undated document to form her Will: 
There is no suggestion that anyone, other than the deceased herself, provided the initiative for the preparation of the undated document. Not unnaturally, it is written in a way that demonstrates a lack of legal knowledge and grammatical sophistication, and in a manner commensurate with the deceased's English language skills.

The undated document shows unmistakeable signs that the deceased believed she would not be alive at the time that it would be read.

In this case, not only did the deceased see Mr Vlahakis to discuss what she had written in the Exercise Book, she wished him, in effect, put what she had written, in the Italian language, into the English language.

The deceased expressed to various persons, consistently, her great dissatisfaction about her relationship, relevantly, with the Defendant and the lack of closeness with, and even fear of, her. This provides an obvious reason for changing the testamentary disposition to the Defendant that is made in the Will. It is not inconsistent with what she expressed in the undated document, which, in the circumstances, is rational on its face and in its context.

Whilst it seems clear that the deceased knew that for a document to have legal effect as a Will, it had to be signed, this is not a case where the evidence raised doubts about whether she wanted to think further about what she had written, or where the evidence did not disclose any act or words by the deceased "adopting" the document as her intended Will.

Also, this is not a case where the deceased exhibited any reluctance to sign a Will prepared by her solicitors when given an opportunity by them to do so. She was never given that opportunity because her death intervened.

That the deceased, herself, when referring to the undated document, described it as a "Will", to so many different people, is compelling. That she did so, even after conferring with Mr Vlahakis, is equally so. The evidence from the various witnesses, who speak, effectively, with one voice, to which I have referred, and which evidence I have accepted, confirms that the deceased intended the undated document to give effect to her testamentary intention. As
Slattery J noted in Yazbek versus Yazbek, at [87], "[a] "will" is a very commonly understood means of recording testamentary intentions".

That the deceased thought it was necessary to, in effect, hide the
Exercise Book, so that the Defendant and/or John would not be able to easily find it, assists the Plaintiff. It suggests the importance of the Exercise
Book to the deceased who retained it in her custody. That she told the
Plaintiff where it was to be found after her death, in circumstances where, otherwise, it might not have been, is also important. This is not a case where the concealment of the undated document demonstrates that the deceased did not intend it to be her Will. It was located where she said it was to be found only after her death. Therefore, she retained what she had described to others as her Will and did not disclose to anyone, other than the Plaintiff, where it could be located on her death.

The deceased clearly had considered whether she wished to make any provision for the Defendant and decided that she did not wish to do so.
I do not accept the Defendant's submission that "[a]t its highest ... the informal document [is more than] a note or sequence of notes made by the deceased at a point (or points) in time which is unclear" and that she wrote it "to assist her in conveying her instructions to [her] solicitor so that a will could be prepared for her". Her repeated statements that she had written her Will and, on 15 December 2011, when speaking to Mr Sader, having informed her solicitor of the contents of the undated document and was having it put into English: "That's it now. I am very glad I am finished", suggests the significance, to her, of what she had done.
Merely because the conference notes of Mr Vlahakis and the contents of the undated document are different, does not mean that the deceased did not intend the undated document to be her Will. Whilst, following the settlement of her financial inter-relationship with John, she may have wished to sign another, perhaps, different, or more detailed, Will, that does not mean until she did so, she did not intend the undated document, without more, to form her Will. 
Similarly, whilst I accept that the deceased's knowledge of the formalities required for a valid Will may bear on the Court's assessment of whether she intended the undated document to form her Will, that is only one of the factual matters which the Court will consider in assessing whether the requisite intention existed. Her state of knowledge is obviously a relevant consideration in assessing her intention, but, ultimately, the question is whether the Court is satisfied of her intention.
In this case, there is ample evidence of the circumstances in which the undated document came into being; how and why it came to be written; and that the deceased wrote it herself, without assistance from any other person. Her desire to communicate the nature of the undated document and that she regarded it as a Will is clear from the content of the conversations stated by a number of different people. 
Accordingly, I am satisfied that, on the balance of probabilities, the undated document is a document, purporting to state the deceased's testamentary intentions, which document has not been executed in accordance with [Part 2.1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/index.html#p2.1) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/), and which the deceased intended to be her Will. Accordingly, the saving effect of [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/s8.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) can be relied upon. In all the circumstances, it is the undated document that should be the subject of a grant of Probate in solemn form.
The Court: 
Declares that the Court is satisfied that the undated document purports to state the testamentary intentions of the deceased, and that it has not been executed in accordance with [Part .1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/index.html#p2.1) of the [Succession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/).

Declares that the Court is satisfied that the undated document forms the deceased's Will and that the deceased intended it to form her Will.

Orders, subject to compliance with the rules of Court, that Letters of
Administration with the undated document annexed, in solemn form, be granted to Gordon A Salier. (The Registrar may be satisfied to make the grant of the agreed copy until the Commissioner of Police releases the original.) 
Orders that the matter be remitted to the Registrar to complete the grant.

Orders that the administration bond be dispensed with.

Orders that the balance of the further amended Statement of Claim and the
Cross-Claim be dismissed.
Counsel requested me to hear submissions on costs following the delivery of reasons for judgment, as there may be documents that are relevant to how the burden of costs should be borne. I shall determine the issue of costs following the parties' submissions if the parties are unable to reach agreement.
I shall stand the matter over to a date for any argument on costs and make directions in relation to the filing and service of evidence and submissions in relation thereto.
 * * * 
