

Chow versus The Registrar General of NSW Matter No 4667/97 [1998] NSWSC 305 (24
June 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
CHOW versus THE REGISTRAR GENERAL OF NSW /97 June 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced by the registered proprietors of land at Northwood and Lane Cove to recover damages for deprivation of an interest in land under <case> of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) because of the registration of two forged mortgages. 
By notice of motion filed 28 April 1998, the defendant Registrar General sought leave to cross claim in negligence against three persons whom he alleged had contributed to any loss he may suffer if he suffers a verdict in these proceedings. On 8 May 1998, by consent I gave leave to cross claim against two of these people and the Registrar General duly filed a cross claim on 11 May. The third proposed cross defendant, Suncorp-Metway Ltd (Metway) opposed the order. I directed written submissions which came in due course and said I would give my decision in writing which I now do.

The basal facts so far as concern Metway which I take from a record of interview between Detective Senior Constable Craig Doran of the Queensland
Fraud and Corporate Crime Squad and a Mr Khoo, now a long term prisoner in a
Queensland gaol, are as follows. Mr Khoo had been appointed by the Chows, who live overseas, as their Australian agent. Mr Khoo impersonated Mr Chow and arranged with an Asian lady, Ms Lien, to impersonate Mrs Chow. They convinced a mortgagee, McLaughlin Nominee Mortgages Pty Ltd in Southport Queensland, of their identity as Mr and Mrs Chow and also convinced a Justice of the Peace who witnessed their signatures on a mortgage. As a result, McLaughlin Nominee
Mortgages Pty Ltd gave Mr Khoo a cheque for $530,689.79 in favour of Mr Chow.
Mr Khoo took this to the Metway Bank at 344 Queen Street Brisbane where he knew Mr Chow operated an account. He knew this because he was an authorized signatory on the account. He then deposited the mortgagee's cheque into that account. A few days later he forged a withdrawal slip in Mr Chow's name. He produced to an officer of Metway a cash card in the name of Johnny Chow and asked the officer to make out a bank cheque to K M Khoo. Metway duly did this.
Mr Khoo then banked that cheque in his own bank account at the Advance Bank from which he later obtained a bank cheque made out in favour of Conrads
Treasury Casino Brisbane which funded Mr Khoo's gambling until the whole lot was lost.

Mr Simon White of counsel for Metway put that leave to file a cross claim should not be granted for two reasons. First he submits that statutory subrogation under <case> of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) does not occur until the Registrar General has paid damages in accordance with a judgment under ss 126-7 of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). He says that even if the claim against Metway was valid, there is no present cause of action vested in the Registrar General. He further says that even a declaratory action at this time would be an abuse of process.

Secondly, if the submission on the procedural point should fail, Mr White says that if a person in fact has authority to obtain money from another's account it does not matter what method he uses to obtain that money because the ultimate question is, has the owner of the account consented to the withdrawal? If he has given the person who makes the withdrawal an unlimited authority (as appears to be the case here), he has no complaint against the bank. I will call this the substantive point.

Mr Wales for the Registrar General agrees that no cause of action has yet arisen. However, he argues that the case is ripe for declaratory relief. He further says that there are good reasons why all issues should be determined in one set of proceedings. If the present proceedings are determined without
Metway, Metway would not be bound by the court's finding of facts. Although obtaining the attendance of Mr Khoo is not likely to be a major problem, there is no way that the Registrar General could ensure his co-operation. Similarly, the Chows reside in Hong Kong and the Registrar General has no effective way of compelling their attendance or co-operation in separate proceedings.
Moreover, the other two cross defendants whose case involves similar issues, have consented to be joined and the cross claims against them will raise the same issues. It is thus suitable for everything to be raised in the one set of proceedings.

On the substantive point, Mr Wales simply says that Mr White's submissions are just wrong in law.

I will deal with the two questions in turn.

The Procedural Question 
It is now clear that the matter as to whether a declaration is or is not made is almost always a matter of discretion rather than one of jurisdiction.

Mr White says that that proposition is too wide. He refers to Ainsworth v
Criminal Justice Commission <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 564], 582, where four Justices of the High Court said that the power to grant declaratory relief is a discretionary power which "is confined by the considerations which mark out the boundaries of judicial power." The reference in the footnote to In re Judiciary & Navigation Acts <case>; [(1921) 29 CLR 257] shows that what the Justices had in mind was the distinction between a merely advisory opinion which is not a judicial matter and the making of a declaration of right which is.

Mr White then says that the passage from Ainsworth versus Criminal Justice
Commission referred to above was picked up in the judgment of Stein, JA with whom Meagher, JA agreed in Galaxy Communications Pty Ltd versus Paramount Films of Australia Inc - 27 March, 1998 as yet unreported. That was a case where a plaintiff sought a declaration that it was entitled to terminate an agreement on the ground that the other contracting party had become insolvent.
The other party, the claimant in the Court of Appeal, said that no declaration should have been made because the matter was merely hypothetical. Stein, JA said that it was an important feature of declaratory relief that it was flexible and discretionary, noted the comment about the boundaries of judicial power and said that the relief must be "directed to the determination of legal controversies and not to answering hypothetical or abstract questions."
However, apart from the reference to the boundaries of judicial power, it seems quite clear what his Honour did was to look at the matter as a question of discretion rather than jurisdiction. He considered that the circumstances in that case were sufficient for the court not to exercise its declaratory jurisdiction.

Stein, JA referred to the South Australian case of JN Taylor Holdings Ltd v
Alan Bond (1993) 59 SASR 432. It is clear from that reference that Stein, JA was looking to the discretionary aspects of the declaratory remedy. At 436 of the Taylor Holdings case, King, CJ said "I can find no warrant for the imposition by the courts of a self-denying restriction on their jurisdiction to grant declaratory relief. In my opinion there is no jurisdictional limit.
The court's power to grant such relief is `only limited by its own discretion' (Hanson versus Radcliffe Urban District Council [[1922] 2 Ch 490], 507), and the boundaries of judicial power ...". Prior, J said at 443 that he agreed and that the "discretionary power is not to be fettered by laying down rules as to the manner of its exercise, but it is confined by the considerations which mark out the boundaries of judicial power." 
Actually the jurisdiction is restricted by more than just the limits of judicial power. Although the possession of a cause of action is not now required as a prerequisite to declaratory relief, if it ever was, there is some limit to the situations where there is jurisdiction to make a declaration. Some would say that that limit is reached where there are no "rights" between the parties; see eg Parramatta City Council versus Sandell [[1973] 1 NSWLR 151.] 
However, "rights" may exist in the sense of being able to obtain a declaration of rights. In Sankey versus Whitlam <case>; [(1978) 142 CLR 1], 23, Gibbs, ACJ said "The word `right' in the expression `declaration of right' ... is used in a sense that is wide and loose. It includes what might more precisely be described as privileges powers and immunities. And the power to make a declaration extends to enable a plaintiff to have it declared that he is under no duty or liability to the defendant...". See in general Young on Declaratory Orders 2nd ed (Butterworths Sydney 1984) para [205]. See also Zamir and Woolf The
Declaratory Judgment 2nd ed (Sweet & Maxwell London 1993) p 39.

There is no jurisdictional point involved in the instant case. The point is whether it is within the court's discretion to make a declaratory order.

One of the common cases where a declaratory order is made where there is no cause of action is in the case of a guarantee. I dealt with the matter in my book on Declarations 2nd ed (supra) at para [1909]. It is common for a surety who can only assert his rights at law after he has paid the creditor to obtain a declaration of rights and liabilities even before payment. The classic example is Wolmershausen versus Gullick [[1893] 2 Ch 514.] A more recent example is Rogers versus Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd [[1985]
WAR 304.] 
It seems to me that the present case is very much like a guarantee case. For that reason one should sympathetically consider giving declaratory relief.

Mr White submits that the plain words of <case> of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) make it clear that there is no right in the Registrar General until he has paid. I must confess I cannot find anything in the wording of the section which justifies that result. To my mind there is a fairly close analogy between the Registrar
General's right of subrogation and a guarantee case.

However, when one adds to the analogy with the guarantee the further circumstances alluded to by Mr Wales as to the evidentiary problems for the
Registrar General in mounting two separate actions where persons are dispersed across the globe, this reinforces the utility of allowing the proceedings.

Accordingly, the procedural objection to the proposed cross claim fails.

The Substantive Point 
The substantive point is an extremely neat one. Essentially it is, where an agent has authority to obtain money by signing his own name to a withdrawal form but in fact obtains the money by impersonating the principal and forging his signature, is the payer liable to the principal? 
Counsel did not refer me to any authority directly on the point and this is understandable.

Mr White put that as Mr Khoo was acting within the scope of the authority given to him, no question of lack of authority could arise. In his written submissions Mr White asserted "Thus, the withdrawal slip remains valid and
Metway was bound to honour it (see Banker & Customer, Weaver &
Craigie Vol 2 p 6101)." I cannot see how that learned text assists, nor does the main case referred to on that page, Morison versus London County and
Westminster Bank Ltd [[1914] 3 KB 356.] That case dealt with a situation where a person had authority to sign cheques for specified purposes but signed a cheque for a purpose outside his authority. As the cheque was completely valid on the face of it it had to be honoured. In the instant case the withdrawal slip which was honoured was a forgery and the identification offered was forged.

Mr White then says that Mr Chow had given the bank a full mandate authorising
Mr Khoo unconditionally to operate the account without the need for the plaintiff's signature. All that was required was that the persons operating the account be either Mr Chow or Mr Khoo. If Mr Khoo chose an unorthodox way of withdrawing the money, that merely went to the mechanics of the affair.
There was still the underlying consent to the withdrawal made on the authority of Mr Khoo. He relied on Reg versus Gambling [[1975] QB 207] as authority for the point that there may very often be a situation where the identity of a person using a false name is quite irrelevant. I agree that often this distinction is vital, but I cannot see, with great respect, how it has anything to do with the present case. In any event, it may be that Reg v
Gambling should be considered as having been wrongly decided because that is what the Queensland Court of Criminal Appeal held in R versus Kolence [[1996] Qd R 412.] 
However, the mere fact that the authority cited is questionable does not detract from the undeniable force of the proposition which Mr White puts.

Mr Wales refers to the Court of Appeal's decision in Sansom versus Westpac
Banking Corp [(1996) 7 BPR 14,615.] In that case a husband and wife opened a joint banking account with overdraft facilities. The wife forged her husband's signature to three mortgages and incurred a large debt on the overdraft without her husband's knowledge or approval. The trial judge ordered the mortgages to be set aside against the husband and this was upheld on appeal. At 14,622 and following, Sheller, JA with whom Priestley JA agreed, deals with the problems where Mrs Sansom drew and placed the account in overdraft where Mr Sansom was not aware of what was happening. Mr Wales says that the discussion shows that the mere fact that Mrs
Sansom had authority was not considered to be determinative by the court of the matter. In reply, Mr White said that a proper reading of what Sheller, JA said in fact supports his case.

The present situation is not one where I have to determine the matter on a final basis. The law is that if a person wishes to make a claim and the claim is arguable, then ordinarily that person should be allowed to make the claim and have it determined in due course. Although I have probably a slight bias at the moment towards Mr White's argument, it seems to me that the matters which can be raised are fairly arguable and the matter should be allowed to proceed to trial.

Accordingly, the Registrar General should be given the leave to cross claim against Metway that he seeks in his notice of motion of 28 April 1998. The
Registrar General's costs of the motion should be his costs on the cross claim.
 * * * 
