

Perpetual Trustees Victoria Ltd versus Logan Matter No 12019/96 [1997] NSWSC (14 November 1997) 
Perpetual Trustees Victoria Limited versus Logan /96 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - Perpetual Trustees Victoria Limited versus Logan 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced in 1996. The claim which the plaintiff wishes to propound may be found in the Amended Statement of Claim filed on 19 September 1997. The plaintiff seeks possession of certain land known as Lot B, Jensen Road, Wadalba (the land). The claim is founded on default by the defendant under a Mortgage dated 4 September 1995. 
The defendant has filed both a Defence and a Cross-Claim. There are three cross-defendants. The first cross-defendant is the plaintiff. The second cross-defendant is Mr Finnie. The third cross-defendant is Moneypac Securities
Pty Limited (Moneypac).

It seems that Mr Finnie was a finance broker and that the defendant responded to an advertisement placed by him in a local publication. He arranged financial accommodation which came from the plaintiff. The advance was disbursed to Allied Mortgage Trust. It is alleged that two solicitors (Messrs
Sullivan and Wakeling) purported to act for the defendant in relation to the transaction. It is alleged that Moneypac was a loan originator for the plaintiff and played a role in the making of the application for financial accommodation. Mr O'Brien was a director and employee of Moneypac who was involved in the making of the application for financial accommodation. There is also another organisation (Interstar Securities Pty Limited) which performed a management role as agent for the plaintiff.

During the hearing, I was informed that it was alleged that Mr Finnie was the "villain" and that he had defrauded the plaintiff. In the pleadings, various allegations are advanced against him (including the making of untrue representations). Relief is claimed pursuant to the Contracts Review Act, (the Act), the Trade Practices Act, 1974 and the Fair Trading Act, .

On 15 September 1997, the defendant filed a Notice of Motion. It sought leave to amend the Cross-Claim. The proposed amendment involved the addition of
Messrs Sullivan, Wakeling and O'Brien as parties to the Cross-Claim.

Since the filing of that Notice of Motion and after an inspection of documents produced by Mr Sullivan, the defendant has notified that she seeks a further amendment. This amendment involves the inclusion of the following additional paragraph in the Defence:- "28A. Further, Interstar Securities Pty Limited or the Plaintiff or both of them failed properly to evaluate loan applications and failed properly to consider directions to disburse the proceeds of the loans to Allied Mortgage
Trust in relation to similar contracts between the Plaintiff and third parties in which the borrowers were defrauded and the Plaintiff took the benefit of such similar contracts.

PARTICULARS 
Loan from the Plaintiff to Allan Raymond Williams dated 8 August, 1995 in the sum of $150,038.61 of which $24,225 was paid to Allied Mortgage Trust.

Loan from the Plaintiff to Sandro Ferro in the sum of $112,000 of which $44,371.50 was paid to Allied Mortgage Trust.

Loan from the Plaintiff to Lynette Heather McKenzie and Catherine Gladys
Hogan dated 23 October, 1995 in the sum of $200,500 of which $66,000 was paid to Allied Mortgage Trust.

The Defendant may add to these particulars on completion of discovery." 
The Court was informed that notice of the application had been given to Messrs
Sullivan and Wakeling. Neither of them appeared to oppose the application.

Mr Dennis appeared on behalf of Moneypac and Mr O'Brien. Also, he mentioned the position taken by the legal representative for Mr Finnie.

Mr Finnie neither consents to nor opposes the application. Mr O'Brien opposes his addition as a party to the Cross-Claim.

The plaintiff does not oppose the proposed amendments to the Cross-Claim. It has informed the Court that it may seek to have the original proceedings heard separately from the Cross-Claim if the amendments to the Cross-Claim delay the hearing of its claim. It opposes the proposed amendment to the Defence.

Mr O'Brien's opposition was briefly put. There was mention of matters such as additional costs and the possibility of a conflict of interest. The submissions were vague in nature and not developed. In my view, they did not agitate matters which could be accorded much weight.

In the circumstances of this case, it seems to me that justice is best done between the parties if I grant leave to make the proposed amendments to the
Cross-Claim. Accordingly, I order that Neil Sullivan, Donald William Wakeling and Michael O'Brien be added as cross-defendants to the Cross-Claim. Any
Amended Cross-Claim is to be filed within 7 days.

The real matter agitated during the hearing was the proposed amendment to the
Defence. The application for leave was vigorously opposed.

The Court was informed that the purpose of the proposed paragraph 28A was to agitate the matter referred to in section 9(2)(k) of the Act. It is a provision in the following terms:- the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to similar contracts or courses of dealing to which any of them has been a party; 
In an affidavit sworn on 10 October 1997, Lisa Marie Egan (a solicitor in the employ of the solicitors for the plaintiff) has deposed, inter alia, to the following:- "7. The evidence has been closed as between the plaintiff/first cross defendant and the defendant/cross claimant for more than two months and as between these parties, the matter is ready for hearing. The insertion of proposed paragraph 28A in the defence at this late stage would have the effect of completely changing the course of proceedings, putting the plaintiff and the defendant back fourteen (14) months in terms of preparation and hearing, and potentially quadrupling the length of both interlocutory procedures and hearing time given that there would be four (4) contracts in issue even though whether the plaintiff was negligent in relation to three of the contracts, would be irrelevant to the issues relating to the contract between the plaintiff and the defendant." 
One of the matters raised in opposition to the application to amend the
Defence, turns on the language of section 9(1) of the Act. This provision contemplates a determination of injustice "in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made". It is pointed out that the transaction referred to in (b) of the proposed paragraph 28A has an unspecified date.
Also, it was pointed out that the transaction referred to in (c) thereof was a transaction entered into subsequent to the making of the contract in this case.

It is said that neither of these two transactions could be matters relevant to this case. This submission may have merit. I was not referred to any authority. The question was not fully argued.

In my view, when regard is had to all the relevant considerations, it is not appropriate to proceed to the forming of any final view on the question. It suffices to say that there is a real question as to whether or not at least a substantial part of the matters sought to be agitated under the proposed paragraph 28A has relevance to the claim for relief made under the Act.

In passing, it may be appropriate to mention that the paragraph may be read as asserting that the plaintiff owed certain duties to the defendant. This matter was not agitated by the parties and I put it aside for present purposes.

It seems to me that the allowing of this proposed amendment may transform the preparation for trial and the trial process itself from an examination into one transaction into an examination of aspects of at least three additional transactions. Each of these aspects may give rise to time consuming areas involving greater expense to parties.

The plaintiff asserts that the allowing of the amendment would cause it to suffer prejudice. It is likely to cause further delay in the disposition of the proceedings. It could be expected to substantially increase the costs of the proceedings (inter alia, it has a potential for increasing the duration of a trial, perhaps by some days). The plaintiff claims that the amount now secured by the Mortgage is in excess of $138,000. It claims that interest continues to accrue under the Mortgage. There is evidence that the value of the property may now be only $110,000. The defendant is unemployed and appears to lack other resources from which monetary claims may be satisfied.

There are presently seven individual parties to the litigation. It is already a vehicle that may consume considerable Court time and be expensive. In applications of this nature, the Court may take into account the interests of other litigants and those of the Court in the expeditious conduct of its business. This Court is already overloaded with business (SPCC versus AIS [(1993) NSWLR 487] at 493). In an endeavour to alleviate this problem,
Parliament has seen fit to substantially increase the jurisdiction of the
District Court.

In the circumstances of this case, it seems to me that justice is best served between the parties if the application for leave to amend the Defence is refused.

The defendant is to pay the costs of the application and any costs thrown away by reason of the making of the amendments to the Cross-Claim.
 * * * 
