

Shaw versus Tosich Construction Pty Ltd and Anor Matter No 14881/91 [1997]
NSWSC 596 (1 December 1997) 
Shaw versus Tosich Construction Pty Limited & Anor /91 December 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /91 - Shaw versus Tosich Construction Pty Limited & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff claims to have suffered personal injury in an incident that took place on 5 May 1989 when struck by a brick whilst working at the Campbelltown College of TAFE. These proceedings were commenced on 5 September 1991. The plaintiff propounds a claim for damages. There are two defendants. The first defendant was the head contractor at the site. The second defendant was a subcontractor at the site. 
On 31 January 1996, the first defendant brought a Second Cross-Claim against the second defendant. This process propounded a claim for indemnity which was founded on both statute and Clause 19(a) of the Sub-Contract Agreement (the
Sub-Contract) which was dated 4 July 1988. No Defence was filed to the Cross-
Claim.

By letter dated 20 June 1996, the first defendant sought the consent of the second defendant to the amending of the Second Cross-Claim by the addition of a further cause of action founded on breach of Clause 19(b) of the Sub-
Contract. In substance, the proposed claim related to a further form of contractual indemnity (the Sub-Contract required the second defendant to effect Public Liability insurance extended to include the name of the first defendant). The amendment involved the addition of four paragraphs (12-15).
The first defendant's present solicitors had received instructions to act shortly prior to 20 June 1996. The second defendant declined to consent to the proposed amendment (see letter dated 15 January 1997).

I should mention that, at some stage after the commencement of the proceedings, the first defendant went into liquidation. The first defendant had insurance with GIO Australia Limited (GIO). It seems that GIO has exercised its rights of subrogation in taking over the conduct of the proceedings on behalf of the first defendant and stands behind it. There may well be some procedural matters which require attention. However, these do not appear to have caused concern to the parties.

It seems that the matter of the taking out of the Public Liability insurance was agitated in correspondence in about March 1993 by GIO. By letter dated 23
December 1993, the solicitors for the second defendant advised GIO as follows:- "With respect to your enquiries regarding the Zurich policy we advise that
Tosich Pty Limited were not named as the principal under the policy held by
Antileak Roofing Pty Limited with Zurich Australian Insurance Limited." 
An application for leave to amend came before Acting Prothonotary Irwin (pursuant to Notice of Motion filed on 12 June 1997). He delivered a reserved decision on 19 September 1997. He granted leave to the filing of the Amended
Second Cross-Claim.

The second defendant has sought a review of that decision (pursuant to Notice of Motion filed on 24 September 1997). The review took place on 19 November .

The Acting Prothonotary has delivered written reasons for his decision. The reasons reveal that leave was granted pursuant to Part 20 rule 4 of the
Supreme Court Rules. In reaching that decision, the Acting Prothonotary took into account various matters including the relevant limitation provisions, the delay, the explanation for delay and prejudice.

The reasons do not contain any reference to the power conferred on the Court by Part 20 rule 1. I am informed by Council that this provision was brought to the attention of the Acting Prothonotary during the course of argument. There has been some debate as to whether the provisions of Part 20 rule 4 have application in the circumstances of the present case. This is a question which need not be pursued. It is common ground that rule 1 is a source of power which enables the making of the Acting Prothonotary's order. Rule 4 expressly provides that it does not limit the powers of the Court under rule 1.

Further, it was common ground that the power conferred by rule 1 may be exercised even though the relevant limitation period has expired. This is a position that is well established by authority (see, inter alia, McGee v
Yeomans [(1977) 1 NSWLR 273).] 
Ultimately, the challenge to the Acting Prothonotary's decision revolved around the question of whether or not he had properly exercised the discretion conferred by rule 1.

I should also mention that some discussion took place concerning the provisions of section 74 of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969 and of section 78 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), 1970. It seems to me that the present application can be determined without embarking on the question of a consideration of these provisions.

There was also some discussion as to the date when the relevant limitation period for the Second Cross-Claim had expired. On this question, the second defendant's submissions were lacking in precision. If its views were correct, the Second Cross-Claim itself was filed after the limitation period had passed. As yet, the statute has not been raised as a defence and apparently no objection has been taken to the Second Cross-Claim having been filed out of time.

The review principles require the applicant for relief to demonstrate a basis for disturbing the decision made by the Acting Prothonotary. In the circumstances of this case, I consider that the second defendant has failed to demonstrate a case for disturbing the decision.

In my view, regard was had to the relevant discretionary considerations. I consider that the decision to grant leave was open to the Acting Prothonotary.

It may be helpful to add some further observations as to matters which were agitated during argument. It seems to be accepted that little could be said in support of the proposition that there was prejudice by reason of the liquidation of the first defendant. There was certainly no material before the
Court as to the liquidation itself. The second defendant also relied on the prejudice which is founded on what was said by Mr Farrell in paragraph 15 of his affidavit. There is contest between the parties as to the existence of the alleged prejudice. If it be accepted that the matters referred to by Mr
Farrell are present in this case, I am not satisfied that any such problems flow from the delay in the seeking of the amendment. It may be that the making of the amendment will be of little import in the proceedings.

Delay of itself may give rise to presumptive prejudice (see Brisbane South
Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866).] It is not said that the delay has seen a loss of witnesses or documents. Indeed, breach of Clause 19(b) may not be put in issue. The correspondence may be read as containing an admission of breach.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion filed on 24 September 1997. The second defendant is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion.

These proceedings have been the subject of a show cause notice and have come before Abadee J. I am informed that the question of the transfer of these proceedings to the District Court has been deferred pending the disposition of the application to amend. The plaintiff has advised the Court that he consents to the proceedings being remitted to the District Court. Accordingly, I vacate any further listing before Abadee J and remit the proceedings to the District
Court.
 * * * 
