

Pearce versus Metz Pty Ltd and 3 Ors Matter No 1233/96 [1997] NSWSC 654 (16
December 1997) 
Last Updated: 6 November 1998 `GARY PEARCE versus METZ PTY LTD & 3 ORS` `001233/96` `16 December 1997` `Master Macready` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: This is the hearing of two Notices of Motion, one brought by the plaintiff and one by the first and second defendants. The plaintiff's Notice of Motion filed on 20 November seeks leave to amend to add a claim for winding up as well as the claims for relief which are presently made in the Statement of Claim by reference to the original summons filed in the matter. The application by the first and second defendants is made on 31 October and raises in substance three issues. Firstly, a question of an item of discovery; secondly, an application for the strike out of affidavits filed by the plaintiff on 22 February and 1 August 1996 and thirdly, it seeks directions in a number of forms in respect of affidavit evidence. 
The present suit is a claim for oppression and arises from the fact that the plaintiff and the second defendant are shareholders in the first defendant.
The plaintiff has a 25 per cent share and the second defendant a 75 per cent share. The company acquired a business of a similar name in which the plaintiff was an existing employee.

The summons in the matter was filed on 6 February 1996 and an amended summons was filed on 7 March 1996 which deleted a claim made in the original summons for the winding up of the first defendant. This apparently was done in order to avoid difficulties with bankers and creditors. Thereafter the plaintiff had filed its affidavit in chief on 22 February 1996. That affidavit, including its annexures, was in excess of 90 pages, containing 71 numbered paragraphs.
To this Mr Ellis, the second defendant, responded in his affidavit of 4 May which had some 65 pages and 273 numbered paragraphs. In particular in paragraph five he had the following to say: "I have experienced difficulty in responding comprehensively to the affidavit of the plaintiff, partly because of its complexity and partly because it does not deal with events in chronological sequence, alternatively in segments of subject matter. I found in order to maximise my assistance to the Court the most expedient way for me to come to issue on Pearce's affidavit material is by segments of subject matters in chronological or as nearly as possible and chronological sequence." 
The plaintiff then filed an affidavit in reply sworn 1 August 1996. That affidavit is 126 pages with annexures taking it to over 200 pages and it contains 344 paragraphs.

After these affidavits were filed there was an order made for the filing of pleadings. The Statement of Claim was filed which in preliminary paragraphs set out the background to the matter.

Paragraph 10 contains an allegation of a refusal to pay dividends. Paragraphs and 12 plead matters relating to exclusion from management of the plaintiff. Paragraph 13 deals with payment of company funds for private expenses of the second defendant. Paragraph 15 pleads matters which may be described as unfair remuneration. Paragraph 16 pleads an attempt to dilute the share capital and paragraph 17 pleads matters relating to the increase and debt level and expansion such as to place the company at risk.

The major matter in the motions is of course the nature of the affidavits which, as I have indicated, are voluminous. The application made by the defendant in their Notice of Motion is based squarely on Pt 38 r 8. That rule provides that: "Where there is scandalous irrelevant or otherwise oppressive matter in an affidavit the Court may order that: the matter by struck out or the affidavit be taken off the file." 
The defendants presented a case based upon the second alternative. There is also a provision in Pt 65 r 5 which refers to documents in fairly similar terms although also includes a ground for frivolity.

I was referred to the commentary on the English rule which is Order 40 r 6 and also a Northern Territory case of The Queen versus The Chief Minister; Ex parte
Boswell which is recorded in [47 NTR 1.] The terms of the rule in that case are somewhat different in that the only two grounds are scandalous or irrelevant.

In the present case it is not suggested, of course, that there is anything scandalous about the material. It was suggested that it is irrelevant or otherwise oppressive. The second part of the rule in the New South Wales
Rules, namely otherwise oppressive, I think is the one matter which would concern the Court in considering an application in the present case. I particularly had in mind a situation which frequently arises in trials where affidavit evidence is given of important conversations between parties in inadmissible form that invariably leads to either applications for adjournments or for applications to lead evidence-in-chief orally. In either case there is frequently prejudice to one of the parties which sometimes is met with an adjournment and increased costs and sometimes not met and a party has to suffer the consequences, be it the failure to have evidence to support a claim or being able to effectively deal with the material adduced orally.

I have been taken through the affidavit in chief with some care and I have also gone through it again myself. I have had regard to the contents of lists of objections that have been served by each party, at least in respect to the principal affidavit, the objections that have been served in respect of the plaintiff's affidavit in chief.

In submissions before me it became clear that not only were those objections relied upon but also objections were taken as to relevance in relation to parts of the affidavit which had not been the subject of comment in the list of objections that had been served.

Another way in which the defendants presented the case was to refer to the fact that the Statement of Claim particularises conduct alleged to be oppressive in various ways by referring to named paragraphs in the Statement of Claim. When one analyses these named paragraphs it is apparent that approximately half the affidavit was not relied upon. I myself do not think that that is an appropriate way of considering the matter because some of the material in the affidavit is background or historical and sets the scene for what subsequently follows. I think it would be to simplistic a view to take of the task the Court has if it proposes to act under this rule.

Turning to the affidavit in more detail, paragraphs 1, 2, 11, plead a number of what I might call are matters which are introductory and historical. This is often given in form which is not admissible and is of doubtful relevance, notwithstanding the fact that it is historical. The first matters of substance that one comes to in the affidavit are the agreements which were said to be entered into for the appropriate purchase of shares in the business. For instance, in paragraph 12 in the first sentence there is a reference to discussion of the matter relating to potential involvement. That would not be admissable and probably is not terribly relevant unless there is something hidden behind there which is not apparent.

Paragraph 13 is the paragraph that gives an actual conversation whereby the parties agreed to go into their appropriate percentages. That conversation is deposed to in the last three sentences of the paragraph. However, before that, there are three sentences which deal with the plaintiff's feelings about how he might or might not go into the deal. They are in inadmissible form.
However, if the substance of what is referred to there was sought to be tendered, there is a possible relevance if there were some evidence of it being communicated to the second defendant but that evidence does not appear.
However, there is evidence in the last part of the sentences as to what was the arrangement.

In paragraph 14, for instance, there is reference in the first sentence to a matter which I would have thought is totally immaterial and not admissible unless there is in some way that is not explained some effect upon the relations between the parties.

Paragraphs 16 to 30 generally deal with a lot of history of what happened after the initial agreement, some of which I must say I find of doubtful relevance.

In paragraph 25 there is a good illustration of the type of matter that could give rise to the prejudice that I have talked about. There, there is inadmissible evidence of a conversation about an agreement to have equal income and an appropriate remuneration package. That would be rejected at a trial and would lead to the problem of either the plaintiff not being able to press that part of its claim or leading evidence at the trial.

Paragraph 34 is another interesting example in that a bald statement is simply made that the day-to-day running of the company was left to the plaintiff.
This is the only particular given of the allegation which is in support of paragraph 12 of the Statement of Claim which was a paragraph that alleges an actual agreement for the leaving of the inclusion of the plaintiff in management decisions. The affidavit evidence simply is not there. I would have thought, although this is probably arguable, that what is said in paragraph 34 is probably not admissible.

When one moves on to paragraph 16 of the Statement of Claim which deals with dilution of the shareholding or attempted dilution, one finds a number of objections in those paragraphs. For instance, in paragraph 45 one finds in the third sentence and second sentence statements about purposes and amounts of loans, all of which are inadmissible and would require supplementary evidence.
There is also in that paragraph allegations of agreements without an interest that loans would bear given in inadmissible form and reference to the overruling of an objection is also in inadmissible form.

Paragraph 47 in the third and second sentences are in inadmissible areas.
Paragraph 48 contains allegations of discussions of fact about the objectives of the business. Those matters, if they ultimately become important, would have to be by evidence other than what is in the affidavit as it would be struck out. When one turns to debt level, one finds a few examples in paragraphs 52 and 53 of inadmissible evidence but not a lot.

The claim in paragraph 10 in respect of the failure to declare the buildings is sought to be supported in paragraph 60 of the affidavit in which general allegations are made about discussions about dividends, all of which allegations are in inadmissible form and would not be admitted. If this were the only evidence, then clearly the hearing of that part of the claim would fall away. In paragraph 66 there are some minor matters of inadmissibility which touch on that area.

Paragraph 13 of the Statement of Claim deals with the allegation of private expenses being made by the company. This is dealt with in paragraph 68 of the affidavit. The first sentence is expressed as a plaintiff's belief and would not be admissible. Thereafter there is a series of correspondence which is annexed and it may be, having regard to the existence of that correspondence or cross-examination of the second defendant, that a case may be made.
However, there are some, as I say, minor views which are not put.

Paragraph 69 seems to be submission material on valuation which would hardly achieve a substantial status in the case. However, notwithstanding these somewhat critical comments that I have been making, it is clear that there is a substantial amount of background material whose relevance can be debated probably at length at the trial.

There are clearly some areas where, as the evidence stands at the moment, the plaintiff will not perhaps succeed at the trial on those particular issues or parts of conduct which go to make up the ground of oppression.

It is however a fairly substantial step to take to strike out evidence at this stage or to remove an affidavit from the file. As I have said, I think there are areas where the plaintiff, once it has a real look at it, will want to improve its evidence. There was also evidence from the course of today regarding matters of relevance beyond what has appeared in the list of objections taken so far.

Accordingly, at this stage, I decline to order the affidavits of the plaintiff of 22 February and 1 August be struck off the file. However, I will make further directions as to steps to be taken to put the matter back on track so that relevant evidence is advanced in time for the parties to consider their position before the trial.

Accordingly, I will give the following directions: 
I direct the first and second defendants to serve an amended list of their objections to the plaintiff's affidavits within 14 days of today's date. I order the plaintiff to: 
File any additional affidavit which it wishes to file in chief on or before 28 January; 
I give leave to the plaintiff to file an amended Statement of Claim raising a claim for the winding up of the first defendant and any necessary allegations in support of that claim on or before 28 January.

I direct the defendant to file any evidence in reply on or before 14 February.

As far as discovery is concerned, there is to be an arrangement between the parties.

I order the plaintiff to provide to the defendants by 14 January 1998 a supplementary list of the relevant handwritten notes of the plaintiff made by him of discussions at meetings at which he attended.

I have heard further submissions about costs. I appreciate that discovery may have been necessary and agreement was only reached at the hearing today, however, a substantial part of the matter related to affidavits. In the circumstances I think the appropriate order is that each party's costs of the application today be costs in the cause.

Exhibit 2 can be handed back. Exhibit A also can be returned which is a folder of annexures.
 * * * 
