

Dennis versus Nrma (No 2) Matter No C 00034/94 [1997] NSWSC 672 (22 December )

Last Updated: 10 March 1998 
DENNIS versus NRMA (No 2) 
C00034/94 December 1997 
James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter I delivered a judgment on 21 November 1997. In that judgment I deferred making a decision on the plaintiff's claim for damages for future care. I requested further submissions on the claim for damages for future care and also requested submissions on any outstanding questions of interest or costs. I received further submissions on these matters from both parties. 
Future Care 
In my judgment of 21 November 1997, while awarding some damages for past care,
I did not allow any damages for past care in respect of the period from 18
August 1994 to the present. I did not award any damages in respect of that period, not because I was not satisfied that during that period the plaintiff had some need for care services, but because I was satisfied that during that period services to satisfy the plaintiff's needs had been provided by children of the plaintiff who were living with him and hence both members of the same household and of the same family as the plaintiff. In those circumstances s72 of the Motor Accidents Act was applicable and I was not satisfied that the plaintiff had established a need for care services for more than six hours per week.

In his further submissions counsel for the plaintiff propounded a claim for damages for future care along the following lines:- 
At the time of the trial two of the plaintiff's children, being his sons aged eighteen and fifteen, were still living with the plaintiff and providing services to the plaintiff. However, it could be anticipated that these two children would do as their older siblings had done and leave home, probably at about the age of eighteen years and not return to live with their father. It was pointed out that the plaintiff's children had progressively left home; there had been a time when all of the plaintiff's six children were living with him, by the time of Dr Morgan's report of 19 August 1994 two children had left home and four children were still living with the plaintiff and by the time of the trial another two children had left home. Because of the plaintiff's brain damage and sexual impotence, it was unlikely that the plaintiff would form a relationship with a woman, so that she became a member of the same household or the same family as the plaintiff and as such provided services to him.

It was then submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that, when the last of his children left home, he would have at least some needs for services of a domestic, gardening or handyman nature, such as were referred to in the evidence the plaintiff gave at the trial, (and indeed in other evidence), which would no longer be provided by any of his children and would have to be provided by persons who were not members of the same household or the same family as the plaintiff and accordingly a claim for damages for such services would not be subject to the restrictions set out in s72 of the Motor
Accidents Act.

It was further submitted that after the last of the plaintiff's children left home leaving the plaintiff to live by himself, the plaintiff would also need a "minder", who would not be a member of the same household or family as the plaintiff, who would be required to perform functions of the kind contemplated by Dr Jolly in his last report. Services provided by such a minder would also not be subject to s72 of the Act. If the plaintiff came to live alone without his children, his need for someone to keep a check on him would actually increase.

Counsel for the plaintiff quantified the plaintiff's claim for damages for future care as follows. It was submitted that, beginning in three years time, the plaintiff would have a need for care services of two hours a day, at a rate of $1499 cents per hour, for the rest of what I found in my earlier judgment to be the plaintiff's life expectancy, that is up to age seventy.

I consider that I should generally accept counsel for the plaintiff's submissions. In my opinion, it is probable that in about three years time the last of the plaintiff's children will have ceased to live with him and that none of the plaintiff's children will return to live with him. Although in my earlier judgment I said that I did not accept all of the plaintiff's evidence,
I am satisfied that from about three years from now and until the end of his life the plaintiff will have needs for care services and for the services of a minder and that these services will, at least very frequently, not be provided by a person who is a member of the same household or family as the plaintiff.
I would not regard an aboriginal person, who does not live in the same house as the plaintiff and who is not a member of his immediate family, as being a member of the same household or family as the plaintiff, within the meaning of those expressions in s72 of the Act. Where services will not be provided by a person who is a member of the same household or family as the plaintiff, the restrictions imposed by s72 of the Act on an award of damages do not apply.

It is obviously impossible to be very precise about the number of hours of care per week, which will reasonably be required by the plaintiff from three years in the future up until the end of his life. I am of the opinion that Dr
Jolly's estimate of the plaintiff's needs is excessive. The number of hours per week is, of course, likely to vary over the long period of the rest of the plaintiff's life. Some services may be provided by persons who are members of the plaintiff's family. I propose to allow damages on the basis of ten hours per week.

I calculate damages at $1499 per week x 8097 (5% multiplier for twenty-nine years, being the balance of the plaintiff's live expectancy, as from three years in the future) x 864 (loss postponed for three years on 5% tables) = $104,867.

Interest 
The only claim for interest which was made by counsel for the plaintiff was for interest on the damages awarded for past economic loss. It was conceded that claims for interest on the damages for past care and on the damages for past non-economic loss were barred by s73 of the Motor Accidents Act. It was also conceded that none of the past medical expenses had been paid by the plaintiff and that no claim for interest could be made on any part of the damages for past medical expenses.

Interest on damages for past economic loss would not be payable, unless a condition in one or other of the sub-paragraphs of par(a) of subs(4) of s73 of the Act were satisfied. No written offer of settlement was made. The only condition in par(a) which could have been satisfied is that set out in sub- par(i). However, I am not satisfied that information that would enable a proper assessment of the plaintiff's claim was given to the defendant and that the defendant had a reasonable opportunity to make an offer of settlement in respect of "the plaintiff's full entitlement to all damages of any kind". Nor am I satisfied, having regard to the uncertainty about which of the plaintiff or his wife was driving the vehicle, that it was appropriate for the defendant to make an offer of settlement. Consequently, I do not consider that I should make an order for payment of interest.

Costs 
I consider I should simply make an unqualified order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs. It was submitted on behalf of the defendant that I should exempt from a general costs order in favour of the plaintiff, the costs attributable to Dr Jolly's evidence. However, despite my criticisms of Dr
Jolly's evidence in my principal judgment, I have relied to some extent on Dr
Jolly's evidence in assessing the damages for future care.

Conclusions 
I find a verdict for the plaintiff 
The plaintiff's share of responsibility for his contributory negligence is %.

I award damages as follows - 
Past Medical Expenses $ 58,618.00 
Future Medical Expenses $ 24,091.00 
Non-Economic Loss $175,000.00 
Past Economic Loss $ 50,040.00 
Future Economic Loss $134,676.00 
Past Care $ 19,715.00 
Future Care $104,867.00 $567,007.00 
Reduced by 50% for contributory negligence $283,503.00 
I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
