

Regina versus Howland Matter No 60692/93 [1997] NSWSC 662 (18 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 
Regina versus John Robert Howland /93 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Sully J, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /93 REGINA versus John Robert HOWLAND 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Although this appeal was commenced more than four years ago it has not been prosecuted with any sense of urgency. This may be related to the circumstance that the appellant, when sentenced in 1993, was already serving sentences in respect of other offences which involved a minimum term that was not due to expire until 4 April 2000. It seems, also, that the appellant has had a number of changes of legal representation, for reasons that are presently immaterial. 
The earlier sentences had been imposed by Newton DCJ. It is the apparent effect of those earlier sentences upon the decision of Job ADCJ in the instant case which forms the basis of the principal argument advanced on behalf of the appellant in the present appeal.

The facts are set out in the judgment of Sully J, which I have had the benefit of reading in draft form. I agree with his Honour's conclusion, but think it proper to express in my own words my views on what I took to be the main issue in the appeal.

The appellant pleaded guilty of conspiring, in 1991, with two men named Kucler and Stanton, to manufacture amphetamines. He came for sentence before Job ADCJ on 3 December 1993. He had spent eighteen months in pre-sentence custody referable to that offence. In April 1993 he had been sentenced by Newton DCJ in relation to other offences. The sentences imposed by Newton DCJ involved concurrent terms of ten years, divided into a minimum term of seven years, to commence on 5 April 1993, and to expire on 4 April 2000, and an additional term of three years to commence on 5 April 2000, and to expire on 4 April .

Kucler and Stanton had been dealt with, not for conspiracy, but for substantive offences of supplying amphetamines. Kucler was sentenced to a minimum term of three and a half years, and an additional term of fourteen months (in total, four years eight months). Stanton was sentenced to a minimum term of three years, and an additional term of one year (in total, four years).

Job ADCJ, in sentencing the appellant for conspiracy, said that the culpability of the appellant, Kucler and Stanton in relation to the enterprise in question was roughly equal. However, he also said that an aggravating feature of the appellant's offence was that it was committed when he was on parole and on bail. This involved one factual error. The appellant, who has a history of drug offences, was sentenced for such an offence in 1989. The parole period of that sentence expired in November 1990; a fact which was not drawn to the judge's attention. The appellant was arrested on 19 April 1991 in relation to the offences dealt with by Newton DCJ, which involved possession of 3.5 kilograms of amphetamines. He was released to bail on 26 April 1991.
The conspiracy the subject of the proceedings before Job ADCJ was entered into almost immediately. Thus, at the time of the offence, the appellant was on bail, but not on parole. Kucler was not on bail, although he was on parole for manslaughter. Stanton had not previously been in custody, although he was on a bond for a driving offence.

At the conclusion of his remarks on sentence, Job ADCJ said: "I am of the opinion that for the offence of conspiracy to supply amphetamines a sentence of three and a half years would be appropriate. In view of the fact that the prisoner was in custody for this offence for a period of almost eighteen months I now impose the following sentence: For the offence of conspiracy I fix a minimum term of two years hard labour to commence at the expiration of the sentence you are now serving, that is the sentence will date from 5 April 2000 and will expire on 4 April 2002. Bearing in mind that the total sentence you are now serving is nine years I fix an additional term of three years to date from 5 April 2002 which will expire on April 2005." 
It is obvious that when, in the second line of that paragraph, the learned judge referred to "a sentence" he was referring to a minimum term.

Attention was drawn, in argument, to the relationship between the total sentence imposed upon Kucler, and the total sentence imposed upon the appellant. Kucler was sentenced to a total term of four years and eight months. Taking into account the eighteen months pre-sentence custody, the appellant was sentenced to a total term of six years and six months. In each case the effective minimum term was the same.

Counsel submitted that the opening words of the concluding sentence in the paragraph quoted above, as well as a comparison between the appellant's sentence and Kucler's sentence, indicate that Job ADCJ imposed a longer total sentence upon the appellant that he would otherwise have done by reason of the existence of the sentences previously imposed by Newton DCJ.

Job ADCJ was constrained by [s9(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s9.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) . Given that the sentence for the offence presently in question was to be cumulative upon the sentences previously imposed by Newton DCJ, then the sentence had to commence on 5 April 2000. That did not have the legal consequence that the additional terms imposed by Newton DCJ disappeared. However, it had the practical consequence that the minimum term imposed by Job ADCJ would be operative during the additional terms imposed by Newton DCJ. The extent of the overlapping, of course, would depend upon what Job ADCJ regarded as an appropriate minimum term.

Although his reasoning was expressed succinctly, Job ADCJ had to take into account a variety of considerations (including totality, parity, matters of aggravation, and the constraints of [s9(1))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s9.html) which tended in different directions. As to totality, the position was complicated by the overlapping of the minimum term fixed by Job ADCJ with the additional terms fixed by Newton DCJ.

The essence of the appellant's argument was that the learned judge did not give proper consideration to the head sentence he was imposing for the offence of conspiracy to manufacture amphetamines, but simply first fixed what seemed to him a proper minimum term (bearing in mind the pre-sentence custody) and then calculated a rather arbitrary additional term, based, amongst other things, upon the length of the sentences imposed by Newton DCJ (cf R v
Moffitt [(1990) 20 NSWLR 114).] The resultant head sentence (six years and six months, including the eighteen months pre-sentence custody) is, so it is argued, excessive.

Counsel for the appellant argued that it would be wrong in principle if the effective head sentence imposed upon the appellant were, for any reason, extended beyond what it would otherwise have been because of the existence of the sentences imposed by Newton DCJ (as distinct, for example, from an extension by reason of the aggravation involved in the appellant's bad record). As a matter of principle, I agree. My difficulty is in seeing that the principle has been violated in the factual circumstances of the present case.

I do not infer from the fact that Job ADCJ referred sequentially to the minimum and additional terms that he engaged in what is sometimes described as a "bottom-up" process of reasoning. It is more likely that he had thought about, and decided upon, all aspects of the sentence before he began to enunciate his reasons. Nor do I regard the words "bearing in mind that" as meaning "because". Considerations of totality required the judge, in fixing both the minimum term and the additional term, to bear in mind the sentences that had been imposed by Newton DCJ.

I am not persuaded that Job ADCJ imposed on the appellant a longer head sentence than he would otherwise have imposed because of the earlier sentences imposed by Newton DCJ.

However, although I do not consider that the appellant has demonstrated error in the sentencing judge's reasoning, like Sully J, I think it appropriate for this court, in view of the complexity of the considerations that were relevant to the sentencing, to consider whether the ultimate result was unfair to the appellant, and whether the sentence was excessive.

This was a serious offence by a serious drug offender.

The fact that the appellant had very recently been admitted to bail on a similar offence, at the time he committed the instant offence, was an important matter of aggravation.

In R versus Richards [[1981] 2 NSWLR 464] at 465
Street CJ said: "As the lists of persons awaiting trial on serious criminal charges continue to lengthen, there are at large within the community an increasing number of persons on bail. Many of those persons will in due course plead guilty to, or be found guilty of, the offences for which they are awaiting trial. The community must be protected as far as possible from further criminal activities by persons who take advantage of their liberty on bail to commit further crimes. The only means open to the criminal courts to seek to provide this protection is to pass severely deterrent sentences upon those who thus abuse their freedom on bail." 
Those remarks are relevant both to a comparison with the sentence imposed upon
Kucler and to a consideration of whether the appellant's sentence was excessive.

Having regard to the maximum penalty, a total effective sentence of six years and six months was not excessive for this offence, even allowing for the commencing date. This court, if re-sentencing, could not properly impose a lesser sentence.

I agree with the orders proposed by Sully J.

In relation to the appellant's appeal against the conviction which followed his plea of guilty in this matter, I agreed with the original judgment of
Sully J, and I also agree with the additional observations made at the commencement of Sully J's reasons for judgment on sentence. I would add that a good deal of what the appellant has put before the court in relation to his conviction consists of unproved assertions of fact which, even if true, might inculpate other people but do not exculpate the appellant.

REGINA versus JOHN ROBERT HOWLAND 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: On 1 October instant, the Court heard an application by Mr. John Robert Howland ["the applicant"], for an extension of time within which to appeal against a conviction; the substantive appeal against conviction; and an application for leave to appeal against a sentence of imprisonment that was imposed upon him in consequence of that conviction. Mr. Howland was unrepresented on the first and second of those several proceedings, but he was represented by counsel upon the application for leave to appeal against sentence. 
The Court granted the extension of time necessary for the prosecution of the appeal against conviction; and dismissed the substantive appeal. Judgment was reserved on the application for leave to appeal against sentence. The present judgment respecting the application for leave to appeal against sentence should be read in conjunction with the judgment dismissing the appeal against conviction.

After the Court had formally reserved its decision as to the application for leave to appeal against sentence, and had adjourned for that purpose, the applicant wrote to the Registrar of the Court a letter dated 3 October 1997.
In that letter the applicant asserts that, when asked by the Chief Justice whether he was intending to proceed with his conviction appeal, he, the applicant, had mistakenly believed that the Chief Justice was asking whether he was still intending to proceed at a later date with the conviction appeal.
The applicant goes on in his letter to assert that it was not until after the judgment dismissing his appeal against conviction had been delivered, and he had thereafter spoken to counsel representing him on the application for leave to appeal against sentence, that he realised that his conviction appeal had been, in fact, dismissed. The applicant's letter adds to these representations an assertion, which is there is no cause to doubt, that he is profoundly deaf in one ear and has only partial hearing in his other ear. The applicant alleges that these handicaps contributed to his claim to misapprehension as to what was happening in Court with regard to his conviction appeal.

The applicant's letter asks for: "another chance to put my case forward in regards to my all grounds appeal and ........ a re-hearing. I would also ask for time to seek legal representation or, at least, time to prepair (sic) my own submission".

The Court responded to this letter of the applicant by having the Registrar of the Court write to the applicant inviting the applicant to put in writing anything further that he wished to say in connection with his conviction appeal. The applicant has responded with a letter dated 7 November 1997. It comprises 8 manuscript foolscap pages to which are attached photocopies of various extracts from the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) .

It will be necessary to return presently to the detail of what is said in the letter of 7 November 1997. Before that is done, something more needs to be said about what happened at the hearing on 1 October 1997. The relevant transcript has been taken out and it discloses the following matters.

The Chief Justice told the applicant that the members of the Court had read the written material put in by the applicant. His Honour told the applicant that he was "free to add anything that you wish".

The applicant told the Chief Justice, in response, that he was "half deaf".
The Chief Justice again told the applicant that the members of the Court had read everything put in in writing; and the applicant replied, simply: "yes".

The Chief Justice told the applicant that there was no need to add anything to the written material that had been thus submitted. The applicant responded as follows: "There is not much I can add. This matter occurred with another conviction I am serving at the moment and both matters are tied in together. I think it was probably a mistake to separate them but that was the decision by the DPP in the beginning. I am still fighting that matter as well, it is still subject to a 474 from the Attorney General's office. There is not much more I can add to that." 
Argument was then heard on the application for leave to appeal against sentence. At the conclusion of that argument, learned counsel then appearing for the applicant on the sentence application, informed the Court that there was something more that the applicant wished to say with regard to the conviction appeal. The applicant was invited to put whatever it was that he wanted to add; and he said this: "The notebooks were submitted from the previous trial in front of Newton DCJ and these were tendered as evidence. What I was arguing was my barrister,
Garry Wendler, when he was arguing against the notebooks there is no way they could be tendered without letting the jury know we were previously involved with the police." 
It is appropriate that the Court consider what the applicant has said in his letter of 7 November 1997; but it can fairly be said that the substance of the assertions made by the applicant in his earlier letter of 3 October 1997 do not appear to be borne out by the course of events as recorded in the relevant transcript.

I have read the letter of 7 November 1997, and I have re-read the 24 page document referred to at page 4 of the judgment that I delivered on 1 October respecting the conviction appeal. It seems to me that the substance of the applicant's letter dated 7 November 1997 does no more than to reiterate the three particular grounds of appeal noted at page 4 of my earlier judgment.
What is said by the applicant in his letter of 7 November 1997 does not cause me to change any of the opinions that I expressed in my earlier judgment on 1
October 1997.

The sentence in question was imposed by Job ADCJ on 3 September 1993. It was a sentence of imprisonment for five years, apportioned between a minimum term of two years and an additional term of three years. The sentence was imposed as punishment for a contravention of [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s24.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) .
The statutory maximum penalty for such an offence is imprisonment for twenty years.

The relevant facts are as follows.

Between April and October of 1991 a Task Force of the State Drug Enforcement
Agency carried out extensive investigations into the suspected manufacture of, and trafficking in, amphetamines by the applicant and two associates, named
Stanton and Kucler. An authorised listening device was installed in Stanton's home; and the home telephones of all three suspects were subjected to authorised monitoring.

On 19 April 1991 the applicant was arrested and charged with the manufacture of some 3.5 kilograms of amphetamine; and with the supply of that amphetamine.
The applicant was released to bail on 26 April. Thereafter, continuous police surveillance established that the applicant, almost as soon as he had been released to bail, had contacted Stanton and that the applicant, Stanton and
Kucler had thereafter conspired for the supply to Kucler of one pound of amphetamine, the substance having been manufactured by the applicant out of chemicals supplied to him in whole or in substantial part by Kucler through
Stanton.

On 29 October 1991 the applicant was arrested and charged with such conspiracy. Bail was refused.

The two matters for which the applicant had been arrested on 19 April 1991 went to trial in 1993 before Newton DCJ. The trial lasted for some five weeks, and resulted in the applicant's being found guilty of both offences. Newton
DCJ sentenced the applicant on 25 June 1993. His Honour imposed in respect of each offence a concurrent sentence of imprisonment for ten years. Each such sentence was apportioned between a minimum term of seven years to commence on April 1993 and to expire on 4 April 2000; and an additional term of three years to commence on 5 April 2000 and to expire on 4 April 2003.

The applicant appealed to the Court of Criminal Appeal against the two convictions, but did not challenge the concurrent sentences. On 16 December the Court of Criminal Appeal dismissed the appeals against conviction.

When Job ADCJ came in September 1993 to sentence the applicant, three particular matters had to be taken into account. First, an allowance had to be made for the fact that the applicant had been in custody, bail refused, for a period of almost eighteen months. Secondly, there was a need to achieve a proper parity between, on the one hand, any sentence imposed upon the applicant; and, on the other hand, sentences that had already been imposed upon Stanton and Kucler. Both co-offenders were dealt with in respect of the substantive charge of the supply of a commercial quantity of amphetamine;
Kucler receiving a minimum term of three years and six months, and Stanton receiving a minimum term of three years. Thirdly, there was a statutory requirement, deriving from [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s9.html) of the [Sentencing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) , that any sentence imposed by Job ADCJ must commence at the expiration of the minimum term imposed by Newton DCJ: that is to say, on 5 April 2000.

The conclusion reached by Job ADCJ on the parity aspect previously mentioned, was that all three of the co-offenders "roughly ...... should bear equal responsibility". In my opinion, this conclusion was clearly open to his
Honour.

His Honour gave practical expression to that conclusion by, in effect, imposing a minimum term of three years and six months, reduced to two years in order to take into account relevant pre-sentence custody. His Honour dated that minimum term, as he was required by the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) to do, so that it commenced on 5 April 2000. Having thus fixed a minimum term that would expire two years later than that set by Newton DCJ, his Honour had then to fix an additional term to follow a total minimum term of nine years exclusive of pre-sentence custody; or 10 1/2 years inclusive of that pre-sentence custody.
His Honour fixed an additional term of three years.

In deciding how he would frame a sentence, Job ADCJ was required to take into account established principles of totality and of proportionality. As to totality, his Honour had to make an assessment of the total criminality represented by the offence for which he was himself imposing a sentence, taken in conjunction with the two offences for which Newton DCJ had sentenced. That requirement raises, for present purposes, the question whether sentences aggregating 13-1/2 years are appellably excessive for the total demonstrated criminality of the applicant. (13-1/2 years is the total possible period of imprisonment now faced by the applicant in the event that he is not released to parole at the expiration of the accumulated minimum terms of -1/2 years inclusive of pre-sentence custody.) 
The requirement of proportionality raises, for present purposes, the question whether, if it be granted that such aggregate sentences are not appellably excessive, apportionment between a minimum term of 10-1/2 years and an additional term of three years does not provide an appropriate proportionality between such minimum term, and such additional term.

In considering whether his Honour fell into appellable error in his approach to totality and to proportionality, it is, in my opinion, important to make the correct relevant comparison. That comparison can be expressed as follows: before Job ADCJ imposed any sentence, the position of the applicant was that he would serve in any event a term of seven years, and was at risk of having to serve a term of ten years, should he fail, for whatever lawful reason(s), to be admitted to parole after having served seven years; whereas after Job
ADCJ had passed sentence, the position of the applicant was that he would serve in any event a term of ten years and six months, and was at risk of having to serve a term of thirteen years and six months, if not admitted to parole at the expiration of the stipulated minimum term.

Comparing the two aggregate terms, of ten years and of thirteen years and six months, I do not see that there is any appellable error manifested by the comparison. Job ACDJ seems to me to have taken a properly severe view of the objective criminality involved in the totality of the applicant's three relevant offences. His Honour's remarks about the relevant subjective aspects of the applicant's case were brief; but they are clear and complete. The submissions put for the applicant did not put, as I followed them, anything of substance to the contrary.

Comparing the two minimum terms, of seven years and of three years and six months, I do not see any error in his Honour's approach. A minimum term of three years and six months was, in my opinion, appropriate to the particular offence with which Job ADCJ was dealing; and, as previously indicated, such a term was properly comparable to the minimum terms of Stanton and Kucler.

It was not argued that an additional term of three years, as set within an aggregate sentence of ten years by Newton DCJ, was appellably wrong; and, in my opinion, such an argument, had it been advanced, could not properly have succeeded. It is settled law that the true purpose of an additional term is to express a curial view of what the particular offender is seen as needing for proper rehabilitation after the service of the relevant, related minimum term.
If it be appropriate to look only at the sentence of 6-1/2 years imposed by
Job ADCJ, then I do not see that his Honour's apportionment of that sentence, as between minimum and additional terms cases, calls for the intervention of this Court. If it be appropriate to look, rather, at the total effective accumulated sentence of 13-1/2 years, then I do not see that an additional term of three years, set within an aggregate sentence of thirteen years and six months, calls for the intervention of this Court. Within an aggregate sentence of thirteen years and six months, a sentencing Judge may set any additional term not exceeding three years and four and a half months, before being required to advance justifying special circumstances as contemplated by [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). In my opinion, his Honour's approach had not been shown to have involved any erroneous disproportion between minimum and additional terms.

It was submitted strongly by counsel for the applicant that his Honour had fallen into error in that he had determined a minimum term before settling upon a total sentence . It is true that if one looks at the actual sequence of his Honour's words, one finds his Honour dealing successively with pre- sentence custody; with the setting of a minimum term for the particular offence before his Honour; with the statutory requirement of accumulation of minimum terms; and with the setting of an additional term by reference to a revised aggregate minimum term of nine years. It does not at all follow, however, that the process of reasoning in fact followed by his Honour as various possible combinations took shape in his Honour's mind, was precisely and rigidly in line with his Honour's final recorded words. If it be true to say that sentencing is an art and not a science, - and there is clear authority in this Court for that proposition, - then it is equally the case that sentencing is not an exercise in either creative forensic mathematics or creative forensic semantics.

The submissions put for the applicant asserted, additionally, errors by his
Honour in the matters of totality; of proportionality and of parity. As previously explained, I am of the opinion that none of these attacks has been made good.

I would add for the sake of completeness, that, even had I been of the opinion that his Honour had made some error sufficient to require this Court now to look afresh at the question of sentence, I would not have thought that any sentence other than that imposed by his Honour was, to quote the relevant provision of the Criminal Appeal Act, "warranted in law".

I would grant leave to appeal against sentence; but I would thereupon dismiss the substantive appeal.

REGINA versus John Robert HOWLAND 
JUDGMENT 
BRUCE J: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Gleeson CJ and Sully J. I agree with the original judgment and the additional observations of Sully J and with the judgment of the 
Chief Justice. I agree with the orders proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
