

Forrester versus Hall and Ors Matter No 20498/95 [1997] NSWSC 247 (4 July 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Gregory Forrester versus Donald Hall and Ors /95 July 1997 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 Gregory FORRESTER versus Donald HALL and Ors.
 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: On 24 September 1994 the plaintiff sustained extremely serious injuries in circumstances shortly to be recounted. It is his case that his injuries were caused by the negligence of the third and fourth defendants, as occupiers of the premises where he was injured and he accordingly claims damages against them. No attempt was made to make out a case against the first and second defendants, identified in the pleadings as the owners of the premises, and it was conceded that there must be a verdict in their favour. It will be convenient therefore, to refer to the third and fourth defendants as the only defendants. There is a relatively limited, although significant, area of dispute about the circumstances in which the plaintiff was injured, and the facts may therefore be stated briefly. 
In September 1994 the plaintiff was aged twenty-five. He had a long standing friendship with the third defendant and his wife, and was a frequent visitor to their home at 192 Hyatts Road, Plumpton, and was very familiar with its surroundings. 24 September was the occasion of one such visit. The plaintiff, two other young men and the third defendant, all of whom had been friends since school days, and the third defendant's wife, the fourth defendant, watched a football match on television following which the men, observed by the fourth defendant, themselves took up an impromptu and informal game of football in the front yard of the Hyatts Road home. The game seems not have been one that adhered to any particular code or any particular set of rules, but was little, if anything, more than four young men kicking a football around a garden, and was described by the plaintiff as something of a cross between Australian Rules and Rugby Union. This was something they had done many times before, without incident. On this occasion, however, the plaintiff was injured. In the garden, near the front boundary, was a dead shrub, about four feet high, still bearing many fine branches and twigs. The lawn was unmown, perhaps six to eight inches long. During the course of the game the plaintiff tripped over an object which he then thought was a brick, and stumbled into the shrub, the central trunk of which shattered and pierced his perineum and pelvic organs. Closer examination disclosed that, surrounding the dead shrub, and at its base, but concealed in the long grass, was a border of small wooden logs, each standing upright and set into the ground. It was over one of these that the plaintiff tripped before being impaled upon the trunk of the shrub.

The plaintiff acknowledged that he had previously been aware of the existence of the dead shrub, but claimed to have been unaware of the border surrounding it, and this was the one aspect of the evidence that was the subject of considerable challenge. The plaintiff was extensively cross-examined to suggest that the frequency of his visits to the premises, his intimacy with the third and fourth defendants, and his familiarity with their home was such as to render his claim that he was unaware of the log border improbable and unworthy of acceptance. Although there was some issue about the regularity about his attendance at the premises, the plaintiff never shrank from his concession that he had been to the home many many times and had, indeed, played games of football in the same garden on twenty or thirty occasions.
Notwithstanding this, he maintained that he did not know of the existence of the logs. This denial I accept. I do not find it at all unusual that a young man of the plaintiff's age could walk past a dead shrub without consciously observing the surrounds at its base, particularly when the grass was long. It was urged upon me on behalf of the defendants that I should find as a fact that the plaintiff "knew absolutely the nature and the details of the structure and the tree itself". I reject this submission. I accept that the plaintiff had a conscious knowledge of the shrub, but not of its surrounding base.

The defendants accepted that they owed the plaintiff a duty of care. They denied that they acted in any way in breach of that duty. That issue calls for a consideration of all the circumstances in the light of the well-known judgment of Mason J (as he then was) in Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47. It is worth quoting the relevant passage in full: "In deciding whether there has been a breach of the duty of care the tribunal of fact must first ask itself whether a reasonable man in the defendant's position would have foreseen that his conduct involved a risk of injury to the plaintiff or to a class of persons including the plaintiff. If the answer be in the affirmative, it is then for the tribunal of fact to determine what a reasonable man would do by way of response to the risk. The perception of the reasonable man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude of the risk and the degree of the probability of its occurrence, along with the expense, difficulty and inconvenience of taking alleviating action and any other conflicting responsibilities which the defendant may have. It is only when these matters are balanced out that the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what is the standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the defendant's position.

The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of injury which is remote in the sense that it is extremely unlikely to occur may nevertheless constitute a foreseeable risk. A risk which is not far fetched or fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable. But, as we have seen, the existence of a foreseeable risk of injury does not in itself dispose of the question of breach of duty. The magnitude of the risk and its degree of probability remain to be considered with other relevant factors." 
It is necessary, firstly, to define the precise conduct of the defendants alleged to involve a foreseeable risk of injury. Two aspects of the defendants' conduct were relied upon by the plaintiff. Each was, in fact, an omission to act as distinct from the commission of an act, but this is a concept that is familiar in the law of negligence. The first omission pointed to by the plaintiff was the failure of the defendants to remove the dead shrub, which would have presented no great expense or difficulty. The second was the omission to warn the plaintiff of the existence of the wooden border, which was, by reason of the long grass, concealed from view. I reject the first proposition. It is inconceivable that a dead shrub, in a garden, in full view, could constitute a foreseeable risk of injury to the plaintiff or to any class of persons to which he belonged.

The second proposition repays closer examination. The failure to warn the plaintiff of the existence of the timber stakes cannot be considered in isolation from the surrounding circumstances. The existence of the long grass was one relevant circumstance, concealing, as it did, the wooden pickets, but even taking into account the long grass the failure to warn the plaintiff of the hidden pickets could hardly, in the ordinary course, be thought to involve a foreseeable risk of injury. It was when the game of football began that a different complexion was cast upon these facts. No longer was it unlikely that the plaintiff (or the class of persons to which he belonged) would venture too close to the dead shrub; no longer could it be assumed that anybody in the garden would, behaving normally, maintain a sufficient distance between himself and the shrub. The commencement of the game of football put the defendants on notice that their guests would be likely to be running, both forwards and backwards, would be likely to paying attention to the ball rather than the ground surface, and would therefore be at risk from any obstruction or untoward feature of the terrain, particularly one which was not readily observable. It was then, in my view, that the risk of injury escalated, and it was then, in my view, that it became foreseeable that failure to apprise the plaintiff of the obstruction that lay in the ground constituted a risk of injury. Until then, the risk that the plaintiff would stumble over the pickets and into the bush was so remote as to be almost far fetched or fanciful. From that time, the risk ceased to be far fetched or fanciful, and became real and significant, and one which gave rise to a duty in the defendants to take steps by way of response. That duty could simply and without any expense have been discharged. All the defendants had to do was inform the plaintiff that there were obstructions on the surface of the garden, not plainly apparent, over which he might stumble and trip. It would equally have been their duty to warn of, for example, rabbit burrows of which they were aware, or anything else on or in the ground surface over which a person playing and running might trip.
The duty was the greater in relation to these pickets because of their proximity to the shrub, with its rigid but brittle central trunk.

It is quite apparent that, had he been armed with relevant knowledge, the plaintiff could have continued to participate in the game, but would have been in a position to avoid the dangerous area. The precautionary measures that were available were so simple and so devoid of cost or effort that the magnitude and probability of the risk scarcely matter. As Gibbs CJ said in
Turner versus The State of South Australia [(1982) 56 ALJR 839:] "Where it is possible to guard against a foreseeable risk which, although perhaps not great, nevertheless cannot be called remote or fanciful, by adopting a means which involves little difficulty or expense, the failure to adopt such means will in general be negligent." 
Senior counsel for the defendants relied heavily upon the decision of the
Court of Appeal in Phillis versus Daly [(1988) 15 NSWLR 65], and in particular on the conclusion of Samuels JA that the purpose of the plaintiff in entering the premises is a relevant factor in determining the standard of care. It is worth looking at what his Honour said. He referred to
Australian Safeways Stores Pty Limited versus Zaluzna [(1987) 162 CLR ], which abolished the distinction between the duties of care owed by occupiers of premises to the various categories of entrants, and established one single duty, to take reasonable care for the safety of entrants in the applicable circumstances. Samuels JA considered that, nevertheless: "the classical categories of entrant may still be accorded some potency. It is perfectly rational to assume that the degree of care which is appropriate to a trespasser, whose entry may fall at any point in a long continuum of knowledge, perception and expectation on the occupier's part, may be much less than that which can reasonably be demanded by the business visitor whose appearance is anticipated and welcomed, and less than that owed to someone whose entry is anticipated but merely tolerated. Equally, the nature of the danger will be a necessary constituent in working out whether any breach has occurred since it will be material to the foreseeability and magnitude of the risk, and the requirements of the defendant's response." 
It was therefore argued that, the plaintiff's purpose in entering the premises having been a social one, the standard of care was at the lower end of the scale. This may be so, but the point of Zaluzna is that the standard of care owed by an occupier depends upon the whole of the circumstances.
Certainly, until the game of football began, it could hardly be contended that the duty of care owed by the defendants to the plaintiff included warning him about the risk of tripping over a concealed log in an area of the garden where he was unlikely to venture. It was only when the game of football began that the danger created by the logs assumed significant proportion, and with that, the content of the duty of care owed by the defendants also assumed significant proportions.

Senior counsel also relied upon that part of the decision in Phillis of
Mahoney JA in which his Honour held that a central feature in deciding whether there has been a breach of the defendant's duty of care is the expectation that the plaintiff will take reasonable care for his own safety. This is a material matter, as in Phillis, where the danger, or the circumstances creating danger, is obvious and apparent on cursory observation; it has little or no materiality, where, as here, the danger is known to the defendants, but not known to the plaintiff, and is not apparent to him on ordinary observation.

I therefore conclude that the defendants were in breach of their duty to take reasonable care for the safety of the plaintiff. Since the plaintiff had no knowledge of the existence of the danger, there were no precautions he could reasonably be expected to take for his own safety, and I find no contributory negligence.

DAMAGES 
Damages are claimed under a number of heads, many of which are the subject of agreement between the parties.

General Damages 
The plaintiff's injuries were extremely severe. Dr Watters, a urological surgeon who treated the plaintiff on the evening of his injury wrote: "I have rarely seen such a severe injury to the rectum, bladder, prostate and urethra." 
Immediately after his injury the plaintiff realised that he had done a substantial amount of damage to himself. He had passed urine involuntarily, and, on physical investigation, observed: "There was a great deal of flesh and a great deal of blood." 
The fourth defendant drove him to the Mount Druitt Hospital where he was admitted and underwent five hours of surgery. He remained an inpatient for one month until 27 October and was readmitted on a number of occasions, during which he underwent a number of surgical procedures. An indwelling catheter was installed, and a colostomy bag, which remained until 27 June 1995. He was in a good deal of pain, was unable to eat or drink for several weeks and was fed by a drip. He was given pethidine, followed by morphine for pain relief.

On his discharge he went to live with his mother, although he had previously been living independently. It was necessary for his mother to attend to all his needs, including changing of bed linen which was at times soiled and very messy.

At an early stage he was advised by his medical practitioners that the catheter and colostomy bag would be a permanent part of his life, that he would never be able to have children, and that he would not able to engage in sexual relationships. He found this extremely distressing. Fortunately, the advice turned out to be unduly pessimistic and the catheter was removed in
February 1995, the colostomy bag in June. He suffered from weeping around the injured area, and was obliged to wear a pad. He was incontinent of faeces and urine, and even now has occasional episodes of incontinence, fortunately diminishing.

He remained living at his mother's home until the end of July, dependent, but decreasingly so, upon her. He retains a large and unsightly scar on his stomach. He faces the possibility of surgery in the future, which he will undergo if so advised, although he understandably said that he has had enough of surgery.

He describes the time since his injury as extremely traumatic and still experiences the emotional after effects. He has been advised by a medical practitioner who examined him on behalf of the defendants, but whose report was not in evidence, to seek psychiatric counselling. This advice is consistent with the opinion of Dr James Grady, a psychiatrist who examined him at the request of his own solicitors, and who diagnosed post traumatic stress disorder. He does propose to accept the advice of these practitioners and to undertake counselling.

He is now able to enjoy sexual relations, but does not ejaculate, and, if he wishes to father children in the future, it will be necessary to do so by means of an invitro fertilisation programme. This has cast some doubt in his mind about his prospects of marriage or an equivalent relationship.

I assess general damages at $85,000 of which $50,000 is attributable to the period between the date of injury and date of judgment and therefore attracts interest. At 2 percent for a period of two and three quarter years the plaintiff is entitled to $2,750 as interest on that part of the general damages apportioned to the past.

Economic Loss 
The plaintiff claims the sum of $30,029 as economic loss to date and this figure is agreed and is allowed.

Additionally, he claims a sum calculated at $42,588 to represent the loss of opportunity to obtain promotion within the organisation in which he was employed. This claim is disputed, and requires some elucidation.

He was employed as a deputy trading floor manager with the Sydney Futures
Exchange at the time of his injury. He then reported directly to the trading floor manager who in turn reported to the chief executive officer of the
Exchange. The plaintiff had aspirations to become a trading floor manager, and, indeed, during the time he was absent from work by reason of the injury he was offered a promotion to that position. He found, however, on his return to work that an additional intermediate position had been created, a divisional manager of trading operations and facilities and that position was at a higher level in the hierarchy and carried a higher salary and greater responsibilities to which he was appointed. There was a very substantial difference between the salary applicable to the position to which he was appointed and the salary paid to the occupant of the position of trading floor manager previously. His expectations as to his status and remuneration were not met.

An attempt was made to attribute the difference and the restructuring to the plaintiff's injury. When asked if he had been told the reason for the restructuring the plaintiff gave an answer which outlined the nature of the restructuring, but did not contain any real explanation for it. Nobody was called from the Exchange to explain why the decision had been taken to create an additional level within the hierarchy. In these circumstances I am not able to conclude that the reason for those decisions was anything to do with the plaintiff's injury. This claim is rejected.

Future Loss of Earning Capacity 
The plaintiff further claims an award of damages representing future loss of earning capacity, identified as the loss of opportunity to obtain the position of trading floor manager, now entitled Divisional Manager, Trading Floor
Operations. This claim is disputed.

There is no evidence that the plaintiff will, by reason of his injuries be deprived in the future of opportunities he otherwise would have had. He has, in fact, made what appears to be a quite remarkable recovery, to the extent that he has resumed participation in a number of sports including first grade
Rugby Union. This claim is rejected.

Gratuitous Services 
The plaintiff claims a total sum of $16,492 for past and future gratuitous services, and interest on that attributable to the past. This amount is agreed and allowed.

Out of Pocket and Future Treatment Expenses 
The plaintiff claims a total of $29,932 by way of past and future medical expenses. Only two items were challenged. $14,000 is claimed for anticipated invitro fertilisation treatment. Initially, this claim was disputed on the basis that it included treatment for the plaintiff's future partner, but as I understood it, the opposition was withdrawn after argument. In any event, I consider the claim to be eminently reasonable and the amount claimed is allowed. The second area of challenge concerned the allowance to be made for repeated urethral dilatations and reconstructive surgery for which the costing is between $6,000 and $8,000. The plaintiff claims $7,000; the defendant argued that the amount allowed should be between $4,500 and $7,000. I allow the $7,000 claimed, and accordingly the whole of the $29,932 claimed.

Loss of Support and Future Maintenance 
The plaintiff claims a cushion, estimated at $50,000 for compensation for the possibility that, because of his injuries, he will be denied the supportive relationship of a wife or partner, and the maintenance that may be associated with that relationship. No case has been made out for such an award. The plaintiff was asked about his views of what effect the injury may have upon the prospect of forming a permanent relationship and he replied that the knowledge that any children would have to be conceived by invitro fertilisation may constitute something of a disincentive to a potential partner. This is undoubtedly true, to a limited extent, but has already been taken into account in the assessment of general damages. I reject the claim under this head.

There will be a verdict for the plaintiff in the sum of $164,203. I order the defendants to pay the plaintiff's costs. I was not asked to make any order in relation to the costs of the first and second defendants, and no order is made.
 * * * 
