

Bitupave Ltd versus Bollington Matter No Ca 40325/98 [1998] NSWSC 561 (4
November 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
BITUPAVE LTD versus BOLLINGTON 
CA 40325/98; CLD 20674/94 November 1998 
Priestley JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES - COMMON LAW
DIVISION - SIMPSON J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40325/98 CLD 20674/94 
DELIVERED: 4 NOVEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 10 SEPTEMBER 1998 
PARTIES: BITUPAVE LTD V BOLLINGTON 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY JA, BEAZLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: J E MACONACHIE QC/D G T NOCK SC 
Respondent: R J BURBIDGE QC/I D ROBERTS 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: PHILLIPS FOX 
Respondent: COMMINS HENDRIKS 
CATCHWORDS: 
NEGLIGENCE - CAUSATION - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE - DAMAGES - APPLICATION OF [MOTOR ACCIDENTS ACT ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), [PART ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p6) - ECONOMIC LOSS 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 26 
BITUPAVE LTD versus BOLLINGTON 
NEGLIGENCE - CAUSATION - [MOTOR ACCIDENTS ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) - DAMAGES - Appellant closed lanes of the Hume Highway while doing resurfacing work - various barriers were erected to direct the traffic - around midnight the respondent followed the signs, drove his semi trailer along an exit ramp believing he was still on the highway, came to the intersection at the top of the ramp and, before he could stop, crashed through the guard rail - respondent sued claiming that he was mislead by the appellant's negligently placed signs causing him to drive along the exit ramp and crash - witness evidence was conflicting however the trial judge, although not accepting all the respondent's evidence, found that the appellant did not take the necessary care with the signs, which were misleading, and subsequent damage occurred - contributory negligence was also found and assessed at 12 ½ percent.

On appeal the appellant submitted that:
Her Honour misdirected herself with respect to the proper test to be applied in determining the issue of causation, or alternatively misapplied the law in determining the question of causation;
Her Honour erred in law in finding the Motor Accident Act 1988 Pt 6 did not apply to the assessment of damages;
Her Honour erred in assessing contributory negligence at 12 ½ per cent;
Her Honour erred in allowing the figures provided by the witness Elmer to stand and be accepted as evidence of the respondent's economic loss;
Her Honour erred in law in not considering the effect of the cross- examination of the witness Elmer and in not giving reasons why acceptance of facts established by that cross-examination could not be relied upon.

Held:
It was open for the trial judge to accept the respondent's evidence as to speed and pursuant to the Abalos/Devries orthodoxy the appellant's expert evidence was not powerful enough for this court to disturb those findings; "cause" includes a sufficiently contributing cause so, for the purpose of this case, the causes of the respondent's injuries were the negligently misleading signage arrangements of the appellant and the respondent's "not driving with due care and attention" as found by the trial judge, March versus E and MH Stramare Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506]; regarding contributory negligence, with the finding that the appellant was negligent coupled with their failed speed argument, the conclusion is that the appellant should bear the greater part of the responsibility; the award of damages to the plaintiff related to the injury to him caused by the negligence of the appellant as road repairer and not by his fault as the driver of the semi trailer in its use pursuant to the Motor Accident Act; there was quite sufficient material that her Honour must have had in mind at the time of reaching the figures for both loss of earning capacity and future economic loss to justify no interference with it by this court.
 [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/) [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p6) [s 69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s69.html) 
Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506] 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs 
BITUPAVE LTD versus BOLLINGTON 
PRIESTLEY JA: Simpson J heard proceedings brought by Mr G.J. Bollington as plaintiff against Bitupave Ltd as defendant in which the plaintiff claimed damages for negligence against the defendant. The trial took seven hearing days. Her Honour delivered judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $1,002,369. 
The defendant appealed to this court.

The plaintiff's case was that the defendant, which was doing resurfacing work on the Hume Highway, negligently placed signs on the highway which misled the plaintiff into driving his semi trailer along an exit ramp from the highway in the belief he was still on the highway and that this caused the semi trailer to crash.

The circumstances were that the plaintiff was driving his semi trailer southwards on the highway at about midnight on 27 May 1993. It was foggy and hard to see. In this area the highway comprised two lanes for southbound traffic separated from two lanes for northbound. As the plaintiff drove south of Mittagong the highway curved to the right. About half way along the curve there was an exit ramp curving to the left at about the same angle as the highway there curves to the right. The exit ramp appears almost as a continuation of the highway. A driver going south and coming to the division in the road where the highway is curving right and the exit ramp left would see what looked like an equally divided fork in the road. The exit ramp runs into the Illawarra Highway about 250 metres after leaving the Hume Highway. At the time of the plaintiff's accident there was an exit sign at the point where the exit ramp divided from the highway. There were stop signs where the exit ramp joined the Illawarra Highway. On the far side of the Illawarra Highway opposite the mouth of the exit ramp there was a steep drop. Between this drop and the roadside were barrier rails above which was a large sign (called in evidence the Armco board or the Armco sign).

About some aspects of the plaintiff's accident there was no doubt. Instead of following the Hume Highway's curve to the right he drove his semi trailer so that it went up the left curving exit ramp, came to the intersection of the ramp with the Illawarra Highway, went straight across that highway, through the guard rail and down the drop on the far side. The plaintiff was badly injured in the crash.

His case for saying Bitupave was liable for his accident was as follows. The resurfacing work Bitupave was doing meant that lanes on the highway were closed from time to time and various barriers and signs put up. The plaintiff was driving towards the curve where the exit ramp went left and the Highway right, he had seen a "Roadworks Ahead" sign, then barrier boards blocking the left lane directing him into the right lane, and then signs directing him left near the starting point of the exit ramp. This caused him to diverge to the off ramp believing he had returned to the left southbound lane. By the time he saw the barrier at the Illawarra Highway intersection it was too late for him to avoid crashing into it.

A number of witnesses gave evidence of the positioning of barriers and signs on the Hume Highway as it approached the exit ramp at or close to the time when the plaintiff had his accident.

The trial judge in her reasons gave detailed consideration to all this evidence, noticing the differences between the various accounts and considering the probabilities in regard to each witness's evidence after considering that witness's reliability. Some of these witnesses gave evidence from which the inference was plainly available that at times close to the time of the plaintiff's accident other drivers were misled into either driving or beginning to drive up the exit ramp thinking it was a continuation of the highway, although all of these realised their mistake before coming to any harm. Much of the evidence from the different witnesses was conflicting, in minor ways in some cases and major ways in others, particularly in regard to evidence given by witnesses called by the defendant.

After her detailed examination of this evidence, the trial judge stated her conclusions. In arriving at these factual findings the trial judge did not accept the plaintiff's evidence completely, saying for example that in some respects he had "concertinaed" his recollection, and that to some extent he was in error in his recollection or reconstruction of the location of the second set of road signs. However she did not regard these matters as impinging on her generally favourable view of his credibility. She considered he was a truthful witness and accepted him as such unless she stated otherwise on some particular point.

In regard to the exit sign in the fork dividing the exit ramp from the highway she found on the evidence that it was likely that a red covering was in place when the plaintiff took the wrong arm of the fork.

The most important part of her conclusions is extracted below.
 "From all of this it will be observed that the evidence about the roadworks was as confusing as, on the plaintiff's case, was the signage. It is quite impossible, with any degree of confidence, to reach a conclusion, on the preponderance of the evidence, that signs were placed, whether accidentally, carelessly, or by unfortunate design, in such a way as to create an impression in the mind of south travelling motorists, that they were being directed to the Illawarra Highway exit ramp. Specifically, I am satisfied that there were signs which had the appearance and effect of diverting traffic to the left lane, that the left lane itself was blocked or partly blocked by traffic signs, and that the effect of the diversion was to send some traffic, including the plaintiff's truck, onto the exit ramp to the Illawarra Highway.
I am not satisfied that the mouth of the left lane was completely blocked as depicted in the diagram drawn by the plaintiff, ex A, but I am satisfied that signs were present in that lane and that, in the dark and fog, it may have appeared to have been blocked. Senior counsel for the defendant pointed out that the plaintiff gave no evidence of observing any signs on the right of the road, and that he said that, immediately prior to the accident, he had been alert and concentrating on his driving. From these two facts, he argued, it should be inferred that, even if the barrier boards were present on the right, apparently directing traffic to the left, they had no bearing on the course the plaintiff took. I do not accept this. The plaintiff was very seriously injured. I do not find it at all surprising that, after his recuperation, there is some confusion in his mind as to the precise location of the signs.
From his diagram it is clear that he did perceive signs directing him to the left. It is only the precise positioning of those signs which is confused in his mind. Moreover, the weather conditions were such that it may well have appeared to him that signs which were in fact on the right lane, were in the left. Given the configuration of the highway itself at that point, with the highway proper taking a sweeping curve to the right, the ramp to the Illawarra
Highway being, geometrically, almost a continuation of the highway, together with the known weather conditions, it was incumbent upon the defendant to take particular care with respect to the placement of signs. The circumstances required special care that the signs were positioned in such a way as to ensure that motorists were not misled. I am satisfied that the necessary care was not taken and the result was a confusing and misleading array of signs that brought about the devastating consequences for the plaintiff." 
The trial judge added two further observations. She thought the expert evidence supported her view although it was not essential to it. She also noted that the defendant had not tendered in evidence records required to be kept under Australian standard 1742 which is recognised as the appropriate standard for traffic guidance schemes; she inferred from this non production that any such records would not have helped the defendant's case.

She then again referred to the expert evidence and stated her ultimate opinion on the plaintiff's cause of action: "Both parties adduced expert evidence, and relied upon the reports and opinions of civil engineers experienced in the use of traffic control devices.
Ultimately, on this issue, these were of little assistance. Each expert depended very heavily upon the factual matters of which he was informed by his client. Having found the facts as I have, it is unnecessary to resort to expert opinion to determine fault. I am satisfied that the defendant negligently placed signs on the road, and that this negligence was causative of the plaintiff's error in taking the Illawarra Highway exit ramp rather than the Hume Highway. He is therefore entitled to an award of damages." 
The trial judge then dealt with contributory negligence. She said the weather conditions had clearly required drivers on the highway to take particular care including the speed of driving. She considered the evidence relating to the speed at which the plaintiff had been travelling when he took the wrong fork.
Her conclusion was, after declining to accept the opinion of the defendant's expert for reasons which she gave, that there was no other basis on which she could conclude that the plaintiff's speed was excessive for the circumstances (a matter upon which, in connection with contributory negligence, the defendant bore the onus of proof). However, for another reason, she concluded that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence. His evidence had been that he had not seen any of the signs at the intersection of the exit ramp with the Illawarra Highway apart from the Armco sign. Her Honour's conclusion on this issue was as follows: "[The plaintiff] said that, from the moment he entered the ramp, the Armco board `flashed in front of my eyes and that had my full attention'.
Photographic evidence ... for example, exs X, 3 and 7, suggest that, had he observed and heeded the `Reduce Speed' sign, he would have been in a position to take the necessary action to bring his vehicle to a halt before it reached the Armco sign. In my opinion the plaintiff's failure to perceive any of these signs is inexplicable other than as indicative that he was not driving with due care and attention. Just as the roadwork and weather conditions cast a duty upon the defendant to take particular care, so did those factors cast an identical duty upon the plaintiff. I think his failure to see the signs indicates that the plaintiff must bear some part of the responsibility for his injury. However, bearing in mind that he was lured onto the wrong road by the fault of the defendant, and that, if he had been on the highway as he reasonably believed he was, it is unlikely that there would have been any adverse consequences from his lapse of concentration, I consider that his share in the responsibility for his injury should be assessed at 12½ percent." 
The defendant's notice of appeal contained fourteen grounds. In its written submissions the defendant abandoned all but grounds 1, 8, 12, 13 and 14 and asked leave to reformulate grounds 1 and 12.

In their final form, the grounds of appeal argued by the defendant were as follows:
Her Honour misdirected herself with respect to the proper test to be applied in determining the issue of causation, or alternatively misapplied the law in determining the question of causation.
Her Honour erred in law in finding that the Motor Accident Act 1988 Pt 6 did not apply to the assessment of damages.
Her Honour erred in assessing contributory negligence at 12.5 per cent for the reason that: she erred in finding that the plaintiff/respondent was not travelling at a speed considerably in excess of 80 or 85 kph at the point when he applied the brakes; her apportionment of responsibility to the plaintiff/respondent is outside the range of a proper exercise of discretion.
Her Honour erred in law in allowing the figures provided by the witness
Elmer to stand and be accepted as evidence of the respondent's economic loss.
Her Honour erred in law in not considering the effect of the cross- examination of the witness Elmer and in not giving reasons why acceptance of facts established by that cross-examination could not be relied upon.

Ground 1: causation.

The submission for the defendant was that two sentences in the trial judge's reasons showed that she had asked herself the wrong question with the result that she either overlooked or did not decide issues critical to the question of causation.

Both sentences appear in parts of her Honour's reasons I have already set out.
The first was: "I am satisfied that the necessary care was not taken and the result was a confusing and misleading array of signs that brought about the devastating consequences for the plaintiff." 
The second passage was: "I am satisfied that the defendant negligently placed signs on the road, and that this negligence was causative of the plaintiff's error in taking the
Illawarra Highway exit ramp rather than the Hume Highway." 
Upon the second of these sentences the defendant based the submission that her
Honour asked herself the question whether or not the negligent placement of the signs on the road was causative of the plaintiff's error in taking the
Illawarra Highway exit ramp. It was submitted this was not the right question and that she should have asked herself whether the conduct of the defendant in negligently placing signs on the road was a cause of injury. Rather than risk misstating the balance of the defendant's submissions on this point, I set them out below: "6. All that was determined by the finding that the negligently placed signs caused the plaintiff to turn onto the exit ramp (AB35N) was that the negligent conduct secured the presence of the plaintiff at a place and at a time when he might be injured.
What was further necessary to be decided was whether or not being so placed created a risk which came home.
The plaintiff could not succeed on the issue of causation unless he persuaded the court that being so placed caused or materially contributed to the injuries suffered by him.
That question could not be properly determined without considering whether, as a matter of common sense, being so placed was a cause of the plaintiff's injuries or whether it was nothing more than a preliminary circumstances and that the real cause, and only effective cause, of the injuries suffered by the plaintiff was the manner and speed at which the vehicle was driven in the circumstances that then obtained.
Her Honour gave no consideration to the manner and speed at which the vehicle was driven in the circumstances which then obtained in the context of determining the question of whether or not the breach of duty found by her was causative of the plaintiff's injuries.
Alternatively, her Honour failed to explain the basis of that crucial finding of fact and thereby fell into error (see Soulemezis versus Dudley
Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR 247] at 281;
Mifsud versus Campbell [(1991) 21 NSWLR 725] at
C)." 
In oral submissions, counsel for the defendant elaborated this argument by particular reference to the question of speed. This aspect of the argument was based on the evidence of an expert witness called for the defendant who, from matters such as the length of the skid marks left by the plaintiff's vehicle (which went right to where the vehicle went through guard barriers) and other physical evidence, calculated that the plaintiff's vehicle must have been travelling at a significantly faster speed than eighty kph at the stage when he began to react to his realisation of the significance of the Armco board and then began to put on his brakes. He submitted that the trial judge had not been justified in refusing to accept this witness's evidence. He submitted that this court should accept it and should then go on to conclude that notwithstanding the judge's findings about the confusing and misleading array of signs which the defendant had left coming up to the exit ramp (findings which he did not dispute) what the defendant had done had not in any way been a cause of the injury suffered by the plaintiff. Although it was put in a more sophisticated way than this, the submission came down to saying that the accident was entirely and solely the fault of the plaintiff and not in any way contributed to by the negligence of the defendant.

However, the plaintiff had given evidence that he was travelling at eighty to eighty-five kph on the exit ramp prior to his becoming aware of the Armco sign. In view of the judge's findings about his credibility, and the way in which she dealt with the question of speed, there seems to me to be no doubt but that she accepted the plaintiff as to speed. This is a finding which according to the Abalos/Devries orthodoxy to which this court is subject this court should not disturb in the absence of very powerful evidence that the trial judge was mistaken. I do not think the evidence of the defendant's expert falls into this category. The facts he based his opinion on were not accepted by the trial judge, and need not have been accepted, as established by evidence to her satisfaction. There was debate and conjecture about some of those facts. Another experienced truck driver witness had given an inconsistent opinion, based on his own long experience. In my opinion, therefore, this court is not in a position to displace the judge's view on this matter and then approach this case on the basis that the expert evidence relied on for the defendant must be accepted.

Once that position is reached, I can deal with the defendant's causation argument, which I do not accept, more generally. In my opinion the trial judge in her reasons made it quite clear that her view of the facts was that in driving up the exit ramp the plaintiff thought he was driving on Hume Highway, that he was misled into that belief by the negligent way in which the defendant had arranged its signs, that he entered the exit ramp at a speed based on his belief that he was driving on the highway, that by the time he realised his mistake it was too late to avoid the accident, that the accident was in the sense relevant to a finding of liability against the defendant, caused by the defendant, that the injuries were the result of the accident thus caused. "Cause" as I have used it in the preceding sentence includes a sufficiently contributing cause as explained in March versus E and MH Stramare Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506.] Such a finding of cause is in no way inconsistent with her Honour's views about the contributory negligence of the plaintiff. The authorities have for many years recognised, as the current law about contributory negligence itself recognises, that particular events may have more than one "real" cause and more than one "effective" cause. In my opinion the causes of the plaintiff's injuries relevant for the purposes of this case were the negligently misleading signage arrangements of the defendant and the plaintiff's "not driving with due care and attention", as her Honour found.

Ground 12: contributory negligence.

The principal argument for the defendant on contributory negligence was the argument about speed that I have already considered in dealing with ground 1.
The failure of the argument about speed means that the only argument left to the defendant against the judge's apportionment of blame is the general one mentioned in par (ii) of ground 12 set out above. When however the matter is approached on the factual basis upon which her Honour approached it, it seems to me that the reasons I have summarised in regard to ground 1 for finding the defendant was negligent lead also to the conclusion that the defendant should bear by far the greater part of the responsibility for the accident. I would therefore not interfere with the assessment of the trial judge.

Ground 8: does the Motor Accident Act 1988 Pt 6 apply to the assessment of damages? 
For the appellant it was contended that Pt 6 of the Motor Accident Act 1988 applied to, and thus restricted the damages which might be awarded by the court. This submission was based on <case> of the Act which said: "This Part applies to and in respect of an award of damages which relates to the ... injury to a person caused by the fault of the owner or driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle." 
The argument was that the award of damages to the plaintiff related to the injury to him caused, in part, by his fault as the driver of the semi trailer in its use. Therefore the Part applied.

I do not agree with this submission. In my opinion the award of damages to the plaintiff related to the injury to him caused by the negligence of Bitupave as road repairer. That award was reduced by 12.5% being the amount the trial court thought just and equitable having regard to the plaintiff's share in the responsibility for the damage. Thus what the plaintiff received as damages was the amount which related to his injury caused by the fault of Bitupave as road repairer less the proportion attributable to the plaintiff's own fault.

Assuming in the defendant's favour that the plaintiff's injury was caused by his own fault in the sense of <case> (something about which I have doubts), there was nothing to quantify pursuant to [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p6) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) in respect of that fault of the plaintiff. The quantification of amount was entirely done in calculating what should be awarded to the plaintiff for the damage caused to him by Bitupave's breach of duty, which had nothing to do with the [Motor
Accidents Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).
Once that amount was quantified, it was reduced pursuant to the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/) in accordance with the trial judge's judgment of what was just and equitable having regard to the plaintiff's share in the responsibility for the damage quantified in the plaintiff's common law claim, unaffected by the [Motor
Accidents Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), against Bitupave.

Grounds 13 and 14: economic loss.

The plaintiff, who was born in 1952, had been doing long distance truck driving for a living since 1973. He had become an owner driver about ten years before the accident and was nearing the position of completing the hire purchase type arrangement pursuant to which he owned his semi trailer. His evidence was that there was plenty of work and, although in his driving he had covered all of Australia, in the last few months before his accident his work consisted almost entirely of carrying loads between Sydney and Melbourne.

The trial judge's calculations of economic loss were based upon a report and the oral evidence of the plaintiff's accountant, Ms Elmer. In a report dated April 1997, (Blue AB 160-163) Ms Elmer summarised her method: "1) The actual income tax figures from 1988 to 1993 were summarised.
 ) Within those figures there were various expenses which while allowable for income tax purposes we did not consider appropriate in the determination of real profit. These items were added back to assist in determining the real profit.
 ) To determine future profitability we looked at the figures to determine if there were any abnormal items. In this regard we considered the repairs and maintenance figures for 1989 to 1992 to be abnormal. These figures were adjusted so that we could see what the profit was excluding the abnormal repairs.
 ) The tax figures were looked at to see if there were any changed circumstances. In this regard the leasing of the truck ceased in 1990 and a hire purchase agreement put in place. The 1989 and 1990 figures were accordingly adjusted so that we could see what the results of those years would be if the same set of circumstances existed in those years as existed in .
 ) After taking into account the above adjustments the sheet headed `Profit and Loss Accounts - Loss of Potential Income,' was prepared. The figures in this sheet initially come from the tax return figures but have been adjusted as above. By doing this we achieved an overall picture of what the net profit would have been for the period of 1989 to 1992 had all circumstances remained constant for those years.
 ) The calculation in item (5) gave us the average net profit for 4 years.
This was then indexed using the past 10 years index numbers published by the tax office." 
The trial judge said in her reasons that Ms Elmer was extensively cross- examined about her method but except in one extremely minor respect she (the trial judge) considered that Ms Elmer's approach was correct. No countervailing expert evidence was called. She therefore awarded damages for economic loss to the date of the trial based on Ms Elmer's calculations, subject to the minor correction she had mentioned. The correction she made caused very little difference in the particular figure which had been the subject apparently of considerable argument at the trial.

The principal matter of criticism in the appeal was her Honour's use of adjusted net profit figures Ms Elmer arrived at for the four years 1989, 1990, and 1992. The figures were $47,728, $45,578, $19,400 and $38,228. Having stated these figures her Honour then said that she considered justice would be achieved between the parties if the plaintiff were treated as having a loss of earning capacity from 1993 to 1998, before tax, of $42,500, from which had to be deducted an amount representing income tax which she estimated at $12,000 per year, saying that no precise figures had been put before her. This brought her to a result for the five years of $152,500, the amount that she allowed.

For the defendant the figure taken by her Honour of $42,500 was criticised as being unexplained. There is some merit in this criticism in that the reader of her Honour's reasons is left to work out for himself or herself how it was that the trial judge arrived at this figure. There is however in my opinion quite sufficient material, which her Honour must have had in mind at the time of reaching the figure, to justify this court in not interfering with it.

I mention only two chief reasons myself for saying this. The first is that if the average is taken of the figures for 1989, 1990 and 1992, the result is $43,844. It seems to me, that on the evidence before her, the trial judge was justified in regarding 1991 as an atypical year, leaving it out of her averaging calculation and then adopting a somewhat lower figure. The fact that she was not attempting to achieve an illusory precision seems to me to be shown by her choice of words in the sentence in which she stated the figure, namely that "I consider that justice is achieved between the parties if the plaintiff is treated as having a loss etc".

The second reason which seems to me to be strongly indicative of the appropriateness of the figure arrived at by the trial judge is that she had in evidence before her (Blue AB 174) evidence that under one award wage applicable to employees driving interstate between Melbourne and Sydney twice a week the gross wage was $867 per week and under another award covering the same work, $936 a week. On a yearly basis that shows that for an employed driver doing very much the same work as the plaintiff, the yearly gross earnings would be between approximately $45,000 and $48,600 a year.

From the figure of $42,500 which the trial judge arrived at for earning capacity from 1993 to 1998 she deducted an amount representing income tax which she estimated at $12,000 a year. She commented that no precise figures had been put before her. When asked in the course of the oral argument in the appeal whether the defendant complained about the income tax deduction estimated by the trial judge, counsel replied, sensibly if I may respectfully say so, that in the defendant's view the figure was wrong "but not so wrong as to take up time about it".

The amount the trial judge included in the plaintiff's damages for loss of earning capacity from 1993 to 1998, after deducting her estimated income tax figure, was $152,500. For the reasons I have given I do not think this court should interfere with that figure.

The trial judge approached the estimation of future economic loss on the basis that the plaintiff's injuries had made him permanently unemployable. This was not disputed by the defendant in the appeal. The trial judge referred to the information before her concerning award wages and said her estimation would be based on her view that the plaintiff would have earned $45,000 per annum gross as a self-employed truck driver. She estimated that would be about $635 a week net. On the assumption that the plaintiff would have continued to work to sixty-five, and allowing a conventional 15% for vicissitudes, she arrived at a figure to be included in the damages of $409,000.

The defendant does not quarrel with the mathematics of the calculation, but in written submissions asserted that the actual taxation rate at the time of trial would translate a gross annual wage of $45,000 to a net weekly figure of $616.55, not the $635 used by the trial judge. The written submissions combined this point with the argument that there was no evidence that the plaintiff had intended to be employed, and, presumably, might have been content to earn less working for himself than for an employer.

The latter argument seems to me to miss the point of the award wage figures.
They seem to me to provide a reasonably sound basis for thinking that if an employer can run a transport business at a profit paying award wages, the award wages must be an at least moderately reliable guide to what a self- employed driver, conducting his small business with reasonable prudence, would be expected to make for himself net of his expenses.

As to the first argument, namely that the trial judge should have taken $616.55 as the weekly figure after tax, there seem to me to be three possible reasons for not accepting it. The first one is that I think this argument probably fell within the concession of counsel I have earlier quoted. I may be wrong about that however and will not take it into account. The second reason is that the defendant's criticism of the figure taken by her Honour leaves out of account the fact that she was working on the lower of the two annual award wage figures which were before her in Ex U (Blue AB 174). The third reason was that her Honour was working in an area of approximations and, so far as I have been able to ascertain, the figure asserted in the written submissions was never put to her. In the circumstances it seems to me to be unreasonable to criticise the figure which she used.

In the oral submissions to this court in the appeal, the principal point made, in addition to what was in the written submissions, consisted of a repetition of what had been said in the earlier submissions directed to her Honour's calculation of loss in the period between the accident and trial. For the same reasons as given in regard to what her Honour said concerning that period of loss, I am not persuaded that the court should alter the figure the trial judge arrived for future economic loss.

In my opinion none of the defendant's arguments in the appeal should be accepted. In my view, therefore, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Priestley JA. 
STEIN JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
