

R versus D W D Matter No 60522/97 [1998] NSWSC 45 (2 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
REGINA versus D W D /97 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Cole JA, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus D W D 
SENTENCING - CROWN APPEAL - GRIFFITHS REMAND - offences of child sexual abuse - appellant spends some years on pre-trial diversion programme - HELD - in the exercise of its discretion the Court of Criminal Appeal should not at this stage intervene in the sentencing process - appeal dismissed. 
ORDER 
Crown appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus D W D 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The Court makes an order prohibiting the publication of anything identifying or capable of identifying the victim. 
This is a Crown appeal against a decision of Moore DCJ given on 3 September when the respondent on that day came before Moore DCJ for sentence in circumstances that will be explained below. The learned judge adopted a course that is sometimes described as granting a Griffiths remand. For the purposes of the operation of the Criminal Appeal Act, the adoption of such a course constitutes the imposition of a sentence and thus the Crown has a right of appeal.

The case was described by Moore DCJ as extraordinary. That description appears to me to be accurate. The history of the matter may briefly be summarised as follows. Between January 1992 and October 1993 the respondent committed a number of offences falling within the statutory category of aggravated sexual intercourse without consent. The respondent was born in July 1962. The victim of the offences was a young female child who was the daughter of a previous marriage of the respondent's wife. The offences did not involve penetration but took the form of acts of cunnilingus.

The offences came to light because in October 1993 the respondent, apparently out of remorse, revealed them to a family member, who reported them to the respondent's wife. She, in turn, made them known to the police. The respondent was charged with the offences in May 1994. He was committed for sentence in
September 1994.

At that time, the relevant authorities made a decision that this was an appropriate case for the application of the provisions of the [Pre-Trial
Diversion of Offenders Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pdooa1985320/). That legislation had as its principal objective the protection and the alleviation of the stress of victims of child sexual assault. As the legislation was explained when it was introduced into Parliament, the Act was based upon the theory that there are certain cases in which punishment is not an effective or appropriate deterrent. The Act established a procedure whereby certain offenders were to be diverted from the ordinary curial path and made subject to a program of treatment intended to modify their criminal behaviour, the ultimate aim of the treatment being the reduction of the prospects of re- offending.

The Act recognised that one of the problems of the ordinary operation of the criminal justice system in cases such as the present is the likelihood of the offender, after a period of imprisonment, returning to a domestic situation which will place the offender in close proximity to the victim of the offence.
In those circumstances, the legislature took the view that, provided certain conditions were satisfied, it could be regarded as an appropriate objective of the system not to measure out punishment, with its usual consequence of general deterrence, but to endeavour to treat the offender in circumstances where there were significant prospects of rehabilitation and thereby protect the victim in the future.

Following the decision to put the respondent into the Pre-trial Diversion of
Offenders program, he came before Phelan DCJ in the District Court on 17
November 1994. Phelan DCJ gave effect to the provisions of the Act and, in particular, section 24. From November 1994 until January 1997 the respondent was on the program. It is unnecessary for present purposes to go into the full detail of the history of his performance on that program. Ultimately the view was taken that, because of breaches of certain conditions, he should not remain on the program and he was taken off it on 30 January 1997.

The respondent then came before Moore DCJ for sentencing according to law on 3
September 1997. Moore DCJ had before him full details of the history of the treatment which the respondent had received and of his conduct whilst under the supervision of the program. His Honour also had before him a report of Dr
Jonathan Phillips, a consultant psychiatrist, dated 17 June 1997 and a report of Dr Schultz, a consultant physician in psychological medicine, dated 28
August 1997.

Both of those reports recommended an intensive course of psychotherapy at
Westmead Hospital. Dr Phillips, in his report said that the reason for the unsuitability of the Pre-Trial Diversion Program for the respondent was that he was suffering deep-seated and profound disturbance.

It is unnecessary for present purposes to go into the history and the detail of that. He said: "There had been significant developments in the psychological therapy of severely disturbed people in recent years. Sydney has a place on the world stage in this matter. In particular, the Department of Psychiatry at Westmead
Hospital is regarded as a centre of excellence in therapy of this type." 
He went on to say the respondent would be accepted as suitable for that program. On the other hand, if we were sent to prison for a set period of time, it would "offer nothing in terms of putting right his high level of psychological disturbance". He said that the respondent's prognosis would be greatly improved if he undertook appropriate therapy and that his risk of re- offending would be minimised. To like effect was the report of Dr Schultz.

Moore DCJ had a very difficult sentencing exercise to perform. The course he took was to remand the respondent for sentence for a year, that is, until 3
September 1998, granting him bail in the meantime on conditions which included a condition of undergoing the course of psychotherapy to which reference has been made.

The present appeal has been conducted on the basis that the respondent is complying with those conditions and undergoing the psychotherapy.

It is argued on behalf of the Crown that considerations of appropriate retribution and, in particular, of general deterrence required that Moore DCJ should have sentenced the respondent in September 1997 to a term of full time custody. Criticism has been directed to the approach taken by Moore DCJ as a matter of principle to the use of the Griffiths remand in this case, especially in light of observations made by his Honour in his reasons that, at the end of the period of the remand, the respondent may well receive a custodial sentence.

It was argued by the Crown that a Griffiths remand is only appropriate in cases where there is a real and substantial possibility of the imposition of a non-custodial sentence at the end of the period of the remand. This was a case in which, according to the Crown, the remarks of Jacobs J in Griffiths versus The
Queen (1976-77) 137 CLR 293 at 325 were particularly in point. There Jacobs J said: "If it was intended that he would be sentenced to penal servitude, then there was no justification for delay. If, on the other hand, it was contemplated that there might not be a prison sentence, then for the trial judge to take such a view was wrong." 
It was argued on behalf of the Crown that the uncertainty that attaches to the outcome of the treatment which is being undertaken by the respondent, especially when the prognosis is considered in the light of the history of the respondent's performance on the Pre-Trial Diversion Program, is such that it was erroneous for the Judge to conclude that there was a real expectation, founded upon solid ground, that the treatment would be successful.

In my view, in the circumstances in which the matter comes before this Court, it is neither appropriate nor necessary for this Court to form or cause any concluded view on whether or not Moore DCJ was in error in the course which he took in this matter. Rather, I consider that the Court should dispose of this matter on the basis of its residual discretion which exists in relation to
Crown appeals against sentences.

Having regard to the extremely unusual history of this matter and, in particular, having regard to the fact that by the time the respondent came for sentence before Moore DCJ, he had been convicted of these offences almost three years previously and had still not been dealt with for the offences according to law and, having regard further to the opinions of the psychiatrist which were placed before his Honour, his Honour was confronted with an extremely awkward situation.

The matter is compounded as far as this Court is concerned by the consideration that it comes before us almost halfway through the period of the
Griffiths remand. The respondent, having previously undergone a long course of treatment before he came to Moore DCJ, has, for several months since he was before Moore DCJ, been undergoing more psychotherapy and, according to the order made by Moore DCJ, he will appear before Moore DCJ for sentence on 3
September of this year.

Against that background it would be inexpedient and inappropriate for this
Court at this stage and in those circumstances to intervene in the sentencing process. I would propose that the appeal should be dismissed.
 
COLE JA: I agree. I would add only this. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pdooa1985320/s28.html) of the [Pre-Trial Diversion of Offenders Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pdooa1985320/), as amended in 1993, deals with the situation of a person who has been placed on the Pre-Trial Diversion of Offenders Program in consequence of giving an undertaking and who has failed to abide by that undertaking.
 [Section (a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pdooa1985320/s28.html) confers upon a judge before whom such a person is brought a power either to sentence "or otherwise deal with the person as if the undertaking had not been given".

That seems to me to readily ground a power in the Judge to consider in all the circumstances of the case what is the most appropriate course to be taken in relation to such a person in those circumstances.

I agree with the reasons of Gleeson CJ and with the orders which he proposes.
 
BARR J: I agree with Gleeson CJ.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
