

Kinnas versus Petricca Matter No Ca 40371/97 [1998] NSWSC 625 (1 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 11 December 1998 
ANTONIUS KINNAS versus ROBERTO PETRICCA 
CA 40371/97 December 1998 
Priestley JA, Handley JA, Fitzgerald AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: District Court - Civil (Rummery DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40371/97; DC 1635/97; DC 3383/97 
DELIVERED: Tuesday 1 December 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: Monday 16 November 1998 
PARTIES: ANTONIUS KINNAS versus ROBERTO PETRICCA 
JUDGMENT OF: Priestley JA; Handley JA; Fitzgerald AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: J D Hislop QC 
Respondent: P Menzies QC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Grahame Goldberg Partners 
Respondent: Autore & Associates 
CATCHWORDS: 
LIMITATION OF ACTIONS - [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/)  [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) - leave to commence proceedings out of time - prejudice 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 14 
ANTONIUS KINNAS versus ROBERTO PETRICCA 
LIMITATION OF ACTIONS - [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/)  [s 52(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) - leave to commence proceedings out of time - prejudice 
In 1989 the respondent was injured in a motor vehicle accident due to the appellant's negligence. Following the accident the respondent's solicitors maintained communication with the appellant's insurer for some five years, after which there was a period of silence of some two years and seven months from the middle of 1994. During this time the respondent sought further medical advice and it became apparent that he may have suffered brain damage.
The appellant's insurer did not become aware of this aspect of the claim until the notice of motion for an extension of time and supporting affidavits were served in April 1997. Rummery DCJ gave the respondent leave to commence proceedings outside the three year limitation period. The appellant appealed by leave.

HELD: Allowing the appeal: (1) Because of the nature of the respondent's alleged injuries, his credibility and reliability would be in issue at the trial. The long delay would seriously prejudice the appellant's ability to contest important questions of history going to the validity of the brain damage claim. (2) The trial Judge misdirected himself in relation to the exercise of his discretion to grant an extension of time. The discretion was to grant the application, not to refuse it. The ultimate onus is always upon the party applying for leave and the discretion should not be exercised where there will be material prejudice to the defendant, or where the delay has made the chances of a fair trial unlikely. Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541] applied. (3) The effect of the delay has been to cause material prejudice to the appellant which would now make a fair trial unlikely. 
ORDERS 
Appeal allowed with costs.

Set aside the orders of Rummery DCJ.

In lieu thereof order that the notice of motion of 25 March 1997 be dismissed with costs.

The respondent to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.

KINNAS versus PETRICCA 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with the reasoning of Handley JA in coming to the view that this appeal should be upheld. 
In reaching that agreement I am particularly influenced by three considerations:
Rummery DCJ in forming his opinion, appears to have overlooked the factor identified by Handley JA, which was a significant one for his opinion- formation;
This court has regularly regarded the High Court's holdings in Brisbane
South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541] (which were directed to the Queensland [Limitation of Actions
Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/loaa1974226/)) as applicable to the differently expressed limitation provisions in the New South
Wales [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), a situation accepted by the appellant in this case.
It seems to me, on the present state of the authorities, that in applying the holdings in Brisbane South to the facts of the present case, I should be guided by the statement by Mason P in Sydney City Council versus Zegarac [(1998) NSWLR 195] which explains such application.

HANDLEY JA: This is an appeal by the defendant, by leave of this Court, from the decision of Rummery DCJ given on 6 June 1997 granting the plaintiff leave to bring proceedings outside the three year limitation period in [s 52(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) (the Act) as it stood on 1 July 1989. It is common ground that this is the relevant provision. 
The plaintiff was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 4 May of that year and clearly as a result of the defendant's negligence. He attended Port Kembla
Hospital the same day and consulted his general practitioner, Dr Turner, on 22
May. He then saw solicitors and on 19 July a Transcover claim form was lodged with the Government Insurance Office (GIO).

On 26 April 1990 the GIO wrote to the plaintiff admitting liability, offering $1,000 in full settlement for out-of-pocket expenses, and stating that his claim did not meet the damages threshold in the Act. On 2 July the plaintiff replied rejecting this offer as inadequate because, as he said, he was suffering from constant pain which if anything was getting worse.

The plaintiff continued to be represented by solicitors who, from time to time, obtained medical reports. On 1 July 1992 the 3 year limitation period fixed by [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s146.html) of the Act expired. About this time the plaintiff changed his solicitors and his new solicitors wrote to the GIO on 4 September 1992. On 23 October it replied seeking particulars of the plaintiff's claim which were never supplied. At that time it obtained a report from Dr Cameron, a surgeon, dated November 1992. He found no objective evidence of musculo-skeletal or orthopaedic abnormality in the plaintiff's neck, back or lower limbs. He considered that any injuries sustained in the accident had long since healed and any continuing symptoms were attributable to postural factors and poor muscular fitness, which had been complicated by emotional factors associated with his personal life.

The GIO wrote again to the plaintiff's solicitors on 26 February 1993 asking whether the claim would be pursued and received a formal reply. It wrote again on 23 November, and received a reply dated 24 December, which enclosed copies of medical reports, and stated that they still had instructions. They wrote again on 29 July 1994 stating that they had instructions to prosecute the claim and were collecting further evidence to support it.

The plaintiff had married on 5 February 1994 and his wife, who had known him before his accident but had not seen him for some years in the meantime, became concerned at his condition. As a result of her concerns, his solicitors obtained a report from Dr Nasser, a psychiatrist, dated 9 June 1994, which diagnosed depression as the cause of his apathy and memory disturbance, and raised the possibility of brain damage caused by the concussion suffered in the accident. Dr Nasser recommended a CT scan. This report was not sent to the
GIO, and was not referred to in the solicitor's letter of 29 July 1994.

The plaintiff was referred to Mr Freestone, a clinical psychologist, for a neuro-physical assessment. He reported on 21 September, confirming Dr Nasser's diagnosis, and recommending an MRI scan which could reveal brain damage that would not be picked up by a CT scan. The GIO wrote again to the plaintiff's solicitors on 23 September 1994, forwarding a number of medical reports and claim forms.

There was no further communication between the solicitors and the GIO until the motion for leave to commence proceedings was served on the GIO early in
April 1997. However there had been further activity in the plaintiff's camp involving a fees agreement and further medical investigations in 1995 and
A report from Betsy Lilley, a clinical psychologist, was obtained on 12
July 1996. She concluded that the plaintiff's mental deficits were consistent with brain damage. The GIO first heard of this aspect of the claim when it received the notice of motion and supporting affidavits in April 1997.

The primary Judge noted as factors favourable to the plaintiff on the application that the accident had been reported in time, that the GIO had admitted liability, and that there had been correspondence with the GIO "at all material times". This was true for the period from 19 July 1989 until 23
September 1994, but was not true for the ensuing period of 2 years 7 months which was also material. His Honour found that the evidence of the plaintiff's mental problems provided a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay, but with respect, there was no explanation for the apparent inactivity, so far as the GIO knew, during this period of 2 years and 7 months when the plaintiff, his wife and solicitors were aware of his problems.

The Judge found that the overall delay had been prejudicial to the defendant "especially referring to the fact that he hears at a late stage, for the first time, of a non-physical consequence of the accident which, on present material, may be explained by brain damage to take a worse case situation". He anxiously considered whether "that forensic disadvantage" was so great that he should not grant the application, but decided it was not because "It is not an insurmountable matter for the respondent to adequately deal with".

He analysed the possible explanations for the late emergence of the claim for mental illness. The first was that the illness was in fact due to brain damage, but he noted that other possible explanations included "that the applicant dropped his bundle for reasons we do not know", or that he was "feigning some of the symptoms". However he thought that the delay was "at least a 2-edged sword" and that the defendant was not in the position "where he is simply unable to answer any case which may be presented by the applicant if he is allowed to proceed". Accordingly he granted the application.

The stark fact in this case is that the defendant first learned of the existence of a potentially large claim for brain damage in April 1997, almost years after this accident. This fact alone, in my judgment, established significant presumed prejudice. The Judge also found actual prejudice, but his assessment undervalued the severity of this prejudice.

Dr Quach reported on 9 January 1991, having seen the plaintiff on 22 June, 18
July, 3 October and 28 November 1990, stating: "His prognosis is reasonably good in that he has remained in full time employment involving physical work, however he is experiencing pain and problems with his work and may have difficulty in the future".

Dr Cameron recorded in his report of 24 November 1992: "He said a few months after his motor vehicle accident he moved to Canberra to be near his fiancee who was working there. The marriage plans fell through leaving him psychologically depressed for some time ... Mr Petricca said he had done a few jobs in the past including some work as a car salesman and as a club doorman. At the time of his motor vehicle accident he had been working with Stewart Toyota for seven months as a car salesman. He continued there for four months after his accident before resigning to move to Canberra where he did some bar work and other casual jobs, including labouring doing steel deliveries".

However on 9 June 1994 Dr Nasser recorded in his history that following the accident: "He then went `downhill'. Two weeks after the accident he was put off work. He had been a car salesman for eight months and `one of the best salesmen they had'. He had held his job in spite of rapid staff turnover. In the two weeks after he resumed work he was irritable, `had no patience' with customers and sold no cars. He suffered with a chronic sore back and found that he lost his balance. When he worked in Canberra delivering steel the back pain was worse and he was forced to take sick leave. He was put off and has not worked since.
He tried to obtain work and became depressed because of his failure and the chronic back pain. He separated from his fiancee and returned to Wollongong".

Mr Freestone in his report dated 21 September 1994 wrote: "He reported he had seven jobs since leaving school, the longest being of 2 years as a Machine Operator in Canberra".

The plaintiff in his affidavit sworn 9 November 1996 said (pars 8, 13): "I returned to work as a car salesman in May 1989 with my then employer,
Stuart Toyota at Sutherland, but due to my pain, I could not hold down that job, and I was laid off after a few weeks, and went onto unemployment benefits.
 ...

From time to time I did casual paid work as a truck driver delivering steel (about 1990) and as a bricklayer (1994) but I could not keep these up (due) to the pain".

The evidence on the extension application did not include any CAT scan or MRI scan of the plaintiff and it is not known whether such examinations were held and if so whether objective signs of brain damage were found. An accurate history of the plaintiff's behaviour and symptoms during the first few years after the accident may therefore be essential for a fair trial of this claim.
Did the plaintiff remain at work with Stuart Toyota for some months after the accident until he resigned to move to Canberra, or was he dismissed after two weeks? Was he in full time employment in Canberra between 22 June and 28
November 1990 or not? What actually happened when his relationship with his then fiancee broke down in Canberra? As suggested by Dr Cameron was this the real, or at least the precipitating, cause of his continuing depression? 
The only material available to the defendant on these issues may turn out to be the histories obtained by Dr Quach in 1990, Dr Cameron in 1992 and Mr
Freestone in 1994. The plaintiff may deny their accuracy, and it may be difficult to ascertain the truth. It may be impossible at this late stage to obtain independent corroboration from Stuart Toyota of what occurred in 1989, or even identify his employers in Canberra. The former fiancee of the plaintiff has not been identified in the evidence, and she may well have married and be hard to trace. Even if witnesses can be found and are co- operative, it may not be possible to obtain useful information from them so long after the event.

The case is therefore one where the credibility and reliability of the plaintiff are likely to be in issue at the trial, but the long delay will have seriously prejudiced the defendant's ability to contest important questions of history going to the validity of the brain damage claim. As I have said his
Honour, in my judgment, seriously underestimated the extent of the prejudice to the defendant and apparently overlooked the total absence of communication with the GIO during a period of 2 years and 7 months between 1994 and 1997. In addition his Honour, in my view, misdirected himself in his approach to the exercise of the discretion.

The High Court made it very clear in Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541] that the discretion in a case such as this is one to grant an application, not a discretion to refuse it. His Honour treated as relevant to such an exercise his findings that the defendant's forensic disadvantage was not "insurmountable" and that he would not be left in a situation where he was "simply unable to answer" the plaintiff's case. His Honour therefore appears to have proceeded on the basis that the discretion should be exercised in favour of a plaintiff unless a fair trial was impossible. However Taylor's case establishes that the ultimate onus is always on the applicant and moreover Toohey and Gummow JJ, in their joint judgment, held that the discretion should not be exercised where there will be "material prejudice" to the defendant (ibid 547), or where the delay has made the chances of a fair trial "unlikely" (550). This is a more favourable test for an applicant than that of a real possibility of significant prejudice which was adopted by
Dawson and McHugh JJ (555).

These considerations establish that his Honour's exercise of the discretion miscarried, and this Court must therefore undertake its exercise afresh. On that basis I must conclude that the plaintiff has not made out a case for the extension of the limitation period. The overall delay of nearly 8 years establishes presumptive prejudice in a case such as this, but the specific matters already referred to relating to the inconsistent histories seem to me to establish actual prejudice. Even if this is not strictly so, they strengthen the presumption of prejudice that arises from the delay itself. In my judgment the effect of the delay has been to cause material prejudice to the defendant which would now make a fair trial "unlikely". The following orders should be made: 
Appeal allowed with costs.

Set aside the orders of Rummery DCJ.

In lieu thereof order that the notice of motion of 25 March 1997 be dismissed with costs.

The respondent to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.

FITZGERALD AJA: I agree with Handley JA. * * * 
