

Regina versus Mark Thomas Gorman [1997] NSWSC 198 (15 May 1997) 
REGINA versus Mark Thomas GORMAN /95 May 1997 
C O U R T O F C R I M I N A L A P P E A L 
GLEESON CJ, HUNT CJ at CL, SPERLING J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Conviction for murder following confession that appellant did act leading to death - claim on appeal that this was a lie - blame for that act assigned to another - version still inconsistent with medical evidence - not cogent - murder and manslaughter.

RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The appellant (Mark Thomas Gorman) stood trial with his de facto wife (BJA) in the Supreme Court sitting at Newcastle. He was charged with the murder of K-LH, and (in a separate count) with her manslaughter upon the basis of criminal negligence.[1] The appellant pleaded not guilty of murder but guilty of the manslaughter charged in the separate count. His co-accused was charged only with manslaughter, upon the same basis of criminal negligence, and she pleaded not guilty. The jury found both accused guilty as charged. Badgery-Parker J sentenced the appellant to penal servitude for seventeen years for the murder, consisting of a minimum term of thirteen years and an additional term of four years, and a fixed term of imprisonment for four years for the manslaughter to be served concurrently. He deferred passing sentence upon the co-accused pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

The deceased was the co-accused's child, and she was at the time of her death eighteen months old. The Crown case was that the appellant had deliberately immersed the child into a bath tub of scalding water for a significant period, with the intention of causing her grievous bodily harm. She suffered burns over approximately 50% of her body, some of them full thickness burns. She died from those burns over two months later, the immediate cause being kidney failure resulting from fluid deprivation caused by the delay in resuscitation.
The appellant and his co-accused had failed for some hours to seek medical attention for the child, and this failure formed the basis of the separate manslaughter counts against each of them.[2] 
The appellant expressed the fear at the time that, if medical attention were sought, the police would be called, and that there were then warrants for his arrest outstanding. The appellant and his co-accused attempted to treat the child themselves, but her condition deteriorated and she lost consciousness.
When the decision was finally made to seek medical attention, the co-accused told the neighbour whose telephone she used to call for help that she had dissolved some Napisan in hot water in a bucket and had left it whilst she changed the nappy of a younger baby, that she had heard a scream and that when she returned to the bucket she found that the deceased had burnt herself.
According to the appellant's mother, who accompanied them to the hospital, the co-accused repeated this version to the doctor who admitted the child, and she added that the child must have fallen into the bucket. She denied that the child had been placed in a bath. The co-accused subsequently told the appellant's mother that the appellant had placed the child into the bath because she had soiled her nappy. All of this evidence was led only against the co-accused, and the jury were appropriately warned that they could not take this evidence into account in the case against the appellant. I refer to it, however, because of its relevance to one of the arguments put by the appellant in this appeal.

When he was interviewed by the police two months after the event, the appellant told them that he had been trying to teach the child a lesson for having soiled her nappy. He said that he had placed the child in the bath and was filling it with cold water. He had then decided to warm it up. He turned on the hot water tap as well, and had done other things elsewhere whilst the hot water flowed. When he went back to turn off the hot water, the light in the bathroom was not working and he had turned off the cold water instead of the hot water. He had returned to the bathroom when he heard the child scream.
At that stage, he said, the skin was peeling off her legs. He told the police that he had not sought medical attention for the child because of the outstanding warrants.

The co-accused was interviewed by the police several months later and confessed that the version which she had given the hospital about the bucket was false. She said that, when the child had soiled her nappy, she had given her to the appellant to bath. Again, this evidence was led against the co- accused only.

Extensive medical evidence was led from the doctors who treated the child, and from the pathologist who performed the post mortem examination, as to the nature of the burns which she had suffered. They were circumferential burns over the lower half of her body, which was described as being typical of an immersion injury. Those doctors were unanimously of the view that the injuries were wholly inconsistent with the child sitting in the bath and being burnt by the water from the hot tap. Particularly relevant to those opinions was the sharp line of demarcation between the burnt and the unburnt skin and the absence of the many splash patterns in the burns which would have been expected if that is how it had happened. It was said that a child of this age would have sought to escape from the bath, rather than sit in the hot water and let it rise up her body.

Evidence was led by the Crown from the child's father (who had had regular access to her) that she was able to get out of a bath by herself, and from neighbours that the appellant had disliked the child because she looked so like her father and that he treated her violently.

The appellant gave evidence at the trial consistently with the version which he gave to the police. He said that, after first turning on the hot water, he had been watching television, he had returned to the bathroom, checked the water and realised that it was too warm and that he had intended to turn the hot water off but had turned off the cold water by mistake because there was no light in the bathroom. He heard the child scream shortly afterwards, and he found her trying to get out of the bath. Her skin was coming off. It was the appellant's case that the neighbours who gave evidence against him either bore him a grudge or were exaggerating ordinary domestic incidents.

Evidence was called by the appellant from a surgeon specialising in burns, who had inspected photographs of the child and the hospital notes. He said that the injuries could have occurred in the way described by the appellant, although he was not asked whether that was a reasonable explanation for the injuries. He did say that it was reasonable to assume that the child would stay sitting in the water whilst the temperature of the water remained comfortable, although he would have expected the child to have moved around to try to get out of the water when it started to get too hot. He did not think that the photographs showed a sharply demarcated upper water line level, but he conceded some uncertainty in interpreting the photographs. He also conceded that it was at least unlikely, if not virtually impossible, for the child to have suffered some of the burns around her genital area if she had attempted to get out of the water when it started to get too hot around the upper part of her body.

The appellant has conducted this appeal in person. He has not filed formal grounds of appeal, but he has provided helpful written submissions from which it is possible to identify the issues which he wishes to raise. He did not wish to add to these submissions in court.

The appellant's principal submission is that he is innocent because he lied in the statements which he made to the police and in his evidence when he said that it was he who had placed the child in the bath. He says that it was the child's mother, the co-accused, who had done so and that he had been in another room of the house watching television and smoking marijuana at the time. She had left the child in the bath alone. The child had called out and the co-accused had gone into the bathroom, abused her, and - according to what the co-accused had subsequently told him - she had turned the hot water on and the cold water off. She had again left the child alone and had returned only when the child screamed. He had himself entered the bathroom when the co- accused had called him, and he saw the child's skin peeling off her.

When the decision was made to call his mother for help - she had apparently had nursing experience - the co-accused had asked the appellant what explanation she should give to his mother and to the hospital for the child's injuries. He had instructed her to tell the truth, but (he says) she had instead made up the story about the child knocking the bucket of boiling water over herself. He says that he could not go through with that lie when questioned by the police, and that he had truthfully told them how it had happened - but with the exception that he had falsely said that it was he who had put the child in the bath. He says that he had lied because it seemed "the right thing to do at the time". He also says that there was a deal struck between them prior to being questioned by the police that his co-accused would pay $20,000 to his mother and his son if he were to go to gaol. He says that, if things "got out of hand", or if the police knew that the co-accused was not telling the truth, he had intended to tell the police what had really happened.

With reference to the claim made by the co-accused in her evidence at the trial that she had made up the nappy bucket story only at the insistence of the appellant, and the inference from her allegations of mistreatment by him that she had done so out of fear of him, the appellant denies that that was the case, and he points out that there are no "official records" of any mental or physical abuse of her by him. The appellant says that a friend of the co- accused recently informed his stepfather's brother that the wrong person was in gaol for the murder. We have nothing from this person before us, even in an informal way, by which that hearsay upon hearsay statement can be interpreted.
The appellant asserts that the co-accused had no love for the deceased child, and that he has witnesses who will give evidence as to his own character which, he says, may be far from perfect but it is not the character of a murderer.

The appellant also suggests that the child's death may have related more to the severity of the treatment which she received in hospital than to the burns which she suffered in the bath. He says as well that, as the child had never been immunised, her injuries may have been complicated by infections which she picked up in hospital. He believes that the case should be re-investigated, and the murder charge against him dropped.

These submissions appear to raise a number of different issues. This Court has no power to re-hear criminal trials or to decide for itself whether the person charged was guilty. However, where this Court is satisfied that there was a miscarriage of justice at the trial arising out of an error of law or otherwise, it has power to order a new trial, but it cannot itself decide the guilt of the person charged.[3] 
A new trial will be ordered where this Court is satisfied that the absence of particular evidence at the trial amounted to a miscarriage of justice, but it will so conclude in favour of the appellant only if it considers that there is a significant possibility that the jury at his original trial, acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant if that evidence had been before them.[4] Relevant to that test is the credibility and the cogency of the material now put forward,[5] but its credibility and cogency must be considered in the context of the evidence which was already before the trial court, and the appellant must show that it is of such a nature that, in that context, such a significant possibility exists.[6] There is no miscarriage of justice if that material was available to be called at the original trial and if the appellant had been content to go to trial without it.[7] He will not be given a second trial simply because the evidence which he was content to produce at the original trial was unsuccessful in achieving the result which he sought to achieve and because the result at a second trial with the additional material may be different. That is not, of course, a universal and inflexible rule, but it will be departed from only in unusual circumstances; those circumstances will ordinarily be related to the strength of the "new" material in question.[8] 
The material which was not given at the trial must usually be put before this
Court on oath, so that the Crown can test its credibility and cogency. Because the appellant is unrepresented, this has not been done in this case, but in my view this issue can be determined in the present case upon the assumption that the statements made by the appellant in his written submissions would be the subject of the evidence which he would have given, and that he would have maintained that evidence despite cross-examination upon its many inconsistencies with the still unchallenged confession which he had made to the police.

Such evidence would, however, immediately run into the problem that it, too, proceeds upon the basis that the child suffered the burns as a result of sitting in the bath whilst the hot water was running. That version remains necessarily inconsistent with the medical evidence given by the treating doctors and the pathologist called by the Crown as to the nature of the burns which the child suffered. The contrary evidence of the surgeon who was called on behalf of the appellant at the trial suffers greatly from the fact that he never saw the child's burns himself and was forced to rely on photographs.
When sentencing the appellant, the judge remarked that the surgeon's evidence was "rather unconvincing". I formed the same view from reading it.

The fact that this new version was never put forward at the time of the trial also reduces its credibility. No satisfactory explanation has been given for the appellant's failure to put it forward at that stage. The new version is totally inconsistent with the evidence which the co-accused gave at the trial, and its contents were never suggested to her in cross-examination. I am not satisfied that there is any significant possibility that the jury at the appellant's original trial, acting reasonably, would have acquitted him if he had given that evidence. That conclusion, together with the fact that the appellant was content to go to trial with the earlier version, denies the existence of any miscarriage of justice on that basis.

The second issue which may be raised by the appellant's submissions is that his legal representatives at the trial failed to investigate his case properly and to interview witnesses who were available to give evidence of character.
As I have already pointed out, it is apparent from the way in which the trial was conducted that the appellant had not told those legal representatives the version which he now puts forward. The suggestion that the child's death may have resulted from the treatment which she received in hospital is purely speculative. Evidence was given by a treating doctor that the child was already moribund by the time of her admission to hospital, although she did in fact survive for some time thereafter. That suggestion may perhaps also be inconsistent with the appellant's plea of guilty to manslaughter, which necessarily concedes that his failure to obtain medical attention contributed to the child's death. He maintains his guilt of manslaughter, so has not sought to withdraw that plea.

If evidence of character had been led on behalf of the appellant, there was available to the Crown a significant amount of evidence as to his violence which could have been led in reply; indeed, some such evidence was led from the co-accused at the trial. Assuming that this evidence of character had been made available to the appellant's legal representatives at the trial, the very experienced Queen's Counsel who appeared for him would almost of necessity have had to advise him of the grave danger of calling that evidence.[9] I see no miscarriage of justice there.

The third issue which may be raised by the appellant's submissions is that the jury's verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. The test to be applied by this
Court in relation to that issue is whether, having made its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence, this Court is persuaded that it was not open to the jury, upon the whole of the evidence, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty.[10]
Because the appellant is unrepresented, I have given anxious consideration to the evidence in this case. Having done so, I have to say that it was an extraordinarily strong Crown case. I do not accept that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt, and I would not uphold any submission that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The remaining matters raised in the appellant's written submissions involve what he sees to be a contradiction between the two guilty verdicts which the jury gave against him. The availability of both charges - murder and manslaughter - is explained by the fact the child's death was the result of two quite separate acts or omissions - one was the act of immersing her in hot water and the other was the failure to seek medical attention for her following the burns which she suffered from that act. Each was independently a material cause of her death. Each constituted a separate crime. In no sense were they alternative charges. The separate count for manslaughter on the basis of criminal negligence to which the appellant pleaded guilty was added, by consent, so as to make that clear.

I should also that, when sentencing the appellant, the judge stated that he was taking the failure to seek medical attention for the child into account as an aggravating factor in relation to the murder, so that (he expressly made it clear) the conviction for manslaughter on the separate count represented no additional criminality on the appellant's part beyond what was reflected in the sentence for murder. That is why the two sentences are concurrent. That was, in my view, an appropriate course to follow.

There is no application made for leave to appeal against sentence. I have in any event given consideration to the sentences, and I am satisfied that, in the particular circumstances of the relationship between the two accused revealed in the evidence, there was no disparity between those sentences imposed on the appellant and that imposed on the co-accused, and that those imposed on the appellant were perfectly proper.

I propose that the appeal be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

SPERLING J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court will be that proposed by Hunt CJ at CL.
 [1] The [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/), by <case>, prohibits the publication of any report of the proceedings which leads to the identification of any child to whom the proceedings relate or who is mentioned or otherwise involved in those proceedings. As the judgments of this Court are now published on the Internet, without editing, it is necessary to use pseudonyms so as to ensure that there will be no breach of <case>.
 [2] Regina versus Taktak [(1988) 14 NSWLR 226] at -240, 250.
 [3] See, generally, Regina versus Kurtic [(1996) 85 A Crim R 57] at -60.
 <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 392] at 399, 402; Mickelberg versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259] at 273, 301-302.
 [5] Gallagher versus The Queen (at 395-396, 399, 401-402, 408-409);
Mickelberg versus The Queen (at 301).
 <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 659] at 670, 676-677; Gallagher versus The Queen (at 397, 410);
Mickelberg versus The Queen (at 302); Regina versus Gregory Mark Hemsley (CCA, 8
December 1996, unreported), at 5.
 [7] Lawless versus The Queen (at 666, 675); Mickelberg versus The Queen (at ); Regina versus Asfour [(1992) 60 A Crim R 409] at .
 [8] cf Gallagher versus The Queen (at 395); Regina versus Goonan [(1993) 69 A
Crim R 338] at 341-342.
 [9] cf Regina versus Hamilton [(1993) 68 A Crim R 298] at -300.
 [10] M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at -495, 508; Regina versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333] at -339.
 * * * 
