

St George Bank versus Hammer (No 2) [2015] NSWSC 953 (17 July 2015) 
Last Updated: 17 July 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
The defendant's notice of motion filed on 13th March 2015 (as amended on 1st
May 2015) seeking summary dismissal of the proceedings is dismissed; 
The defendant's notice of motion, filed on 17th April 2015, to transfer the proceedings to the Federal Court of Australia is dismissed; 
Under r 14.28 Uniform Civil Procedure Rules, the Amended Defence dated 6th
July 2015, filed on 8th July 2015 (and, to the extent necessary, all former editions of the defence) are struck out; 
No further defence is to be filed in the registry without the prior leave of a judge of this court obtained by motion on notice; 
The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of each of these applications including the costs thrown away by reason of their adjournment on 23rd May 
Catchwords: 
PROCEDURE - civil - possession of security by bank - borrower in Hawaii - interlocutory issues - application to strike out defence by bank - borrower's application for summary dismissal  
PROCEDURE - civil - jurisdiction - application to transfer proceedings - lack of federal jurisdiction  
JUDGMENT
I am deciding three motions brought on notice in a case in the possession list. They are, in logical, not chronological, order: * (a) The defendant's application to "transfer" the proceedings to the Federal Court of Australia; * (b) The plaintiff's application to strike out the defendant's defence; and * (c) The defendant's application for summary dismissal of the proceedings on the grounds that they are vexatious and disclose no reasonable cause of action.
The defendant is currently living in the State of Hawaii, United States of America, as his previous visa has expired. I am informed that he is not yet eligible to apply for another. I granted Mr Mark Pytellek leave to appear for the defendant. Mr Pytellek has a power of attorney over the defendant's affairs in Australia in his absence. I earlier refused an application for adjournment for counsel to be retained for reasons given in <case> 
Nature of the claim
The plaintiff, who I will refer to as the bank, is seeking judgment for possession over land of which the defendant, who I will refer to as the borrower, is the registered proprietor. The property is in northern New South Wales.
The bank's case is that the borrower obtained a loan from St George Bank Limited secured by registered mortgage no AD 8XXXX5. The borrower denies the loan, but admits the mortgage. The bank avers that it is the successor in title, or successor in law, to St George Bank Limited pursuant to the provisions of the [Financial Sector (Business Transfer and Group Restructure) Act 1999](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fstagra1999593/) (Cth). St George Bank is now referred to as division of the bank. The borrower denies the bank has title to bring the proceedings for a number of reasons which it will be necessary to deal with more fully below.
The borrower admits that if there has been a default under the loan, the lender is entitled to take possession of the property. He disputes, as I have said, that the bank is the lender, and default on his part. He admits, however, that the bank has served a notice of his purported default on him on 16th October 2013.

The borrower's defence
The bank's statement of claim is dated 19th June 2014. It was filed on 27th June 2014. As Mr Gor of counsel, who appears for the bank, put it there are a number of "iterations" of the borrower's defence, the latest of which is a third Amended Defence filed (without leave) on 8th July 2015. It was agreed that all previous versions should be taken as having been subsumed in this and I granted leave for the bank to amend its motion (dated 14th May 2015) to include a prayer that this third version of the amended defence be struck out.
In its present form, the defence is expressed in archaic language, even for a pleading, and characterised by a deal of prolixity. In summary, the borrower challenges the bank's title to possession on the following bases: * (a) the borrower dealt with St George Bank Limited, he "did not sign or make any agreement with Westpac Banking Corporation". There is no privity of contract between the borrower and the bank; * (b) assuming the [Financial Sector (Business Transfer and Group Restructure) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fstagra1999593/) had the legal effect contended for by the bank (which the borrower did not seem to accept) the bank "could not become the successor in law of the mortgage note because it was already sold (by St George Bank Limited) through securitisation". By this he means St George Bank "was already paid in full" by an unidentified third party before the bank became its successor. For these reasons, he asserted, the transfer of the mortgage to the bank is fraudulent; * (c) again, although put in various ways, the borrower denies the bank (or St George Bank for that matter) loaned money or advanced him credit. Rather the bank (or St George Bank) paid the amount it alleges was a loan ($840,000) as "consideration for the purchase of or in exchange for the original completed bona fide wet ink signature loan application". The written loan application is the subject of many averments in the defence. The borrower pleads (apparently correctly) that many and various requests have been made for its production which have been ignored by the bank. The borrower regards that document as critical evidence of any title bank has to sue for possession. Its failure to produce it, according to the borrower, betrays an incurable flaw in the bank's title; * (d) presumably if he is wrong about everything else, the borrower says he has, in any event, fully discharged any indebtedness to the bank by delivering "a promissory note bearing number PNKGC320420131039 for an Australian currency amount on its face of one million dollars made in favour of the Plaintiff. [And] [t]he plaintiff, its agent/s or employees failed to present the promissory note for payment to the [borrower]...by the date disclosed on the face of the promissory note as required under S92 and S93 of the Australian [Bills of Exchange Act 1909](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/) (Cth)" as required to hold the "borrower" liable. ([11] of the Amended Defence); * (e) by reason, in particular, of the failure of the bank to produce the "original completed bona fide wet ink signature loan application", which as I have said, he regards as the mortgagee's title document, the bank cannot establish that it has acquired St George's title by "assignment, sale, securitisation or otherwise", and its failure to present the promissory note for payment makes the claim vexatious, frivolous, an abuse of process and "hopeless"; * (f) the mortgage agreement is unjust and unconscionable because the bank "was always aware that the amount of the monthly mortgage loan repayments required to be made by the [borrower] was beyond the capacity of the [borrower] to meet"; and the failure of the bank to provide "the original completed bona fide we ink signature loan application" and to engage in meaningful pre-trial mediation is also unconscionable; and * (g) because the borrower invoked federal legislation, he argued that this court "lacks jurisdiction to hear matters of fact and law concerning matters governed by federal legislation, acts, statues and codes".

He also alleges the bank has breached the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cth) and the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth) by reason of its failure to produce the original document and its actions were piracy and an obstruction of the course of justice. He also claims the sum of $1.5 million, on what basis is unclear.

The jurisdictional point
It is obviously convenient and logical to deal with the borrower's application to transfer the matter to the Federal Court because this Court lacks jurisdiction first. As both the bank and the borrower rely upon laws of the federal parliament to make good their case, the Court is exercising federal jurisdiction. But there can be no doubt that the Court has this jurisdiction. The substantive dispute is a claim by an alleged mortgagee for judgment for possession against an allegedly defaulting mortgagor. This is not a subject matter peculiarly within the jurisdiction of the Federal Court of Australia. Moreover, by <case> [Judiciary Act 1903](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/) (Cth) "the several courts of the States shall within the limits of their several jurisdiction ... be invested with federal jurisdiction in all matters ... in which original jurisdiction can be conferred upon" the High Court of Australia, subject to exceptions not presently relevant. Under [s 76](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s76.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) the federal parliament "may make laws conferring original jurisdiction on the High Court in any matter ... arising under any laws made by the Parliament". If it can be said that this matter arises under the federal legislation invoked by each party the Court is invested with federal jurisdiction by [s 39(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s39.html) [Judiciary Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/): see also <case> [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/) (Cth). The borrower argued that this court could hear the case, but it could not decide any question involving any interpretation of federal law. This is clearly fallacious. The exercise of the ordinary jurisdiction of a court involves identifying, when necessary interpreting, and applying applicable laws whether state, federal or common law.
No other ground was advanced for suggesting that this court was a clearly inappropriate forum. This is perhaps unsurprising.
I will dismiss this motion with costs when pronouncing orders.
For completeness I record that the matter was adjourned when last before the court on 23rd May 2015, before Schmidt J, in compliance with the provisions of <case> [Judiciary Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/). Notices were duly given to the Attorneys General and the evidence before me demonstrates that none wish to intervene at this time.

The application to strike out the defence
It seems logical to deal with this application before considering the borrowers application for summary dismissal as each raises common issues.
I will detail the evidence led under r 14.28(2) [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/). Given the borrower's second application, it may also be taken as evidence under r 13.4(2).
The evidence for the bank consists of Exhibit AP-1, being the exhibit to the affidavit of Mr Addy Pong, solicitor, sworn on 19th May 2015. The loan agreement between St George Bank and the borrower is dated 8th January 2008. Broadly, the document is expressed as an offer by St George Bank (p 8). The form indicates that the mode of acceptance is by the borrower signing, dating and returning the offer within 21 days. The date of the offer is 3rd January 2008. The borrower signified his acceptance by signing the document on 8th January 2008 and returning it to St George Bank. The type of facility was described as Portfolio Credit Limit of $840,000, requiring a minimum monthly repayment, initially, in the sum of $3,460.50 "payable from [the borrowers] own funds" (p 3). The sum of $540,854 was drawn-down immediately to discharge an existing mortgage over the property with an entity referred to as East Coast Finance. It was a term of the loan agreement that the borrower provide a "first priority registered Real Property mortgage" over the property.
For present purposes, it is important to point out the following condition: (at p 6): 
Payment Method 
All repayments must be made in Australian currency by electronic transfer from a St. George Bank account or by direct debit from an account at another financial institution approved by us.

The loan agreement incorporated general terms and conditions including the requirement that the minimum repayment set out in each bank statement provided by the bank be made "by the due date (which is the last banking day of the month after the month covered by that statement)".
As contemplated by the loan contract, the borrower provided St George Bank with a [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) mortgage in proper form, signed by him on 26th February 2008. The mortgage memorandum provided that the borrower would be in default if he did not pay the amount owing on time. This includes amounts owing under an agreement covered by the mortgage, which includes the loan agreement.
Upon default, the bank was entitled to give notice of the default, allowing a period of grace of 21 days for its correction. If the borrower did not correct the default, cl 20.3(b) of the mortgage authorised the bank "to take possession of the property". The mortgage is duly registered on the Certificate of Title as a first mortgage.
The evidence shows that the borrower first defaulted by failing to pay the minimum monthly repayment on 7th May 2010. The facility was fully drawn by 11th June 2010. As at 31st March 2015, (p 77) the total outstanding, debit balance was $962,980.45. The last instalment seems to have been paid on or about 8th July 2013.

The transfer of St George's business to the bank
On 18th February 2010, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) approved a voluntary transfer under [Financial Sector (Business Transfer and Group Restructure) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fstagra1999593/) in respect of "the total transfer of business" from St George Bank Limited to Westpac Banking Corporation and issued a certificate under [s 18(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fstagra1999593/s18.html) of that Act "stating that the transfer is to take effect" (p 71). By its terms, the certificate came into force on 1st March 2010. The legal effect of the certificate coming into force was that all the assets and liabilities of St George Bank became assets and liabilities of the bank (without any transfer, conveyance or assignment): <case> of that Act. The bank says that by force of <case>, the mortgage held by St George Bank became its property. I repeat that the borrower says that I cannot be satisfied that the Certificate of Transfer is authentic, and in any event, this mortgage, and I infer any agreement underpinning it had been "securitised" to some unknown third party, and accordingly was not an asset of St George Bank at the time any authentic certificate came into force. Whatever the force of the securitisation argument, the <case> certificate is clearly authentic.

The borrower's evidence
The borrower relied upon his affidavits of 14th April 2015, 28th April 2015 and those verifying the various permutations of his defence. The 14th April affidavit annexed, or exhibited, a series of 10 letters written by the borrower between 25th July 2013 and 2nd August 2014. The first 9 were written to the bank, its officers and solicitors; the 10th dated 2nd August 2014 was to the "New South Whales [sic] Ombudsman". In each of the letters to the bank, the borrower offers in "good faith ... to pay the total amount due". But there are always strings attached. For instance on 25th July 2013, he requested a "pay off invoice ... signed under FULL COMMERCIAL LIABILITY". He also asked to see "all Trust Deed and Promissory Note transfers from the original lender to the last purchaser were lawfully endorsed as required by law". He asked for "the actual street address wherein I can bring the total amount of cash due, to exchange for my original Trust Deed or mortgage and Promissory Note in order to lawfully complete and finalize this transaction".
The bank did not respond to this letter. The borrower followed it up with another letter on 13th September 2013 in which he reiterated the expression "Good-Faith Offer to Pay the Total Amount Due". The bank did not respond. Indeed it responded to one only of his letters, that of 18th November 2013.
On 22nd October 2013 he wrote again, this time to the bank's solicitor. Referring to previous letters, he said: 
In these letters I offered to pay the entire balance due in full.

He made it clear this was purely conditional upon him seeing the documents referred to in his first letter. He wrote: 
I am very aware of the Banking fraud that is going on in the United States and many Banks are pretending to be the lender and trying to collect money from people when in actual legal fact they are not a party of interest.

He asserted the fact that the bank ignored his letters and then hired a lawyer was indicative "of fraud and deceit". He concluded: 
Please read my July 25, 2013 letter carefully and have the responsible party respond to my question under FULL COMMERICIAL LIABILITY and under PENALTY OF
PERJURY. Then I will be assured that St George Bank claim for monies owed is valid and my payment will be made to the true creditor.
He wrote to the bank again on 18th November 2013 stating: 
I am offering to pay the total amount due but you are refusing to answer important questions concerning whether or not you are the true holder in due course of the mortgage.

He acknowledged receiving letters from the bank asserting his default and wrote: 
Until you answer my question in my letters ... I am withholding paying off the loan. I am willing and able to make the payment due but I need to make sure you are the holder of the note in due course and hence party of interest.
There is so much bank fraud going on these days so I need to make sure you are the true party of interest before I pay you a considerable sum of money to pay off the mortgage in full.
A bank officer telephoned the borrower on 18th December 2013 asking him to contact the solicitor for proof that the money was due to the bank. He wrote to the solicitor that same day again pointing out his belief that banks in the United States pretend to be the lender "when in fact they have securitised the loan". He purported to quote an opinion expressed by someone he identified as "George Gingo, California and Florida Licensed Attorney". In this letter, he for the first time referred to "the original wet signature Note", saying "this would be the proof I need and then I can issue you a payment immediately in full and this matter can be closed". He added: 
On the other hand if St George Bank is a pretender Lender and is not the party of interest then I would not be comfortable paying you almost $900,000 ......would you!!! 
If you proceed with foreclosure action and you client St George Bank refuses to comply with my request for proof of claim that they are the true creditor then you will be doing so fraudulently.

He purported to give his own "Notice of Fault" to the bank (MJH 10) demanding the production of the documents he had identified in his earlier correspondence. On 2nd January 2014 he wrote again to the solicitors (and to the CEO of St George Bank) asserting that as there had been no response to his
Notice, the bank was "unwilling to reply to [his] request and [its] claim is fraudulent". He threatened legal action. But to avoid any question of him being in default, "I will be tendering you a payment in full which you will receive within 10 days".
On 8th January 2014, he delivered the Promissory Note PNKGC320420131039 (and other documents not attached to his affidavit) to the Lismore Branch of St George Bank. The promissory note was a two page document signed by the borrower, describing himself as "agent". So far as material, it is in the following terms: 
Pay to: St George Bank $1,000,000.00  ... 
Redeemable on DEMAND at (an address in Bangalow)  at 10:35 hours without; let, delay, hindrance or ado, on the 15th day of
January AD 2014.

Its second page stated: 
Promissory note for settlement of portfolio loan contract.
The bank did not show up at the appointed place, day and hour to redeem the note and on 17th January 2014 the borrower executed a document entitled Certificate of Protest Default Dishonour, which seems to declare that given the Bank's non- attendance it was in default and his liability to it (I will add if any) was accordingly discharged. On 4th March 2014, he requested a photocopy of his file with the bank. And on 19th May 2014 sought "the original loan application, income and expense and other papers relating to [his] loan application form for [his] records." He made the same request again on 19th June 2014. I interpolate I am uncertain why the bank did not provide a copy of the documents he requested.
On 2nd August 2014, he went to the Ombudsman complaining about the bank's failure to provide the requested papers. He wrote: 
These papers are critical for me to see as I suspect fraudulent loan activities by the Bank and they are no doubt trying to cover up this fact by not showing me what could be incriminating evidence to them.
Mr Pytellek tendered a Notice to Admit Facts filed and served on 19th March 2015 and the bank's notice disputing the facts. The "facts" sought to be admitted are a mish-mash of the circumstances I have just recounted, and conclusions of mixed fact and law which the borrower sees as the foundation of his case. They do not bear recitation, and in any event, the bank disputed each and all of them.
The affidavit verifying the Amended Defence of 8th July 2005 again recites many of the same facts I have sought to summarise. It also sets out in detail what the borrower says about his "unconscionability" case based on an assertion of "asset lending". Few facts are stated. He quotes from a newspaper article about other unspecified cases and asserts that in "all cases (of asset lending) the courts have ordered lenders to fully extinguish mortgages within 30 days". He states without disclosing any facts which might support it, that his income "could never have supported a $840,000 loan at an interest rate around 8 per cent". If the bank had exercised "appropriate due diligence" it would have found this out. No evidence is given of any other facts in support of this case, and none are stated.

Decision on strike out application
I am satisfied that the Amended Defence of 8th July 2015 should be struck out as disclosing no reasonable defence. In every respect the borrower's various defences seemed to be based upon a complete misunderstanding of the law of mortgages, possibly derived from what he believes to be the law in some parts of the United States, and informed by information obtained from unreliable sources.
In expressing this conclusion, I appreciate that I am dealing with an interlocutory application to strike out a defence. There has been no trial nor has the bank applied for summary judgment. This is not the occasion for final fact-finding.
Where, as here, the ground for striking out the defence is its failure to disclose a reasonable defence, the applicable test is the General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways  <case>; [112 CLR 125]; 16 BPR 31at [3]; see also Ward JA at [66] - [68]. Here the question must be whether the defences which are actually pleaded, on the evidence led under r. 14.28(2), and assuming the material facts (if any) actually averred can be proved, have a real, not fanciful prospect of success. As there is no question of the entry of summary judgment the bank will establish that the pleading discloses no reasonable defence if it demonstrates that the outcome of the litigation, on the pleadings as they stand, is so certain that it would be an abuse of process to permit the action to proceed to a full hearing on the merits.
As I have said, I am satisfied that the bank has discharged this heavy onus. However, as I will show, the Amended Defence, in many respects, does not comply with the requirements of the Rules.
I am satisfied to the requisite degree of the following: * (a) The "privity of contract" defence as pleaded has no real prospect of success. The evidence I have recounted above demonstrates to a high degree of certainty that the mortgage and loan agreement as assets of St George Bank Limited were transferred to the bank by operation of <case> [Financial Sector (Business Transfer and Group Restructure) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fstagra1999593/) when the certificate of 18th February 2010 came into force on 1st March 2010.
* (b) The idea that St George Bank had already sold those assets by way of securitisation prior to 1st March 2010 has not been shown to be other than a product of the borrower's ruminations on what he believes, or may have read about, the "sub-prime crisis" in the United States as a precipitant of the GFC. There is nothing in the material before me suggesting that evidence will be available at a final hearing which, if accepted, is capable of proving that securitisation of the mortgage and loan agreement has occurred. There is no evidence or material from which I could infer that evidence of a legal assignment, as he asserts occurred as part of that process, will be available to be led at any trial. Had legal assignment occurred, the borrower would have received notice and would therefore know who the assignee was to identify it (it is overwhelmingly likely it would be a corporation) for the purpose of his defence. Even assuming for the purpose of the argument that the process of securitisation was more likely to have occurred by way of equitable assignment, legal title would remain with the bank and the borrower would be liable to it on his obligations under the loan agreement and mortgage. As I have said, this argument, on the evidence before me, does not rise above an entirely ill-founded suspicion on the part of the borrower. Moreover apart from the bare assertion, in various ways, of securitisation no material facts are pleaded showing how this was said to have occurred, and why this meant his obligations were discharged.
* (c) The argument that the transaction was not a loan secured by a mortgage but rather consideration for the purchase by the bank of the "original completed bona fide wet ink signature loan application" is so fanciful that it may be completely rejected out of hand. A related point, based upon what appears to be his misunderstanding of the law of mortgages, is that the borrower seems to regard his loan application as a document of title. This is not so. The bank's title to sue for possession, and that is the only remedy sought, is its mortgage registered under the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). His original loan application is a preliminary document which does not form part of the loan contract. Moreover, he repeatedly "offered" to pay the total amount due, if only his conditions were met. This itself is a potent evidential admission of what the documents overwhelming demonstrate: this was a loan.
* (d) His delivery of the Promissory Note to the bank could not, of itself, discharge any liability of the borrower under the mortgage and loan agreement. If anything, it created a new obligation to pay had the bank presented the note to him on the date, time and place it specified. The bank's failure to do so discharged him from any liability on the note: ss 89 and [93](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s93.html) Bills of Exchange Act 1909 . It did not discharge him from any liability on the mortgage or loan agreement, the latter of which specified the required mode of payment in terms which did not include by Promissory Note.
* (e) The borrower's main argument going to "unjustness" or "unconscionability" is his "asset lending" claim. As Mr Gor correctly points out, this is a matter upon which the onus lies squarely on the borrower: he who asserts must prove. Lending money without regard to the ability of the borrower to maintain his repayments only because the security is adequate in the event of a default may be one limb of a successful argument that the transaction is unjust within the meaning of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) , or unconscionable: Perpetual Trustee Company Ltd versus Khoshaba  <case>; [14 BPR 26,639] at 227 <case> the question must in any case depend upon "other matters as well". That is to say, the matter will depend upon all the circumstances of the case. The only averments made by the borrower are that this was a "low-doc" loan, at a somewhat higher interest rate than the norm (8 per cent) and if the bank had made proper inquiries, it would have realised that the borrower would have difficulty servicing the loan. There is no pleading of what his financial circumstances actually were at the relevant time or of what particular steps were, or should have been, taken by the bank to ascertain his true position. His pleading in this regard completely falls short of the requirements of the rules that all material facts necessary to make good the case at trial must be summarised in the pleading: r 14.7. And this part of the defence must be struck out as inadequate on that basis alone. However, I allow myself the additional comment that it is doubtful whether any such case is even "pleadable". He at all times maintained his willingness and ability to pay the total amount due; he provided a Promissory Note in the sum of $1 million, which presumably he was prepared to honour if it was presented as specified; and on the evidence before the court he frequently makes trips overseas to Europe and the United States of America for the purposes of his business. However, obviously, this is not the occasion for coming to any conclusions about that matter. The allegations about the bank's failure to mediate or provide documents after his default do not go to the bank's title.
* (f) The allegation that the mortgage is "fraudulent" is entirely baseless. More pertinently the pleading is completely devoid of the high level of specificity required of a party raising fraud: r 14.14. The allegations of breaches of federal criminal laws are entirely irrelevant, and for that reason "embarrassing".
I deal with the question of "vexation" raised by the Amended Defence when I deal with the borrower's motion for summary dismissal.
The Amended Defence of 8th July 2015 must be struck out. Given the history of the matter which includes a number of "iterations" of the defence filed without leave, and the apparent baselessness of the defences raised so far, I think it appropriate to accede to the bank's application that the borrower should not be permitted to file a further defence, without the leave of a judge first obtained.
Naturally, when a borrower raises questions of unjustness or other forms of unconscionability, a court will be slow to shut him out. As Sheller JA explained in Horrobin versus Australia & New Zealand Banking Group [(1996) 40 NSWLR 89], if such a case is made good, it undermines the bank's title to sue for possession (see p 100). At least on a summary judgment application, the court will be astute to avoid shutting a borrower out from a trial on that issue, provided, as Macfarlan JA pointed out in O'Brien, the borrower demonstrates a real, not fanciful, prospect of success.

The borrower's application for summary dismissal
As I have already observed, an applicant for summary judgment, or dismissal, is required to demonstrate that the outcome of the litigation is so certain that it would be an abuse of the processes of the court to require the action to proceed to a full hearing on the merits. This is another way of stating the "plain and obvious" test derived from Dey. 
The borrower has completely failed to discharge this heavy onus. The bank's evidence which I have recounted above satisfies me that it has a very strongly arguable case for possession. This finding in my view also takes care of the "defence" that the proceedings are "vexatious".

The costs of 23rd May 2015
The bank sought the costs of the aborted hearing before Schmidt J on 23rd May 2015, when these motions were last listed for hearing. The matter was adjourned on that day in compliance with the provisions of <case> [Judiciary Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/). I accept the bank's argument that although the court was required by federal law to adjourn the proceedings until notice had been given to the Attorneys General as required, the borrower's "constitutional" argument is now seen to be so clearly untenable that he should pay the costs thrown away by what was in effect an exercise in futility.
My orders are: * (1) The defendant's notice of motion filed on 13th March 2015 (as amended on 1st May 2015) seeking summary dismissal of the proceedings is dismissed.
* (2) The defendant's notice of motion filed on 17th April 2015 to transfer the proceedings to the Federal Court of Australia is dismissed; * (3) Under r 14.28 [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/), the Amended Defence dated 6th July 2015, filed on 8th July 2015 (and, to the extent necessary, all former editions of the defence) are struck out; * (4) No further defence is to be filed in the registry without the prior leave of a judge of this court obtained by motion on notice; * (5) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of each of these applications including the costs thrown away by reason of their adjournment on 23rd May 2015.
 * * * 
