

D R Lewis versus G H Varley P/L and Westham Dredging Co P/L [1996] NSWSC 495 (18 October 1996) 
DONALD RAYMOND LEWIS versus G.H. VARLEY P/L & WESTHAM DREDGING COMPANY P/L 
N300022/94 
Friday 18 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - ELECTRIC SHOCK WHILST USING EMPLOYER'S WELDER ON BOARD SHIP UNDERGOING REFIT - AGREED APPORTIONMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY - MODIFIED AND UNMODIFIED COMMON LAW DAMAGES ASSESSED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 3 January 1993 the plaintiff was working for the first defendant as a boilermaker/welder. He was using a Trans MIG 500 welding unit supplied by it which had been brought on board the dredge W.H. Resolution. The second defendant owned that vessel. The intended task on that day was the removal and replacement of "wear plates" which are, in effect, shields against which dredged material is sprayed and they buffer against pressure being applied directly to the hull of the vessel. 
The welding unit was sited upon rubber wheels on a companionway running above the upper deck of the ship. It was connected to ships power by a 60 metre extension lead. Apparently the plug at the end of the extension was incompatible with the socket in the forecastle to which connection needed to be made and the ship's electrician had fabricated a "pony tail" to provide a link for current delivery.

The plaintiff turned on the welding unit and leaned down to make an aural check that the fan within the housing was functioning. He placed one hand on a metal handle attached to the welder and the other on the ship's rail. His body thus completed a circuit and he suffered electrocution. He broke the circuit by kicking himself free against the housing of the welder.

It is unnecessary to investigate the reason for this occurrence at length.
Counsel for each of the defendants explicitly elected not to make submissions on liability and it was agreed that any damages payable to the plaintiff should be apportioned between them as to seventy five percent against the first defendant and twenty five percent against the second defendant. Counsel for the plaintiff participated in this agreement and accepted that apportionment for the purposes of [s
Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).

The evidence showed that each defendant had obtained expert opinion and the evidence of Mr Lang a consulting electrical engineer retained by the plaintiff was given in the context of exchanges of information derived from reports by all investigators. It suffices, in the light of the concessions for the purpose of litigation just mentioned, to note that Mr Lang opined that there were three possible reasons for the plaintiff sustaining electric shock.
First, that the rail of the ship had become electrified. He discounted this proposition. Second, that the welder induced and permitted leakage of current because of the accumulation of detritus within it and third, that there was a problem with earth discontinuity caused by one or both of the connections from the welder lead to the power source. The probable cause was to be found in the second or third postulation or in a combination of them.

Obviously the plaintiff would not have been shocked if the current supply was intercepted before it reached him and his body had not provided itself as a conductor for flow. The ship's generated power supply was being used and the functional apparatus included fuses and warning lights on a switchboard but did not include earth leakage circuit breakers. Devices such as these have been in common use for the last twenty years. By the same token there are available at modest cost and in common use over the same period, portable earth leakage circuit breakers which prudently should have been provided and used where lengthy extension cabling runs between the power source and the powered implement.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff sustained electric shock as a result of the concurrent negligence of both the defendants. It was not suggested that he should be found guilty of contributory negligence and I will therefore apply the agreed apportionment of responsibility between the defendants.

The ship's generator supplied power at 415 volts but as the plaintiff's contact was with material enlivened by leakage it was estimated that he received something in the vicinity of 175 volts which even at that level represented an exposure of hazardous magnitude. Although it remained unstated,
I infer that reception of 415 volts would probably have been fatal.

The plaintiff is a single man born on 27 November 1958 and was therefore aged thirty four when injured and he is now thirty seven. He comes from a large family and he and his siblings were well educated and achieved suitable employment and stations in life. He was a qualified boilermaker/welder who had developed special skills for working in confined and hazardous places as well as performing mirror welding. These skills equipped him particularly well for work in shipbuilding and refit. Prior to the accident he was in robust health.
He was fit enough to engage in pursuits such as cycle road racing and 16 foot skiff sailing.

He was employed by the first defendant on a casual basis. This status returned higher wage for hours worked but of course lacked some of the benefits of permanent employment, importantly amongst these, continuity. A casual boilermaker/welder would be engaged for the extent of the requirement for that trade in a particular project. This pattern of employment led to some significant breaks but these were no doubt tolerable to the plaintiff given his single status and chosen lifestyle. I will return to this aspect when dealing with economic loss as an ingredient of damage.

After the incident the plaintiff was taken by ambulance to the John Hunter
Hospital. He did not lose consciousness and after detaching himself he was able to warn others against touching the "live" welder. He had burns to the left hand. He was seen by a plastic surgeon but no skin graft was required and his injuries were treated by dressing and replacement of it. He has some minor residual scarring. He sustained crush fractures of the thoracic vertebrae.
These have healed and there does not appear to have been any disc involvement.
The plaintiff complains of shoulder symptoms. I accept that he first thought that these were referred pains from the, (by then diagnosed) thoracic fractures. A final conclusion cannot be reached. Ultrasound investigation in
July 1994 and in 1995 showed signs of sub-acromial impingement and suggested a small supraspinatus lesion. Arthroscopy was indicated but has not yet been undertaken. Dr Sonnabend reported that if this provisional view were correct - and capsulolabral or bicipital pathology were excluded - cuff decompression was indicated. I take the latter as a probable diagnosis. I accept Dr
Sonnabend's observation of the sphincter, that there was slight wasting but no apparent instability and very slight global restriction of range. The lastmentioned would contrast with the plaintiff's demonstration in court that he could raise his arm laterally only to the horizontal plane.

Although I accept that the plaintiff has shoulder symptoms they are only modest contributors to any disability most of which, as I shall later elaborate, I find to be founded in emotional reaction to the accident.

There is a discrete complaint of binaural tinnitus. The plaintiff has been seen by Doctors Fernandez and Williamsz who are described as ear nose and throat specialists. Reports from neither were tendered but a series of documents from Ms MacSween, an audiologist, were. She wrote that the tinnitus experienced by the plaintiff was genuine and "appears" to be the result of his electrocution. Her theory was that it caused an acute, extreme change in blood pressure which aggravated an underlying cochlear damage (itself most likely having been earlier noise induced) to the point of inspiring the tinnitus. In the absence of contradiction, I accept Ms MacSween's hypothesis as I accept the plaintiff's complaints of symptoms. I see no reason for prospective remission and I therefore find that the plaintiff has in this regard a significant permanent deficit.

Possibly associated indirectly with the foregoing, the plaintiff was referred for some dental treatment. The report of Mr Matthews of 26 July 1994 is pertinent. I accept that probably as a result of severe clenching of the teeth in the incident the plaintiff did some damage to teeth which manifested in the emergence of craze lines but no tooth fracture. The tenderness and soreness resolved and the plaintiff did not suggest that he was consciously troubled by crazing of the enamel surfaces of his teeth.

The plaintiff tendered a series of reports from a Dr Hopcroft a practitioner in Taree whose stationery describes him as MB BS (Hons), FRCS (Edin), General
Surgeon (Orthopaedics). His examinations were conducted at the request of the plaintiff's solicitors. His opinion supports the probable right shoulder rotator cuff lesion. However, his gloomy assessments and prognostications of the consequences of the thoracic fractures are not accepted. They do not conform with the essential minor nature of the injuries nor with the tenor and content of the overwhelming and more moderate opinion from other examiners which I prefer.

I turn to what, for want of any other convenient economical description, I have referred to as the plaintiff's emotional response. There was vigorous contest throughout the trial and in counsel's addresses about the quality of medical support for these claims in particular - which is not to say that other aspects of claim stood undisputed. Counsel for the defendant pointed to the absence of material from several of the nominated treating attendants scheduled in Exhibit B. Useful though Jones versus Dunkel inference may be, it remains necessary to see if an acceptable conclusion can be derived from evidence which I do have. Regrettably I can find no coordinated sources which provide this in a comprehensive fashion.

In lay terms the effect of the plaintiff's evidence - supported to an extent by Mr Hadley - is that the accident provoked a species of "nervous breakdown".
The expression is mine and it is not extracted verbatim from any testimony.
The plaintiff claims a phobia for electricity. To the extent that it is practical, he seeks to avoid using electrical appliances. He claims loss of ability in short term memory and concentration to which are added feelings of anxiety. His personality is said to have changed whereby he now manifests a previously undisplayed aggression. He has presented on occasions as depressed.
He has not worked and I find that he has not made any real attempt to work since the accident.

Just under three months after the occurrence (on 31 March 1993) the plaintiff was referred by Dr Harvey, a general practitioner in his local practice, to Dr
Helme a psychiatrist whose rooms are in Toronto. Concerning symptoms of anxiety and fear (about future health and ability to work) Dr Helme reported that these appeared to be direct results of the electrical incident and hoped that they would abate during rehabilitation. Given a geographic handicap, he did not make further appointments to see the plaintiff but I infer that he would have but for that obstacle.

On 3 May 1993 Dr White, a psychiatrist in Newcastle, saw the plaintiff it would seem at the request of the first defendant's insurer. I observe that he assumed that the plaintiff received a maximum of 48 volts. This I find to be a gross underestimate. As I read his report it is focussed upon the incongruity of symptoms and their basis in physical deficit. Although Dr White reports on the exchanges between himself and the patient, including references made to anxiety and sleep disorder, he does not appear to have investigated the question of phobia nor other deficits. Of course the accident was then recent and some manifestations may not immediately emerge or be able to be identified. The burden of Dr White's report seems to be his statement that the patient himself should provide a formal diagnosis with medical evidence to explain and attribute his disability. I find the approach difficult to appreciate as if this could be done, by the plaintiff himself, a psychiatric opinion would appear to be surplus. I derive no assistance from this evidence.

In October 1993 the plaintiff's solicitors arranged for Mr Goard to undertake a psychological assessment. There is no evidence that these tests were administered to assist in clinical treatment. Mr Goard commenced with the proposition that severe electrical shock can cause brain damage and I accept that as a hypothesis. The relevant issue is whether that is something which happened to the plaintiff. In oral testimony Mr Goard located "brain damage" at the junction of the brain stem and the main mass. This damage he predicted would not be detectable by scanning or objective investigations. I did not understand him to purport to explain the mechanics whereby this particular physical injury was sustained and I understood his opinion to be entirely derivative from the tests which he undertook supplemented by subjective contributions of history from the plaintiff.

I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has sustained brain damage still less "a significant" but undemonstrable degree of it. I adopt the criticism of Mr
Goard's diagnosis articulated by Dr Segelov when he commented in these terms: "Psychological assessment on 28/10/93 by Mr William Goard commenced with the statement `as severe electrical shock can cause neurological damage, including brain damage'. Mr Goard decided the patient needed comprehensive assessment including `diagnostic tests for brain damage'. In administering a series of tests the comment was made that "an individual's performance in some of these sub-tests can be lowered by adverse emotional factors such as anxiety or depression by brain damage, or both.' Good performance in some of the tests and poor performance in others was said by Mr Goard to be conclusive evidence of brain damage. However the report goes on to say `three tests of his emotional state indicate he has severe emotional problems'. Again the report stated `Mr Lewis found undertaking these tests, which probed deeply into his emotional state, increasingly unsettling. As a result he tended to become increasingly confused, convoluted and, at times, quite obfuscated in his expression.' Although Mr Goard had earlier noted that the results of the tests could be lowered by adverse emotional factors, he appeared to opt for a diagnosis of `significant degree of brain damage', a diagnosis which I feel is quite out of keeping with the fact that the patient was not rendered unconscious at the time of the electric shock, did not suffer any period of hypoxia due to cardiac or respiratory arrest, and required only overnight observation in hospital. The pathway for the electric shock was different to that usually seen in persons struck by lightning where the current passes through the head and trunk to the lower limbs and to the ground. In such cases it is not uncommon to sustain loss of consciousness and possible cardiac arrest. In this particular case the only basis for a diagnosis of brain damage appears to be the results of certain psychological tests carried out by Mr
Goard, the conclusions derived from which, I believe, are not substantiated by the clinical progress of the patient." 
The repeated administration of tests in January 1995 by Mr Goard does not vary the unacceptable quality of his conclusions. Mr Goard confirmed his disagreement with the suggestion by Dr Lambeth (a psychiatrist) that the plaintiff be given "cognitive restructuring" but Mr Goard postulated that the plaintiff needed "much more intensive and indepth treatment" of an undisclosed content. The aim would be to dispose of a "considerable fund of held-in aggression". The regime proposed is that two sessions per week (at $140 to $150 per hourly session) be conducted over a period of two to five years. The plaintiff will remain (in Mr Goard's opinion) permanently unemployable but his quality of life - without the treatment - will never improve. I reject the contention that this regime of treatment is reasonably required to ameliorate any of the consequences of tort.

Mr Goard's intelligence scale testing placed the plaintiff in the average range although he advances a theory that the inborn intelligence had been superior.

The plaintiff has been seeing Dr Lambeth at Warners Bay. He was originally apparently retained for medico legal report but perceived a need for treatment and this was thereafter appropriately arranged with him through the intervention of a general practitioner. I find nothing inherently sinister in that order of events. Dr Lambeth diagnoses a chronic Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder. That indefinite label is elaborated in the plaintiff's case in these terms: "This is a disorder which comes on when a person has experienced an event or events considered to be outside the range of usual human experience and would be distressing to almost anyone. Being the victim of electrocution is one such event. As a result of this, Mr Lewis experiences a recurrence of the event. In other words, Mr Lewis re-experiences the event as evidenced by his dreams of electricity, and becoming distressed when reminded of the event. He then tends to withdraw to some extent displaying avoidance behaviour, detachment and estrangement from others, a decreased interest in most things, and a bleak outlook on the future, together with a quite significant degree of depression.
In addition to all this, he is in a state of hyperarousal as evidenced by his sleep disorder, his irritability, poor concentration, hypervigilance, and exaggerated startle response." 
As at May 1994 Dr Lambeth suggested three things: medication, rehabilitation training and cognitive restructuring by an experienced therapist. Although he suggested that these would not restore the plaintiff to his pre-accident condition he thought that those measures would "overcome much of his disability".

When giving evidence Dr Lambeth qualified his report and testified that although he had given the plaintiff medication and psychotherapy he had not responded to this treatment. So far as therapy was concerned, he had twice recommended that the plaintiff be referred to Dr Anthony Nicholas (a psychologist) whom he thought would be better qualified to assess the benefit of behavioural treatment. Even by the time of trial, Dr Lambeth was uninformed as to whether this had occurred. The evidence is that the plaintiff has seen
Dr Nicholas three times and that a fourth consultation did not occur only because of a transport difficulty. There is nothing from Dr Nicholas in the evidence. I infer from the repeat visits that assessment has been made and that treatment is being undertaken. I cannot know Dr Nicholas' opinion but in the context of this case I do draw the inference that evidence by him would be unlikely to advance any cause for larger damages advocated on behalf of the plaintiff. I emphasize that this is of course far from a determination that the plaintiff is on a path to complete cure.

Putting together the disparate material at my disposal I find that the probability is the plaintiff does suffer from a form of post traumatic stress disorder. I do not consider this will permanently incapacitate him from all the pleasures of life or from gainful employment but it will handicap him from the continued fulfilment of the life style which he earlier enjoyed. Although later abandoned by its proponent, I would estimate the probable situation as formulated by Dr Lambeth in 1994 namely that with medication, rehabilitation and therapy the plaintiff will overcome much of his disability. Residually, I find he will not overcome his phobia of electricity. It may become less intense in time but I do not anticipate that it will disappear. I expect that he will indefinitely exhibit traits of anxiety, aggression, faulty memory, disturbed concentration and depression. All these will not manifest concurrently always and the plaintiff will, as I have said, be handicapped as opposed to disabled. I have earlier referred to the permanency of tinnitus.
The consequences of injury and handicap can conveniently be dealt with as the ingredients of damage are assessed.

In short summary, these are the consequences of the electric shock. The plaintiff had crush fractures to thoracic vertebrae 5-6 and an injury to his right shoulder, probably a rotator cuff lesion. There is mention of suggested aggravation of cervical level degeneration but to the extent that this occurred I am unpersuaded that there was any significant injury to the neck in the fall after the electrocution. The plaintiff will permanently suffer the ear symptoms and he will have the phobia and other residua which I have just described.

The plaintiff can only recover modified common law damages from the first defendant by reason of the restrictions imposed by the [Workers Compensation
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) but, save the application of [s
Z](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html), the damages against the second defendant are not so restricted. Most of the ingredients will be the same but I must necessarily make two separate assessments of damages and it is convenient first to assess damages payable by the first defendant.

The out of pocket expenses are agreed in a calculated sum of $13,566.16 but there is dispute as to the inclusion of two items, a bill from Dr Sonnabend for $128 and the cost of a CT scan on 24 June 1996 at $1,155. On balance I conclude that these expenses were reasonably incurred as treatment even if in a somewhat subordinate context and I propose to include in the damages the computed amount. It is agreed that the plaintiff's damages should include $3,404.30 to avoid the detriment identified by the High Court in Fox versus Wood.

There is a minor matter of past economic loss which it is convenient to deal with separately. The plaintiff had an interest in oyster farming and, before the accident, he had purchased a lease. He had not by the time of the accident undertaken a harvest. Exhibit N includes a projection from a local chartered accountant of the profit of the harvest of the oysters which were growing at the time the plaintiff become incapacitated from tending to them. I am satisfied that the injuries to the plaintiff inhibited the plaintiff from practical operation as an oyster farmer but I am not satisfied that the projection represents a reasonable loss caused by the tort nor am I persuaded that the whole of the loss did not involve a considerable contribution from "heat losses" which affected oyster farmers in the area generally. I note the use of the word "tremendous" to describe the local industry losses in February
I am persuaded that the plaintiff has proved likely economic detriment to the extent that it will do justice between the parties if I include a sum of $4,000 for the chance of a profitable crop.

I am satisfied that on balance the plaintiff has remained unemployed since the accident to date as a consequence of the accident and its after effects.
Exhibit L conveniently schedules and averages amounts earned by comparable employees during the relevant period (terminating at the hearing on 4
September 1996). It was argued for the defendants that the selected employees were not precisely comparable with the plaintiff in terms of their permanency of employment and previous work patterns. I agree that this is so but I consider that the overall figures provide a useful basis for a perception of the real interference with earning capacity that I find the plaintiff has sustained and the loss of which that incapacity has been productive. The precisely calculated figure postulates a loss of $94,605.58. I use this figure as a guide. I am conscious of my earlier observation that it was the plaintiff's choice to work on an intermittent or casual basis. This paid him a greater rate for actual performance but necessarily led to gaps in employment.
I think it probable that as the plaintiff grew older the attractions of permanent employment might have gained sway with him but I do not think that this would have occurred up to the present time. I assess the plaintiff's economic loss to date at $75,000 (excluding the discrete loss attributable to the failed oyster crop).

The plaintiff claims interest upon this element of damage insofar as it exceeds subventions already received from relevant other sources. These figures can be extracted from Exhibit L and are represented by worker's compensation payments of $12,891.85 and social security payments of $29,762.04 being a total of $42,653.89. The difference between this sum and my total award for economic loss to date is $36,346.11.

I adopt the submission that an appropriate rate to apply over the period of .5 years is 7 percent and I am constrained by statute to make a 25 percent reduction to the final calculation (see [s151M(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151m.html) [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/)). The resultant figure is $6,679 and I include that sum in my assessment.

From Exhibit M I extract and use as a guide a present weekly loss representing the plaintiff's whole earning capacity of $532.50 nett per week. In the light of my findings as to the plaintiff's medical condition and the prospect of some amelioration of his difficulties by appropriate treatment I propose to award the plaintiff the sum of $224,950 for this ingredient of damage. The processes by which I have assessed this sum are as follows. I postulate a period of five years from the present during which the plaintiff should regain and come to the point of probable utilization of some residual earning capacity. At the authorized discount rate a loss of $532.50 over that period of five years amounts to $123,273. For the balance of the plaintiff's working life (which I assess to his sixty fifth year), that is to say a further twenty three years after the expiry of five years, I use a weekly loss of $250 as a guide. A loss of $250 per week deferred for five years but extending over the succeeding twenty three years capitalizes on the authorized table at $141,374.
The total of the ingredients which I have specified is $264,647. In this case
I regard it as appropriate to discount that calculation by 15 percent in order to allow for preponderance of adverse over beneficial vicissitudes. The reduction of the figure which I have mentioned by that factor produces an ingredient of $224,950.

I do not suggest that I have powers of clairvoyance to predict the plaintiff will remain totally unemployed for the next five years and then will lose the amount which I have specified over the ensuing twenty three years. I indicate those calculations to reveal a process of reasoning whereby I have determined the figure as appropriate for what I regard as a significant interference with the plaintiff's earning capacity which is likely to be productive of economic loss over the balance of his working life.

The final ingredient of damage is for non economic loss. It is agreed between the parties that the applicable figure to reflect a most extreme case is $212,750. Proportioning the plaintiff's loss to the hypothetical category of a most extreme case is necessarily a matter of impression. Although I have estimated that the plaintiff's economic damage is considerable, his residual capacity to enjoy life will be enhanced once appropriate treatment is undertaken and the comparative exercise which is implicit in assessing damages for this ingredient brings me to the conclusion that an award calculated as 40 percent of that referrable to a most extreme case namely $85,100 represents an appropriate assessment of the plaintiff's non economic loss.

The final ingredient to be included in the plaintiff's assessment of damages against the first defendant is a sum to indemnify the plaintiff for the costs of future treatment.

A written submission which remains with the papers sets out the way that the plaintiff calculates an ingredient of damage at $65,192.50. The single largest contributor to this sum is the future cost of some years of psychotherapy by
Mr Goard. In the light of what is now known and ought to be known by the plaintiff I reject this as a reasonable response to tort induced need. The ingredients of the amounts claimed are as follows. The costs of future surgery at $3,540. I think it is likely that this procedure will at some stage by undertaken although not immediately. The next ingredient is for psychiatric and psychological treatment claimed at $39,585. I have already mentioned my finding concerning the psychological treatment. On the other hand, the uncosted visits to Dr Nicholas should be taken into account together with some supervisory consultations of Dr Lambeth. The other ingredients claimed are to allow for a visit to the general practitioner once every two months at $3,676.40: one visit annually to a specialist totalling $1,747.20; two regimes of physiotherapy at six treatments per regime at $8,099 and the provision of pharmaceutical expenses, Panadeine (or alternative) and Temazepam at $8,544.90. Removing the substantial element of the unreasonable and unnecessary extended treatment proposed by Mr Goard by way of psychotherapy and allowing for the delay in undertaking surgery and the probability that the plaintiff's need for medication will decrease as his perception of symptoms fades with proper beneficial treatment I have come to the conclusion that an inclusion of $35,000 for future medical expenses is appropriate in all the circumstances.

For ease of reference I tabulate the ingredients abovementioned: 
Out of pocket expenses  $13,566.16  
Fox versus Wood  $3,404.30  
Past economic loss as a boilermaker  $75,000.0  
Past economic loss as an oyster farmer  $4,000.00  
Interest on the award for past economic loss allowing for total subventions already received  $6,679.00  
Future economic loss  $224,950.0  
Non economic loss  $85,100.0  
Future medical and allied expenses  $35,000.0 $447,699.46  
It is agreed between the parties that the defence of payment relevant to worker's compensation entitlement provided to the plaintiff has been sustained to the extent of $20,714.05. Accordingly the resultant potential figure for entire modified common law damages against the first defendant is $426,985.41.

The agreement between all the parties that the plaintiff should recover judgment for 75 percent of damages as thereby assessed translates into a sum of $320,239.05.

Accordingly I propose to enter judgment for the plaintiff against the first defendant for $320,240.

I turn to assess the ingredients of damage for which judgment should be entered against the second defendant. The ingredients of damage will be the same with the exception that general damages will be calculated other than by reference to proportioning against a most extreme case and the award of interest on the difference between the ingredient of past economic loss and subventions received will not be reduced in accordance with the requirement of the [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). The figure for interest should be increased to $8,905. My assessment of appropriate common law damages, independent of the requirements of the statute when assessing this ingredient against the employer, would be that general damages ought lie in the appropriate range of $80,000 to $90,000 and I see no reason in the circumstances why I should not re-adopt the figure for non economic loss of $85,100. When I say that I re-adopt the figure I do not intend to convey that I am awarding damages in accordance with the statute but it is selected as a sum conformably within the appropriate range. The final distinction is, of course, that the second defendant cannot plead payment of worker's compensation entitlement to the plaintiff.

Factoring those variations into the tabulated ingredients of damage, that is to say substituting $8,905 for $6,679 interest and omitting the reduction for worker's compensation payment, a total assessed damage of $449,925.46 emerges.

In accordance with the agreed apportionment between the defendants there should therefore be entered against the second defendant judgment for $112,480.

I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff against the first defendant for $320,240. I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff against the second defendant for $112,480. It is noted that the judgments are independent of each other and the plaintiff is entitled to recover the accumulation of those amounts.

I order the defendants to pay the plaintiff's costs of action. I assume that it is intended that those costs will be paid in accordance with the agreed apportionment but in any event I grant liberty to any party to apply in respect of any corrections to calculations or in relation to costs upon 48 hours notice to the other parties. This liberty to apply extends for 28 days from this date.
 * * * 
