

Regina versus Tan Do Matter No 60032/97 [1997] NSWSC 180 (7 May 1997) 
Regina versus Tan Do /97 May 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Grove J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown Appeal. Appeal from District Court (Ford DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60032/97 
DELIVERED: Wednesday 7 May 1997 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday 7 May 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus TAN DO 
JUDGMENT OF: Gleeson CJ, Grove J, Sperling J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - M Latham 
RESPONDENT - I S Lloyd QC 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - S E O'Connor 
RESPONDENT - Trevor Nyman & Company 
RESULT: Crown appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SENTENCE - ACCESSORY AFTER THE FACT TO MURDER -
DISCUSSION OF WIDE RANGE OF CULPABILITY - PARTICULAR FACTS - ABSENCE OF ACTIVE
INVOLVEMENT - FAVOURABLE SUBJECTIVE ASPECTS - IMPRISONMENT TO BE SERVED BY
PERIODIC DETENTION WITHIN RANGE 
NO OF PAGES: 11 
REGINA versus TAN DO 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Grove J to give the first judgment.

GROVE J: This is an appeal by the Crown pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act asserting that sentences imposed by his Honour Judge Ford in the Campbelltown District Court on Monday 16 December 1996 were inadequate. 
The principles to be applied in such an appeal are well established and there is no need for recitation: Griffiths versus The Queen 1977 137 CLR 293; Everett v The Queen <case>; [1994 181 CLR 295.] 
The respondent was presented upon two counts of being an accessory after the fact to murder. The charges related to the same event and the difference in the counts related to the identities of the respective alleged principal offenders. It was conceded by the Crown Prosecutor that he would not be in a position to prove the offence of the offender named in the second count and a plea of not guilty was accepted. The respondent pleaded guilty to the first count. He was further charged on a third count with receiving stolen property, namely the sum of $1500 to which he also pleaded guilty.

On 21 December 1995 three men committed an armed robbery at a video store in
Penshurst. Firearms were presented against the operators of the store and against customers, some of whom were required to lie on the floor while the robbery was undertaken. One of the owners Mr Angelo Cusumano became involved in a struggle with one of the felons (Ross) Aaron Robinson whose firearm discharged and killed Mr Cusumano.

It is not suggested that the respondent had any foreknowledge of this crime or its intendment. Two of the offenders are alleged to be Aaron Robinson and his brother Seldon. The respondent knew Aaron Robinson through mutual friends and their acquaintance extended back approximately five years. Coincidentally, however, they later became students in the same year in the same course at the
University of Technology and their association thus became closer. There was evidence that by December 1995 they had completed their third year of enrolment although Aaron Robinson was becoming less than conscientious about his course. His parents encouraged friendship with the respondent whose apparently greater diligence they no doubt hoped would inspire their son.

About a week after the crime Aaron Robinson came to the respondent and told him of his involvement although his expression was that he had done a robbery rather than a murder. The slaying of Mr Cusumano was, however, common knowledge between them. The respondent's observation was that his friend was shaking, his eyes were teary and he seemed emotional and pale. Robinson expressed regret and mentioned that his brother was contemplating suicide. He asked the respondent to provide him with accommodation to which request he acceded. He also asked the respondent to agree to provide him with an alibi to the effect that they had been attending a movie (Toy Story) at the time of the offence. The respondent expressed his agreement to this although nothing was done in relation to providing Robinson with this alibi. Indeed by the time the respondent was spoken to by police Robinson had confessed his involvement in the crime to them. The respondent gave sworn evidence that although he told his friend that he would provide him with the alibi it was never his intention so to do. The other aspect of the respondent's involvement was to retain the sum of $1500 on his behalf. Robinson had anticipated that he may require money to draw upon for legal advice in the event that he was arrested and charged.

It should be observed that it was not suggested that the respondent was actively concealing Robinson during the time that he stayed with him. The learned sentencing judge concluded that there were three aspects to the involvement of the respondent in the offence. First his silence upon becoming aware of the commission of the offence by Robinson; second, the agreement (I add, even if accompanied by mental reservation) to provide a simple alibi and third, to receive the money which were proceeds of the robbery and agree to make it available to Robinson when the need arose. The respondent was kept in full time custody for fifteen days after he had been charged and this was taken into account when the sentencing judge imposed concurrent fixed terms of twelve and six months imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention.

It was appropriate to impose concurrent sentences. In a real sense, the offence of receiving charged as the third count was a particular facet of the respondent's accessorial behaviour. In analysing the present matter it is appropriate to pay regard to the major offence.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant Crown can be summarized thus.
The respective prescribed maximum penalties for accessory after the fact to murder and receiving are twenty five and ten years penal servitude respectively.
A sentence must reflect objective seriousness; deterrence and denunciation. A sentence served by way of periodic detention has a strong element of leniency built into it and is outwardly less severe in its denunciation.
The sentencing judge was in error in finding that the respondent was "quite frank" with the police.
The sentencing judge gave too much weight to the subjective effect of full time sentence upon the respondent's university studies and the benefit that he should receive from doing voluntary work which he undertook after being charged with this offence.
The sentencing judge correctly categorized the offence as "very serious" but the ultimate sentence does not reflect this.

It is convenient first to deal with the specific assertion that his Honour was in error in finding that the respondent had been quite frank. It is pointed out that it was only after the police revealed to the respondent that Robinson had confessed that his own interaction with the police merited that description. His Honour's remarks on sentence do not conclusively demonstrate that he made the error ascribed to him. It is true that he did not make observations about the earlier attempts at prevarication but his remark was that upon interrogation by the police he was frank and that is supported by the evidence. His Honour did not say that the respondent was frank from the very first moment that the police spoke to him. I am conscious that this places an arguably too narrow construction upon the word interrogation but, in any event, the issue is peripheral. I am unpersuaded that his Honour has made any appealable error.

The other matters raised on behalf of the Crown advert to general principles about which there can be no debate. The essential question is whether having regard to those principles the sentence is so lenient that, either there must be some undefined error or the sentence is below the minimum of range available from the sound exercise of discretion.

Counsel for the appellant has extracted information about penalty range in statistics kept by the Judicial Commission. Although the figures may be incomplete and it would be risky to rely upon them absolutely there are ten cases recorded of sentences for being an accessory after the fact to murder.
The small number enables direct reference to raw figures. Three convicts were released upon recognizance pursuant to <case> of the Crimes Act; one was released on conditions including supervision and six were sentenced to prison for varying terms.

To this information might be added the appeal in R versus Farroukh, unreported 29
March 1996 where on Crown appeal sentences for accessory after the fact to murder were increased from eighteen months (minimum term six months; additional term twelve months) to two years (minimum term eighteen months; additional term six months). That case (involving two respondents) was considerably distinguishable from the present. The respondents had enabled the murderer to escape justice and actively assisted in attempts to dispose of incriminating evidence. They did not plead guilty and there was material positively suggesting lack of remorse. The judgment in that appeal includes an examination of the criminality involved which is in marked contrast with the present. The three aspects of the involvement of the respondent were considerably distanced from the behaviour of the Farroukhs.

The sentences in the current appeal are classifiable as mild, particularly having regard to the administration of sentences to be served by way of periodic detention: see R versus Hallacoglu [1992 29 NSWLR 67.] Nevertheless I am unable to detect any material error in his Honour's approach. It may be that the weight which he gave to favourable subjective factors affecting the respondent was more liberal than might emanate from others but his conclusion and ultimate sentences lie within the range of the sound exercise of discretion. I reach this conclusion with some fortification from the statistical observation that entirely non custodial sentences have been imposed in four of ten such cases. The sentences imposed upon the respondent are partly custodial and in my view adequately reflect his relatively, although not entirely, passive role in committing this offence.

I propose the Crown appeal be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree. In the case of The Queen versus Farroukh, Court of Criminal Appeal unreported 29 March 1996, this Court examined some of the principles relating to sentencing for the crime of accessory after the fact of murder. It was pointed out in that case, that although the maximum penalty is penal servitude for twenty-five years, there is a wide variation in the possible degrees of moral culpability of persons involved in offences of this kind. 
The present was not a case, as sometimes occurs, where an accessory after the fact has been personally involved in the criminal activity, although the involvement falls short of participation as a principal. Nor is the present a case, as sometimes occurs, where the accessorial involvement in the crime of murder arises from the regular association of the offender with criminal elements. In view of the reference that has been made to Farroukh it should also be added that the present is not a case where the conduct of the offender resulted in the escape from punishment of the murderer.

In my view the sentence imposed in the present case was a lenient sentence, but one that was not outside the range of sentencing discretion available to the trial judge. I agree that the appeal should be dismissed.

SPERLING J: I also agree with the proposed order and with the reasons that have been given by the Chief Justice and Grove J. 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court will be that the appeal is dismissed. * * * 
