

Lawson versus Lawson and Anor Matter No 2245/96 [1997] NSWSC 566 (18 November )
 
Kathleen Adrienne Lawson versus Stephanie Ann Lawson & Anor /96 November 1997 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /96 - KATHLEEN ADRIENNE LAWSON v STEPHANIE ANN LAWSON & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Edna Barbara Rundle late of Belrose, widow, died on 29 February 1992 and by her last will of 26 September 1991 she appointed her nephew Dr A.H. Milson executor, gave three legacies totalling $8000 (to Dr Milson, Valerie Turtill and a grand-daughter Kristen Louise Clark) and gave the residue of her property to two of her grand-daughters, Kathleen Adrienne Lawson and Stephanie Ann Lawson, who are sisters, in equal shares as tenants in common. Dr Milson obtained probate of the will in this Court on 20 July 1992, set about administering the estate and paid the legacies. His inventory of property for probate purposes lists assets, principally a commercial bill with Westpac Banking Corporation but also moneys in a bank and financial institutions, jewellery, a life policy and a debt, some small liabilities and the balance is $50,019.30. However Mrs Rundle's estate also included $22,000 being loans which she had made to Dr Milson. Dr Milson contended that these loans were not assets in the estate because he had in effect been forgiven them by transactions which were perfected by his appointment as executor. 
The plaintiff Ms Kathleen Adrienne Lawson brought the first equity proceedings of 1993 against Dr Milson in which she claimed that Dr Milson was obliged to pay $22,000 to the estate. After a contested hearing that claim succeeded, for reasons in my judgment dated 24 November 1995. Thereafter Dr Milson paid $22,000 from his personal resources into his own hands as executor with a further sum, said to be about six thousand dollars, for interest accrued.

In the first proceedings Dr Milson was named as defendant twice, once in his personal capacity and once as executor and trustee to represent the estate. Dr
Stephanie Lawson (who is now the first defendant) did not join as a plaintiff; she had the opportunity to do so and declined. When those proceedings were commenced she was not a party at all, she was joined as third defendant by amendment, and she and Dr Milson are bound by the result, as they would have been had the result been adverse to her interest. She did not take an active part as a defendant and was not represented at the hearing, although she gave evidence in support of the plaintiff's case.

The residuary beneficiaries are not the equitable owners of the moneys recovered, but their right to due administration and equal distribution of the residue means that, apart from the effect of any costs incurred, they are each directly advantaged to the extent of one-half of the moneys recovered.

Most unfortunately, another dispute in the estate has given rise to these the second equity proceedings, commenced by Ms Kathleen Lawson on 27 May 1996 claiming a declaration that Dr Stephanie Lawson has disclaimed any interest in the estate which arises from the debt and an order that Dr Milson distribute the estate accordingly. Dr Stephanie Lawson defended the proceedings. Dr
Milson, who was represented, has no interest in the outcome and he and his solicitor took a part appropriate for a disinterested executor and trustee. Dr
Milson gave some evidence.

It happens from time to time that equity suits within families about deceased estates take courses which are difficult for anyone outside the family to understand, and the disputes in this estate, on which it is likely that the parties together have spent more than the original estate was worth, are a striking example. It seems that this was an injurious inheritance and the family as a whole would have been better off if Mrs Rundle had not given them anything.

There were no pleadings. This was unfortunate as this is not the kind of simple case without a factual dispute for which a summons is appropriate. The positions taken needed careful definition and the argument suffered for the lack of it. One of the many advantages of pleadings and a defined debate is the opportunity for parties to come to an appreciation of what their litigation involves before they are immersed in the hearing. The plaintiff's case invoked Disclaimer and Equitable Estoppel, which are not simple subjects.
The first defendant made a cross-claim to establish a contrary case to the plaintiff.

In April 1992 Ms Kathleen Lawson spoke to Dr Milson and found that he took the position that he did not have to repay his debt to Mrs Rundle and did not intend to. Her evidence is that she then telephoned Dr Stephanie Lawson and told her of this. Dr Stephanie Lawson said to this effect: "Well, there is nothing we can do about it." Ms Kathleen Lawson said she was outraged and would consult a solicitor immediately and Dr Stephanie Lawson said "I've got no money for solicitors" and said that she was not prepared to join in any action against Dr Milson.

Dr Stephanie Lawson gives an account of this conversation which differs in some circumstances and matters of detail. She says that she suggested waiting until the estate was distributed on Dr Milson's basis, when there would be money to pursue the claim.

Whatever exactly was said, Dr Stephanie Lawson knew before the litigation was commenced that Ms Kathleen Lawson proposed to bring the claim, and declined to join in it. Dr Stephanie Lawson says there was some further communication after the proceedings were commenced and that she declined to take any part in the conduct of the case at that time and had no money to do so.

In November 1992 Ms Kathleen Lawson's solicitor in correspondence asked Dr
Stephanie Lawson to consider whether she wished to join in proceedings against
Dr Milson. Dr Stephanie Lawson was unwilling to join because she was involved in numerous proceedings in the Family Court including proceedings relating to custody of her daughters, did not have the resources to embark on further litigation and was not prepared to incur costs. She needed the money from the estate to meet the costs of proceedings in the Family Court.

Ms Kathleen Lawson says that there was some further conversation on 16 March ; Dr Stephanie Lawson denies that this conversation took place. Ms
Kathleen Lawson says that she told Dr Stephanie Lawson "I am prepared to stake my share in the estate to see that he complies with Gran's wishes" and Dr
Stephanie Lawson replied "I will not join you, I need the money and I'm going to sign a release. You can pursue the matter with Milson without involving expensive solicitors." There was some further reference to a release. In my finding this conversation could well have taken place, and the significant statements attributed to Dr Stephanie Lawson represent what was then the actual position which she would have stated if asked.

Dr Stephanie Lawson conducted correspondence with solicitors representing Dr
Milson about estate matters, in the course of which Dr Milson's solicitor said that he could not proceed to wind up the estate while confronted with a claim.
In a letter of about August 1993 Dr Stephanie Lawson pressed for a distribution of the moneys which were available and Dr Lawson's solicitors asked her to write confirming that she would accept her "rightful share" of the estate to exclude any amount owing by Dr Milson and that it would not be her intention to open the matter again; there would then be a distribution. On September 1993 Dr Lawson wrote to Dr Milson's solicitor and so far as material said "... I am now writing to confirm that I will accept my rightful share of the estate, which excludes `any amount owing by Dr Milson relating to the subject loan'. It is not my intention to open this matter again." She asked for a cheque and a closing statement without delay and on 1 October 1993
Dr Milson's solicitor sent her the larger part of what was distributable according to his view, withholding a small sum because of the threatened litigation and the possibility of incurring costs.

On 24 August 1994 Ms Kathleen Lawson's solicitor wrote to Dr Stephanie Lawson referring to the estate and saying: "You will recall that I act for your sister in her claim against Dr. Milson.

Kate now has to decide whether to continue her claim, having regard to the legal fees which have already been incurred and which would be involved if the matter were pursued further, and the amount of $22,000 which is claimed to be owing by Dr. Milson.

I understand that, by your letter dated 20 September 1993 to Clive A. Potts, the solicitor for your grandmother's estate, you disclaimed any interest in `any amount owing by Dr. Milson relative to the subject loan.' 
Please advise me whether I am correct in giving advice to your sister based on this undersanding." 
Dr Stephanie Lawson wrote across the foot of this letter: "My apologies for the delay and reply - Yes, I did give a disclaimer of the kind described in your letter", signed the note and sent the letter back.

In explaining her handwritten note Dr Stephanie Lawson has stated what she thought of the inquiry she was then answering: "By this I thought was meant: had I signed the release claiming any right to pursue the matter of the money owing to the estate with Dr Milson?" 
In October 1994, solicitors then acting for Dr Milson asked Dr Stephanie
Lawson to execute a draft Deed of Release which would have spelt out in extended language releases of Dr Milson from claims against him personally, and releases of the estate of Mrs Rundle from any claim connected with the claim against Dr Milson. She was not willing to execute this release, did not do so, spoke on the subject to Dr Milson and then asserted that they agreed that she need do nothing further.

In commencing and carrying on the first litigation at her own expense Ms
Kathleen Lawson acted on the understanding that Dr Stephanie Lawson had given a legal release from any claims against Dr Milson or the estate of Mrs Rundle.
She says on oath "on the basis of my sister's replies to me I then decided to pursue the matter, on my own behalf, against Milson. I would not have pursued
Milson if my sister had not led me to believe by her conversations with me and her written reply to my solicitor's letter to her of 24 August 1994 that she had no further interest in the debt due to the estate by Milson then included in the residuary estate." Miss Kathleen Lawson pursued the litigation, and incurred the costs of so doing; the litigation was at least nominally successful, although the evidence shows that to establish that the estate was entitled to $22,000 together with interest she incurred costs of $31,824.20.
She recovered an order for costs against Dr Milson and he has paid $15,000 in respect of costs. There is a dispute about the effect of the communications which led to this payment, Dr Milson claims that he has satisfied his costs liability while Ms Kathleen Lawson seeks to recover some or all of the remaining $16,824.20 which she has incurred. I do not know what the outcome of this dispute may be.

I make some general observations on the parties' conduct.

Dr Stephanie Lawson was under no obligation to any person to bring any proceedings against Dr Milson or to join in proceedings against Dr Milson. On the other hand she was joined a defendant (and I would not have been willing to give a judgment in the first proceedings unless she had been) and she was bound by the result.

It was in no sense a failure on the part of Dr Stephanie Lawson that she did not support the first proceedings by contributing to costs or incurring any liability for costs. If the size of her entitlement is enhanced by a favourable result, her right to that enhancement is not injured by her not having shared in bringing the proceedings.

Dr Stephanie Lawson did not request or invite Ms Kathleen Lawson to take any course of action. There is an unbridgeable gulf between knowing that Ms
Kathleen Lawson was to bring the proceedings, to her own possible advantage, and inviting Ms Kathleen Lawson to bring the proceedings. I see no way in which Dr Stephanie Lawson could have prevented Ms Kathleen Lawson from bringing the proceedings if she had wished to. She exercised no control over what Ms Kathleen Lawson did and was not in a position to do so.

Dr Stephanie Lawson's letter to Dr Milson's solicitor of 20 September 1993 made an arrangement between Dr Milson and herself dealing with Dr Milson's liability or alleged liability for the loan. When she said that she would accept her rightful share of the estate which excluded any amount owing by Dr
Milson relative to the subject loan, she made that statement to Dr Milson in the context of his supposed liability to repay the loan. She was not asked to release the estate from any entitlement which she might have to a share in residue, and did not agree to release the estate from any such entitlement.
She was not asked to confer any entitlement which she had in respect of the estate on Ms Kathleen Lawson, and did not agree to do so. What she was asked to do was to release Dr Milson from a claim against him personally, and that is altogether a different thing to conferring the benefit of that claim, in whatever form benefit ultimately appeared, on Ms Kathleen Lawson. A release of a claim against A is a very different thing from an assignment of the thing released to B.

Dr Stephanie Lawson told Dr Milson that it was not her intention to open the matter again, and she has not opened it again with Dr Milson. She expressed herself to release Dr Milson, but the release has not had any effect beneficial to Dr Milson; he has been required by judicial decision to pay the whole amount of the alleged loan and interest to the estate, where it forms part of the residuary gift. The release which Dr Stephanie Lawson gave him has been ineffective. Dr Milson did not rely on the release in the first litigation. While I do not readily see how he might have done so, there is probably some procedural course by which he could have claimed advantage from his having been released by one of the persons entitled to the residuary estate from a debt which if paid to the estate would enhance the residuary estate. It is not a foregone conclusion that he would have been successful; it would be difficult to show that there was any consideration for the release or purported release, and his position as a trustee in withholding a distribution until he got a personal advantage in a form of a release of an obligation which he was alleged to owe to the estate is not a very good one; particularly in retrospect when it has been established that the claim by the estate was just. In answer to a claim by Ms Kathleen Lawson on behalf of the estate, the fact that any one beneficiary had given him a release could not be a relevant defence. The purported release may not have been of much value to him, but in any event he did not attempt to rely on it.

Dr Stephanie Lawson's handwritten reply to the request of 24 August 1994 answered the request fully and accurately. The reply was factual, it was simple, it was not promissory and it was true. The request was for advice whether the understanding that she disclaimed any interest in any amount owing by Dr Milson relative to the loan was correct, and she answered that she did give a disclaimer of that kind. She was not asked to make and did not make any representation otherwise than exactly what she did say as to the terms or effect of the disclaimer. She was not asked to say whether her interest, however it should be expressed, in a claim against Dr Milson was to pass to Ms
Kathleen Lawson; and she gave no indication that it would.

In my view the letter of 24 August 1994 and her reply are not rationally open to the interpretation which the plaintiff's counsel sought to put on them that
Dr Stephanie Lawson invited Ms Kathleen Lawson and her lawyer to go ahead with the second proceedings on the basis that Ms Kathleen Lawson would have whatever entitlement Dr Stephanie Lawson might otherwise have had to part of
Dr Milson's debt.

If Dr Milson had brought proceedings against another person to establish the existence of a debt to the estate he would receive from the court the indemnity usually extended to trustees out of the estate assets for expenses properly incurred additional to costs recovered. Ms Kathleen Lawson took the position of representing the persons interested in the residuary gift and the ordinary machinery by which a trustee is indemnified does not apply. However in administering equitable remedies I am of the view that Ms Kathleen Lawson took the position which a trustee would have taken in a simpler situation for the benefit of the estate generally and should receive the same protection as a trustee would have received. All interested in the fund represented by the residuary gift should share the burden of protecting it. The practical effect is that in some form Dr Stephanie Lawson should pay half of any excess expenses, or half should be deducted from her share of the residuary gift. It is not possible to determine now how much this is because of the unresolved conflict about the amount of costs recoverable from Dr Milson. This is impossible because the question of a dispute about what is recoverable from Dr
Milson emerged with affidavits produced only within the last two days before the second proceedings were heard, so that even if it were otherwise appropriate for issues relating to them to be examined Dr Stephanie Lawson and those advising her had no fair opportunity to deal with them. I am not yet in a position to deal finally with all matters in controversy in the second proceedings.

The plaintiff's case equates giving up the claim against Dr Milson in a bargain with Dr Milson with assigning that claim to the plaintiff. The first defendant was never asked to do that. If the disclaimer were effective in favour of Dr Milson it was effective under some estoppel principle, as it was not effected by a deed and it was not effected under a contract for consideration. There was no consideration because the money distributed to Dr
Stephanie Lawson was money to the estate, not of Dr Milson, and it was money which it was his duty to distribute.

The plaintiff's counsel in submissions put the plaintiff's alleged entitlement on two bases, Disclaimer and Equitable Estoppel. The claim based on disclaimer was supported by citation of In Re Young, Fraser v. Young [[1913] 1 Ch ] and
In Re Cranstoun deceased; Gibbs versus Home of Rest for Horses & Ors [1949]1
Ch 523.

In Re Young a trust legacy had been given in trust for the plaintiff for life, after her death for her son for life and after his death for residuary legatees. The plaintiff was entitled to the income but refused to receive the income from the trustees and consented to its being paid to her son. Her son predeceased her. She then demanded payment of future income. She did not claim that the income which had been paid to her son during his lifetime should be paid to her. The residuary legatees took the position that she had disclaimed all her interest in the legacy and could not retract. At 276 Swinfen Eady J said: "The defendants' real contention was that a bequest refused by a legatee must be treated as void. They relied on a passage in Sheppard's Touchstone, 7th ed.
P. 452: `If one devise his land to another in fee simple, fee tail, for life, or years, and the devisee after the death of the testator doth refuse and wave the estate devised to him; in this case, and by this means, the devise is, [as to him,] become void. [And, by the refusal of a particular estate, the remainder will be accelerated; and an intended remainder may be converted into an executory devise.] And it seems a verbal waver is sufficient in this case.
[The general practice is to execute a deed of disclaimer, as distinguished from a release. Crewe v. Dicken. (1798) 4 Vesey 97] So if one give goods or chattels to another, and the devisee refuse it; by this means the devise is become void, and any waver or refusal will suffice in this case: for a man shall not be compelled nolens volens to take a thing devised to him [3 Prest.
Abstr. 104.]' 
They contended that this passage shews that a bequest becomes void on the refusal of the legatee to receive it and cannot be restored by retractation of that refusal.

The first answer is that the whole gist of the passage is that a legatee is not compelled to take a bequest against his will. It does not in any way deal with the question whether his refusal may or may not be retracted.

The second answer is that the present case ought not to be dealt with on the footing of refusal of a legacy. The trust was duly created, and the fund bequeathed was set apart, received, and invested by the trustees and became a trust fund. There was no question of refusal of that bequest. The trustees accepted the money and held it in trust. For a time with the plaintiff's consent they paid the income to her son. Now that he is dead the plaintiff says that she merely voluntarily relinquished her right to the income for the time being, but never gave up her life interest, to which she says she is still entitled. I think that is the true legal position and that the plaintiff is entitled to the income from her son's death." 
The exact terms of the disclaimer are not reported but from the statement of facts at 273 it appears that the plaintiff wrote to one of the executors and trustees (not to a residuary legatee) saying that she preferred to have no interest whatever in the will and had later confirmed this statement with emphasis. The present facts are different in that the disclaimer was not directed to the executor and trustee, but to Dr Milson in another capacity as alleged debtor, and it was not a disclaimer of the gift in the will, but of the liability of Dr Milson to the estate which if met would enhance the value of the gift in the will. Swinfen Eady J's conclusions relate to the circumstances in which a voluntary disclaimer of an equitable interest in the gift in a will could be retracted, in circumstances where the retraction was limited to future income.

It is striking how little authority was referred to by Swinfen Eady J for the binding effect of disclaimers. Shepherd's Touchstone is a very old work, originally compiled before the evolution of much modern law including the law relating to Equitable Estoppel, the administration of deceased estates in
Equity and much else now of daily importance. The square brackets show the signs of revision in many editions. There is no clear statement about the manner in which an effective refusal and waiver of a devise of an estate takes place; there is a statement that it seems that a verbal waiver is sufficient in the case of the devise of an estate but it is also said that the practice is to execute a deed of disclaimer. Then it is said without reference to judicial authority that any waiver or refusal will suffice for a gift of goods or chattels. There is no statement about waiver of equitable interests.
Swinfen Eady J treated the principle of waiver of a bequest as relating to the whole bequest, which the executors and trustees had not waived. To my reading his Lordship did not regard the passage in Sheppard's Touchstone as relating to a refusal to accept an equitable interest in a legacy where the legacy had not been waived but had taken effect. Swinfen Eady J dealt with the case on a basis appropriate for enforcement by equitable remedies of an equitable interest by looking to see whether any events had happened in which a voluntary relinquishment of a right to income in the future ought to be enforced, and deciding that issue on a basis appropriate to an equitable remedy, the basis that a mere voluntary relinquishment could be retracted. The headnote suggests that the fact that neither the trustees or the residuary legatees had changed their position on the faith of her refusal was a basis for the decision, but although his Lordship mentioned that fact at 275, he did not mention it in giving reasons for disposing of the proceedings. On general principles, a voluntary relinquishment or release of an equitable interest is ineffective, but it may become effective if some interested person changes his position to his detriment on the basis of the voluntary relinquishment. There was no such issue, so the absence of alteration of position cannot be taken to be a ground of his Lordship's decision.

In Re Cranstoun related to a relatively small interest, with which there were complex dealings extending over many years. The basis of Romer J's decision was a view of the facts that there was a renunciation of a gift of the residue of an estate but that the renunciation was purely voluntary, for no consideration and nobody had changed his position on account of it. Romer J said at 528 "In the absence of any authority I should have thought that it was open to anyone at any time to change his mind, when no one has acted to his hurt on the faith of his renunciation" and went on to refer to In Re Young and to say "It is probably strictly true that the learned judge's observations on this point were obiter, but I have the view of Swinfen Eady J that if a renunciation is not acted on it may be withdrawn." 
Although the passage cited from Sheppard's Touchstone suggest that even a verbal waiver of a devise of an estate in land was effective that view was not acted on or applied to equitable interests in these modern decisions, which proceeded on the basis appropriate for equitable interests that voluntary dealings, whether assignments or releases, are not enforceable of themselves although they may become enforceable through acquiescence or estoppel. The cases cited do not establish that there is a law of Disclaimer under which shares in a gift on trust of an interest in a residuary estate become unenforceable. In my opinion if such a share is to become unenforceable there must be a basis such as a transaction for consideration, an effectual release, acquiescence or equitable estoppel. Identification of parties against whom the share is unenforceable is important. Only parties to transactions can enforce them; only persons who have acted on a representation are entitled to the benefit of any estoppel. None of this law avails the plaintiff. In addition to the difficulty that the transaction between Dr Stephanie Lawson and Dr Milson did not deal with Dr Stephanie Lawson's interest in the residuary estate, the transaction was one between Dr Milson in his personal capacity and Dr
Stephanie Lawson, it was in no way an assignment to Ms Kathleen Lawson, it purported to release Dr Milson but was not effective as a release, and when notwithstanding that purported transaction Dr Milson has been compelled to pay the whole debt to the estate, interests in the residuary estate are not affected by it.

Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the judgment in Re Young shows that any change of position disallows a person who has disclaimed from retracting.
In my opinion this was not decided in Re Young and there is no statement to that effect in the judgment. There are no relevant legal principles of
Disclaimer and the significance of change of position and detriment relates to
Equitable Estoppel. The only change of position which could be relevant is one which works to the detriment of the person who changes position, as otherwise there could be no reason in principle why the change should affect rights.

Detriment cannot be a nominal or slight requirement because it is the detriment which is proposed to make the conduct of the party estopped unconscionable, and a nominal or slight matter could not justify the Court in making that severe judgment and preventing reliance on rights. Observations in judgments in The Commonwealth of Australia v. Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394 state more fully the significance of detriment in Equitable Estoppel stated authoritatively in the judgment of Priestley JA (with the concurrence of Hope and McHugh JJA) in Silovi Pty Ltd v. Barbaro [(1988) 13 NSWLR 466] at 472
Priestley JA's Proposition 7 is: "The remedy granted to satisfy the equity ...
will be what is necessary to prevent deteriment resulting from the unconscionable conduct." Observations in Verwayen which relate to the significance of detriment include the following. At 410 "... the fundamental purpose of all estoppels [is] to afford protection against the detriment which would flow from a party's change of position if the assumption that led to it were deserted ..." in a passage in the judgment of Mason CJ. "Equity was concerned, not to make good the assumption, but to do what was necessary to prevent the suffering of detriment. To do more would sit uncomfortably with a general principle whose underlying foundation was a concept of unconscionability. So, in Waltons Stores, a majority of this Court concluded that equitable estoppel entitled a party only to that relief which was necessary to prevent unconscionable conduct and to do justice between the parties. Mason CJ and Wilson J referred <case>; [(1984) 164 CLR 387] at 404) to the statement of Scarman LJ in Crabb v. Arun
District Council ([1976] Ch. 179 at 198) that the Court should determine what was `the minimum equity to do justice to the plaintiff'. We went on to state (at 405): `Holding the representor to his representation is merely one way of doing justice between the parties'" at 411 (Mason CJ). See too 419, 428-429
Brennan J, 441 to 443 (Deane J) 454 (Dawson J) and 500-501 (McHugh J).

I must have regard to contemporary statements of law in Australia which support the view that the detriment must be appraised, as not every detriment will make it unconscionable for another party to return to the position which existed before the detriment was incurred. When I look for the substance of what has happened in Ms Kathleen Lawson's position I do not see her bringing the litigation as overall a detriment, because she was successful in everything she claimed. If a risk does not mature the fact that it formerly existed is not a reason in principle why another party should not return to her former position.

It was contended that the plaintiff can rely on Equitable Estoppel. Counsel submitted that whether or not Dr Stephanie Lawson intended to release Dr
Milson as to half of the debt is irrelevant. What was said to be relevant was the belief in the mind of the plaintiff, and counsel contended that the plaintiff accepted the conversation of March 1993 and the documents of
November 1993 as a basis for entering on the proceedings on the view that Dr
Stephanie Lawson had disclaimed any interest in the estate, and that entry on the proceedings was the reliance and incurring the risk of costs the detriment. However on the facts Ms Kathleen Lawson was not invited by Dr
Stephanie Lawson to commence the proceedings or to take any course of action.
The conclusion that she should bring the proceedings was one generated by herself, where she had an interest in success in the proceedings, and her course was not the result of any invitation extended to her or of any representation that a benefit would be conferred on her. Dr Stephanie Lawson's position did not go further than making it clear and obvious that she would not take part in any such proceedings and that she gave Dr Milson a disclaimer.

It was contended that the disclaimer was from its terms a disclaimer of any interest in the estate not of a claim against Dr Milson personally. In my view the document did not disclaim any interest in the estate in favour of any other person who might be interested in it; it was a disclaimer of Dr Milson's personal liability to Dr Stephanie Lawson and of nothing else; the terms of the disclaimer make this clear and the context of correspondence makes this even clearer. The handwritten note on the letter of 24 August 1994 went no further; it was quite accurate and answered the inquiry fully. The circumstance that it was foreseeable or likely that having had that reply the plaintiff would decide to go on with the litigation against Dr Milson does nothing to make the reply an invitation to do so or a representation that success in the litigation would bring any particular advantage to the plaintiff. The plaintiff's counsel contended that there was an obligation on the defendant to correct any misapprehension which the plaintiff might have, and that she should have made known the full terms and effect of the disclaimer. In my view there is no basis for any such obligation. The plaintiff's case would seek to equate Dr Stephanie Lawson's communications with a statement to the plaintiff to the effect that if the plaintiff won her proceedings against Dr Milson she could have all the residuary estate. There was of course no such statement and nothing was said which could reasonably have that meaning. Nothing was said which could cross the great gulf between telling Dr Milson that Dr Stephanie Lawson disclaimed any claim against him and conferring the rights of Dr Stephanie Lawson on another person when the disclaimer did not avail Dr Milson. The plaintiff needs to point to a representation which is clear and she has not done so. See Legione v.
Hateley <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 406] at 435-436 (Mason & Deane JJ) and Foran v. Wight <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 385] at 410-411 (Mason CJ) and, in discussion by Deane J at 434-437, the sentence at 435-6.

The plaintiff did not know the terms of the disclaimer and did not ask for them. Of course its specific terms are critical for an understanding of what it disclaimed, and if they were truly of importance for the plaintiff's decision to go on with the first litigation, the plaintiff and her advisers could have asked for a copy. It also seems remarkable that, if the plaintiff was proceeding on the assumption that she alone to the exclusion of Dr
Stephanie Lawson would benefit from success in the litigation, in which Dr
Stephanie Lawson was a defendant and a witness, this assumption was not made explicit to Dr Stephanie Lawson until after the decision had been obtained.

I cannot make orders on the cross-claim without knowing what protection I should give the plaintiff in respect of costs and expenses of the first proceedings and that must await resolution of the dispute about costs with Dr
Milson.

My Orders are: 
Dismiss the plaintiff's claims in the Summons with costs.

Reserve further consideration of the Cross-claim.

I certify that this document comprising pages is a true copy of the reasons for judgment herein of His Honour, 
Justice John Bryson.

Associate 
Tuesday 18 November 1997.
 * * * 
