

Regina versus Mhn (No. 2) Matter No 70085/97 [1998] NSWSC 553 (20 November )

Last Updated: 2 December 1998 
REGINA versus MHN (No. 2) /97 November 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: 
For the assistance of members of the media who intend to report these remarks on sentence, I point out that, although the prisoner being sentenced today is now more than eighteen years of age, he was a young person at the time his offence was committed, so that s11 of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) continues to prohibit the publication of his name or any other material by which he may be identified.

On 4 November 1998, the prisoner was arraigned upon an indictment charging him with two offences: * First, the murder of Nhut Thanh Truong on 21 June 1996 at Petersham. * Secondly, the malicious wounding of Luat Ngo on the same day, at the same place. 
The prisoner pleaded guilty to the charge of malicious wounding. He pleaded not guilty to murder, but guilty to manslaughter. That plea was accepted by the Crown in full satisfaction of the indictment.

A number of documents were tendered without objection. They included a document headed "Agreed Statement of Facts". They also included a number of statements from witnesses, and a transcript of an ERISP police interview with the prisoner. The prisoner did not give evidence.

It is not easy to reconstruct, from this material, a coherent account of the events of Friday 21 June 1996. There is considerable evidence as to the general affray which occurred upon that evening. However, the evidence as to the circumstances in which Nhut Thanh Truong (also known as Jason Truong) was fatally stabbed, and Luat Ngo was wounded, is spare indeed. Most of the material comes from the prisoner himself.

Inevitably, in these circumstances, there are difficulties in determining the facts. In dealing with this material, I am guided by the following basic propositions enunciated in R versus Pilley [(1991) 56 A Crim R 202], per Finlay J at 204: "(1) Once there is a verdict or plea of guilty it is entirely for the judge to determine the relevant facts for the purpose of sentence in conformity with the essential elements of the crime which such verdict or plea establishes:
Martin [[1981] 2 NSWLR 640] at 643, per Hope JA; Accused [[1988] 1 NZLR 422] at 426, ; Saffron (No 3) [(1988) 39 A Crim R 123] at .

Where any statement of facts (not essential to the conviction but relevant for the purpose of sentencing) is disputed then such facts: if a matter of aggravation - must be proved to the judge's satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt - but I note the facts cannot be taken into account which would have warranted conviction for a more serious offence.

If in mitigation - must be proved to the judge's satisfaction on the balance of probabilities.

In either case such facts must be proved by the party on whom the evidentiary onus lies." 
On 21 June 1996 the prisoner was a few months short of his eighteenth birthday. Three weeks earlier he had met a Vietnamese girl, Nina. Nina lived at Waterloo with her family. On Friday 21 June 1996 she suggested to the prisoner that they go to the Petersham roller skating rink in New Canterbury
Road, Petersham. The prisoner did not know how to roller skate. However, he agreed to go. Together they went by train.

They arrived at the roller skating rink in the early evening, some time between 7.00 and 8.00 pm. The rink was apparently popular with Vietnamese youth. By chance, the prisoner met a number of his former classmates. He sat with them in the gallery whilst his girlfriend skated. The prisoner said that he was very happy to see his friends. He had no thought of trouble.

Near closing time, a group of seven youths, each of Asian appearance, came into the rink. It is said that they had arrived in three vehicles which were parked in New Canterbury Road, opposite the rink. One vehicle was a red Nissan sedan, RCX.730. Another was a white Suzuki Swift with a registration plate,
ACR.06C. The third vehicle was a white Honda with a number plate, PKB.452.
These vehicles were later searched by the police. Weapons were found. I will refer to that evidence later in these remarks.

According to the prisoner, when this group entered the rink, they stared at him. In his interview with the police he said this: "And then they saw seven bad people coming in and they just kept looking at me, that was all." 
The prisoner decided he would leave. He asked his girlfriend to come with him.
She did so. However, as they left the rink, the group followed. Speaking in
Vietnamese, one of them said the following words to the prisoner: "What are you doing, coming here?" 
The prisoner did not respond. He did not recognise anyone from the group. He continued to leave the rink. Once outside, he described what happened in these words: "Walking out, and then they started rushing, flying at me to, to fight me, to hit me and that was when the other people, they heard the noise of fighting and they came rushing out from inside." 
One gathers that this occurred part way across New Canterbury Road, which is a busy road. The prisoner yelled. It appears that a number of the prisoner's friends had followed him out of the rink. They heard his yell. They saw what was happening. A fight then began.

The prisoner told the police that he ran away. He got to the southern side of
New Canterbury Road, where there were parked vehicles. The fight continued.
Referring to the deceased, the prisoner said this: "The situation was that they started fighting me here and I ran away here and then this fellow, he ran after me and when he was approaching me I hit him back and at that stage he pulled out a knife and he started stabbing me." 
The police interview then included the following: "No, he didn't hit me at all. His friends were punching me and then after that
I was over this, this side of the road and he came, he pulled out a knife and came at me and when he came at me like that I hit him and he dropped the knife." 
The police sought to clarify the apparent contradiction between these statements. The prisoner said this: "And I hit him like this. I hit him like this. I didn't make any connection to him but I managed to dislodge the knife and it fell down." 
Shortly thereafter the prisoner added another matter, by way of clarification.
Referring to the deceased, he said the following: "A. ... When he pulled out the knife, at that stage I didn't know that it was a knife because I was in the fight.

Q. Yeah, but he, you realised that it was a knife once you, once he came close to you, didn't you? 
A. No, not until it fell on the ground because there were so many of them hitting me. That's why I, when I pick it up I thought it was a stick and I was intending to use it to, to fight them back." 
When the prisoner went with the police to the scene of the crime, later the same day (18 November 1996), he elaborated upon this account. The deceased not only produced a weapon which the prisoner ultimately determined was a knife, but he lunged at him. The prisoner hit the deceased. The deceased dropped the weapon. The prisoner picked it up. It was heavy. He recognised that it was a knife. It was in a sheath. He removed the sheath, which he threw to one side.
He added: "So I said, I, I stab at him. I just blindly stab at him and then when I feel there's some other people jumping in so I just stab blindly at, at them and then after that I, I ran along here." 
The prisoner described his state of mind in these words: "A. Because at, at the time I was terrified. I was very scared.

Q. You were very scared but nevertheless you, you stabbed the boy that many times? 
A. What I meant was that not really scared but what I meant was that I couldn't control myself, having a good control of myself.

Q. So what you're saying is you, you weren't scare of what would happen to you, it's just that you couldn't control your, your anger. Is that right? Is that what you're saying? 
A. Yes." 
He described the circumstances in which he stabbed the second person, Luat
Ngo, as follows: "A. ... After I stab at him a number of times and then there was someone else jumping, jumping in, and I was busy stabbing at that person, the second person. I didn't take any notice of the boy.

Q. How many persons did you stab that night? 
A. Two people and, but I didn't know whether I stab anybody else because I just can't remember." 
During the course of the melee, friends came to the prisoner's assistance.
Others appeared to have engaged in various acts of violence. The fight occurred on a busy road, in a busy neighbourhood. Accounts were given to the police by motorists who were passing through the area, and by shop proprietors and residents who were attracted by the noise. A number of individuals were described as having weapons. Many appeared to have been armed with machetes.
One person is said to have had a baton several feet in length. Another was described as having a sword, which he removed from a scabbard. Yet another had a steel weapon like a knife. The accounts varied as to the number of youths involved. One put the number as fifty. Others at twenty or thirty. All were of
Asian appearance, rushing along New Canterbury Road. Groups of three and four youths were seen to attack an individual, and kick him when on the ground.
Vehicles were smashed with machetes. The scene was chaotic.

The prisoner left the scene immediately after the fight. He was still carrying the knife. It was covered in blood. He stopped to pick up newspaper to wrap it up. He then carried it home on the train. It was later apparently given to one of his friends, who had it in his possession when stopped by the police. It was shown to the prisoner by the police when he was interviewed. He identified it as the weapon which he had used to stab Jason Truong, and wound Luat Ngo.

The knife itself was a large stainless steel Bowie knife. It was 325 mm in length. It had a blade 210 mm long and 33 mm wide.

There were four stab wounds to the deceased. They were described by Dr
Bradhurst, who performed the post mortem, as follows: "Post mortem examination confirmed that the cause of his death was a stab wound to the chest which had penetrated through the left lung and into the cavity of the left ventricle of the heart. There was a second stab wound to his chest which penetrated into the pleural cavity only. As well, there was a through-and-through stab wound to the lower part of his left upper arm and a through-and-through stab wound to his left buttock." 
Dr Bradhurst believed that the wounds were consistent with having been caused by the large Bowie knife which the prisoner identified as the weapon which he had used on that evening.

Luat Ngo was taken to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. He suffered a number of wounds, many of which were inflicted by persons other than the prisoner. He did suffer a stab wound 1.5 to 2.5 cms in length to the right shoulder and upper abdomen.

There is some confusion in the prisoner's account of this evening. However, the essential elements are plain enough. They are as follows: * First, that he was not the aggressor. The fight began when he was attacked by the group. * Secondly, that unlike his assailant, the deceased, the prisoner was unarmed. * Thirdly, that in the course of the fight with the deceased he was being attacked by other individuals as well. * Fourthly, that he did not know the deceased, or the wounded man, and had no reason to engage either of them in a fight. 
There are no statements from witnesses, other than the prisoner, describing the circumstances in which the stabbing of Jason Truong and Luat Ngo occurred.
Nonetheless, there is evidence which supports the version of the prisoner.
First, there is evidence that the group of individuals, which included Jason
Truong, attended the scene well armed. One member of that group, Thai Ha
Nguyen, provided a number of statements to the police. The statements are not entirely consistent. However, in one such statement he asserts that Jason
Truong came to the scene with a machete. Within the red Nissan sedan (RCX.730), when searched by the police after the incident, was the sheath of a machete. Inside the white Suzuki sedan (ACR.06C), was a machete still in its sheath.

Secondly, the account of the prisoner is plausible, and in some respects, adverse. He said that when he picked up the weapon which had been dropped by the deceased, it was still in its sheath. It was he who removed the sheath. It would have been easy to conceal this detail and suggest that the knife, when he picked it up, was already out of its sheath. Such an account would have enhanced his suggestion of self defence. The provocation offered by the deceased would have been that much greater. It is to his credit that he gave the account that he did. The sheath was found adjacent to one of the vehicles.
Its location was consistent with the action depicted by the prisoner on video as he removed the knife from the sheath, throwing the sheath away.

Thirdly, the deceased, on autopsy, was found to have 3.0mg/L of morphine in certain organs, consistent with heroin use. To some extent, therefore, the deceased was a person living on the fringes of criminal activity.

I accept as probable the account given by the prisoner, that he was not the aggressor, that he was attacked by a number of youths, spoiling for fight, that the deceased introduced a knife into the fight, that the prisoner managed to take hold of that knife, and remove it from its sheath, that he thereafter blindly, and with a loss of self control, thrust the knife towards his assailants, killing Jason Truong and wounding Luat Ngo.

The prisoner gave the following account to Dr Canaris, psychiatrist, as to his state of mind during the fight in which the deceased died, and Luat Ngo was wounded: "He told me that as this was happening, he felt `confused' and `really angry' which in the circumstances were reasonably appropriate responses. He recalled that he `lost control of my thinking' and that he came to the point that he felt as though `I lost everything at that instant, I had nothing left.'" 
Dr Canaris formed the view that the prisoner was quite seriously depressed. He observed what he termed a "pervasive sadness" emanating from the prisoner, adding: "The interviewer is left with an overwhelming feeling of sadness rather than badness and a sense of his offences being somehow inexplicable in terms of his overall presentation. I found myself wondering for example whether his apparent gang involvement was more a manifestation of his having effectively no family rather than an attraction for the gangland culture per se. It is quite possible and certainly plausible that his alienation from his family was as much the product as the cause of his depression." 
Upon the basis of this diagnosis, Dr Canaris expressed the following view on the issue of diminished responsibility: "Given the substantial likelihood that a substantial abnormality of the mind may have existed at the time of the killings, the question arises as to whether your client could avail himself of the defence of diminished responsibility. I think it is certainly likely that his depression would have been sufficiently severe to interfere significantly with his judgment and impulse control. Depression particularly in adolescent males may manifest itself in frankly destructive and antisocial behaviour. The severely depressed individual is much more likely to adopt an attitude in which he cares very little for the consequences of his actions. This combined with impaired judgment and impulse control can very considerably lower the threshold at which a person may become violent. This would be especially likely to manifest itself in a situation such as the Petersham melee in which he was, by his account at least, attacked by a gang of armed hoodlums.

Your client's history supports such a hypothesis. In particular, his statement to the effect that he felt as though he `lost everything' and `had nothing left' in the midst of the melee whilst at the same time he `lost control of my thinking' suggests a direct causal nexus between his depression and the killing. It is consequently my opinion that your client would be able to avail himself of the defence of diminished responsibility in the Petersham matter.
The picture is of course somewhat confused because of the context of your client apparently being set upon and presumably in some danger of his life or limb. Nevertheless the impact of his depressive disorder on his actions at the time continues to be apparent. I think his chances of losing control would have been very much less had he not been depressed. Moreover the loss of control seems to hinge on his perception at the time that he had `lost everything'." 
It can be readily seen why the Crown, in these circumstances, accepted a plea of guilty to the charge of manslaughter. The prisoner, by his plea of guilty, has acknowledged that the Crown could establish that his actions were unlawful, in that they were not carried out in self defence (Zecevic v
DPP (Vic) <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 645).] His admission to the police that he was not really scared, but angry, and could not control himself, was no doubt enough to establish the
Crown case. However, there was provocation, and a serious issue based upon Dr
Canaris' evidence, of diminished responsibility. In terms of my function, in forming a view as to the level of criminality, I believe it is reasonable to view the incident as manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act.

These are the objective circumstances in which the prisoner committed the crimes to which he has pleaded guilty. The matters personal to the prisoner have already been considered by me when passing a previous sentence on 29
October 1998. That sentence was in respect of the murder of Hoang Huy Le on 7
August 1996. These remarks should, therefore, be read in conjunction with the remarks made on that occasion. I will advert, in an abbreviated way, to some of the relevant issues more fully set out in the remarks on sentence of 29
October 1998.

There is no question that the prisoner has led an unhappy and deprived life.
He was born on 11 October 1978 in Vietnam. He spent his early years in an institution. He lived with his mother between the ages of seven and twelve.
Although he was happier during this phase of his life, it was not without difficulties. The decision was made to send him to Australia to join his father, when he was aged twelve. He was not consulted. He now believes that move was a mistake. He found the adjustment to life in Australia difficult, especially because he did not speak English. He ultimately ran away from home.
Thereafter, he essentially lived on the streets, and with friends.

I accepted on the last occasion, as I do now, that any sentence imposed must take account of his youth. He was seventeen years and eight months when these crimes were committed. He is now twenty years old. His rehabilitation must be an important consideration since, even when he is released after serving the sentence imposed in October, he will still be a relatively young man.

I have before me medical evidence of Dr Canaris, psychiatrist, and Ms
Robilliard, psychologist. I accept their evidence, as I did when passing sentence on the last occasion. I accept the prisoner was, and is, suffering from a psychiatric illness, namely depression, and that he is in need of treatment.

In this matter, more than the last, the prisoner must be given a significant discount upon the basis of the principles enunciated by Street CJ in R v
Ellis [(1996) 6 NSWLR 603] where his
Honour said (at 604): "This Court has said on a number of occasions that a plea of guilty will entitle a convicted person to an element of leniency in the sentence. The degree of leniency may vary according to the degree of inevitability of conviction as it may appear to the sentencing judge, but it is always a factor to which a greater or lesser degree of weight must be given.

When the conviction follows upon a plea of guilty, that itself is the result of a voluntary disclosure of guilt by the person concerned, a further element of leniency enters into the sentencing decision. Where is was unlikely that guilt would be discovered and established were it not for the disclosure by the person coming forward for sentence, then a considerable element of leniency should properly be extended by the sentencing judge. It is part of the policy of the criminal law to encourage a guilty person to come forward and disclose both the fact of an offence having been committed and confession of guilt of that offence.

The leniency that follows a confession of guilt in the form of a plea of guilty is a well-recognised part of the body of principles that cover sentencing. Although less well recognised, because less frequently encountered, the disclosure of an otherwise unknown guilt of an offence merits a significant added element of leniency, the degree of which will vary according to the degree of likelihood of that guilt being discovered by the law enforcement authorities, as well as guilt being established against the person concerned." 
The confession made by the prisoner to the police on 18 November 1996 was unprovoked. He had, by that time, already been interviewed by the police in connection with the incident at Petersham on 16 September 1996. He had denied being present. Having been charged with another matter, unrelated to
Petersham, he was asked to attend the Bankstown police station on 18 November
Detective Karras recounted what occurred in these words: "About 12.30 pm, I saw the defendant (MHN), enter the main part of the
Bankstown Police Station. I approached the defendant and said, `(MHN) I want to speak to you about your reporting conditions. Can you come with me?' He said, `Yes.' 
The defendant followed me to the Detectives' Office where he was placed in an interview room. Constable Stamoulis had returned from his inquiries and also came into the interview room. I said, `(MHN) can you tell me where you live now?' He said, `In the streets.' At the same time the defendant placed both his hands over his face and began to cry.

I said, `Why are you crying?' He said, `I want to tell you something.' I said, `What do you want to tell me?' He said, `I want to tell you about a fight at
Petersham I stabbed a boy.'" 
At the time this confession was made, the police had no evidence to connect the prisoner with the death of Jason Truong, or the wounding of Luat Ngo. They had no witnesses' statements. There were no blood stains, nor finger prints to link the prisoner with that death.

Both the Crown, and Counsel for the prisoner, urged me to make any sentence imposed upon the prisoner, in respect of the offences now being considered, concurrent with the sentence for murder of twenty two years (with a minimum term of sixteen years) imposed on 29 October this year. The Crown said this, referring to [s9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s9.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/): (T15) "It is a matter in my submission that it is not appropriate for the Crown to press issues of sentence. However, there are a number of useful things that I might say. Whilst the option is clearly open to your Honour in relation to [s9(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s9.html) to accumulate sentence, the Crown does not press that course. There is a clear public interest in the community in having matters of this sort clarified and dealt with." 
I accept these submissions. The sentences I will impose will be concurrent with the term the prisoner is now serving. However, I believe it appropriate to date the sentence from the date of his plea of guilty (4 November 1998), rather than the time the prisoner went into custody (18 November 1996). The time spent in custody before 29 October 1998 was taken into account when the prisoner was sentenced for murder.

Plainly, the appropriate sentence for manslaughter, and for malicious wounding, will be significantly less than the minimum term which the prisoner is now serving. The principle to be followed, in these circumstances, was stated by Hunt CJ at CL in R versus Thomas [(1993) 65 A Crim R 269] in these terms at 275/6: "Before concluding, I should say this. Where a sentencing judge is dealing with either concurrent sentences of unequal length or cumulative sentences, so that any additional terms upon the shorter or earlier sentences would be of no utility (because the prisoner will still be in custody), it is appropriate in such circumstances for the judge to set a fixed term for the length of what would otherwise have been the appropriate minimum term: Donovan (unreported,
Court of Criminal Appeal, 9 September 1992); Close (unreported, Court of
Criminal Appeal, NSW, Sheller JA, Hunt CJ at CL and Sully J, 6 November 1992), applied. The judge should, however, when giving the reasons pursuant to [s6(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s6.html) for setting the fixed term, state expressly that the fixed term is intended to be the equivalent of such a minimum term. It would not be appropriate in such circumstances to impose a fixed term for what would otherwise have been the total sentence of the court." 
MHN, on the charge of the manslaughter of Nhut Thanh Truong, I sentence you to penal servitude for a fixed term of four years, representing the minimum term that I would impose for that crime, such sentence to commence on 4 November 1998, and to be concurrent with the term you are now serving. 
Further, on the charge of malicious wounding of Luat Ngo, I sentence you to penal servitude for a fixed term of one year, representing the minimum term that I would impose for that crime, such sentence to commence on 4 November , and to be concurrent with the term you are now serving, and the sentence in respect of manslaughter.

I recommend, as I did on the last occasion, that you should receive psychiatric treatment during your time in prison.
 * * * 
