

Regina versus Sam Matter No 60117/97 [1997] NSWSC 381 (5 September 1997) 
Regina versus William Wai Man SAM /97 September 1997 
Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
The Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus William Wai Man SAM 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: William Wai Man Sam has appealed against his conviction of supplying 447 grams of heroin, being not less that the commercial quantity. He was sentenced to a minimum term of four years and an additional term of 16 months.

The Crown alleged Sam, Cheng and Ujka were involved in the sale of 447 grams of heroin to an undercover police detective for $115,000. On 17 August 1990, the detective and Ujka met in George Street North, Sydney, pursuant to a prior agreement between them that Ujka would supply the detective with a pound of heroin. Surveillance police were in attendance during the events of that evening.

The detective and Ujka travelled in a Navaro four wheel drive, an undercover police vehicle, to Goulburn Street. Ujka made three telephone calls from a mobile telephone to a number used by the appellant, about arrangements for the delivery of the heroin and a further telephone call after the delivery had taken place. That was the inference sought to be drawn.

Earlier, the superior officers of the detective had given him a blue carry bag or sports bag containing $115,000 in Australian bank notes. He had placed that in the vehicle. Upon arrival in Goulburn street, Ujka took the bag which had been fitted with a transmitter device and entered a high rise block known as Belvedere
Apartments, 160 Goulburn Street. A few minutes later Sam walked from the
Brisbane Street exit of the underground car park of the Belvedere Apartments, carrying the blue bag. Sam walked to the rear of a blue Mercedes sedan which was parked on the eastern sides of Brisbane Street, opened the boot of his vehicle and placed the bag inside. He drove around the block and entered the car park below the Belvedere Apartments. There was a short delay. Sam drove out of the car park in his Mercedes, apparently accompanied by Cheng who left the car at the corner of Commonwealth and Albion Streets.

In the meantime, Ujka had returned to the Navaro without the blue bag and directed the detective to park at the intersection of Crown and Tudor Streets,
Surry Hills. Both men left the vehicle, with the passenger's side front window down and Ujka made a telephone call. They eventually entered a hotel and had a drink. Ujka left and returned. They both went to the police Navaro. There was a yellow and brown Skinnys Hideouts plastic carry bag on the front passenger's seat. Ujka placed this on the floor of the vehicle. After a telephone call
Ujka showed the detective the contents of the bag which included two plastic bags, each containing a white rock and powder substance. It was ascertained that the substance contained heroin. While the detective and Ujka were away from the Navaro, other police observed a Nissan Bluebird motor vehicle in which Cheng was allegedly a passenger, drive alongside the Navaro. Cheng alighted from the Bluebird and went around to the passenger's side of the
Navaro. A thud was heard on the police receiving device. Cheng returned to the
Bluebird.

It is unnecessary to trace the movements of the various men during the evening. About 11.38pm Sam drove his Mercedes back into the car park of the
Belvedere Apartments. Police entered the apartments about midnight. As the police approached Sam's apartment the police scanning device, which was on the same frequency as the transmitting device in the blue bag, received strong signals. Sam's apartment was entered shortly after 1 am by the police. In
Sam's bedroom, there was a blue bag which had been unzipped. Inside there were bundles of money. Sam said that the money was his and that it came from his gambling wins. Sergeant Packer told Sam that the money in the bag was used by the police to purchase heroin, that the police had the heroin and that they believed he had supplied it. Sam allegedly relied "Yes, but what heroin? I don't have any heroin. A man gave me that bag to mind for him." Packer replied, "You just told me that you won money gambling." Sam allegedly said; "Yes, but it is not mine, John (Ujka) gave it to me to mind." Sam stated that
Ujka just came and knocked at his door and asked him to mind the money. Sam stated that he had not been out all night. There was a dispute as to this conversation.

A mobile telephone was located in Sam's coat pocket at his apartment. Sam allegedly told the police that it was his. That telephone received the calls placed by Ujka on the night of the drug transaction.

There was a contest as to who spoke to Ujka. In his dock statement at an earlier trial, which Sam adopted at the current trial, Sam stated in substance that on 17 August 1990 he was told by John's (Ujka) girlfriend, that John wanted him to mind some money for him. The appellant met John downstairs and picked up a blue bag. The appellant did not go back to his unit but went to a massage parlour in Albion 
Street. Upon finding it closed, he went home. He carried the blue bag upstairs and put it in his bedroom. After a period of time he went to Chinatown to eat and then returned home. He had just stepped into the shower when the police arrived. They did not show him the search warrant but did show him the phone which the appellant assumed he had lent to Ujka earlier that morning. The phone was one which the appellant had use of, which belonged to Chan, a friend with no fixed address. The appellant allowed Chan to register it under his
Goulburn Street address. The appellant did not see where the phone came from prior to the police showing it to him at his apartment. He was not shown any rubber bands. (The police had alleged that rubber bands placed by them around the money had been found in Sam's apartment).

The appellant did not open the bag given to him by John or touch any money.
The police tested him with ultraviolet light but found nothing. (The police stated that powder had been put on the notes but Sam declined to be so tested).

The appellant contended that he never told the police that the money in the bag was his from gambling, nor that he had not left the apartment that night.
It was also put that the police were mistaken when they said that they saw the appellant and Cheng together in a car on the night of 17 August 1990. He denied that he was involved in any drug dealing.

The trial started on 18 November 1996 and the evidence extended over nine days, concluding on 28 November 1996. At the conclusion of the evidence and the dock statement, the Judge stated that in his final remarks, he did not intend to refer to the evidence in any detail. Counsel would refer the jury to the parts which they regarded as significant. Counsel addressed. At the conclusion of the addresses there was a brief discussion as to lies. The Judge summed up on 29 November .

There were some 24 witnesses called in the Crown case, some of whom were quite lengthy and detailed. There were over 400 pages of evidence and some 27 exhibits.

The nine page summing-up consisted of the conventional directions as to the functions of judge and jury, the need for a unanimous verdict, the onus of proof and proof beyond reasonable doubt. The Judge said: "... the charge is one that the accused supplied the prohibited drug heroin and that there was involved an amount which was not less than the commercial quantity. That involves essentially two elements: Did the accused supply heroin? That is the first one. The second element is: Was the quantity involved not less than the commercial quantity.

Supplying a drug such as heroin includes selling or distributing or agreeing to supply or offering to supply the drug in question. In relation to heroin, the commercial quantity is 250 grams. In relation to the quantity, you have the documentary material which indicates, if you accept it, that patently there was much more than 250 grams involved.

The Crown has not contended and has not set out to prove that this accused was the person who actually handed over the heroin in question to the undercover police officer. That has not been the Crown case. In bringing the charge against this accused, the Crown has relied upon a legal principle generally referred to as a joint enterprise or a common purpose. What the Crown contends is that this accused with others was involved in the supply of the heroin to the undercover police officer. The law provides that if two or more people embark upon a joint criminal enterprise and they do that knowingly, then each one is responsible for what occurs." 
The Judge gave the conventional bank robbery illustration and followed that with a conventional direction as to drawing inferences including that an inference should only be drawn if it appears to be the only rational conclusion in the light of all the evidence. The Judge warned the jury about using admissions allegedly made to the police when no one but Sam and the police were present. The Judge told the jury what use could be made of Sam's dock statement and summarised it.

The Judge said: "Put very simply and very directly members of the jury the conflicting arguments effectively are these: The Crown says that the accused is found in possession of the marked bank notes totalling $115,000 which had been handed to the undercovered police officer in response to which this quantity of heroin was passed over to the undercover police officer.

The Crown secondly says on top of that you have the evidence from the various police officers as to surveillance of the accused's Mercedes motor vehicle in the eastern suburbs area on video in close proximity to that time and in close proximity to the time when the heroin was actually handed over. In a nutshell that is the crown case.

In a nutshell what the accused says to you is whilst not disputing that the money was found in his flat, that he was simply minding that money for an acquaintance of his and he effectively denies movement of the Mercedes in the manner alleged by the police officers." 
This was followed by the usual concluding directions which are presently of no consequence.

The Judge did not attempt to relate the law to the facts. The jury was left to deal with the matter in a very general way. The Judge did not deal with the question of lies, although he discussed that matter with counsel on the previous day.

I think that the Crown is right when it submits that this was a joint enterprise case and that at one point when the Judge used the words "as a joint enterprise or common purpose", he did so interchangeably and that the rest of what he said related to a joint enterprise.

On the hearing of this appeal, Mr Barker, Q.C. for Sam propounded a number of issues which he contended were probably raised at the trial: Did Ujka talk to
Sam on a mobile telephone at 7.34pm and 7.41pm on 17 August 1990; what was the significance of the incoming telephone call and the conversation between the caller and Ujka, partly in Albanian; could the jury exclude the inference that the caller arranged the deal; and, did Sam drive Cheng to Commonwealth and
Albion Streets at 7.47am.

While it is true that there was an issue as to whether Sam drove Cheng to
Commonwealth and Albion Streets at 7.47pm, and as to the identification of Sam and Cheng, the Crown evidence on these matters was strong.

There were other matters on which Mr Barker relied, namely; if Sam did drive
Cheng, did he do so knowing Cheng possessed a bag of heroin and knowing Cheng intended to put the heroin in the police Navaro.

There were two further issues; namely, did Sam receive the bag of money knowing that it was payment for the sale of heroin, and, if Cheng put the heroin in the police Navaro, did he do so pursuant to a joint enterprise with
Sam. From reading the materials, the critical issue would appear to have been whether Sam was knowingly involved.

The Judge had to explain to the jury that they had to be satisfied that there was a joint enterprise to supply heroin to the detective; that it was so supplied to the detective and that Sam was knowingly involved in that enterprise. This meant that there had to be at least one other and that the
Crown alleged that Sam was involved with at least Cheng and Ujka. It was necessary for the Judge to spell out the facts and circumstances from which they were asked to conclude beyond reasonable doubt that Sam was knowingly involved in the enterprise.

The judge was also required to indicate what facts and circumstances mitigated against that conclusion. It was not sufficient to refer broadly to the evidence. This was a case where some particularity was required, especially having regard to Sam's defence that he had been asked to mind the money by
Ujka and that no heroin had been found in the apartment. The initial responses of Sam which were much in contest, as to how he had obtained the money and where he spent the night, needed to be dealt with.

Counsel for the Crown submitted that as the appellant had not asked the Judge to relate the law to the facts and spell out the matters on which the requisite inferences were based for the purposes of the Crown, [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) applied and it was up to the appellant to demonstrate that there had been a miscarriage of justice. This was a case of some complexity and not one where it was open to the Judge not to relate the law to the facts or to fail to isolate for the jury the facts, matters and circumstances relied upon by the Crown as justifying the inference of knowing involvement which the Crown sought that the jury draw.

The Crown also placed reliance on one of the listening device tapes and there was a contest in respect of that tape as to whom Ujka was speaking. Was it the appellant or Jody Rush. The summing up was deficient in material respects.

The Crown contended that Sam was better off with the kind of summing-up which was given as the brief summaries of the cases of each party made the defence case appear more attractive and substantive than it was. The Crown contended that the defence position was at its weakest when the Crown case was stated and analysed at some length and that the defence case could not withstand scrutiny. There is strength in the Crown argument.

This was a very strong Crown case and the defence propounded by Sam is not one which readily commands acceptance. Unfortunately the second trial miscarried by reason of the inadequate summing-up in which the relevant law was never related to the facts and the critical exercise earlier mentioned was never undertaken. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) should not be applied.

An accused is entitled to have a trial in which the relevant law is adequately explained and related to the facts and in which the jury is told on what facts and circumstances it is alleged that the inferences of Sam being knowingly involved should be drawn as the only rational conclusion. This was a very serious offence where a lengthy sentence was the only appropriate one if Sam was found guilty. Regrettably, there will have to be a new trial. This renders it unnecessary to deal with the other ground of appeal.

I propose that the appeal against conviction be allowed, the conviction be quashed and that a new trial be had. Any application for bail may be made in the usual way before a single judge.
 
SIMPSON J: I agree.
 
SPERLING J: I would like to add a word of my own concerning the concept of miscarriage of justice. In Wilde <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 365] Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ specified two circumstances in which there would be a miscarriage of justice. The first is where a conviction would not have been inevitable absent the error in question. The second is where, irrespective of that consideration, the error is a fundamental irregularity in the conduct of a criminal trial. I am satisfied that there was a miscarriage of justice in this case in both respects.

I agree with the orders proposed for the reasons given by Smart J.
 
SMART J: The orders are as proposed.
 * * * 
