

Magarditch and Anor versus Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Limited
Matter No Ca 40318/97 [1998] NSWSC 446 (23 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 November 1998 
MAGARDITCH & ANOR versus AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND BANKING GROUP LIMITED 
CA 40318/97; ED 2181/91 September 1998 
Priestley JA, Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Summons for leave to appeal - Equity Division Santow J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40318/97; ED 2181/91 
DELIVERED: 23 September 1998 
HEARING DATE: 28 November 1997 
PARTIES: MAGARDITCH & ANOR versus AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND BANKING GROUP LIMITED 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY, SHELLER JJA 
COUNSEL: 
Claimants: Represented by son, J Sourian 
Opponent: J E Thompson 
SOLICITORS: 
Claimants: N/A 
Opponent: Norton Smith & Co 
CATCHWORDS: Leave to appeal - no arguable error in decision of single Judge 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:Dismissed with costs 
NO OF PAGES: 51 
MAGARDITCH & ANOR versus AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND BANKING GROUP LIMITED 
In these proceedings, the claimants sought leave to appeal from the decision of a single Judge who had upheld an appeal by the opponent from a decision of a Master in relation to a guarantee and mortgage the claimants had given to secure certain loans made to their company Magic Australia Pty Limited.

The issue before the Master and Judge was whether the opponent was entitled to apply monies received from the sale of a property, which had been purchased by the claimant's son and mortgaged to the opponent, in first reducing the son's indebtedness rather than reducing Magic's indebtedness. The Master had held that those proceeds should have been applied to reduce Magic's indebtedness and the single Judge reversed this decision.

Held:
The only issue before the Court was whether there was arguably an appealable error in the single Judge's decision. The claimants have not shown any such error and the single Judge's decision was correct.
There was no evidence of any injustice done by the Bank or the liquidator to the claimants, their son or Magic.

ORDERS 
Application for leave to appeal dismissed with costs.

MAGARDITCH & ANOR versus AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND BANKING GROUP LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: 
INTRODUCTION 
From about 1984 the claimants, Mr and Mrs Magarditch, and their children conducted a Caltex Service Station at 607 Pacific Highway, Chatswood through a company, Magic Australia Pty Limited (Magic), which Mr and Mrs Magarditch owned and controlled. One of their children was Mr Jake Sourian who was an employee and, though this was disputed, arguably, a director of Magic. Magic had an overdraft facility with the opponent, Australian and New Zealand
Banking Group Limited (the Bank), and had obtained a loan of $60,000 to assist in the purchase of land at Thornleigh (West Pennant Hills) (the Thornleigh property). To secure these arrangements the Bank required a guarantee by the directors of Magic and on 28 January 1987 Mr and Mrs Magarditch signed a guarantee of the payment of Magic's indebtedness to the Bank. In 1987 Magic borrowed $430,000 by way of a fully drawn advance (FDA 1) from the Bank to buy a property at 136 Victoria Road, Gladesville (the first Gladesville property).
At the time of this purchase Mr and Mrs Magarditch gave a mortgage over their home at 2A First Avenue, Willoughby (the Willoughby property) further to secure Magic's indebtedness.

In October 1987 Mr Sourian completed the purchase of 140 Victoria Road,
Gladesville (the second Gladesville property) with the assistance of $205,000 borrowed from the Bank by a fully drawn advance (FDA 2). On 17 October 1987 Mr
Sourian gave a mortgage over the second Gladesville property in favour of the
Bank expressed to be in consideration of all or any loans advances credits or banking accommodation given by the Bank to for or on account of the mortgagor,
Mr Sourian, or to for or on account of Magic, referred to in the mortgage as "the Customer". In April 1989 the second Gladesville property was sold to
Wilpine Pty Limited (Wilpine) for $400,000. By agreement between the parties only $325,000 of the proceeds of sale was to go to the Bank. The Bank applied this amount to pay out what was outstanding in FDA 2 and the balance to reduce the amount owing in Magic's overdraft account and to reduce the amount owing by Magic in FDA 1.

THE PROCEEDINGS 
Two strands of litigation arose out of these transactions. The first strand consisted of proceedings taken over by the Bank to wind up Magic and proceedings taken by Mr and Mrs Magarditch and Mr Sourian relating to the conduct of the subsequent liquidation. The second strand consisted of proceedings between the Bank and Mr and Mrs Magarditch about their guarantee of 28 January 1987 and the mortgage to the Bank over the Willoughby property.

On 20 June 1991 in proceedings begun by the Commissioner of Taxation against
Magic in 1990 (1821/90) and taken over by the Bank, Master Windeyer, as his
Honour then was, after a hearing which took several days, made an order winding up Magic and appointing a liquidator. In 1991 Mr and Mrs Magarditch began proceedings (2181/91) to remove a caveat placed by the Bank on the
Willoughby property. The Bank cross-claimed to recover monies due by Mr and
Mrs Magarditch to the Bank under the guarantee of 28 January 1987. The Bank also claimed possession of the Willoughby property, later given as security for the guarantee. In separate common law proceedings, the Bank claimed possession of the first Gladesville property. The liquidator was advised that
Magic had no defence to this claim.

On 28 April 1994 in proceedings 2181/91 Windeyer J declared that Mr and Mrs
Magarditch were in default of their obligations under the guarantee and under the Willoughby mortgage and were liable to the Bank under the guarantee and the mortgage for an amount to be determined by the Master. The order of reference was as follows: "The proceedings be referred to the Master to inquire as to the amount owing by the plaintiffs under the guarantee and the mortgage." "Judgment be entered for the defendant against the plaintiffs for such an amount as is determined by the Master to be owing under the guarantee and the mortgage." 
In both strands of proceedings a contested and critical issue, probably the central issue, was whether the Bank was entitled to use part of the proceeds of the sale of the second Gladesville property to pay out the amount owing to it in FDA 2 and used for the purchase of that property or whether the whole of the proceeds of sale should have been used in the reduction of FDA 1 and
Magic's overdraft. Part of Mr and Mrs Magarditch's argument was that FDA 2 was not Magic's debt but Mr Sourian's debt. It was said that if that part of the $325,000 had been used not to pay out FDA 2 but to reduce FDA 1, Magic would not thereafter have been indebted to the Bank and Mr and Mrs Magarditch would not have been liable under the guarantee to the Bank.

Master McLaughlin conducted the inquiry ordered by Windeyer J and gave his decision on 20 March 1996. The Master found that FDA 2 was not Magic's debt but Mr Sourian's and held that no amount was due by Mr and Mrs Magarditch to the Bank under the guarantee. On 17 April 1997 Santow J allowed an appeal by the Bank from this decision. His Honour held that under the terms of the mortgage to the Bank over the second Gladesville property the Bank was entitled to apply the proceeds of sale to pay out FDA 2, whether or not FDA 2 was properly regarded as Magic's debt or Mr Sourian's debt, and further, contrary to a finding by the Master, that the Bank so applied part of the proceeds of sale in accordance with an agreement made with Mr and Mrs
Magarditch and Mr Sourian.

APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL 
Mr and Mrs Magarditch applied by summons filed on 10 September 1997 for leave to appeal from Santow J's decision; [s101](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s101.html) (e) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). Mr and
Mrs Magarditch had filed a notice of appeal on 4 June 1997 and the Bank a notice of motion to strike out the appeal as incompetent on 9 September 1997.
The summons was filed in response to this application.

SANTOW J'S DECISION 
Santow J carefully reviewed the facts and summarised Master McLaughlin's findings and the Bank's submissions on the appeal to him. His Honour said that essentially the matter concerned whether the Bank was entitled to apply as it did the proceeds of the second Gladesville property mortgaged by Mr Sourian to the Bank, in first reducing Mr Sourian's indebtedness as the registered mortgagor. The Master had concluded that instead, those proceeds should have been applied to reduce the indebtedness of Magic. The Master reached this conclusion even though Mr Sourian's mortgage secured not only Magic's obligations to the Bank but also Mr Sourian's. The conclusion was based on a finding that Magic's indebtedness at no time included any indebtedness in respect of the Gladesville property. If the proceeds of the sale of the
Gladesville property had been applied first to pay off Magic's indebtedness, as the Master held it should have been, Magic would have been in credit. Being in credit, there would then have been no basis for the Bank to enforce the separate secured guarantee given by Mr and Mrs Magarditch.

Before the Master, the Bank claimed $473,269.67 on Mr and Mrs Magarditch's guarantee. Of that amount the balances of FDA 1 and the overdraft on Magic's cheque account and the interest thereon were conceded to be Magic's debt. What was in dispute before the Master was whether, under the terms of the relevant securities and/or in the events that had happened, Mr and Mrs Magarditch's guarantee covered the advance of $205,000 (FDA 2).

Before the sale in April 1989 of the second Gladesville property to Wilpine, the property had been contracted to be sold by Mr Sourian to Magic under an uncompleted contract. The sale to Wilpine was completed unencumbered, by a transfer from the registered proprietor, Mr Sourian, at the direction of
Magic. It was agreed with the Bank that only $325,000 of the $400,000 was to go to the Bank. But this was, according to the Bank (but disputed by Mr and
Mrs Magarditch), on the basis that the $325,000 was to be applied in completing repayment of Mr Sourian's indebtedness under FDA 2 and only thereafter to reduce FDA 1 (by $59,725) and Magic's overdraft (by $28,160.70).
That is exactly what the Bank purported to do. However, the terms of that agreement or entitlement were disputed.

A fuller background of the transactions can be stated shortly from what Santow
J said. Mr Sourian was the manager of the Muffler Shop at the Chatswood
Service Station and acted as an intermediary for his parents in business matters and handled paper work on their behalf and on behalf of Magic. Up until 1986 Mr and Mrs Magarditch and Magic banked with Westpac Banking
Corporation at Willoughby. In October 1986 Mr Sourian met Paul Mortimer Kelly, at that time the Manager of the Balgowlah Branch of the Bank. Thereafter, Mr and Mrs Magarditch and Magic transferred their home loans and their business banking, which included an overdraft facility for Magic to a limit of $20,000 to the Balgowlah Branch of the Bank. The Bank required that the overdraft facility afforded to Magic be secured by way of a mortgage over Mr Sourian's home unit at Artarmon and a guarantee by the directors of Magic. This resulted in the signing of the guarantee of 28 January 1987 by Mr and Mrs Magarditch.
Mr Sourian also signed the guarantee as "company director", a matter not mentioned by Master McLaughlin. In addition to the guarantee, in January 1987
Magic gave the Bank a mortgage over the Thornleigh property. This had to do with a loan of $60,000 approved by Mr Kelly from the Bank to Magic. The mortgage over the Thornleigh property in favour of the Bank again described Mr
Sourian as a director where the document was signed under Common Seal. Santow
J said the foregoing should be noted in correction of the statement by the
Master that in January 1987 "the plaintiffs" gave the relevant mortgage over the Thornleigh property.

Magic's acquisition of the first Gladesville property for the first time required Mr and Mrs Magarditch to give a mortgage over their home in support of the earlier guarantee of 28 January 1987. The application for the proposed loan of $430,000 to Magic for this purchase was eventually approved by the
Bank on the basis that Mr and Mrs Magarditch would give a mortgage over their home, subject to independent advice. The mortgage was given on 2 September .

A question arose about whether Mr Sourian purchased the second Gladesville property for himself or on behalf of Magic. Master McLaughlin said that he accepted that Mr Magarditch believed the purchase was being made by Mr Sourian and that Mr Magarditch (and in consequence, his company, Magic) wished to have nothing to do with that purchase. In fact the deposit of $20,500 was paid from the account of Magic. The Bank agreed to grant a fully drawn advance of $205,000 to Magic which the Master found was intended to be "bridging finance" until Mr Sourian's unit at Artarmon and the Thornleigh property had been sold.
On 30 September 1987 Mr Sourian instructed his solicitors that the purchase was to proceed in the name of the company. The mortgage by Mr Sourian over the second Gladesville property was expressed as securing the debts of both Mr
Sourian and Magic. The Bank contended that if Mr Sourian was the debtor there was no need to refer to Magic as the customer.

Santow J concluded that the fact that the mortgage by Mr Sourian over the second Gladesville property secured the debts of both Mr Sourian and Magic was simply indicative of an intention to cross-collateralise that property so that it was also available for Magic's other indebtedness to the Bank. It did not establish that that indebtedness of Magic to the Bank in fact included the advance for the purchase of the second Gladesville property. In particular, his Honour did not differ from the Master's conclusion that as at the time the monies were borrowed from the Bank for the purchase of the second Gladesville property, the advance was to Mr Sourian alone and not to Magic or in some way guaranteed by Magic.

Santow J summarised Master McLaughlin's conclusions as follows: "(i) FDA No. 2 of $205,000 which was advanced by the Bank to purchase 140
Victoria Road was and always remained a liability of Mr Jake Sourian rather than being a liability of Magic; in particular the Master reached that conclusion after rejecting the evidence of the Bank officer, Mr Kelly, and preferring the evidence of Mr Jake Sourian.

The arrangements made concerning the proceeds of sale of 140 Victoria
Road or arising from a certain letter of 6 July 1989 (including the circumstances surrounding its signing and alteration, as dealt with in the judgment of Windeyer J and described later) did not themselves have the effect of imposing upon Magic any liability for the sum of $205,000 for FDA No. 2 "which the Bank has advanced to Mr Sourian for his purchase of the property, or for interest upon that sum".

Since Magic was not indebted to the Bank in respect of the $205,000, the
Bank was not entitled to appropriate the sum of $325,000 from the proceeds of the sale by direction of 140 Victoria Road towards reduction of what it held was Mr Sourian's indebtedness. Rather the $325,000 should in the first instance have been applied wholly towards reduction of the indebtedness of
Magic to the Bank in FDA No. 1.

Had that been done, Magic's overdraft account would have been in credit in $49,622.17.

The Bank was not justified in deducting its legal costs of $79,163.32 from that notional credit of $49,622.17 in favour of Magic." 
Santow J said that the case of the Bank on the appeal was principally contained in two essential points raised by the notice of appeal and expressed as follows in the Bank's written submissions of 17 December 1996 , in which Mr and Mrs Magarditch are referred to as "the Plaintiffs".
 "(a) There is no challenge to the relevant documents which constitute the
Bank's case - i.e. the Guarantee of 28 January 1987 and mortgage over
Willoughby of 2 September 1987. The mortgage provides that the relevant security is given in consideration of any loans, advances etc that were given or thereafter made on account of the Plaintiffs and/or Magic. FDA No. 1 and the overdraft are conceded to be liabilities of Magic. After the sale of 140
Victoria Road for $400,000 in April 1989 it was agreed between the Plaintiffs and the Bank that the Bank would accept $325,000 from the purchase price on condition that FDA No. 2 was repaid in full, FDA No. 1 reduced to $430,000 and the overdraft reduced to $30,000 approximately. This agreement was made between Peter Smith of ANZ and the First Plaintiff and Jake Sourian. It was an agreement in writing evidenced by letter ANZ to Magic dated 1 March 1989; letter ANZ to Magic dated 31 March 1989 signed by the First Plaintiff and settlement authority dated 7 April 1989 signed by the First Plaintiff, Jake
Sourian and the solicitor for them Mr Stojanovic. Pursuant to that agreement the $325,000 was disbursed so that FDA No. 2 was repaid, FDA No. 1 was reduced [by $59,725] and the Magic cheque account overdraft reduced [by $28,160.70].
Mr Smith was not cross examined about these matters.

Mr Kelly took no part in the relevant negotiations leading to this agreement or in its implementation. Hence the attack on Kelly's credit was misguided and irrelevant as not being directed to any issue and because, further, he had left the Bank prior to this time.

Although on the Bank's primary case it is unnecessary to decide this point, FDA No. 2 was a debt of Magic." 
His Honour set out further parts of the Bank's narrative as follows: "6.12 Sourian claimed that he transferred 140 Victoria Road, Gladesville to
Magic and the ANZ then discharged the Mortgage, with the Discharge of Mortgage document being dated 22 September 1988. Although the Discharge of Mortgage is signed on behalf of the Bank and dated 22 September 1988, there is no evidence that it was handed over on that date. All the evidence suggests that the Bank did not hand over that Discharge until the sale of the property from Magic to the purchaser Wilpine took place in April 1989 when the Bank received $325,000 from the proceeds of sale. Thus the Master was in error to conclude that the
Discharge of Mortgage occurred in September 1988. The Master recognises that the Bank was involved in the negotiations as to how much of the settlement monies it would receive in 1989, which could only have been because it had not handed over a Discharge of Mortgage. There is no evidence on the Discharge of
Mortgage that it was registered on 22 September 1988.
 .13 Mr Magarditch gave evidence as late as 13 September 1995 of a supposed conversation with Jake that the sale to Magic was explained because Mr and Mrs
Magarditch paid a lot of money for the defence of his criminal case and were asking what he could do about it. By that time the criminal case was short lived. In cross-examination Mr Magarditch gave new evidence of debts owing by
Jake back to 1984. These old debts were not supported by the company's accounts." 
Santow J, on balance, did not consider on the material before him that he was compelled to draw a different inference from Master McLaughlin that the indebtedness of Magic to the Bank had not, by the events that had happened, come to include that owing in respect of the advance FDA 2 related to the purchase of 140 Victoria Road. His Honour continued: "This of course leaves for consideration the events set out in 6.12 above and in relation to the transfer of 140 Victoria Road. On that matter I accept the conclusion, essentially unchallenged, that the discharge of mortgage signed on behalf of the Bank and dated 22 September 1988 was not handed over until sale of the property from Magic to the purchaser Wilpine took place in April 1989;
I consider now that matter in the context of the other events of 1989." 
In dealing with the Bank's submissions Santow J began by asking whether there was an agreement about the application of the sale proceeds of the second
Gladesville property. Again, he set out the Bank's written submission.
According to this, in January and February 1989 Mr Sourian had conversations with Mr Smith of the Bank about the Bank's requirements before it would deliver a discharge of mortgage so as to enable the sale of the second
Gladesville property. This material was contained in affidavits from Mr Smith supported by various diary notes. Three options were put forward. Mr Sourian telephoned Mr Smith on 1 March 1989 and informed him that he had decided to accept option number two namely that the Bank would accept $325,000 from the sale proceeds and use them to fully repay FDA 2, reduce the overdraft to $30,000 and reduce FDA 1 to $430,000. On that date Mr Smith sent a letter to
Magic setting out the arrangements as follows: "We wish to confirm our telephone discussions advising that the Bank is prepared to accept $325,000 from settlement of the above property, in lieu of the full sale proceeds which we believe to be $400,000.

Receipt of the $325,000 will enable complete repayment of FDA No. 2 plus provision of interest to reduce balance of FDA No. 1 to $430,000 with the remaining amount sufficient to reduce overdraft to $30,000 approximately." 
It was alleged that Mr Magarditch signed the letter below the words "I hereby agree to the above terms and conditions." 
Mr Magarditch annexed a copy of this letter to an affidavit sworn on 18 April in the common law proceedings. In that affidavit he said: "I recognise the signature on that letter as mine but I don't presently recollect reading or signing the letter." 
However, in an affidavit sworn on 15 May 1995 Mr Magarditch deleted from the evidence given in the previous affidavit the crucial words "I recognise the signature as mine." Furthermore, he gave evidence that the signature on the document was placed there by someone else. Master McLaughlin declined to decide this question. Santow J noted that while the original of the letter was not before the Master or him, with the result that the Master declined to decide the question, he inferred from the copy signature on the copy document and the matters to which the Bank referred, that Mr Magarditch did sign the letter of 1 March 1989 below the words signifying agreement "to the above terms and conditions". His Honour went on "Indeed I consider that this inference should have been drawn by the Master for the reasons given by the appellant." Those reasons were as follows: "7.5 Mr Smith's evidence was that, although he understood that there was not now in existence on the Bank's file a copy of the letter of 1 March 1989 signed by Mr Magarditch, he believed that such a letter had been received by him at the time. On the basis that Mr Smith was an honest and credible witness in his evidence generally, the Bank submits that the Court should accept that the letter of 1 March 1989 so signed by Mr Magarditch was returned to the Bank after 8 March 1989 (see 7.7 below) but before the settlement on 7 April 1989.
 .6 Alternatively, the Bank submits that the fact that Mr Magarditch signed the letter in the way he did constitutes an admission by him, which binds
Magic, that the terms and conditions of the letter were acceptable to the company. This admission operates whether or not the letter was returned to the
Bank .7 The diary note for 8 March 1989 in its last paragraph indicates that the letter signed by Mr Magarditch had not been received back to the Bank by that date. It also indicates that the Bank had sent out a settlement authority prior to that date of which it was awaiting the return.
 .8 Mr Smith's diary note of 31 March 1989 indicates that he had been away on annual leave during March and he had returned only three days before. He had had discussions with Mr Sourian and with his solicitor Steve Stojanovic.
Settlement was now set for 7 April 1989. This represented a delay of several weeks from the date when the Bank expected settlement in the light of which the Bank had agreed to accept $325,000. For the Bank still to accept only $325,000 would mean that it would be losing the interest payment that was charged in late March. However, Mr Smith's file note indicates that the Bank decided it would do so. One particular factor inducing the Bank was the information from Sourian and his solicitor that $200,000 had been offered for the Thornleigh property and the sale of the remaining Gladesville property (136-138 Victoria Road) was now imminent. The file note concludes that Mr
Sourian would collect a new letter agreeing to the above dated 31 March 1989 and would return it together with settlement instructions the following
Tuesday to enable settlement to occur on 7 April 1989.
 .9 The letter of 31 March 1989 in paragraph 2 commences with a summary of the position established by the letter of 1 March 1989: `Receipt of the $325,000 will enable reduction of present debts', and then proceeds to record the further advices as to imminent sale of the
Thornleigh and remaining Gladesville property which Mr Smith and recorded in the diary note of 31 March 1989. The letter of 31 March did not need to spell out again how the Bank would apply the $325,000 since that had been dealt with in the letter of 1 March 1989. Mr Smith described the second letter as being a clarification of the first letter to make clear the Bank was looking to the sale of the Thornleigh and the Gladesville property. This letter was signed and returned by Mr Magarditch and he does not dispute his signature. The diary note in Smith annexure A for 6 April 1989 records that the letter of 31 March was returned on that day.
 .10 The crucial document on this issue is the settlement authority. The diary note for 6 April 1989 records that the settlement authority at that stage had not been returned. Branch Securities were instructed that settlement was not to take place until the settlement authority was received. Document 35 is the original settlement authority. It was produced from the file of Stojanovic and
David, solicitors for Magic. This form of the authority contains the words `To be disbursed in terms of letter dated 1/3/89'. These words were placed on the authority by Mr Smith before it left the Bank to go to Stojanovic and David.
Thus these words were on the document when Mr Magarditch signed it. He did not suggest otherwise. Document 43 is the original settlement authority in the form in which it was returned to the Bank. It is thus apparent that, after Mr
Magarditch signed the document, Mr Sourian also signed it as did the solicitor
Stojanovic and it was then returned to the Bank. Mr Sourian's evidence in paragraph 94 of his affidavit that the words `To be disbursed in terms of letter dated 1/3/89' were not on the settlement authority at the time he signed it, although initially adhered to by him in cross-examination, was ultimately conceded by him to be wrong. Thus the settlement authority operates as an unambiguous instruction (if it be needed) from Magic to the Bank that the Bank could apply the $325,000 in terms of the letter dated 1 March 1989 and therefore could apply part of those monies to discharge in full the FDA
No. 2. In the light of the settlement authority, the finding by the Master that the Bank had no authority to appropriate the sum of $325,000 to the indebtedness under the FDA No. 2 account is demonstrably false.
 .11 Mr Magarditch did not give any evidence, in his affidavit or orally, suggesting that he directly instructed the Bank that the sale proceeds were not to be applied to discharge the FDA No. 2 the only evidence of this nature is found in Mr Sourian's affidavit. Mr Sourian's evidence should be rejected for a number of reasons: * It is directly contradicted by his signature of the settlement authority at any time when it had on it the words `to be disbursed in terms of letter dated 1/3/89'. * Mr Sourian accepts that his evidence in paragraph 94 is wrong. * It is evident from Mr Stojanovic's signature on the settlement authority that neither Mr Sourian nor Mr Magarditch told him at the time that they rejected the terms in the letter of 1 March 1989. * Mr Sourian's evidence is not borne out by anything in Mr Smith's diary notes. * Mr Smith has denied these conversations in his affidavit and this denial was not challenged in cross-examination. * In general Mr Smith's evidence is to be preferred to the evidence of Mr Sourian. The Master found Sourian to be a far from satisfactory witness. * At no time prior to the commencement of the Common Law proceedings did Mr Sourian or Mr Magarditch protest to the Bank about the way in which the Bank applied the funds in 1989. .12 Magic obtained the benefit of the April 1989 transaction. Magic wished to give a transfer of the property to the purchaser Wilpine for a sum of $400,000 of which it would retain itself $75,000. Magic could not give such a transfer until it obtained a transfer from Sourian. The transfer from Sourian to Magic, and the transfer from Magic to Wilpine, were to be unencumbered. Thus before
Magic could obtain the benefit of its sale to Wilpine, the mortgage given by
Sourian to the Bank necessarily had to be discharged. The discharge of mortgage benefited Magic by enabling it to receive for itself $75,000 out of the $400,000 paid by Wilpine. Magic used part of this money to pay legal expenses in relation to the action brought against it by Caltex. In addition the discharge benefited Magic because the Bank applied part of the monies to reduce debts admittedly owing by Magic when the Bank otherwise had no obligation to do so. Those amounts were: * $28,160.70 was paid into the overdraft account. * $59,725.00 was paid to reduce the FDA No. 1. 
These amounts total $162,885 which Magic received as a benefit from the transaction proceedings." 
Santow J's summing up of what he called the salient transactions between the parties and his conclusions on critical factual issues, where there was conflict, was: "(i) The Plaintiffs, Mr and Mrs Magarditch gave a guarantee of Magic's debts to the Bank on 28 January 1987 and gave security over the Willoughby Property in support of the Guarantee on 2 September 1987. This is undisputed.
 Victoria Road was purchased at auction by Mr Sourian, son of the
Plaintiffs, in his own name on 20 August 1987, then mortgaged to the Bank by
Mr Sourian on 15 October 1987 as security for his and Magic's obligations to the Bank. The purchase was completed on 16 October 1987. (It adjoined 136
Victoria Road, Gladesville earlier purchased by Magic with money advanced by
ANZ being $430,000 via FDA No. 1). This too is undisputed.

I have concluded the debt for the purchase of 140 Victoria Road (FDA No.
 or $205,000) was thus incurred by Mr Sourian. However, the Bank contends, contrary to the finding of the Master, that the debt of $205,000 became
Magic's if not from the outset, then under the terms of the relevant securities and/or in the events that happened. I do not consider that I should disturb the Master's finding that the debt of $205,000 was not Magic's from the outset. Nor, with some hesitation, would I disturb the Master's finding that by the end of 1988, the indebtedness of Magic to the Bank had not come to include that owing in respect of FDA No. 2 related to the purchase of 140
Victoria Road, though there are a number of factual indications pointing in that direction. That leaves the position post - 1988 below.

Mr Sourian by contract dated 30 August 1988 agreed to sell 140 Victoria
Road to Magic for $210,000 (for which a deposit of $21,000 was paid). This sale was not completed, but the contract remained uncancelled.

Mr Sourian by contract dated 7 February 1989 (subsequently cancelled by a tripartite deed on 10 March 1989 between Sourian, Magic and Wilpine) agreed to sell 140 Victoria Road to Wilpine for $400,000. By the tripartite Deed it was instead agreed that Wilpine would take a transfer by direction of Magic from the registered proprietor (Mr Sourian).

The sale of 140 Victoria Road was completed in April 1989, the property being unencumbered because ANZ agreed to discharge its mortgage on certain terms. The precise terms are a matter of dispute between the parties. The Bank essentially says it agreed to take $325,000 in lieu of the full $400,000 in return for the whole of the $325,000 being first applied to reduce FDA No. 2 ($205,.000). This meant that only the residue could be applied in reduction of
FDA No. 1 (reduced by $59,725) and of the overdraft (reduced by $28,160.70).

The Bank thus relies for the agreement upon its letter of 1 March 1989; Mr
Magarditch's signed concurrence with its terms appearing on the copy thereof; the Bank's further letter of 31 March 1989 being according to the Bank (though disputed by the Respondents) in no way inconsistent with the letter of 1 March even though it did not repeat the earlier letter; the Settlement
Authority with its endorsed reference to the letter of 1 March 1989 and finally the actual application of the proceeds first in reduction of FDA No.
, with consequential benefit to Magic (and Sourian) brought about at the cost to the Bank of $75,000 in sale proceeds from 140 Victoria Road.

With due respect to the Master who concluded otherwise, I do accept the Bank's contentions in that regard for the reasons set out under Question 3 below, with the result that I am satisfied that the settlement arrangements which occurred were in fact agreed to by Magic.

It is fair to say that the Master did not deal with any specificity with the documentation relied on by the Bank, when the Master rejected that contention of the Bank." 
This summary encapsulates one finding that Santow J made which is determinative of the matter, namely, that Mr and Mrs Magarditch agreed to the
Bank's applying the $325,000 from the sale of the second Gladesville property first to reduce FDA 2. Unless that finding can be disturbed, any appeal would fail. The summary also refers to another finding determinative of the matter, namely, the terms of the mortgage of the second Gladesville property which leads separately to the same result; what Santow J called the straightforward construction of the mortgage over the second Gladesville property. Although the mortgagor was Mr Sourian, the mortgage secured any banking accommodation either to him or to Magic irrespective of whether the true borrower was Magic or Mr Sourian.
 "Thus, if the loan were to Magic, as the Bank treated it, then on any view of matters the Bank could repay itself from the proceeds of sale [of the second
Gladesville property], Mr Sourian having on this basis granted a third party mortgage securing Magic's indebtedness. If, as held by the Master, the loan were rather to Mr Sourian, then it still follows that the Bank as Mortgagee was secured for its $205,000 and could resort to the proceeds from selling 140
Victoria Road to discharge that debt of Mr Sourian. The Bank was entitled to withhold discharge until repaid its $205,000 debt applicable to Mr Sourian from the proceeds - and indeed until repaid any further indebtedness of Magic owed to the Bank. That is precisely what the Bank did. A creditor with several securities to resort to, is entitled to choose which security it is to its advantage to take resort, it being well established the doctrine of marshalling does not interfere with that right; see Mir Bros Projects Pty
Limited versus Lyons [[1977] 2 NSWLR 192], discussed in Fisher & Lightwood's Law of Mortgage, Australian edition, by ELG
Tyler, PW Young and CE Croft, Butterworths 1996 at 656-7. What the Bank did was analogous to that. It had a choice as to whether, under security covering both Mr Sourian's and Magic's indebtedness, it applied the proceeds of selling Victoria Road to reduce Mr Sourian's indebtedness first or Magic's. It was, on this basis, to the Bank's advantage, but also in accordance with its entitlement, that it should apply the sale proceeds of 140 Victoria Road first to repay Mr Sourian's indebtedness. It was to the Bank's advantage, because the Magarditches' guarantee and supporting security over their Willoughby home could only have been applied to repay Magic's indebtedness and not Mr
Sourian's - and on the Master's finding, the loan of $205,000 (FDA No. 2) was never Magic's indebtedness.

Thus to point to the Magarditches' guarantee as being constrained in its application to Magic's indebtedness and not Mr Sourian's, is beside the point.
Nor is it to the point that, as a result of the Bank's ability so to deploy its security, the Magarditches are left guaranteeing a larger quantum of indebtedness of Magic than if the sale proceeds for 140 Victoria Road had been applied first to repay Magic's indebtedness. A mortgagee is entitled to deploy the proceeds of realising its security in this manner to its best advantage, there being no stipulation precluding this course. This is so, whether Mr
Sourian arranged the sale or the Bank and whether or not Magic's indebtedness ever included 140 Victoria Road.

Master McLaughlin in his judgment of 20 March 1996 concluded that `the essential question in this case' was `the liability of the Plaintiff to the
Bank pursuant to their guarantee of the indebtedness of Magic'. While in one sense this is true, that liability is not to be treated as if discharged by the $325,000. Since, as the Master held, the liability in respect of 140
Victoria Road was never Magic's but Mr Sourian's, what necessarily followed was that the Plaintiffs could not be called on to meet that liability of Mr
Sourian. But the Plaintiffs (the Magarditches) have never been called on to meet that liability of Mr Sourian. What they have been called on to meet, is the undischarged liability of Magic. That this liability (FDA No. 1) was not first reduced by application of the $325,000 proceeds in discharge of it simply follows from the fact that those proceeds were properly applied first in the discharge of Mr Sourian's liability. Only a small residue from the $325,000 was in fact then applied in reduction of FDA No. 1, namely $59,725 (as well as $28,160.70 applied to Magic's overdraft).

It necessarily follows that the Bank is entitled to call on the Guarantee and security from the Magarditches for the whole of Magic's present undischarged liability to the Bank, without treating that liability as notionally discharged by first applying the $325,000 towards it. That would be contrary to what in fact happened in accordance with the Bank's rights in that regard." 
This was the second basis upon which the Bank was entitled to apply part of the proceeds of the sale of the second Gladesville property to paying out FDA
To be successful the appeal must displace this.

MR AND MRS MAGARDITCH'S SUBMISSIONS 
The application for leave to appeal first came before this Court on 24
November 1997. Mr Sourian sought leave to appear for his parents. The Court pointed out to him that it was concerned only with the application for leave to appeal from the judgment of Santow J. The application was stood over to 28
November on Mr Sourian's application, amongst other things to see if he could obtain legal representation and to enable him to prepare himself better to present the case on behalf of his parents.

On 28 November 1997 the Court gave leave to Mr Sourian to appear for Mr and
Mrs Magarditch. The presiding Judge reminded Mr Sourian that it was the application for leave to appeal against Santow J's decision that was before the Court and that was all the Court was concerned with. Mr Sourian sought to file an amended notice of appeal which was treated as a document giving notice by him of the matters he wished to raise in the application for leave. It was pointed out to Mr Sourian that the additional matters he wanted to raise in the amended notice of appeal could not be raised. Mr Sourian was required to confine himself to persuading the Court that there were reasons why leave should be granted to appeal against the judgment of Santow J.

After some discussion on 28 November 1997 the Court directed Mr Sourian to file written submissions by 4.30pm on Friday 12 December and gave the Bank until 18 December at 4.30pm to file its submissions. On 10 December 1997 Mr
Sourian wrote requiring further time to complete his submission. At the same time he made an application for the stay of the proceedings pending the outcome of other proceedings which had been in the Equity Division and were referred to the Federal Court, which was not granted.

On 22 December 1997 Mr Sourian filed a submission which consisted of 162 paragraphs set out on 32 pages with annexures running from A to KK.
Unfortunately, a great deal of this material was not relevant to the application before the Court.

The Bank filed the following documents: * Respondent's submission on appeal - leave to appeal, a six page document; * Respondent's written submissions in response dated 15 December 1997 pointing out that at that date no further written submissions had been received from Mr Sourian; * A letter from the Bank's solicitors dated 13 January 1998 referring to the submissions filed by Mr Sourian; * A document filed on 27 January 1998 and described as the respondent's written submissions in response to Mr Sourian's document dated 22 December 1997. This document began by objecting to all the paragraphs numbered from 1 - 135 inclusive in the submissions filed by Mr Sourian because they related to events and decisions other than the decision the subject of the application for leave to appeal. 
This problem is mirrored in the first two grounds of the amended notice of appeal. These assert that 
Santow J should have found the Bank had no right to satisfy its debts from
Mr and Mrs Magarditch until the liquidator had completed an action against
VACC Insurance Co Limited to enforce a contract of insurance in respect of a claim made by Magic for losses caused by a fire that occurred at 607 Pacific
Highway, Chatswood on 3 February 1988, 
Equity proceedings 3283/96 or such part of them as involved a claim against the liquidator for negligence in failing to pursue the insurance claim, should have been expedited; and 
Santow J should have found that the Bank was precluded from satisfying its debts against Mr and Mrs Magarditch until all the assets of Magic had been exhausted including the claim against the insurance company or the liquidator.
None of these matters was in issue either before Master McLaughlin or, on the appeal from him, before Santow J. They were concerned only with the inquiry which Windeyer J had ordered to be undertaken before the Master.

There followed another twelve grounds of appeal. These grounds were as follows: "3. With regard to the whole of the judgment his Honour was inconsistent in his reasoning in having: upheld Master McLaughlin's finding that the loan of $205,000 was a loan to
Mr Jake Sourian (and not Magic Australia Pty Limited) to enable Mr Sourian to purchase in his name such that he became the legal and beneficial owner of No Victoria Road, Gladesville in August 1987.
 found that the mortgage of $205,000 referred to above was not transferred or assigned to Magic Australia Pty Limited in any way and that the mortgage was discharged when No 140 Victoria Road was sold to Magic Australia Pty
Limited in September 1988.
 and then holding that the respondent bank was entitled to apply $325,000 from the proceeds of the sale to Wilpine Pty Limited (from Magic on 7/4/89) of Victoria Road Gladesville in reduction of the loan advanced to Mr Sourian (referred to as FDA No 2 account).
His Honour erred in finding that the letter dated 1/3/89 formed part of any agreement, understanding or intention between the appellants and the respondent bank as to how the proceeds from the sale of No 140 Victoria Road,
Gladesville would be used to repay money owed by Magic Australia Pty Limited to the respondent bank.
His Honour erred in accepting the evidence of Mr Peter Smith who stated that `there was not now in existence on the bank's file a copy of the letter of 1/3/89 signed by Mr Magarditch, he believed that such a letter had been received by him at the time'.
Further, his Honour should have found that the letter dated 1/3/89 though signed by Mr Magarditch was not, in fact delivered to the respondent bank and his Honour should have: drawn an adverse inference (against the respondent bank) from the fact that the respondent bank was unable to produce the original.
 drawn an adverse inference (against the respondent bank) from the fact that the respondent bank drafted the 1/3/89 letter.
 found that Mr Magarditch had a poor command of the English language and therefore misunderstood 1/3/89 letter at the time he signed it but withheld its delivery on comprehending its intention and negotiated changes to the /3/89 letter which were reflected in the 31/3/89 letter.
 was in error in finding that there was no reason why the bank would want to give up the right to reduction of Mr Sourian's indebtedness by applying the agreed sale proceeds of $325,000 from No 140 Victoria Road, Gladesville, and should have found that the true arrangement was that FDA No 2 loan was to be paid with the sale proceeds of Mr Sourian's home unit at 5/1 Jersey Road,
Artarmon and the sale of land at 252 Pennant Hills Road, Thornleigh owned by
Magic Australia Pty Limited.
His Honour placed too much weight on the endorsement (relating to the /3/89 letter) on the settlement papers as Mr Magarditch has a poor command of the English language and Mr Sourian was at his committal hearing at the
Sutherland Local Court at the time of his signing and had insufficient time to examine the document.
His Honour erred in holding that the letter dated 1/3/89 and the actual letter of approval dated 31/3/89 were not inconsistent with one another. The letter dated 1/3/89 refers to the loan to Mr Jake Sourian whereas the second letter dated 31/3/89 referred to the loans to Magic Australia Pty Limited.
(His Honour specifically confirmed the decision of Master McLaughlin that the loan to Mr Jake Sourian was not assigned or transferred to Magic.)
His Honour erred in finding that the respondent's Retail Banking Manager
Mr Smith that Magic Australia Pty Limited, had agreed to option No. 2, (see p26 and p31 of the judgment) as was evidenced by Mr Peter Smith's diary notes and further erred in failing to take into consideration subsequent qualifications contained in those diary notes.
His Honour erred in finding that there was no protest by Mr Magarditch or
Mr Sourian as to the debiting of Magic's accounts and with interest instalments for the FDA No 2 loan.
His Honour erred in his construction of the relevant security documents and should have held that the mortgage to Mr Sourian registered over No 140
Victoria Road, Gladesville did not authorise the bank to apply the proceeds of sale when No 140 Victoria Road was subsequently sold by Magic Australia Pty
Limited to Wilpine Pty Limited on 7/4/89.
His Honour erred in not addressing the implications and ramifications of the respondent bank's: failure to abide by the arrangement between it and Mr Sourian that the proceeds of the sale of Magic's Thornleigh property and Mr Sourian's home unit (yielding $131,699.72) were to be used to satisfy the loan referred to as the
FDA No 2 account (as was held by Master McLaughlin see his Judgment at p22).
 failed to credit any account of Mr Sourian or Magic Australia Pty Limited until 17 months had elapsed.
 failed to credit the FDA No 2 account with the proceeds of $131,699.72 from the sale of Mr Sourian's home unit 5/1 Jersey Road, Artarmon until 17 months had elapsed.
His Honour erred in failing to find that there was an improper intermingling on the part of the respondent bank of the financial affairs of
Magic Australia Pty Limited and those of Mr Jake Sourian and his Honour should have treated Magic Australia Pty Limited and Mr Jake Sourian as separate legal identities.
His Honour erred in reaching an adverse finding as to Mr Jake Sourian's credibility.

His Honour erred in finding that Mr Sourian instructed his solicitors that the purchase of 140 Victoria Road, Gladesville was to proceed in the company name.

His Honour erred in finding that `Mr Sourian falsely denied in cross examination that he gave these instructions.' 
His Honour ought to have accepted Mr Sourian's evidence that Mr Paul Kelly had instructed Mr Geoff Bartels, solicitor, as Messrs Treanor & Bartels who were acting for Mr Sourian in his purchase of 140 Victoria Road,
Gladesville to prepare the documents in Magic's name and his Honour ought t o have found that Mr Sourian corrected this error when he first became aware of it.

The Master found `Indeed, he (Kelly) had directed Mr Sourian to solicitors with whom he himself had some connection, being Messrs Treanor & Bartels (a firm which was a client of the bank), despite the fact that other solicitors, Messrs G W Henry & Co of Crows Nest were at the very time acting for Mr Sourian...' p15." 
In Mr Sourian's written submissions the principal points made on behalf of Mr and Mrs Magarditch related to the agreement for the disbursement of the proceeds of the sale of the second Gladesville property, the Bank's inability to produce the original letter of 1 March 1989 with Mr Magarditch's signature and Mr Magarditch's alleged difficulty in reading or understand the meaning of the letter. Paragraphs 146 to 162 of the submissions contained no material relevant to the question of whether leave to appeal should be granted.

SHOULD LEAVE TO APPEAL BE GRANTED? 
In the circumstances of this case the proper approach is to ask whether on the material before the Court the decision of Santow J has been shown to be arguably wrong. In considering this question it is useful to examine why
Master McLaughlin and Santow J reached different results.

The Master said that the essential matter in issue before him concerned two sums of money totalling $205,000 which were advanced by the Bank towards the purchase of the second Gladesville property. The Master regarded this as essential because the guarantee given by Mr and Mrs Magarditch was to secure
Magic's indebtedness to the Bank. Thus, the Master applied himself to deciding whether the sums which totalled $205,000 were advanced to Magic or advanced to
Mr Sourian and whether this amount was or became a debt owed to the Bank by
Magic or Mr Sourian. The Master said that the major part of the hearing before him over nine hearing days was devoted to this question. He dealt with the evidence in detail. In the course of discussing this question, the Master referred to the letter dated 1 March 1989 and said that he would not be prepared to decide the question of the genuineness of the purported signature of Mr Magarditch on that document without the document bearing the original signature being available to the Court and being placed before Mr Magarditch during his cross-examination on the topic. The only mention the Master made of the mortgage to the Bank of the second Gladesville property was to say that when the monies were advanced on settlement the Bank obtained a mortgage over Victoria Road from Mr Sourian, into whose name that property was transferred, and that the Bank discharged the mortgage on 22 September 1988.

Having reviewed the evidence Master McLaughlin said that in approaching the question of the liability of Mr and Mrs Magarditch to the Bank: "[I]t must constantly be borne in mind that that liability is the liability of the plaintiffs (guarantors) in respect to the indebtedness of Magic to the
Bank. That liability arises solely under the guarantee of 28 January 1987. The mortgage of 2 September 1987 secures that guarantee, but does not create any separate liability of the plaintiffs to the Bank. Thus, if the plaintiffs are not liable under the guarantee, the Bank cannot enforce against them its rights under the mortgage, since that mortgage does no more than secure the indebtedness of the plaintiffs under the guarantee.

I have already referred to the fact, and it seems to me to be of fundamental importance in this case, that the premises at 140 Victoria Road, were purchased in the name of Mr Sourian. At all times the Bank was aware that the premises were being purchased by Mr Sourian. He gave to the Bank a mortgage over those premises. There was no assignment to Magic of Mr Sourian's liability to the Bank in respect of that mortgage whilst Mr Sourian was the legal owner of those premises.

Whilst the situation remained in that state, with the legal ownership continuing in the name of Mr Sourian, I do not see how the Bank could hold Mr and Mrs Magarditch in any way liable for any indebtedness to the Bank in respect of the premises at 140 Victoria Road." 
With all respect, as Santow J's reasons for judgment revealed, these observations, even if correct, did not resolve the question which had to be determined, namely, whether the Bank was entitled to use part of the proceeds of the sale of the second Gladesville property in payment of the amount shown as a debit in FDA 2. If it could, as Santow J explained, the indebtedness of
Magic on FDA 1, to that extent, remained and the Bank was entitled to have resort to the Magarditchs' guarantee of Magic's indebtedness to the Bank.
However, the Master went on, without explanation, when referring to what he described as the transfer by Mr Sourian of the second Gladesville property to
Magic on 22 September 1988, to say "at the time of that transfer the Bank discharged the mortgage over that property granted to it by Mr Sourian". As far as the Master was concerned the point was, and he found, that the indebtedness for the sum of $205,000 and subsequent interest instalments was not properly a liability of Magic.

At the end of his reasons Master McLaughlin turned to the arrangement made for dealing with the purchase price of $400,000 received from Wilpine. Referring to the evidence about the arrangements, the Master said: "However, it seems to me that evidence relating to these matters does not address itself to the essential question in this case, that being the liability of the plaintiffs to the bank pursuant to their guarantee of the indebtedness of Magic.

I am not satisfied that either the arrangements ultimately made concerning the proceeds of sale of 140 Victoria Road or the letter of 6 July 1989 (and the circumstances surrounding its signing and alteration) had the effect of imposing upon Magic liability for the sum of $205,000 which the bank had advanced to Mr Sourian for his purchase of the property, or for interest upon that sum.

If, as I have held, the conduct of the bank in debiting against Magic the original advance and interest thereon was without authority or justification, then the conduct of the bank in receiving part of the proceeds of sale (albeit by arrangement with Mr Sourian and Magic) and crediting that sum to the account of Magic against which the original advance had been debited cannot in any way improve the bank's position or alter the legal relationship between the bank and Magic.

It is my conclusion that Magic is not indebted to the bank in respect to the advance and interest thereon. It follows, therefore, that the bank was not entitled to appropriate the sum of $325,000 from the proceeds of sale towards the reduction of that alleged indebtedness.

That sum of $325,000 should, in the first instance, have been applied towards the indebtedness of Magic in its overdraft account (referred to as FDA No. 1).
If that had been done, then, according to the evidence relied upon by the bank (set forth in the affidavit of Nicolette Francesca Agsten sworn 11 September ), Magic's overdraft account would have been in credit in an amount of $49,622.17." 
With the greatest respect, this statement demonstrates that the Master's approach to the problem to be determined was wrong. The Master said nothing about the terms of the mortgage the Bank held over the second Gladesville property. The Master gave no reasons for his conclusion that that mortgage had been discharged in September 1988. The Master gave no satisfactory reasons, having regard to the evidence before him, for concluding that the agreement between the Bank, Mr and Mrs Magarditch and Mr Sourian was other than as stated in the letter of 1 March 1989. Santow J examined the evidence in far greater detail than the Master and came to the conclusion, in our opinion clearly correctly, that Mr and Mrs Magarditch and Mr Sourian had agreed to the amount of $325,000 being used in part to pay out FDA 2. We are of the opinion that there is nothing in the Master's judgment, to the extent, if at all, to which it deals with these matters, which raises any doubt about the correctness of Santow J's conclusions. The Master held: "that the bank had no authority to appropriate the sum of $325,000 to the alleged indebtedness of Magic in respect of the purchase of 140 Victoria Road (in the FDA No. 2 account). There was, as I have held, no indebtedness of
Magic or of the plaintiffs to that account." 
This statement overlooks the terms of the mortgage over the second Gladesville property. The Master certified that no amount was owing by Mr and Mrs
Magarditch under the guarantee dated 28 January 1987 to the Bank and the mortgage dated 2 September 1987 to the Bank.

THE MATERIAL PUT BEFORE THE COURT BY MR SOURIAN 
The material annexed to Mr Sourian's written submissions includes twelve judgments given in the Equity Division including the judgment of Windeyer J of April 1994 ordering the inquiry. The judgments reflect the history of these proceedings and the extent to which matters central to the present proceedings have been discussed and decided on other occasions. The written submissions include criticisms and intemperate attacks upon the judicial officers concerned unsupported by anything other than the writer's assertion. However,
Mr Sourian has invited the Court to read all this material, which we have done. We propose to refer to some parts of the judgments in chronological order as background to the application with which the Court is here concerned.

JUDGMENT OF MASTER WINDEYER - 20 JUNE 1991 ORDERING THAT MAGIC BE WOUND UP PURSUANT TO THE CORPORATIONS LAW - 1821/90 
In the course of this judgment, from which there was an appeal dismissed by
Hodgson J., Master Windeyer noted that a debt to the Bank of $306,812.64 as at June 1990 was admitted. The Master observed that in October 1987 the Bank opened "for the defendant" [that is Magic] a fully drawn loan account of $205,000 and said that about this account there was a real dispute. He referred to the sale of the second Gladesville property in early 1989 and said this: "By transfer dated 10 March 1989 Mr Sourian transferred No 140 Victoria Road to the defendant (ie Magic) for a stated consideration of $210,000. That transfer was registered number Y309065 [our emphasis]. By transfer dated 7
April 1989 the defendant sold that property for $400,000 the transfer being registered number Y309066 [our emphasis] so that the transfers were clearly lodged together, together with the discharge of mortgage being registered
Y309064 [our emphasis]. The discharge is dated 22 September 1988 there being no proper explanation for that date although to some extent it bears out the story of Mr Sourian. The $210,000 was not paid by the defendant to Mr Sourian, both Mr Sourian and Mr Magarditch saying in oral evidence that Mr Sourian owed that sum to the company for various loans made to him and for payments made on his behalf. I do not accept that evidence and it is fair to say that the purported debts are not alleged to have been shown in the accounts of the company.

As I understand it the complaint of the defendant is that the bank required $325,000 to be paid to it out of the ultimate proceeds of sale in the view of the defendant to discharge certain unauthorised debts on the defendant's accounts with the plaintiff. Throughout the relatively long hearing for this type of action I questioned the basis for this complaint. Leaving aside the transfer from Sourian to the company, which is really unexplained particularly if the company wanted to have nothing to do with that property as Mr
Magarditch continually stated, the fact is that if the company had nothing to do with No 140 Victoria Road it benefited from its sale. The fully drawn account of $205,000 of which it complains was paid out and the current account and the loan account of the defendant with the bank were reduced by amounts well in excess of the charges debited against those accounts in respect of the fully drawn account for 140 Victoria Road. The transfer to the defendant was not made subject to the mortgage and obviously the mortgage was to be paid out of the proceeds of the ultimate sale. If the fully drawn loan account were made to Mr Sourian rather than to the defendant company it had to be repaid and I am unable to see that the company has in any way suffered. Mr Sourian would not have been able to transfer the property without the bank's consent without discharging the liability of the company he having given the mortgage for that purpose. He might perhaps have received a discharge on paying the full amount of the proceeds of sale but he could not have expected a discharge on payment of $210,000 at a time the property was worth $400,000." 
Master Windeyer's findings support the conclusion that the mortgage of the second Gladesville property was not discharged until completion of the sale to
Wilpine and that even if the Bank lent the $205,000 to Mr Sourian, the effect of the mortgage was that it had to be repaid out of the proceeds of sale of the second Gladesville property.

The Master found that Magic was clearly insolvent. "That was really not disputed if the set off against the bank debt was not allowed." As to the validity of the mortgage over the Willoughby property, which was an issue in the caveat proceedings, Master Windeyer said there was no basis for staying the winding up order pending the outcome of those proceedings.

JUDGMENT OF McLELLAND J - 27 JUNE 1991 - 2181/91 
This was an application by Mr and Mrs Magarditch for an order for the withdrawal of the caveat affecting the Willoughby property. In this judgment
McLelland J set out the substance of a letter dated 6 July 1989 to the Bank from Magic by which, in return for the Bank releasing their mortgage over the
Willoughby property, Mr and Mrs Magarditch agreed and undertook the following: "(a) That subject to us being successful in purchasing the block of land next to our Thornleigh property, that we will place our Victoria Road, Gladesville property on the market immediately and accept any reasonable offer for its sale.

Upon signing of contracts for the sale of the Gladesville property, we will arrange for all deposit monies to be paid to the Bank in reduction of our debt, pending full clearance from the sale of the property.

Should the purchase of the Thornleigh property and sale of the Gladesville property not proceed by 6 October 1989, we will return the abovementioned
Certificate of Title, and relative discharge of Mortgage to the Bank." 
Mr and Mrs Magarditch alleged that at the time of the transaction, in the course of which the Bank did deliver to them a discharge of mortgage together with the relevant certificate of title, the words "if we feel it is necessary" appeared in handwriting at the end of paragraph (c). In fact, upon receipt of the discharge of mortgage Mr and Mrs Magarditch, by Mr Sourian, immediately registered it. It was common ground that neither the purchase of the
Thornleigh property, nor the sale of the Gladesville property referred to in para (c), that is to say the first Gladesville property owned by Magic, had proceeded by 6 October 1989. The Bank claimed that it had a security interest in the Willoughby property equivalent to its original mortgage to secure the indebtedness of Magic. McLelland J was satisfied that the Bank had established that it had an arguable case for such an interest and gave the Bank time within which to begin proceedings to establish or enforce the interest.

JUDGMENT OF McLELLAND J - 18 DECEMBER 1991 - 1821/90 
This was an application by the liquidator of Magic seeking directions in relation to proceedings in the Common Law Division of the Court brought by the
Bank against Magic seeking possession of the first Gladesville property. The directors of Magic filed a notice of motion in which they sought to compel the liquidator to determine the quantum of the debt, if any, owing by Magic to the
Bank. His Honour observed that the liquidator had been advised by counsel that
Magic had no defence to the claim for possession by the Bank nor was there any substantial prospect of success in a cross-claim which had been put on in the proceedings commenced by the Bank. His Honour observed that there was nothing before the court to suggest that that advice was other than well founded. His
Honour said that an appeal had been lodged against the making of the winding up order by Master Windeyer but it was common ground that an order for security for costs in that appeal was made against the company which had not been complied with, in consequence of which there was a stay of the appeal. He could see no advantage in the liquidator consenting to the claim for debt being added to the current common law proceedings. Accordingly, his Honour said that the liquidator would be justified in taking the course proposed in relation to the possession proceedings but should not assent to any amendment to the common law proceedings to add a claim for debt.

We interpolate here that on 31 January 1992 the liquidator rejected part of the Bank's formal proof of debt being an amount of legal fees, the amount of $205,000 together with interest representing the fully drawn advance and an excess of claims detailed in bank statements for particular accounts. The total disallowance was $465,713.24.

JUDGMENT OF HODGSON J - 9 MARCH 1992 - 1821/90 
This was a judgment in the course of the appeal from the decision of Master
Windeyer winding Magic up, concerned with the admissibility of further evidence. In the course of it, Hodgson J pointed out that Master Windeyer had stayed the winding up order on 27 June 1991. The appellant, Magic, had an opportunity to have the appeal heard on 25 July 1991 but sought an adjournment. Rolfe J revoked the stay of the winding up order. Reference was also made to a payment in May 1991 of $135,000 which reduced the amount Magic owed the Bank. His Honour referred to Magic's contention that the second
Gladesville property had been sold for $400,000 of which $325,000 was retained by the Bank and that the whole of this amount should have been applied by the
Bank in reduction of Magic's accounts 42134 and 44076, that is to say its overdraft account and FDA 1, but that $237,000 was in fact used to pay out account 44199 (namely FDA 2) which had been opened without the company's authority.

JUDGMENT OF HODGSON J - 3 APRIL 1992 - 1821/90 
This was the judgment on Magic's appeal from Master Windeyer. Again, his
Honour referred to the mortgage taken by the Bank over the second Gladesville property "expressed as securing advances made to Mr Sourian and/or Magic". His
Honour referred to the various dealings with the property and the dispute about the application of $265,000 from the proceeds of that sale and said: "As I read the Master's judgment, he resolved the question in this way. He accepted that there was a real dispute as to the fully drawn loan account of $205,000 and expressed some surprise that evidence from the bank of the circumstances in which the accounts in the name of Magic were opened. On the other hand, he did not accept the evidence led on behalf of Magic as to the consideration said to have been given for the transfer from Mr Sourian to
Magic. In any event, he held that, whatever the position in relation to these matters, ANZ's mortgage had to be paid out of the proceeds of the ultimate sale; so that Magic could not complain about this matter, particularly as it had benefited from the whole transaction in relation to the property (it seems to me, to the extent of about $135,000)." 
Turning, later in his judgment, to express his view on the question of whether there was a bona fide dispute shown, his Honour said: "As I have said, the basis of the bona fide dispute suggested by Magic was that ANZ misapplied $325,000 from the proceeds of sale of 140 Victoria Road,
Gladesville, or at least some substantial part of these proceeds. As I have already said, at the time of the sale, ANZ was registered as mortgagee over this property, that mortgage having been granted to secure the very advance which ANZ had made of the whole of the purchase price, so that the property could have been purchased in the first place. Also at the time of the sale of this property by Magic, ANZ still had in its possession the Certificate of
Title and a Discharge of Mortgage which ANZ had executed. It seems to me that, in those circumstances, in order to show a bona fide dispute on substantial grounds as to the application of proceeds of sale, there was an onus on Magic to show that there was some substantial, or at least plausible, ground for saying that ANZ was not entitled to withhold the Certificate of Title and
Discharge of Mortgage unless and until it was repaid the very amount which it had advanced for the purchase of that property. Merely to show that there was a dispute as to whether the account relating to this advance was or was not properly in the name of Magic does not, in my view, go any distance at all towards showing a plausible ground for saying that ANZ was not entitled to be repaid the purchase price of this land which ANZ had undoubtedly paid." 
The appeal was dismissed.

JUDGMENT OF POWELL J - 22 MAY 1992 - 3046/92 
The proceedings before Powell J were brought by the liquidator of Magic seeking directions:
As to whether the liquidator ought properly in the circumstances to proceed with the auction for sale of the Thornleigh property on 26 May 1992.
As to whether the liquidator ought properly to admit the proof of debt dated 21 October 1991 in the sum of $866,928.95 lodged with him by the Bank.

His Honour dealt only with the first direction sought. He referred to the judgment of Rolfe J revoking the stay on 25 July 1991. Rolfe J had noted that
Magic had been furnished with an opportunity of having the appeal heard on 25
July 1991 and that the only reason that the matter did not go forward on that day was the application by Magic for an adjournment. His Honour referred also to an injunction granted on 17 February 1992 by Cohen J restraining the liquidator from disposing of any of Magic's assets pending the determination of the appeal from Master Windeyer. Powell J said that he had been informed that although an appeal to the Court of Appeal had been lodged, no stay had been sought nor any appeal papers settled. His Honour said: "In the light of what had earlier occurred, it will hardly come as a matter of any surprise when I record that, at one minute to noon on 12 May 1992, Mr
Sourian appeared in my court unheralded, unannounced and without any papers, seeking, ostensibly on behalf of the Company, an ex parte injunction to restrain the auction sale of the Company's plant which was appointed to take place at noon that day. Quite apart from such questions as to whether Mr
Sourian could claim to appear for the Company, and the fact that there was still no stay of the Order for winding up made by Master Windeyer the better part of twelve months before, the lateness of the hour made the application a completely futile exercise and I declined to accede to it." 
Powell J set out the terms of a letter written on 10 May 1992 by Messrs
Caruana Kay & Berry on behalf of Mr Sourian and Mr Magarditch asserting that the company was solvent and that their clients would be moving the court for an inquiry into the liquidator's conduct and seeking an order that the liquidator be removed. Powell J said: "It is not without point to observe that, notwithstanding the bellicose nature of this letter, no application such as was foreshadowed, and threatened, was made to me, and that, even now, neither the Company, nor Messrs Sourian and
Magarditch, seek a stay of the Order for winding up." 
In the meanwhile, the liquidator's solicitors had now advised the liquidator that the rejection of the Bank's proof of debt could no longer be maintained.
The argument that Magic was solvent was put on the basis of the claim that "the directors' estimates of the realisable value of" Magic's assets contained in a report to creditors that Magic was shown to be solvent. Powell J set out a number of matters which he said revealed "the fragility of this house of cards". Describing the position with which he had to deal, his Honour said, inter alia, "despite the absence of a stay, Messrs Sourian and Magarditch have, over the course of the past year, indulged in a series of manoeuvres, made at the last moment, in an attempt to stultify the efforts of the plaintiff to carry out his duties as an officer of the Court." His Honour declared that in the circumstances revealed by the affidavits filed in support of the summons, the liquidator would be justified in proceeding to submit the property for sale at auction on 26 May 1992.

JUDGMENT OF McLELLAND J - 23 JUNE 1992 - 3046/92 
This was the judgment dealing with the second matter raised in the liquidator's summons for directions. His Honour dismissed it on the basis that it would normally be inappropriate for such a direction to be sought or given.

JUDGMENT OF WADDELL CJ in EQ - 16 JULY 1992 - 3046/92 
Waddell CJ in Eq stood the matter over for further hearing on 12 August 1992.
His Honour gave leave to Mr Sourian to file a summons in which the Bank was defendant seeking relief in respect of the sale of the first Gladesville property returnable on that date.

JUDGMENT OF McLELLAND J - 3 AUGUST 1992 - 4027/92 
This related to a summons filed on 24 July 1992 by Mr Sourian returnable on 12
August 1992. His Honour observed that the relief sought in that summons went well beyond the relief of the kind specified by Waddell CJ in Eq on 16 July
An application was made for summary dismissal. His Honour stood the matter over to the Chief Judge on 12 August 1992.

JUDGMENT OF WADDELL CJ in EQ - 12 AUGUST 1992 - 4027/92 
Waddell CJ in Eq dealt with the application to dismiss the summons by treating the various orders sought individually.

First, his Honour dealt with the application that Magic be removed from liquidation. His Honour observed that on 30 April 1992 an appeal had been lodged to the Court of Appeal from the decision of Hodgson J. The remedies open in relation to the winding up order were either by that appeal or by application for a stay of the winding up on the basis that it was no longer appropriate for it to continue. His Honour held that the remedy sought under this head was not available in the proceedings.

Secondly, an order was sought that the court declare that the amount owing to the Bank was a particular figure. It was alleged by Mr Sourian that the Bank by one of its officers fraudulently dealt with the various accounts of the company and that as a consequence of that and other events the amount which was owing to the Bank was considerably less than the Bank claimed. His Honour said that under s538 of the Companies Code a person who was aggrieved by any decision of a liquidator might appeal to the court in respect of that decision. This was the only way in which Mr Sourian could contest that determination. It was not open for him to seek this order.

Thirdly, an order was sought requiring the Bank to restore to the company and its directors possession of the first Gladesville property. Various objections were taken to this claim. One of them was that no proceeding on behalf of
Magic could be commenced without the consent of the liquidator. Mr Sourian and
Mr Magarditch had no right to make such a claim. But the main obstacle to the claim was that the property had been sold by the Bank and accordingly, it was no longer in a position to restore the property to Magic or to its directors.
His Honour said: "There was no order of the court which prevented the bank selling the property. It was quite within its rights to do so." 
The fourth claim was for an order of the same nature in respect of the
Thornleigh property. This property had been sold by the liquidator and there was no evidence to support any ground to set that sale aside.

Fifthly, a claim was made for damages. His Honour pointed out that so far as
Magic was concerned, it made a claim for damages in the proceedings which the
Bank took against it for possession of the first Gladesville property. In those proceedings the Bank succeeded in obtaining an order for possession. In the proceedings, Magic made a cross-claim for damages based upon a variety of allegations against the Bank concerning the way the Bank had dealt with the affairs of the company. Under the law relating to liquidations it was for the liquidator to decide whether or not he would continue with this cross-claim.
The liquidator was of the opinion that the cross-claim had no reasonable grounds of succeeding. He therefore applied to the court for a direction that he should be at liberty to discontinue the cross-claim, the court gave that direction and the liquidator did discontinue the cross-claim.

Waddell CJ in Eq concluded that none of the orders sought could legitimately be sought in the proceedings before him and dismissed them. He pointed out that the Court was only able to deal with grievances in accordance with the law and in accordance with its own rules. It had no legal right to make investigations generally into grievances.

JUDGMENT OF WINDEYER J - 28 APRIL 1994 - 2181/91 
This was the decision which led to the matter being referred to the Master to inquire as to the amount owing by Mr and Mrs Magarditch under the guarantee and the mortgage. However, the main issue for determination was that adverted to by McLelland J in his judgment of 27 June 1991, namely, the situation in which the Bank handed over a discharge of the mortgage of the Willoughby property in return for the letter or document dated 6 July 1989 signed by Mr and Mrs Magarditch. The point at issue was whether the words "if we feel it is necessary" had been added at the end of paragraph (c) before it was signed by
Mr and Mrs Magarditch or afterwards. The Bank manager, Mr Culmer, said Mr
Sourian added the words after the document had been signed and when asked by
Mr Culmer "why did you do a stupid thing like that for, it will not alter anything", Mr Sourian said "we will see". Windeyer J observed that the transaction was a most extraordinary one and it was really unexplained why the
Bank handed over the documents at all.

Windeyer J found that the words in question were added after the document was signed and after the security documents were returned to Mr Magarditch. His
Honour was quite satisfied that the Bank had established that Mr and Mrs
Magarditch were liable to it for the balance of the debt due to it by Magic which it had not recovered and for whatever other amounts they were liable under the guarantee. Accordingly, he referred the matter to the Master for inquiry. He was also satisfied that in procuring the registration of the discharge of the mortgage Mr and Mrs Magarditch were acting fraudulently within the meaning of [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s42.html) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), the evidence being clear that when Mr Sourian lodged the discharge for registration he was acting at least as agent for and within the authority given to him by his father. His Honour thought it perfectly clear that sub- clause (c) of the letter in question relating to the return of the security documents must have contained an implied term that no discharge would be registered unless the additional Thornleigh property had been purchased or at least the sale of the first Gladesville property had been arranged and a breach of that implied term thereby putting it outside the power of Mr and Mrs
Magarditch to comply with the agreement was fraudulent.

JUDGMENT OF SANTOW J - 1 MAY 1995 - 1821/90 
This was an application by Mr Sourian and Mr Magarditch to remove the liquidator. One matter raised in these proceedings was a fire on 3 February at the Chatswood premises of Magic. His Honour observed that the application involved matters of fact, which needed to be the subject of properly admissible evidence, and contentions of law, which needed to be properly enunciated along with adequate particulars. One element related to whether the liquidator should have allowed the Bank's proof of debt in the sum of $866,928.95 or "rather, should have disallowed that part of the proof of debt relating to the loan account 44199 (FDA 2) for the purchase of 140
Victoria Road, Gladesville (the first property)". His Honour regarded this as a matter which would be the subject of the inquiry before the Master. He gave directions for the continuance of the application.

OTHER DOCUMENTS ANNEXED TO MR SOURIAN'S SUBMISSIONS 
Finally, we should observe that in the bundle of documents is a further amended statement of claim in 20124 of 1995 in the Common Law Division between
Mr Sourian and Mr and Mrs Magarditch as plaintiffs and the State of New South
Wales together with four other defendants including VACC Insurance Co Limited and the Bank. This relates to the 1988 fire, the insurance claim thereunder and certain criminal proceedings against Mr Sourian which were dismissed.

In respect of that fire, there is in the material before us an affidavit filed by the liquidator of Magic in matter 50045/97 in the Commercial Division and made on 20 March 1997 in answer to an affidavit of Mr Sourian sworn on 13
March 1997. The liquidator refers to the insurance claim and the charges laid against Mr Sourian. The liquidator acknowledged that he had been requested by
Mr Sourian to proceed against VACC Insurance Co Limited. He continued: "8. The insurance claim, so far as I am aware, relates to a property at
Chatswood which was not an asset of Magic at the time of my appointment or disclosed in the Report as to Affairs being Annexure `A' herein.
At the time of my appointment in 1991, a charge under Section 178BB of the
Crimes Act was pending against Mr Sourian concerning the insurance claim against VACC.
The charge referred to in paragraph 9 above was dismissed by Judge Nader on 2 July 1993. I have read judgments of Judge Nader dated 2 July 1993 and 8
March 1994, copies of which are annexed to the affidavit of Sourian and marked `E' and `F' respectively.
I refer to the affidavit of Sourian and say that I acknowledge being requested by Mr Sourian to proceed against VACC Insurance Co Ltd.
Further, in relation to the potential claim against VACC, I requested information in order to further assess this matter. Annexed hereto and marked with the letters `B', `C' and `D', respectively, are correspondence between myself and the Plaintiff's solicitors.
 `B' letter to Jennifer E Darin dated 28 August 1991; `C' letter from Lees Givney dated 24 September 1992; and `D' letter to Lees Givney dated 6 October 1992.
Other than information referred to in paragraphs 10, 11 and 12 hereof, I have not received any other information concerning the fire and break-in in and 1988 and say further that I have not previously seen copies of the insurance proposal form nor the insurance contract annexed to the affidavit of
Sourian and marked `A' and `B' until I read that affidavit." 
Miss Jennifer E Darin was a solicitor who at some stage was acting for Mr
Sourian and Mr and Mrs Magarditch. Lees Givney were solicitors who were creditors of Magic.

CONCLUSION 
Neither Mr or Mrs Magarditch or Mr Sourian have brought or proceeded with an appeal against any of the judgments to which we have referred other than that of Master Windeyer winding Magic up and now from the decision of Santow J. So far as appears from the material, the appeal from the decision of Hodgson J to the Court of Appeal was not proceeded with, though filed six years ago. We reiterate that the only question before this Court was whether there was some error in the decision of Santow J of 17 April 1997 sufficiently arguable to justify the granting of leave to appeal from his decision.

Having read and considered all the material which Mr Sourian has placed before the Court, we are not persuaded that Mr and Mrs Magarditch have shown any arguable error in Santow J's decision. In fact, we agree with Santow J's decision. Accordingly, in our opinion, the application for leave to appeal should be dismissed with costs.

The criticisms made of the other judgments or of the liquidator or the Bank or its officers are not shown in the material presented to have any substance.
They are irrelevant to the present application. Mr and Mrs Magarditch and Mr
Sourian have had every opportunity to challenge in the appropriate way anything done by the Bank or the liquidator. With the exception of the decision of Master McLaughlin, which Santow J overruled, in our opinion correctly, these challenges have failed. There is nothing to suggest that they deserved any other fate. We have looked carefully to see whether on acceptable evidence any injustice has been done by the Bank or the liquidator to Mr and
Mrs Magarditch or to Mr Sourian or to Magic and have found none.

The application for leave to appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
