

Zaccaria t/as Tony's Precision Automative Engineers versus R Meehan and Ors
Matter No 30012/98 [1998] NSWSC 769 (19 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
EUGENIO ANTHONY ZACCARIA t/as TONY'S PRECISION AUTOMATIVE ENGINEERS versus R MEEHAN & ORS /98 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter, application was made by motion for an order for particulars of a summons instituting an appeal from the Consumer Claims Tribunal. The particulars sought requested elucidation of the basis on which it is contended that the matter determined by the Consumer Claims Tribunal was not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and certain other matters. 
The particulars were requested by letter, that letter was not acknowledged. A month later there was a follow-up, that yielded no result. Further, on the evidence, it appears there was a phone call, which also yielded no result, and the motion was then brought with an affidavit in support.

In consequence of that motion, the particulars have been drawn and have been supplied. Mr. Morris of counsel, who appears on behalf of the plaintiff, was unable to assist with any basis on why the particulars had not been supplied earlier which might in any way mitigate an order for costs. Mr. Lonergan of counsel, appearing for the remaining defendants, has conceded that the particulars furnished do answer the request.

The only issue that remains before me is the question of whether there should be an order for costs. In all the circumstances, I am prepared to make such an order.

As to the further progress of the matter, by consent the matter is stood over to 26 May 1998. I direct the defendants to file and serve any affidavits upon which they wish to rely on or before 4.00 pm, Monday 25 May. I direct the parties to have available on the morning of 26 May a short written outline by way of submission of their respective cases such as to enable the court to ascertain the nature of the argument, the extent of any hearing necessary and the extent which might be necessary of any oral submissions.

Plaintiff to pay the defendants' costs of the motion.
 * * * 
