

The New South Wales Netball Association Ltd (ACN 001 685 007) versus Probuild
Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd (ACN 095 250 945) [2015] NSWSC 408 (7 April 2015) 
Last Updated: 21 April 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
See paragraph 22 of this judgment.  
Catchwords: 
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Interlocutory injunction seeking to restrain adjudication of payment claim - Prejudice due to operation of statutory timetable - Injunction to restrain enforcement of adjudication determination 
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION - Validity of payment claim - Whether arguable case that claim referred to as "draft" was a valid payment claim  
JUDGMENT 
Introduction
By a notice of motion filed on 2 April 2015, the plaintiff (Netball NSW) sought an interlocutory injunction restraining the first defendant, Probuild, from taking any further steps to prosecute the adjudication of a payment claim that was issued by Probuild on 2 March 2015 under the [Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment Act 1999](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/) (the Act). Netball NSW also sought an interlocutory injunction restraining the second defendant, who had been nominated as the adjudicator in respect of Probuild's adjudication application, from proceeding to adjudicate the payment claim. After hearing the parties and inviting Probuild to give an undertaking to pay the adjudicator's costs in the event that Netball NSW was successful in the proceedings, I refused the injunction sought by Netball NSW, but granted an injunction until further order restraining Probuild from taking any steps to file in any court any adjudication certificate it obtains as a result of the adjudication process. That order was made without prejudice to Probuild's right to seek to vary that order once the adjudication determination is made. I also gave directions for the preparation of the case for a final hearing on 25 May 2015. At the time of making those orders, I indicated that I would give my reasons for making the orders I did later. These are those reasons.

Background
Netball NSW is an unlisted not for profit public company that is limited by guarantee. On 22 April 2013, it entered into a contract with Probuild for the construction of a complex housing six netball courts with spectator seating and associated facilities at Olympic Park in Sydney. The funding for the facility was provided to Netball NSW by the Crown.
On 1 December 2014, the independent certifier appointed under the contract issued a certificate of practical completion for Separable Portion 1 of the building works and on 19 December 2014 the independent certifier issued a certificate of practical completion in respect of Separable Portion 2, which consisted of the balance of the works.
In these proceedings, Netball NSW contends that under the contract only one further reference date for the purposes of [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s8.html) of the Act arose following practical completion of the works. It contends that date was 28 December 2014. It also contends that, on the correct construction of the contract, Probuild is not entitled to make any further payment claims for any other work until the expiry of the defects liability period, which occurs on 18 December 2015.
On 5 January 2015, Ms Ashleigh Lang, from Probuild, sent to Mr Jeffrey Clarke of Crown Project Services, among others, an email enclosing a progress claim for $3,993,404.37. The covering email said: 
Please find attached our draft claim #23 for December 2014 for your review.
On 19 January 2015, Crown Project Services served a payment schedule in respect of the payment claim stating that the amount payable in respect of the claim was $Nil. The payment schedule set out a number of reasons for that assertion. Paragraph 1 of the reasons states: 
Progress Claim No. 23 (Payment Claim) does not comply with fundamental requirements of the [Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment
Act 1999](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/) (Act) and is invalid.

The reasons go on to explain the basis of that assertion. One reason was that the payment claim had not been correctly served.
On 2 March 2015, Probuild served Netball NSW with progress claim no 24 claiming the sum of $10,380,083.42.
By letter dated 16 March 2015, Netball NSW issued to Probuild a payment schedule in respect of claim no 24 which certified as payable the amount of $Nil.
On 30 March 2015, Probuild lodged an adjudication application in respect of claim no 24. It is the prosecution of that application that Netball NSW sought to restrain.

The parties' contentions
Mr Miller SC, who appeared for Netball NSW, submitted that payment claim no 24 was invalid because it was served in respect of the same reference date as payment claim no 23 in contravention of [s 13(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s13.html) of the Act. He submitted that, as a consequence, the Adjudicator had no jurisdiction to determine the adjudication application in respect of it: see The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore versus T F Woollam and Son <case>; Reitsma Constructions Pty Ltd versus Davies Engineering Pty Ltd <case> The question of jurisdiction was one for the Court, not the adjudicator: Chase Oyster Bar Pty Ltd versus Hamo Industries Pty Ltd <case>; <case> per Basten JA; [238] per McDougall J. Consequently, Netball NSW was entitled to an injunction restraining Probuild and the Adjudicator from proceeding with the adjudication. Moreover, by granting an injunction now, the Court would spare Netball NSW the costs of dealing with an adjudication application in circumstances where it has limited financial resources.
Mr Christie SC, who appeared for Probuild, opposed the injunction on three bases. First, he submitted that Netball NSW's claim was weak. It was apparent from the covering letter that payment claim no 23 was a draft. Netball NSW, or at least Crown Projects Services on its behalf, denied that the claim was a payment claim for the purposes of the Act. It was in that context that Probuild submitted payment claim no 24.
Second, Probuild submitted that Netball NSW was guilty of delay in bringing the proceedings. Payment claim no 24 was served on 2 March 2015. Netball NSW waited until 2 April 2015 before it informed Probuild of its intention to apply for injunctive relief.
Third, Probuild submitted that the balance of convenience was against granting an injunction. It submitted that it would suffer prejudice in two main respects if an injunction were granted. First, the adjudication application would not be able to proceed in accordance with the Act. As a result, if an injunction was granted, Probuild would lose its rights under the Act. Second, if an injunction was granted, Probuild submitted that it would lose the benefit of [s 25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s25.html) of the Act, which relevantly provides: 
An adjudication certificate may be filed as a judgment for a debt in any court of competent jurisdiction and is enforceable accordingly.
 ...
 ...

If the respondent commences proceedings to have the judgment set aside, the respondent: ...
 is required to pay into the court as security the unpaid portion of the adjudicated amount pending the final determination of those proceedings.

Probuild submitted that if an injunction was granted it would lose the benefit of the security to which it would have been entitled under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s25.html) if Netball NSW followed the usual course and waited for the determination and then sought to set aside the judgment obtained as a result of the determination.

Consideration
I concluded that Netball NSW had an arguable case that payment claim no 23 was a payment claim for the purposes of the Act. "Payment claim" is defined in [s 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s4.html) of the Act to mean "a claim referred to in [section 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s13.html)". [Section 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s13.html) relevantly provides: 
A person referred to in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s8.html) who is or who claims to be entitled to a progress payment (the claimant) may serve a payment claim on the person who, under the construction contract concerned, is or may be liable to make the payment.

A payment claim: must identify the construction work (or related goods and services) to which the progress payment relates, and must indicate the amount of the progress payment that the claimant claims to be due (the claimed amount), and if the construction contract is connected with an exempt residential construction contract, must state that it is made under this Act.
The question must be whether, looking at the matter objectively, by serving payment claim no 23 Probuild was seeking to serve a payment claim in accordance with [s 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/bacisopa1999606/s13.html) of the Act so as to trigger its rights under the Act. The fact that the covering letter described what was served as a "draft" and the fact that Netball NSW contended that it was not properly served, raise factual issues relevant to the answer to that question. But I did not think either of those matters was determinative. Claim no 23 undoubtedly came to Netball NSW's attention and, on its face, it is not clear what its purpose was if not to assert a right to be paid the amounts specified in the claim in accordance with the Act. It may be that if Netball NSW is correct, Probuild has a defence based on an estoppel, but that itself raises factual and legal questions that cannot be resolved on an interlocutory basis.
I concluded Netball NSW had not been guilty of delay in bringing the application. Although it might have been expected that Probuild would lodge an adjudication application based on payment claim no 24, Netball NSW could not know that it would do so. In my opinion, it was reasonable for Netball NSW to wait until the adjudication application was actually lodged. That did not occur until 30 March 2015 and was not served on Netball NSW until 31 March 2015. Netball NSW commenced these proceedings two days later.
I also concluded that Netball NSW will suffer some prejudice if an injunction is not granted because it will incur costs in connection with the adjudication which will be wasted if it ultimately succeeds in these proceedings. To some extent, that prejudice was ameliorated by the undertaking given by Probuild at my suggestion to pay the Adjudicator's costs in the event that Netball NSW is successful in these proceedings.
However, any prejudice that Netball NSW suffers if an injunction is not granted is far outweighed by the prejudice that Probuild will suffer if an injunction is granted. The Act sets out a timetable for the determination of adjudication applications. The object of the timetable is to ensure that adjudication applications are dealt with promptly. That object reflects the underlying policy of the legislation to ensure that contractors receive interim payments for their work promptly. The Court is not given power to adjust the timetable provided for by the Act. The Act sets out the consequences of noncompliance with the timetable. In my opinion, the Court has no power to relieve a party of those consequences. For that reason, I concluded that it ought not to grant an injunction that interferes with the processes set out in the Act for the determination of adjudication applications.
The same consideration does not apply to an injunction to restrain Probuild from enforcing an adjudication determination in accordance with <case> of the Act. However, as I have said, Probuild submitted that the Court ought not to grant an injunction restraining it from filing an adjudication certificate as a judgment for a debt in any court of competent jurisdiction because to do so would deprive it of the benefit of the security provided for by <case>(b). Or, to put the point another way, it submitted that, consistently with <case>, the Court should only grant an injunction on condition that Netball NSW provided security for any amount that is the subject of the adjudication determination. That is consistent with the practice of the Court in cases where a respondent to an adjudication determination seeks to injunct a claimant from registering an adjudication certificate in respect of the determination. Probuild submitted that Netball NSW should not be entitled to achieve a better outcome by commencing proceedings at an earlier stage in the adjudication process.
I considered that there was considerable force in the position taken by Probuild. There can be little doubt that <case> reflects a general policy that a respondent should only be entitled to challenge the validity of an adjudication determination if it provides security for the amount of the determination. However, in my opinion, there was nothing to stop Netball NSW from commencing proceedings when it did. By its terms, <case> only applies if a respondent commences proceedings to have a judgment based on an adjudication determination set aside. Absent a legislative requirement, there may be some cases where it is appropriate to permit a respondent to challenge an adjudication determination without providing security. Relevant to that decision will be the strength of the respondent's case, whether there will be significant delay in the determination of the issue and whether the proceedings will be stultified if security is required.
In the present case, it is unclear how much the adjudication determination will be for and whether, if Netball NSW had to provide security in that amount, that would bring an end to its application.
For those reasons, I considered it appropriate to grant an injunction restraining Probuild from taking any steps to enforce any determination it obtains in its favour. That, however, was on the basis that Probuild could make an application for that injunction to be dissolved once the amount of any adjudication determination was known and Netball NSW was in a position to provide evidence concerning its ability to provide security for that amount.
 * * * 
