

Wetzel versus District Court of New South Wales and Ors Matter No Ca 40157/96 [1998] NSWSC 313 (15 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
WETZEL versus DISTRICT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ORS 
CA 40157/96; DC 905/95 July 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT CIVIL JURISDICTION - HIS HONOUR JUDGE
WALL 
FILE NO/S: CA 40157/96 DC 905/95 
DELIVERED: 15 JULY 1998 
HEARING DATE: 25 JUNE 1998 
PARTIES: WETZEL versus DISTRICT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, PRIESTLEY JA, SHELLER JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: W.R. HAYLEN QC 
Respondent: P. SHARP 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: DUNHILL MADDEN BUTLER 
Respondent: STATE CROWN SOLICITOR 
CATCHWORDS: 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - AUTHORITY OF AN AGENT 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 18 
WETZEL versus DISTRICT COURT OF NSW & ORS 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - AUTHORITY OF AN AGENT - MINING ACT.

The appellant was the registered holder of a Mining Claim which had to be renewed annually, subject to a condition that the holder personally attend to collect the renewal certificate and year tags. The condition was imposed under s 32(1)(b) of the Mining Act 1973. The appellant's agent sought to collect the certificate and tags. The Mining Registrar refused to hand them to him and they remained uncollected during the permissible period. The Chief Mining
Warden cancelled the registration of the appellant's claim for breach of condition. The appellant's appeal to the District Court was dismissed on the basis that the condition required personal attendance by the appellant; the agent's attendance was not sufficient.

On appeal the appellant submits:
If an agent attends to renew a mining claim registration the condition is sufficiently complied with; the relevant power under <case>(b) did not extend to making general conditions to be imposed upon classes of claims, as had been the case in the
Mining District; it can only be imposed individually on a case by case basis; the condition was invalid as it was imposed by Departmental direction and not by the Mining Registrar.

Held: 
The condition clearly requires personal attendance by the registered claim holder; the language in <case>(b) of the Mining Act was broad enough to enable a
Mining Registrar to impose the one same condition on each particular claim if there were sufficient similarities relating to the claims; the evidence in the District Court showed that it was the Mining Registrar who saw to it the condition was imposed because he believed it to be his duty to prescribe that condition on the group of claims and further, it was
Departmental policy; accordingly, there was no invalidity in the imposition of the condition for taking account of the language of <case> along with the fact that there is nothing in the Mining Act categorising the Mining Registrar as anything but an employee of the Crown, who is subject to lawful direction by superiors, when deciding to impose conditions pursuant to <case>(b) a Mining Registrar is not obliged to reach a conclusion independent of Departmental policy or direction.

Mining Act 1973 <case>(b) 
Bread Manufacturers of NSW versus Evans <case>; [(1981) 180 CLR 404] at 429 
Middleweek versus Chief Constable of Merseyside (1985) [[1992] 1 AC 179] at 188-189 
Aronson and Dyer, Judicial Review of Administrative Action, (1996), at -319 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

WETZEL versus DISTRICT COURT OF NSW & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Priestley JA. 
A system of responsible ministerial government is a key element in our polity.
Executive power is made accountable, by various means, to the organs of representative government: Lange versus Australian Broadcasting Corporation [(1997) 189 CLR 510] at 559. In concept, there is a clear distinction between the exercise of public and private authority or power. Control of the former, politically, is ensured through "line management" accountability; and, legally, through strict adherence to rule of law principles. Effective line management permits, indeed requires, control to be exercised through ministers, department heads or senior executive officers, and thereafter through the public sector pursuant to the mechanisms provided (in this State) by the [Public Sector Management Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/).
Parliament is free to establish executive bodies that are accountable to none but itself and the courts. But the constitutional principles I have referred to mean that the onus rests clearly upon those who would construe a grant of legislative authority to do a ministerial act as conferring an independent discretion that can ignore (lawful) policy directives issued with the authority of a minister. As Priestley JA demonstrates, such legislative authority is clearly lacking in the present case. Effective, consistent and ultimately accountable decision-making amply support construing the Mining
Registrar's power under s32(1)(b) of the Mining Act 1973 as one which is amenable to such policy directives as the Registrar's superiors in the department may issue.

WETZEL versus DISTRICT COURT OF NSW & ORS 
PRIESTLEY JA: On 6 September 1988 the Chief Mining Warden, on application by the Mining Registrar for the Lightning Ridge Mining Division, cancelled the registration of Claim 11306 on the ground of failure to comply with Condition 8(b) of the claim. This condition was that "The registered holder of the claim shall personally collect from the Mining
Registrar the certificate of renewal of registration of the claim and year tags and shall ensure that the tags are fixed to each corner post within fourteen days of the date on which the renewal of registration of the claim has effect." 
Renewal of registration took place in June every year. The 1988 renewal was subject to Condition 8(b), as had been renewals in previous years.

The registered holder of the claim had been Mr D. Wetzel. He had given Mr J.
Schnitzenbaumer an authority to act on his behalf in relation to mining matters including the registration of claims, transfer and cancellation or renewal of claims during his absence.

Pursuant to this authority Mr Schnitzenbaumer had attended on the Mining
Registrar four times between 30 June 1988 and 14 July 1988 to collect the certificate of renewal and the year tags. The Mining Registrar refused to hand them to him on the basis that Mr Wetzel had to attend personally to collect them.

In giving his reasons for cancelling the registration of the claim the Chief
Mining Warden said that there had been a practice up to three or four years before the date of his decision "of persons other than the principal claim holder effecting registration in the name of another person who may or may not even reside at Lightning Ridge or indeed ... may or may not even exist". In his view the purpose of Condition 8(b) was to "attempt to ensure that there was no scheme operated by a person which would permit him to hold more than the specified two claims in the particular mining division". He thought that the imposition of the condition was "entirely reasonable" and overrode the general law as to powers of attorney. Thus, the condition not having been complied with, and in the light of other evidence before him, he concluded "the situation is that the evidence before the court is such that I have no alternative it seems to me to cancel the registration of the claim" and he made the order accordingly.

Mr Wetzel appealed to the District Court. On 22 February 1996 his Honour Judge
Wall QC dismissed the appeal. His reasons for dismissing the appeal show that he was of the view that (1) Condition 8(b) required personal attendance by a registered claim holder, (2) there had been no such attendance, the attendance of Mr Schnitzenbaumer as agent not fulfilling the requirement, and (3) on the materials before him, there was no basis upon which he could exercise a discretion to restore the registration of the claim.

On appeal to this court no complaint was made about Judge Wall's view concerning discretion. Two principal points were taken. The first was that attendance by an agent was a sufficient compliance with the condition. The second was that the condition was not lawfully imposed.

As to the first contention it seems to me that the words of the condition show a clear intention of requiring the relevant attendance to be by the registered claim holder in person and not by some representative. Such a requirement provides some safeguard against "dummying", a practice well known and understood in New South Wales in regard to various kinds of property since its early days as a colony. If the condition were to be read as permitting attendance by an agent, then it would be adding nothing to the common law position. For it to have any effect, it needs to be read as requiring what it says, personal collection of the certificate of renewal and the year tags.

Most of the time in the appeal in this court was taken up by the second point.

The argument on this began with <case>(b) of the Mining Act 1973. Relevantly this provided: "(1) Registration and the renewal of the registration of a claim - ...; may be effected subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, or as may be imposed by the Mining Registrar in any particular case; ..." 
It was common ground that Condition 8(b) was not a prescribed condition within the meaning of par (b). For the appellant it was also contended that the condition was not one imposed by the Mining Registrar in a particular case.
The basis for this submission was that the condition was imposed on all claims within the Lighting Ridge area renewed for the period 1988 to 1989, and that in relation to claim 11306 the Mining Registrar gave no consideration to whether or not the condition was particularly appropriate to that claim.

This submission fell into two distinct parts: (1), that the Mining Registrar's power did not extend to making general conditions to be imposed upon classes of claim, but could only be imposed individually, case by case: (2), that the condition was not imposed by the Mining Registrar, but by Departmental direction and invalid for that reason.

Both parts of the submission were based on evidence which was before Judge
Wall, which had been given by the Mining Registrar (Mr Hunt) on three separate occasions.

The first occasion was on 6 September 1988, before the Chief Mining Warden, in the present case. Mr Schnitzenbaumer, who was allowed by the Chief Mining
Warden to represent Mr Wetzel, asked Mr Hunt questions meant to show that in making the application to cancel the registration Mr Hunt was following a policy not based on any regulation. One of his questions was "Now you tell me your section, what you say regulation that it is in your book, or in the mining book, you show me any of them. You cannot make a regulation Mr Hunt." 
To this Mr Hunt replied.
 "Right, section 32 of the Act. Registration and renewal of a claim may be effected subject to such conditions as may be prescribed or may be imposed by the Mining Registrar in any particular case. ... 
SCHNITZENBAUMER: is that to say that you can change the Mining Act and the
Governor and the Minister cannot? 
HUNT: It states that I can impose conditions on claims, but the conditions imposed are not personal conditions imposed by me, they are imposed under instructions from the Department." 
Later in his evidence, Mr Hunt said: "Your Worship the conditions that are attached to the claims are not specifically specified by me, they are specified by Sydney, by the department of mineral resources, are vetted by their legal office and I cannot actually - do not actually have the authority to vary those prescribed conditions." 
The second occasion on which Mr Hunt gave evidence which was before Judge Wall was on 29 August 1990. This evidence was contained in a transcript of evidence
Mr Hunt had given in another case concerning the same Condition 8(b) attached to another claim on a 1989 renewal. Part of that transcript read as follows.
 "Q. I show you a copy of the document marked `Application' which is part of
Ex A, the file, and you will see in the middle of it that it sets out one condition, 8(b). You are familiar with that condition, are you? A. Yes I am.

Q. that condition is a condition which is imposed amongst many other condition on claims when they are renewed? A. It is.

Q. That is a condition that is not a prescribed condition in the sense of appearing in the regulations? A. No it's not a prescribed condition.

Q. It is, in fact, a condition which you as Registrar purport to impose pursuant to your powers under <case> of the Act? A. It was imposed under direction under my powers.

HIS HONOUR: Q. The answer to that is effectively `Yes, yes it was imposed under my powers', is that what you say? A. It was your Honour, yes.

MACREADY: Q. When you say `imposed under my powers' that was under <case>(b) of the Mining Act? A. That's correct.

Q. That condition was imposed on all claims within the Lightning Ridge area at the renewals in 1989? A. Yes it was.

Q. There was no consideration in this case of whether it was particularly appropriate to this case. It was done to all claims? A. It had been done to all claims since 1986." 
The third time Mr Hunt gave evidence on the point was before Judge Wall in the present case. This evidence was to the effect that the renewal of claim 11306 in 1988 was subject to a standard list of conditions which included, as in previous renewals, condition 8(b). The relevant part of the examination in chief proceeded: "ADAMS: Q. I show you a second document together with the original document I showed you. You see that that is a document with a list of conditions? 
A. Yes.

Q. What can you say about that list of conditions in relation to the renewal of claims in 1988? 
A. They're the conditions that would have been attached to the document.

OBJECTION 
HIS HONOUR: Q. Do you know that or are you just assuming that? 
A. No, I know that for a fact because they're all the same, so every single - except in rare circumstances in which case there would have been a definite note to that effect, all conditions would have been the same.

Q. You were the Mining Registrar at Lightning Ridge in 1988? 
A. I was.

Q. You were there in June 1988? 
A. Yes.

Q. Are all the mineral leases renewed in the same month? 
A. They were then your honour.

Q. Pardon? 
A. They were then your Honour.

Q. They were? 
A. They've since, only recently, been changed. Some are anniversary but up until - - 
Q. But I'm talking about in 1988.

A. In 1988 they were all - every claim was renewed in the month of June.

Q. So it was 12 months' registration expiring what, 30 June? 
A. 30 June.

Q. And in relation to this renewal, do you say from your own knowledge that it would have been prepared in your office? 
A. I know from my own knowledge yes, your Honour.

Q. Under your direction? 
A. Under my direction.

Q. What do you say about the copy of the conditions that you've just been shown, are you able to say from your own knowledge whether those conditions would have been stapled or attached in some way to the certificate? 
A. Yes they would have been stapled to the document.

Q. You know that from your own knowledge? 
A. I know from my own knowledge." 
Q. Where would that have been done, in your office? 
A. It would have been done in my office, yes." 
In regard to the first part of the submission for the appellant, I do not think that the Mining Registrar's power can be confined in the way submitted.
The language of par (b) seems to me to be quite wide enough to permit a Mining
Registrar, if he or she were to consider that a number of claims in a particular district should all be subject to the one condition because of the similarities in the considerations relating to each claim, to go ahead and, as each individual claim was renewed to impose the one same condition in each particular case.

The second part of the submission is more complicated. It raises a question which was described by Mason and Wilson JJ in their joint reasons in Bread
Manufacturers of NSW versus Evans <case>; [(1981) 180 CLR 404] at 429, as a vexed one. The question they thus described was "[t]he extent to which a tribunal or public official required by statute to make decisions which affect the rights of the citizen can take into account and act upon the views of the Government or a Minister".

A little later (also at 429) they continued: "... the problem is not one which admits of an answer having a universal application. So much depends on a variety of considerations, for there are few cases in which the statute explicitly provides that the tribunal is bound to give effect to, or to give weight to, a ministerial direction. One must take into account the particular statutory function, the nature of the question to be decided, the character of the tribunal and the general drift of the statutory provisions in so far as they bear on the relationship between the tribunal and the responsible Minister, as well as the nature of the views expressed on behalf of the Government." 
They also noted, at 430, that the statute which gives rise to the question in any particular case often gives no explicit guidance to the answer. Courts, they said, "are left then to spell out what is appropriate from the framework of the relationship which the statute has sketched in". Much the same thing is said in the useful text Judicial Review of Administrative Action, Aronson and Dyer, (1996) at 317, where the authors refer to those governmental officers of whom it would not be obviously expected that they would have something approaching a judge's independence from external influences. Cases involving such officers, they say, "present great difficulties in where to draw the line between permissible and undue external influence. Ultimately, they all turn upon the court's understanding of the nature of the power to be exercised, the context of its exercise, and the character of its repository".

In the present case the submissions for the appellant were confined to the effect of <case> of the Mining Act. The court was not referred to any statutory provisions or evidentiary material from which the relationship between a Mining Registrar and the Minister in charge of his Department or his superior officers could be ascertained. The evidence before Judge Wall in my opinion shows clearly (a) that Mr Hunt felt it was his duty to impose
Condition 8(b) on the group of claims referred to in his evidence, because that was Departmental policy and (b) that it was Mr Hunt who saw to it that
Condition 8(b) was imposed in regard to the 1988 renewal of the claim. Before
Judge Wall, counsel for Mr Wetzel did not ask Mr Hunt whether he disagreed with the Departmental policy of imposition of Condition 8(b), or whether, if the matter of the imposition of the condition had been left entirely to him as a matter of his own discretion, he would not have imposed it. The tenor of Mr
Hunt's evidence both before the Chief Mining Warden and Judge Wall strikes me as being very much to the effect that he agreed with the imposition of the condition as part of a desirable policy of combating "dummying" practices.

Bearing in mind the words of <case> together with the fact that there is nothing to show that a Mining Registrar under the Mining Act holds any office that takes him or her out of the category of an employee of the Crown subject to the lawful direction of his superiors and ultimately the Minister in charge of his or her department, I do not myself reach the conclusion that a Mining
Registrar, in deciding to impose a condition pursuant to the second leg of s (1)(b) is obliged to reach a conclusion independent of Departmental policy or direction. That being so, I see no invalidity in the imposition of
Condition 8(b) in the present case in the circumstances described by Mr Hunt in his evidence.

If the position of Mining Registrar should be regarded as some kind of independent office I would nevertheless not think that for that officer to follow a standing instruction of the Department without first giving consideration to the particular circumstances of each case in which the instruction was followed would make the condition imposed as a result unlawful or invalid. The position would be, in my opinion, that if the legality of what was done in those circumstances was challenged, it would be for the party seeking to uphold the validity of the action to establish that the action was justified in the circumstances of the particular case. This question is one which would be treated objectively and raise a decision for the court considering the matter.

This approach seems to me to fit better with the expectations appropriate to a
Mining Registrar created by <case> and the limited information the court has about that officer's activities, than one which would make the Mining
Registrar an official with an independent discretion necessarily to be exercised independently of Departmental policy. The same kind of approach was adopted by the English Court of Appeal in circumstances which although different from the present have some analogy to them, in Middleweek versus Chief
Constable of Merseyside (1985) [[1992] 1 AC 179] at 188-189; see also Judicial Review of Administrative Action (supra) at 317-319.

On either approach, therefore, my view is that the second part of the principal submission for the appellant also fails.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

WETZEL versus DISTRICT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
