

R versus Thomas John Mcknoulty No. 70011/95 [1995] NSWSC 8 (25 August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CRIMINAL DIVISION
ABADEE J
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 28:6:1995 #ADD 25:8:1995
ORDER
Evidence admitted.
JUDGE1
ABADEE J:  The accused is charged with the offence that on 7 February 1992 he maliciously inflicted grievous bodily harm upon Michelle Bellamy with intent to do grievous bodily harm to her. After the jury was empanelled and after the opening of the Crown case my ruling was sought in relation to the admissibility of alleged previous acts of violence on the part of the accused on and towards the alleged victim. It is appropriate for me to record here that the arguments that were advanced on Monday were detailed and helpful.
It is appropriate also for me to observe that they were advanced at a point of time when there was a jury already empanelled. As events have turned out, that jury has been discharged and a fresh jury has been called and empanelled and the trial has recommenced before me again this morning.
It is also appropriate for me to observe that the submissions advanced by both counsel on Monday have been repeated in short form again this morning. I propose to give a ruling now that the Crown has opened its case to the jury.
Were it not for the recent decision of the High Court in Pfennig versus The
Queen <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 147] my reasons would be relatively brief. However, having regard to that decision and the extensive submissions that have been made in relation to its effect and consequences, my reasons will be perhaps a little more extensive than they would otherwise have been.
It is also appropriate to record as an historical fact only that this is a re-trial of the accused for the same offence, a new trial having been ordered by the Court of Criminal Appeal on 6 February 1995. In the earlier decision the question of admissibility of evidence of such acts did not arise for consideration nor was it otherwise apparently dealt with by the Court of
Criminal Appeal.
Nevertheless, as I understand the Court of Criminal Appeal judgment to which I have been taken, the Court of Criminal Appeal did not appear to have cast doubt upon the admissibility of certain evidence in relation to an assault that occur-red on the afternoon of 7 February 1992 and prior to the events of the evening which give rise to the present charge.
The Crown case has been opened.
It appears that one of the issues in the trial will be how the injuries to the victim were caused. Were they the result of violence by the accused either directly or as a result of an attempt on the part of the victim to escape, as the Crown would contend, or were they the result of the victim attempting to leave the car of her own volition more or less unprompted by any act of violence done by the accused?
As I understand the Crown case opened this morning to the jury, the Crown case is that the injuries caused to the victim were caused by the accused by reason of and in consequence of his hitting the alleged victim on the head whilst she was in the back seat of the car or, alternatively, that the alleged victim (Miss Bellamy) fell out of the car in the course of being attacked and/or was trying to leave it, inter alia, out of fear or by seeking to evade the accused. That is how I understand the case that has been opened this morning.
Further in its opening the Crown has said that an issue was whether the injuries suffered by the victim were perhaps, to put it in terms advanced by the Crown, caused by her falling out of the car or by her jumping out of the car. Again, as I understand what has been put, there is a dispute about these events. There is a dispute about whether or not at any point of time the alleged victim was struck at all by the accused or whether he deliberately did any act which resulted in her injuries.
In relation to the offence which is alleged to have happened, as I understand it, at or about 8pm on 7 February , the Crown case as opened is that the accused and Michelle Bellamy (who were living in a close or de facto relationship) were both sitting in the rear seat of the vehicle initially parked in the car park of the Settlers Arms Hotel at Gosford. The accused was sitting behind the driver in the back seat. Between them was Miss Bellamy's daughter, Samantha. She was not, however, the daughter of the accused.
In the front seats were a Mr Moulds, the driver of the vehicle, and a
Miss Middleton. According to the Crown opening, Mr Moulds will not be called because his whereabouts is unknown and attempts to locate him have proved to be unsuccessful.
Also according to the Crown opening Mr Moulds started the car and commenced to move the car through the car park of the Settlers
Arms Hotel.
The Crown alleges that an argument broke out between the accused and Miss
Bellamy. The Crown case, as opened, is that the accused was sitting in the back seat. Samantha Bellamy was sitting in the centre and the alleged victim was sitting on the other side of Samantha.
It is also clear on the Crown opening that Samantha will not be called; she being aged three and a half years at the time of the alleged occurrence.
The Crown case is that there was an argument that broke out between the accused and
Miss Bellamy. During the course of the quarrel or argument Miss
Bellamy sustained serious injuries in consequence of the accused striking several, or indeed many, blows to her head.
As I understand the Crown case, evidence will be led that Miss Middleton heard noises from the back of the car, turned around and saw the accused with his arm around Miss Bellamy's head forcing her down and hitting her head with a fist and with considerable force on a number of occasions. Again, as I understand the Crown case, the
Crown will claim that Miss Middleton told Mr
Moulds to stop the car. It stopped very quickly and Miss Middleton left the car and observed Miss Michelle Bellamy lying on the ground with one of her legs still in the car and she allegedly observed the left side of her head in contact with the ground.
Evidence will be given of an observation being made, so it is claimed, of a laceration to the right ear, of there being found to be a broken jaw and subsequently a diagnosis of closed head injury was made. Indeed, as
I understand it, evidence will be given that not only did the alleged victim suffer the injuries that I have briefly described, but in consequence of the closed head injury she is brain damaged, is unable to give evidence in any way.
As I have said, one of the issues at the trial will be how the injuries to the victim were caused; were they the result of violence by the accused directly inflicted or as a result of an attempt to escape, as the Crown alternatively contends, or were they, as I understand the case to have been opened, a result of the victim attempting to leave the car of her own volition either by falling out of the car or even by jumping out of the car in consequence of a voluntary decision unprompted by any act of the accused.
The Crown has sought my ruling as to whether it may lead evidence of an alleged assault which occurred earlier on 7 February 1992 in the Gosford Hotel shortly before 4pm. It will seek to lead evidence that at or about that time
Miss Bellamy and the accused were then drinking in the hotel. It will seek to lead evidence from a Mr Ikin, a casual barman employed in that hotel, that he heard the accused and Miss Bellamy arguing and that he allegedly saw the accused hit Miss Bellamy on the nose with his right fist causing it to bleed.
In addition the Crown will seek to lead evidence from Mr Ikin that some time later on but prior to the events the subject of the instant charge,
Mr
Ikin observed Miss Bellamy slap the accused on the shoulder. The Crown also will be seeking to lead evidence from Miss Middleton that in relation to the events giving rise to the blow on the nose that subsequent to such happening she also saw the victim in the hotel with her nose bleeding and that she was allegedly crying.
The Crown also proposes to adduce some evidence from Miss
Middleton of the victim and the accused arguing and swearing at each other and perhaps of an incident whereby the victim pulled the accused's chair back causing him to fall over. The Crown also seeks my ruling in relation to the admissibility of that evidence of the type I have just outlined and which it would seek to adduce from Miss Middleton and Mr Ikin.
The Crown also seeks my ruling in relation to the adducing of evidence from one Jody Turbet in relation to an alleged assault that had taken place some months before in October of 1991. It is said that Miss Turbet allegedly observed the accused in October of 1991 hit the victim across the face several times with the back of his hand - giving her what was described as being 'backhanders' - on two separate occasions. Thus the Crown also seeks to lead further evidence apparently in relation to the events of October 1991. Miss
Turbet also said that after an alleged assault upon the victim she, too, was assaulted by the accused.
The Crown submits that the evidence of prior violence on the two occasions referred to is evidence establishing the nature of the relationship between the accused and the victim, indeed throwing light on that relationship. It also argues that the evidence in question is direct evidence of the fact relevant to the issue. The Crown also submitted that the evidence tends to explain the relevant occurrence, that it assists in the choice between the two explanations of the occurrence, that it assists the jury in deciding whether Miss Bellamy received her injuries due to a deliberate act of the accused in one or more respects, as I have outlined, or by accident and hence the evidence of what took place on the afternoon particularly in relation to the assault is relevant to that issue.
The Crown relies upon the decision of
Wilson versus The Queen <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR .] It also argued that the evidence of prior violence assists the jury in choosing between the competing views as to how the injury was caused - that is, whether by deliberate act of the accused or by accident.
It further, or alternatively, argues that such evidence provides evidence of motive for the accused to behave violently to Miss Bellamy and is relevant to a most important issue in the case as to whether the injuries to Miss
Bellamy were caused by violence of the accused by deliberate acts on his part in one or more of the respects referred to - or were the result of Miss
Bellamy's leaving the car of her own volition, unprompted by any act of violence done by the accused.
The Crown also submits that associated with that issue is one of specific intention, and thus motive, it is said, was relevant to the issue of both deliberate act and specific intention. In this connection I was not only referred to the decision of Wilson, but also the decision of the Court of
Criminal Appeal in Regina versus Frawley [(1993) 69 A Crim R 208] where Wilson's case was considered and applied.
It was said that the case is not one where I am merely concerned with words spoken or words said during the course of arguments in a domestic situation which might be evidence of marital discord and as evidence of relationship: see Wilson, see Frawley and see Regina versus Taylor (CCA 18 April unreported) - a decision decided after Pfennig - and where Hunt CJ at CL considered that particular evidence of marital discord could not properly be described as evidence of propensity.
Indeed, as Hunt CJ at CL observed (at p4) in Taylor that case was not regarded as a propensity case in the usual sense of that term or expression.
It is not necessary to decide whether evidence of marital discord argument or domestic discord argument per se, will in all circumstances fall within a category of relationship evidence always answering the description of propensity evidence, in the light of the decision Pfennig: see p148. Nor is it necessary to decide whether Pfennig may support a distinction between acts and criminal acts or acts of misconduct on the one hand and the spoken word on the other hand, in the context of what might be called propensity relationship evidence.
The evidence of the accused's alleged assault or act in the afternoon is not in terms sought to be admitted upon the basis that it shows only that the accused has a propensity or disposition to commit a crime or act of violence, or that he was likely to commit the crime charged or the act of violence or as evidence that violence by the accused was more likely on the instant occasion the subject of the present charge.
As I understand the way the Crown puts its case, the evidence is essentially being sought to be admitted for another purpose - that it is relevant in some other way as tending to show that the accused is guilty of the offence charged for some reason other than he has committed violent acts in the past or has a violent disposition. In the instant case the Crown also submits that to exclude the evidence particularly that of the afternoon in relation to the assault at or about 4pm would be to force the jury to consider the events giving rise to the charge, which occurred during the evening, in isolation and in an atmosphere of unreality: see Regina versus Garner (1963) 81 AN (pt 1) 120 at ; or as if in vacuum as opposed to further being seen in a relationship of enmity or distrust between two persons in a de facto type relationship: see Wilson per Menzies J at 344.
Indeed, the Crown submits that the act on the afternoon and on the night in question could be perceived as being part of the one transaction that involved a connected series of events and part of the relevant circumstances which also throws light on what in fact occurred on the evening that Miss
Bellamy received her injuries: see O'Leary v The King <case>; [(1946) 73 CLR 566] as explained by McHugh J in Pfennig at 180-181.
The Crown also submits that the acts in the hotel including the offence in the hotel car park were also a connected series of events: see O'Leary at .
In Pfennig McHugh J cited O'Leary in connection with the 'day after day' admissibility of evidence of other criminal acts on the part of an accused to show 'the relationship' between the accused and the victim.
The Crown submits that there is no suggestion in Pfennig that the long line of 'relationship cases' (both sexual and non-sexual assault cases) are not to be followed, are wrong or have been overruled insofar as they deal with relationship type of evidence. As I have said it does not seek to adduce the evidence as going to no more than showing that the accused has a propensity to commit a crime of violence of the type involved in the charge.
It is common ground and accepted by the parties that the evidence of prior acts of violence does, or also does in this case, answer the description of propensity evidence (and that it is to be so classified) as such expression was understood and discussed in Pfennig. It is accepted by the parties that if the evidence sought to be objected to falls within a category or class of evidence answering the description 'propensity evidence' the
Pfennig test applies and the test is one of admissibility in accordance with that decision.
Indeed the parties both agree that if the evidence is admissible in terms of satisfying Pfennig there is little scope for discretionary exclusion because the process involved in the determination of admissibility of such type of evidence itself involves the balancing of the probative value of the evidence against its prejudicial effect.
Finally the Crown submits that the test for the admission of propensity evidence appears in
Pfennig at 158-159. The majority said: "Once that criterion of admissibility is accepted, it is apparent that the trial judge is required to discharge an important responsibility. That point was made by the Supreme
Court of Canada in R versus B (CR) where it was accepted that the process of balancing the probative value of the evidence against its prejudicial effect was a delicate one. But the trial judge, in making that judgment, must recognise that propensity evidence is circumstantial evidence and that, as such, it should not be used to draw an inference adverse to the accused unless it is the only reasonable inference in the circumstances. More than that, the evidence ought not to be admitted if the trial judge concludes that, viewed in the context of the prosecution case, there is a reasonable view of it which is consistent with innocence."
The Crown also submitted that in any event that the accused and the victim had a violent relationship was the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence of prior assaults, and that if it be necessary for the offence charged even to look at the matter in such light there is no innocent explanation of the evidence of prior assault or prior assaults. It submits that nevertheless there is no reasonable view of it which is consistent with innocence. The passage itself says nothing as to the 'time' when such situation should be addressed or viewed. However, in this case there is no dispute between the parties that it is appropriate for me to consider the matter at the conclusion of the Crown opening.
In Taylor, a case involving murder of a spouse, the Court held that evidence of marital discord involving loud arguments (not acts of violence) was relevant to motive and for that purpose, to issues of deliberate act in discharging the rifle and the issue of specific intention. Motive, it is said, was relevant to both issues. Hunt CJ at CL considered that the evidence 'in the circumstances could not reasonably have been misunderstood by the jury as demonstrating a propensity to commit the crime of murder which had been charged. His Honour accepted that normally where evidence is admitted for one purpose and which may also demonstrate propensity to commit the crime charged, ie where there is a limited basis for admitting the evidence, a direction should also be given to the jury that they should not use it as evidence that 'violence by the accused was more likely on the instant occasion'. However,
Taylor was not said in terms to be a case of propensity evidence even though it concerned relationship type evidence and was one where relationship type evidence was sought to be introduced.
The process of balancing the probative value of such propensity evidence is a delicate one. In balancing I recognise that propensity evidence is circumstantial evidence and as such not to be used to draw an inference adverse to the accused unless it is the only reasonable inference in the circumstances viewed in the context of the prosecution case. The test to which
I have referred requires me to view that propensity evidence sought to be admitted in the context of the Crown case which includes an issue, whether the act of the accused was a deliberate act causing the injuries or did Miss
Bellamy receive the injuries while for all intents and purposes by way of accident seeking to leave the car of her own volition.
The Crown has submitted that the evidence it seeks to have admitted, whilst not an essential step in proof of the Crown case, is nevertheless admissible to establish a step in the proof of the prosecution case. It submits that the evidence at least in relation to the 4pm incident is admissible in much the same way as certain relationship evidence was admitted in O'Leary's and Garner's case: see Pfennig per McHugh J at 180-181.
For the accused Mr Cook submitted that the evidence does not fall within the principles outlined governing the admissibility of relationship evidence.
He argues that Pfennig puts up an exclusive test of admissibility, ie it covers the field whenever there is a category of evidence that falls within the description propensity evidence. He further sought to distinguish Wilson and other cases upon the basis that they involved words merely spoken in a domestic context as opposed to acts of violence.
It is appropriate if I should observe in passing that in relation to
Wilson's case one of the two occasions on which there was a quarrel also involved the pushing of the victim to the ground: see Wilson at 337.
Mr Cook sought to argue that relationship evidence is a category of propensity evidence when it involves a criminal act and that Taylor's case concerned domestic arguments not criminal acts of violence. He argued that there is no single inference in relation to prior evidence of assaults or any of them and that the test in Pfennig involves the exclusion of all inferences save for that in relation to proving guilt of the offence charged. Thus it was submitted that the only reason for adducing the evidence is because to use Mr
Cook's words "The issue is did he do it or was it by accident; and because he did it before he did it again".
The
Crown further does not purport to seek the admission of the prior assaults nor would it upon such a basis if such does no more than show the accused had a propensity to commit a crime of violence or a crime of the type here involved.
The Crown counsel accepted that the evidence in relation to the afternoon - ie the assault at 4pm or at or about that time involving a blow on the victim's nose-falls into a category or different category in terms of cogency to what happened in October 1991.
For the defence it is submitted that in relation to the events of October that even were I to conclude that the evidence in relation to the assault on 7 February 1992 is admissible, in relation to the occurrence or alleged occurrence in October of 1991 I should reject the evidence in relation to it.
I agree with the defence submissions. I am disposed to the view that I should exclude the evidence in relation to the October 1991 incident. It is of a different type to that involving the incident on the afternoon of February - at least it is in some ways different. It occurred at a much earlier point of time. Its cogency is different. It did involve two women in connection with a specific event different to that which might be associated with a pure domestic type happening or relationship.
The evidence is highly prejudicial and involves alleged violence to two women and not merely the victim. There is a difference in degree and there is a time difference. I would not be prepared to conclude that it goes so far as to show that when viewed in the context of the Crown case there is no reasonable view of it consistent with innocence. Indeed I would exclude the evidence in relation to October 1991 on several other grounds. I have already mentioned cogency.
Further there is the context in which the assault allegedly took place in that month including the use by the accused of words which could point to him having served a period of time in gaol. In all the circumstances I propose to reject the tender of the evidence in relation to the happening of October .
I now turn to the incident at 4pm on the afternoon in question - that is February 1992. In making the judgment involving balancing the probative value of the evidence against its prejudicial effect ('a delicate one') I am required to recognise and do recognise that the propensity evidence in that case - in this case that is the act of violence by misconduct at 4pm, or alleged act of violence - is circumstantial evidence and as such it should not be used or admitted to draw an inference adverse to the accused unless it is the only reasonable inference in the circumstances of the case. The evidence ought not to be admitted if I conclude that viewed in the context of the prosecution case (although Pfennig does not identify in terms the point of time when it is to be so viewed) there is a reasonable view of it which is consistent with innocence.
It has been said in Pfennig (at 161) that in the case of propensity evidence there is the need to find something in the evidence or in connection with the events giving rise to the offence charged which endows it with a high level or degree of cogency. In my view the evidence of the prior violence on the afternoon at or about 4pm is relevant to the nature of the relationship between the victim and the accused. It is in my view evidence directly relevant to a principal issue in the case, whether it is an act of the accused, indeed a deliberate act of the accused, which caused the injury to
Miss Bellamy or whether it was no act of the accused that did so or an accidental one. Alternatively were it necessary to so conclude I would be disposed to consider it is some evidence of motive thus relevant to the issue of deliberate act and perhaps closely associated with the issue of specific intention: see Taylor. It is however evidence of relationship, or emnity within it.
Further, to exclude the evidence in relation to the events or occurrence at 4pm, would perhaps force the jury to consider the events of 8pm or the events the subject of the charge 'in isolation and in an atmosphere of unreality and ignores the commonsense view that it throws a light on what occurred at 8pm. It is also part of the circumstances.
I would also be disposed to admit the evidence in relation to the slapping for much the same reason although clearly acknowledging that it was not a slap by the accused but rather a slapping by the victim on the accused's shoulder. It seems to me and subject to short further argument that the slapping on the shoulder is likewise admissible evidence. I am disposed to the view that it is. Nevertheless it seems to me that in relation to the event at pm, its timing, and its location, it also endows the evidence with a high level or degree of cogency, if that be the test as referred to in Pfennig (at ).
I propose therefore in accordance with these reasons to admit the evidence in relation to the assault at 4pm on the afternoon in question.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/8.html  
