

Raines versus Tempesta Nos Ca 40172/94; Sc 15860/88 Workers' Compensation -
Crown - Constitutional Law [1995] NSWSC 85 (18 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), CLARKE(2) AND HANDLEY(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 21 April 1995 #DATE 19:6:1995 #ADD 18:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:   R S McColl SC with L P McFee 
Solicitor for the Appellant:
H K Roberts, Crown Solicitor 
Counsel for the Respondent:  D M J Bennett QC with T J Anderson 
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Steve Masselos and Co
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P:  This appeal from the Common Law Division of the Supreme
Court (Master Malpass) presents a test case on the meaning of [s 151E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151e.html) of the [Workers
Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (the Act). The section and its purpose are not entirely clear. The Court has already referred to the obscurity and complexity of the amendments to the Act, of which this is one.
 
A government employee is injured at work and sues for damages
The relevant facts are not in dispute. Mrs Anna Tempesta began employment as a school cleaner in 1972. Originally (and I use the expression without prejudgment) she was engaged by the Government Supply Department and worked at the Newcastle Girls' High School. In November 1973, she was transferred to work at the Jesmond High School. She received wages which were paid by the
Government Supply Department.
At about 6 p.m. on 20 July 1987, after Mrs Tempesta had completed her cleaning duties at the school, she was proceeding down a set of steps in the school buildings. After descending two or three steps, her foot slipped and she fell on her lower back. It was dark in the vicinity of the steps. A light above the steps was not functioning. Indeed, it had not been functioning for about four months prior to the accident. Mrs Tempesta had complained about this to the school handyman, Mr Lee. It was common ground that he was paid his wages by the New South Wales Department of Education. Immediately following
Mrs Tempesta's fall the light was repaired.
The Master accepted evidence that
Mrs Tempesta's fall was made significantly more likely by the combination of the "geometry of the stairs" and the lack of illumination. The Master accepted the evidence of Mrs Tempesta. He found that her injuries and disabilities were caused by negligence: "There were, inter alia, breaches of duty owed to the plaintiff by reason of failure to ensure that the stairs were of safe construction and to ensure that the lighting on the stairs was sufficiently and properly maintained."
The case at trial, and before this Court, proceeded on the footing that the relevant negligence for which Mrs Tempesta recovered judgment was that of
Mr Lee.
Mrs Tempesta was paid compensation under the Act. She brought proceedings for damages against
Mr Trevor Haines, a nominal defendant appointed to represent the Crown pursuant to the Claims against the Government and Crown
Suits
Act 1912. The Master entered judgment against Mr Haines, in that capacity. He found the total amount of Mrs Tempesta's damages in the sum of $242,194.64. From this sum he deducted the amounts, of workers' compensation payments which were "repayable", namely $92,412.96.
He brought in a rounded judgment in favour of Mrs Tempesta in the sum of $150,000. It is against that judgment that Mr Haines, as appellant, appeals to this Court.
The appeal complains that, in arriving at Mrs Tempesta's damages, the
Master had erred in law in his application of <case> of the Act. In effect, the complaint is that the Master treated the entity represented by the nominal defendant responsible for the negligence of Mr Lee as legally separate from the entity liable as Mrs Tempesta's employer to pay workers' compensation to her. The case for the appellant is that the tortfeasor and the employer were one and the same, namely the Crown.
They were not separate Departments.
Accordingly, <case> of the Act (and not <case>) applied. If that were established, the components of Mrs Tempesta's recovery would be substantially reduced by the provisions in the Act limiting, capping and abolishing entitlements to damages at common law which may be recovered against an employer as contrasted with the recovery that may be had against negligent third parties other than the employer.
 
The Master's decision: the tortfeasor is not the employer
Master Malpass recorded the concession for Mrs Tempesta that neither the
Department of Administrative Services (controlled by the Minister of
Administrative
Services) which provided cleaning services to the school where
Mrs Tempesta worked nor the school itself (controlled by the Minister of
Education through the Department of Education) had distinct legal personalities. It was conceded that both, in law, were manifestations of the
Crown in the right of the State of New South Wales. However, the Master recorded the two arguments for Mrs Tempesta for treating the negligence of the school (and of Mr Lee) as creating a liability in some person other than her employer to pay damages in respect of her injury for the purposes of <case> and <case>. The first was an argument that the section applied only to injuries caused by the negligence or other tort of the employer as employer.
The second was that the Act had adopted an assumption that, exceptionally, for its purposes, departments and bodies which constituted units of government employment, were to be treated as if they were separate legal entities. Thus, for the purpose of the Act she was employed by one entity, the Department of
Administrative Services but was injured by the fault of another, viz the
Department of Education.
After recounting the history of the abolition of the right of injured workers to sue a negligent employer for damages at common law and the partial restoration of that entitlement for "serious work related injuries" by the
Workers Compensation (Benefits) Amendment Act 1989, the Master arrived at his conclusion: "The claim pleaded by the plaintiff alleges negligence through the agency of the Department of Education, its servants and agents.
This is not a proceeding which is brought against the
Crown in its capacity as the employer of the plaintiff. No such allegation is to be found in the pleading. The evidence adduced at the trial established negligence on the part of the
Department and/or its employees. The plaintiff's injury was caused by that negligence. It was not caused by any tort committed by the Government
Supply Department.

The Act expressly recognises that a department 'exercising executive or administrative functions on behalf of the government of the State may be an employer for the purposes of
Section 151E. In this case, the Government Supply Department satisfies those requirements. It is a division of the Department of Administrative Services which, by arrangement with the
Department of Education, provided the cleaning services for the school. It is the de facto employer of the plaintiff. In my view it is the 'worker's employer' in the sense that such expression is used in <case>. ... (T)his is not a case where an award of damages is being made in respect of an injury caused by the negligence of the worker's employer. Accordingly,
I conclude that section 151E does not apply to the award of damages made in respect of the plaintiffs injury in these proceedings."
So far as the submission for Mrs Tempesta that the words "as employer" should be added to give clarity to <case> - and the contrary submission for
Mr Haines that the expression "work related injury" should be added - the
Master refused both requests: "Section 151E is expressed in clear language. It is expressed to operate where there has been an injury caused by the negligence or other tort of the worker's employer. In the light of the clear language chosen by the legislature, I do not consider that the Court can give the section either of the restricted meanings advanced by the parties."
The Master pointed out that if his interpretation of <case> did not accord with the suggested Parliamentary purpose, remedial legislation could be introduced. He proceeded to find damages for Mrs Tempesta without the reductions which would have applied to a claim by her for damages against her employer.
 
The relevant provisions of the workers' compensation statute
For the resolution of this appeal, it is relevant to note the following provisions of the 1987 Act.
Section 3(1): In this Act "employer" includes: any body of persons, corporate or unincorporate; the legal personal representative of a deceased employer; a Government employer; and a former employer; "Government employer" means the Crown or any department, person or body exercising executive or administrative functions on behalf of the Government of the State, and includes: an employer prescribed by the regulations.
It was common ground that no such employer had been so prescribed.
E(1) This Division applies to an award of damages in respect of: an injury to a worker; being an injury caused by the negligence or other tort of the worker's employer; 
This Division does not apply to an award of damages to which [Part 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p6) of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) applies.

This Division applies to an award of damages in respect of an injury caused by the negligence or other tort of the worker's employer even though the damages are recovered in an action for breach of contract or in any other action.

Subsection (3) is enacted for the avoidance of doubt and has effect in respect of actions brought before as well as after the commencement of that subsection.

Z(1) If the injury for which compensation is payable under this Act was caused under circumstances creating a liability in some person other than the worker's employer to pay damages in respect of the injury, the following provisions have effect: (detailed provisions then follow) 
If, in respect of an injury to a worker for which compensation is payable under this Act: the worker takes proceedings independently of this Act to recover damages from a person other than the worker's employer; and the worker also takes or is entitled to take proceedings independently of this Act to recover damages from that employer, the following provisions have effect: (detailed provisions then follow)"
Section 151E appears in Division 3 of the 1987 Act titled "Modified
Common Law Damages". The heading of the section is "Application Modified
Common Law Damages". Section 151Z Appears in Division 5 of the Act ("Miscellaneous Provisions").
Its heading is "Recovery Against Both Employer and Stranger". The scheme of the Act is therefore clear enough. Modified common law damages, which were formerly abolished, were restored where a worker received the compensable injury in circumstances involving negligence or other tort on the part of the worker's employer, however the proceedings might be framed (eg for breach of implied conditions of the contract of employment). Separate provisions were made where the worker has a right to common law damages against a stranger, or against a stranger and the employer.
Mrs Tempesta successfully argued before the Master that she fell within the <case> regime. Mr Haines, anxious to limit Mrs Tempesta's recovery to modified common law damages only, submitted that the legal unity of Crown service meant that her damages action was, in reality and in law, against the
Crown. It was both her employer and the party responsible for the tortfeasor.
The administrative arrangement of departments and agencies was for convenience. It had no significance in law, including for the application of s
E. Whether that approach was correct or not is the question now presented to this Court in this appeal.
 
Crown employment - its generally indivisible character
From its history, as originally reposing in the person of the Sovereign,
Crown service began as "one and indivisible" for a single identifiable Crown.
In its various manifestations, the Crown itself is often described as "indivisible". See eg Williams versus Howarth [(1905) AC 551 (PC)], 706. However, with the demise of Empire, the establishment of a Federal Commonwealth of Australia and other Dominions, the growth of the public sector and the diversity of Crown activities within
Australia and beyond, the position has now been reached where it is "thoroughly misleading" for virtually all purposes to conceive of the idea of the Crown as "one and indivisible". See P W Hogg,
Liability of the Crown (2nd ed) Law Book Co, Sydney, 1989, 10; Minister for Works (Western Australia) v
Gulson <case>; [(1944) 69 CLR 338], 350f.
Notwithstanding this, the essential submission for Mr Haines in this appeal is that "the general position" remains "that the Crown in right of the
State is indivisible". Upon this theory, although in respect of the various separate jurisdictions of which the Queen is so recognised, it is usual to speak of the Crown "in right of' that particular jurisdiction, within the jurisdiction itself the old notion of indivisibility of the Crown survives.
This is not to deny that the Crown, like a corporation, can only act through human servants or agents. See Hogg, ibid, 12. Usually, this fact creates no difficulty because of the doctrines of agency and vicarious liability which can be used by or against the Crown to hold it as bound by the acts of its servants or agents and accountable in the courts since the surrender of its prerogative upon enactment of a statute such as the Claims
Against the Government and Crown Suits Act 1912.
As was conceded for Mrs Tempesta, neither the Department of
Administrative Services (including the
Government Supply Department) nor the
Department of Education had a separate legal personality. Both were, and are, in law, aspects or manifestations of the Crown in the right of the State of
New South Wales. Cf Parker versus Commonwealth of Australia <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 295], 67; Kaye versus Attorney-General for Tasmania <case>; [(1956) 94 CLR 193]; Suttling versus Director-General of Education and Ors [(1985) 3 NSWLR 427 (CA)], 431, 438.
No point was taken by either party to this appeal concerning the position of Mr Haines, as the nominal defendant for the Crown. Thus, Mrs Tempesta did not argue that in some way Mr Haines' position was to be distinguished on the basis that he was but the representative of the Crown and not in truth her "employer". Nor did Mr Haines assert that the language or procedures of the
Claims Against the Government and Crown Suits Act 1912 provided an answer to the controversy presented by the terms of <case>.
For Mrs Tempesta it was suggested that, should the eventuality arise that it was necessary to sue the
Crown in two capacities, eg as employer and as occupier of a building negligently kept, it would be possible to nominate two nominal defendants under the last mentioned Act. This could readily be done should there be a risk of conflict, arising, for example, from differing insurance arrangements.
It is unnecessary in this case to explore that possibility. Here, the only negligence alleged against the Crown's nominal defendant was in respect of the failure of Mr Lee to repair and maintain premises under its control.
But, according to Mr Haines, the fundamental flaw in the Master's reasoning was that he overlooked the unified nature of the Crown's service in the State; the fact that the only basis for recovering damages for Mrs
Tempesta was for her to sue the Crown through its nominal defendant; and that upon a proper analysis her real employer was the Crown, thereby making the employer and the tortfeasor one and the same and so attracting s 151E of the
Act. Mr Haines relied upon the analogous position in the Federal sphere, explained in the judgment of Menhennitt J in Commonwealth of Australia v
O'Donohue and Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works <case>; [(1979) VR 441 (SC)], :
"In my view, the true analysis of Commonwealth Departments so created pursuant to [s 64](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s64.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) is that they are parts of the Commonwealth of Australia. The Commonwealth of
Australia functions pursuant to Departments of State, and each department is, in my view, appropriately to be described as part of the Commonwealth of Australia. It is, in my view, erroneous to describe a Department of State, as the Appeals Tribunal did in its reasons, as being an agency of the Commonwealth of
Australia The concept of an agency of a Commonwealth of
Australia is appropriate to be applied to, for example, a corporation ... The distinction between an agency on the one hand and the Commonwealth itself acting through its departments is made by Dixon J in Bank of New South Wales versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1948) 76 CLR 1] at p 358 where his Honour says, referring to the language of [s 75(iii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s75.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/): 'By the use of these expressions does the third paragraph of [s 75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s75.html) intend to give a jurisdiction confined to matters in which the Crown exercising (through the GovernorGeneral) the Executive power of the Commonwealth is itself a party, whether suing or sued in the name of the King or by the Attorney-General or by some other officer or nominal party authorised for the purpose as a matter of procedure?'"
See also the course followed in
Waterford versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1987) 163 CLR ], 55.
By analogous reasoning it was suggested that the various departments of the State Executive Government were all parts of the executive power of the
State. In that sense they were manifestations of the Crown in right of the
State. See also Crouch v
Commissioner for Railways (Queensland) and Anor <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 22], 33, 36.
The foregoing submissions, concerning the essential nature of various parts of State government employment, raise interesting questions of some complexity, doubtless important to the resolution of particular disputes. But great care must be taken in importing the general theory of Crown employment into the operation of the rather peculiar provisions of the Workers
Compensation
Acts. Those Acts have long enacted a fiction in respect of government employment in New South Wales. It is the statutory fiction rather than the general theory of Crown employment which provides the answer to the controversy in this case.
 
Workers' Compensation
Act- special provisions for Crown employment
In the Workers' Compensation Act 1926, <case>, as it appeared immediately before the repeal of the Act, contained special provision in relation to workers in State Government service in New South Wales: "6(1)
In this Act, unless the context or subject-matter otherwise indicates or requires: 'Employer' includes any body of persons, corporate or unincorporate, and the legal personal representative of a deceased employer.
 ......

Employer also includes any Government department heretofore or hereafter created, or any Minister, trust, commission or board exercising executive or administrative functions on behalf of the Government of the State as for example the State Rail
Authority of
New South Wales, the Urban Transit Authority of New
South Wales, the Maritime Services Board of New South Wales, the
Metropolitan
Water, Sewerage and Draining Board, the Water
Resources Commission, the Board of Fire Commissioners of New
South Wales, the omebush Abattoir Corporation, or The Hunter
District Water Board."
The commentary in C P Mills Workers' Compensation New
South Wales,
Butterworths, Sydney, 1969, 92 indicates that author's opinion that the effect of the specific inclusion of government departments and other authorities was two-fold. It negatived the common law rule that the Crown was not bound by a statute, and it permitted the separate bodies nominated to be "joined in proceedings in their official title". This entitlement was carried forward by
Division I Rule 55 WCR under which: "55(1) In any proceedings under the Act ... arising out of an injury to a worker employed by or under the Crown, in which, if the employer was a private person, such employer would be a necessary party, the permanent head of the department by in or under which the worker was employed or, where the department is administered by a Board or by
Commissioners, such Board or Commissioners shall be made a party under his or their official title as representing the
Crown."
By the original terms of the 1926 Act provision was made for an election between benefits provided under the Act and under other legislation. This reflected the fact that initially some persons employed in Crown employment enjoyed entitlements superior to those provided by the Act. Such provisions were later repealed. However <case> of the 1926 remained: "47(1) This
Act shall apply to workers employed by or under the Crown or any Government department to whom this Act would apply if the employer were a private person. " (emphasis added)
It may thus be seen that, from the 1926 Act, both by <case> and <case>, the theory that Crown employment was one and indivisible was effectively negatived by statutory provisions which expressly contemplated that some Crown employees, at least, would be employed "by or under" a "Government department" as such.
No doubt because of the provision of the Act and the facility of the rules, it was not at all uncommon for workers to proceed against departments eo nomine and for such departments to so proceed, including on appeal to the
Supreme Court. The case books are full of such cases. See eg Department of
Public Works versus Majcher (1954) WCR 53 (SC); Department of Education versus Nunn
WCR 114; Department of Attorney
General and of Justice versus Kelly [(1960)
NSWR 154]; (1961) WCR 232 (SC). There are numberless cases involving various statutory bodies such as the Commissioner for Railways. As the supplementary submissions for Mr Haines point out the position in this State is to be contrasted with Federal practice. There the
Commonwealth always appears to have been sued as respondent in compensation proceedings, doubtless because of the understanding of the requirements of the Federal statute. Yet in The
Commonwealth versus Hornsby <case>; [(1960) 103 CLR 588] at 594f, Dixon CJ expressed the opinion that, where an employee was employed by an authority which was a corporate body whose employees were not "employees" of the Commonwealth, such authority should be joined as a party to the suit. "...(T)hose who pay should be parties to the proceedings by which the claim to compensation is put in suit." See also ibid, 602.
Those familiar with the practice of the Workers' Compensation Commission of New South Wales will affirm that it was unremarkable to see Government departments sued as "employer" under the Workers' Compensation Act 1926. It must be assumed that the legislative foundation for this longstanding and widespread practice was the recognition of Government departments as employers by reason of the express provision of the Act.
They sued their departments as such. They did not sue the Crown or seek the appointment of a nominal defendant under the 1912 Act.
The enactment of a similarly broad definition of "employer" by the 1987
Act (see above) with the express contemplation that a "government employer" means not only the Crown but any department, person or body "exercising executive or administrative functions on behalf of the government of the
State", suggests that the old jurisprudence and practice of the 1926 Act was continued into the new Act. It was conceded for Mr Haines that there was no relevant distinction between the definitions in the 1926 and 1987 Acts.
I am prepared to assume that this is so. Accordingly, by express statutory provision and longstanding practice, the general theory of the indivisibility of Crown service was negatived for the purposes of the [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).
 
The reality of differentiated Crown employment today
There may be practical reasons for supporting this dissection of Crown service:
The public, including workers themselves, would, at least in recent times, be inclined to regard the notion of an indivisible service of the Crown as a curious fiction. If Mrs
Tempesta, for example, had been asked to nominate her employer, it seems scarcely likely that she would have named the Crown. In this sense, the statute's recognition of departmental employment, and employment by Crown persons and bodies, simply reflected common community understanding, ordinary parlance and normal practice;
It is also possible that it reflected the differential arrangements which exist within government employment in New
South Wales for insurance against workers' compensation risk.
These differential arrangements are recognised by <case> of the Act. That section contemplates that any government employer may be a "self-insurer" under the government's managed fund scheme, or arrangements might be made with the Insurance
Ministerial Corporation (formerly the Government Insurance
Office). See <case> and (2). Since the passage of the [Government Insurance Office (Privatisation) Act 1991](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/gioa1991437/) (the 1991
Act) the Government Insurance Office has been known as GIO
Australia Holdings Limited. On 30 June 1992 the Premier made an order pursuant to <case> of the 1991 Act excluding certain assets, rights and liabilities from the business undertaking of GIO
Australia Holdings Limited and transferring them to the New
South Wales Insurance Ministerial Corporation. See New
South
Wales Government Gazette, 28 August 1992, 6334. See esp Part 2, clauses 8 and 9. The New South Wales Insurance Ministerial
Corporation acts on behalf of the State of New South Wales. It holds the assets transferred to it pursuant to the <case> order on behalf of the Treasury and contracts with GIO Australia Holdings
Limited which manages those assets on its behalf. <case>, 
Act. In these circumstances, treatment of all State Government departments, agencies and bodies as a single employment for the purposes of the [Workers Compensation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) defies the differential insurance arrangements specifically contemplated by the Act itself;
The trend of modem public administration has been towards differentiated responsibility within departments of the
Executive Government. It involves cross-transfers of funds for services provided by one agency to the other. Modern accounting principles have led to the introduction of such arrangements as a means of ensuring efficiency and true accountability in the provision of the many services of modern government. There are many well known examples. Such differential arrangements cannot stand easily with the theoretical notion that the entire service is wholly unified, either generally or for the application of the [Workers Compensation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/); and
In the various manifestations of State government activities, the Crown operates many functions in respect of which liability as a tortfeasor may easily arise. It would be surprising if the chance coincidence of employment within one government department and injury in circumstances rendering another department liable, which has no direct connection with the injured person's employment, were to attract the limitations upon recovery applicable where a worker sues an employer. The risks are separate. The apparent reason for limiting recovery against employers was the price for reviving, in a modified form, the abolished entitlement to sue employers for damages outside the Act. That general purpose should not be extended to providing a general cloak of protection to the Crown in all of its many multifarious departmental and agency manifestations, where the wrong done to an injured worker was one done by an act or omission for which another department or agency was responsible, different entirely from the department or agency in which the worker was actually employed.
I concede that no solution to the quandary presented by this appeal is entirely satisfactory. For the appellant it was pointed out that the adoption of the approach of the Master may give rise to attempts by workers to evade the limitations contemplated by <case> by the simple expedient of pleading a claim in occupier's liability rather than for negligence of the employer. The
Court was urged to forbid the worker doing indirectly what could not be done directly. Cf Container Terminals Australia Ltd versus Xeras [(1991) 23 NSWLR 214 ], 217. The difficulty of applying <case> to different departments and agencies of government employment was emphasised. It was urged that the "protective cloak" for the Crown would be no greater than that applicable to any other very large employer. The object of s 151E was, broadly stated, to protect and minimise the risk exposure of employers. That included the Crown.
That the intention of
Parliament was to look at the substance of the plaintiff's cause of action and not at its form could be seen in <case> which was added, and given retrospective operation by the amending Act of 1991 (see Schedule 4(2)). I acknowledge the force of these arguments.
They were forcefully and persuasively put to the Court for the appellant.
 
Conclusion: departmental employment is severable .
It has not been unusual in New South Wales legislation to treat State
Government employment as differentiated and not unitary for the purposes of the legislation. So it was found in Holly versus Director of Public Works [(1988) 14
NSWLR 140 (CA)], 148 in the application of the [Government and Related
Employees' Appeal Tribunal Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/gareata1980458/), [s 4(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/gareata1980458/s4.html) So it is in the case of [s 151E(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151e.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).
However much of the old rule of the indivisibility of the Crown and its service still survives in the general constitutional theory in this State, for a very long time workers' compensation legislation in this State has recognised the division in State government service which has reflected the common understanding of the community and the realities of modem public administration. It is simply not possible, for the purposes of the Act, to adhere to a theory of indivisible Crown service in State government employment in New
South Wales consistent with the definition of "government employer" in s 3 of the 1987 Act. In this, the 1987 Act continued an arrangement which had begun under the 1926 Act. What started in the 1926 Act as a fiction of separate departmental (agency and other) employment has now progressed, after nearly seventy years of practice and change, to the point where it is the unified Crown service which appears to be the fiction. Employment by the separate units of the State public sector, as envisaged by the Act, is now much closer to the reality. It is recognised in various ways (including by insurance) under the 1987 Act. When, therefore, <case> refers to "negligence or other tort of the worker's employer" it refers, in the case of a "government employer" to the negligence or other tort of the worker's applicable "department, person or body exercising executive or administrative functions on behalf of the government of the
State".
I do not accept the argument that this construction of the Act permits the worker, merely by an enterprising pleading, to escape the operation of s
E(1) of the Act and its policy to limit the recovery of common law damages in employment injury cases.
It is still necessary for the worker to establish that the relevant "negligence or other tort" can be attributed to some person other than the worker's own department or agency. It is enough in this case to say that the word "employer", as used in <case> and 151Z, imports, in the case of "government employers", the special definition with its enlarged meaning to include departments etc. This does not involve adding any words to either s
E(1) or to <case>. No words should be added. In this, I agree with the
Master. All that this case establishes is that the reference to "employer" imports, in the case of Government employment, the special statutory definition provided by the Act. The pre-existing prerogative and common law notions of Crown employment are, to that extent, modified for the purposes of the Act.
 
Orders: recovery of compensation by the employer
In substance, therefore, the Master's approach to <case> was correct.
Ordinarily, that would be sufficient to sustain his judgment and orders.
However, it was put for Mr
Haines that the "unreality of the Master's approach" in suggesting that the Crown (represented by the appellant) was not
Mrs Tempesta's employer was revealed by the fact that, by his orders, he credited the appellant with the workers' compensation payment made by the employer pursuant to the Act. Yet that credit could only be provided upon the basis that the defendant tortfeasor which was liable was the employer. Only the employer has a defence to the extent of workers' compensation benefits paid. See <case>(e). If the "employer" was truly to be treated as distinct from the "stranger" liable to pay damages, the deduction under <case> of the Act does not apply. The entitlement to the recovery by the employer of workers' compensation payments must then be justified by <case> but in properly constituted proceedings.
In making the deduction of $92,412.96 paid as workers' compensation, the
Master made no reference to the statutory basis for doing so. He simply stated that it was "common ground" that the sum "is to be deducted" as "repayable workers' compensation payments". I am not prepared to assume that the Master erroneously ordered that "repayment" under s 151B(1)(b) of the Act. So far as his reasons are concerned, they can equally be explained as giving effect to an agreement of the parties for deduction to be made under <case>. It is true that there was no formal proceeding before the Master against a person "other than the worker's employer" (as defined). But as this point does not appear to have been litigated before the Master, where the problem might have been cured, I do not consider that it should be raised in this Court. For all this
Court is aware, where there is no differentiation of insurance in separate units of the government service, an arrangement for simple deduction of workers' compensation payments made, without the necessity for the other department or agency to commence proceedings against the worker, will be a sensible course which may be acquiesced in by the worker. It seems to have been followed in this case.
In light of my conclusions, it is unnecessary for the Court to deal with the remaining points raised by the Notice of Contention. I would, therefore, not do so.
I would dismiss the appeal. The appellant must pay Mrs Tempesta's costs.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA:  I agree with the orders and reasons of Kirby P.
JUDGE3
HANDLEY JA:  I agree with Kirby P.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/85.html  
