

Cryer versus Ossher and Ors Matter No 3093/97 [1997] NSWSC 613 (5 December )
 ` 
Guy Lawrence Cryer versus Ian Lawrence Ossher & Ors` ` 3093/97` `5 December 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `  `
 `3093/97 - GUY LAWRENCE CRYER versus IAN LAWRENCE OSSHER & ORS` `  `
 `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: The parties to these proceedings, other than the second defendant, are the registered proprietors of folio identifier 30/SP49599, which refers to commercial premises, Suite 14-16 The Royal Arcade at 401-407 New South Head Road, Double Bay. The parties hold this property as tenants in common in equal shares. 
It is unnecessary to go deeply into the details of the parties. It would seem that they were former friends who were involved in associated enterprises and that they entered into the arrangement of owning the property as co-owners and using it together in the expectation that that would continue for an indefinite time. However, the plaintiff became very ill and he left the premises. The first defendants were unhappy that the plaintiff had not disclosed to them his developing illness and were disturbed that they had been left without the plaintiff's support in continuing to maintain the premises.
As a result of the falling out, the parties - that is the plaintiff on the one hand and the first defendants on the other - are not particularly co- operative, one with the other.

The plaintiff filed a summons for an order under [s
G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) of the [Conveyancing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) that the property be sold. He filed that summons on 4 July 1997. It is supported by the usual affidavits, including the consents of the proposed trustees for sale.

The matter proceeded before the Master but at the very heel of the hunt the defendants sought to put on a cross-claim seeking partition in lieu of sale, pursuant to [s
G(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/). The Master refused to allow that cross-claim to be filed and made the orders in the summons. On 3 November 1997 I considered that the Master was faced with a very awkward situation, that there was some credible evidence that the alternative to sale referred to in [s
G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html), namely partition, was a viable proposition and that the appeal against the
Master's decision should be allowed but that the cross-claim for partition should be heard at an early date. I then fixed the hearing of the cross-claim for today. It is acknowledged that if the cross-claim fails then an order for sale should be made on the summons.

The relevant subsection reads as follows: "If...any of the co-owners satisfies the court that partition of the property would be more beneficial for the co-owners interested to the extent of upwards of a moiety in value than sale, the court may, with the consent of the incumbrancers of the entirety...appoint trustees of the property on the statutory trust for partition...".

Mr Patterson for the cross-claimants acknowledges that his clients need to satisfy the onus of proof in respect of the matters referred to in that subsection.

The history of this legislation is set out in the judgment of Kirby P in
Pannizutti versus Trask <case>; [(1979) 27 ALR 330.] Essentially the Court had jurisdiction to partition from an early date, but had no power to order a compulsory sale of land held in co- ownership. The English Partition Acts, particularly <case> of the 1868 Partition
Act gave statutory authority to the Court to order sale if it considered sale more beneficial than partition. Our Act in different words also operates so that a sale is ordered unless it can be shown by the appropriate people that partition is more beneficial.
 "Beneficial" in the old English Act was construed by the courts as meaning beneficial in a pecuniary sense; see Walker on the Partition Acts (2nd edition, Stevens, London, 1882) page 28, which, I think, is the most recent text on the Partition Acts apart from the present standard text, Mitra's Co- ownership and Partition (7th ed, Eastern Law House, Calcutta, 1994). The leading case on what is "beneficial" in <case> or its predecessor is
Drinkwater versus Ratcliffe [(1885) LR 20 Eq 528] at 533 where Jessel MR said: "I am to direct a sale if I am of opinion that the sale would be more beneficial for the parties interested. What does that mean? It means in a pecuniary sense. I cannot go into questions of sentiment, I must look merely to the monetary results." 
That opinion has been acted on, as far as I can see, ever since. In Rogers v
Squire [(1978) 23 ALR 111] at 121, Gallop J, when a judge of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory, considered that the only matters that he needed to look at were financial matters, following Drinkwater's case, though he also took into account the fact that there would be expense involved in getting the Minister's consent and that on the evidence before him, the circumstances militated against the parties being able to get the Minister's consent. The point was not considered when the Full Federal Court dismissed the appeal from Gallop J, Squire versus Rogers <case>; [(1979) 27 ALR 330.] In Panizutti, the point was not actually argued, though
Needham AJA said at page 542 that he considered that the benefit referred to was a financial one; Kirby P was not quite so sure, see page 540. I think, however, if one looks at 540, what Kirby P was saying was that when one is exercising the discretion that may be imported by the word "may" later in the section, one can look at emotional factors as well.

Thus, I believe that what Mr Patterson's clients must prove is that it is financially beneficial for the persons interested in over half of the property. The "over one half of the property" provision seems to have altered the situation as it was considered in Huddersfield versus Jacomb [1874] Eng WN , where Bacon VC said that one had to show that the partition would be beneficial for all the parties interested, including the opponent.

The evidence on this matter is, with respect, rather sketchy. First, what is it that must be more financially beneficial than sale? The section says "partition of the property", but what partition is being considered? 
Under the old Partition Act and still in India at the present day, a co-owner gets a preliminary decree for partition. The matter is then referred to a
Master or to a Commissioner to bring in a scheme of partition. A draft scheme is prepared by one of the parties and put to the Commissioner. Other people are consulted. A scheme is then finalised and, if necessary, approved by the
Judge and it is then put in place. Accordingly, one could well imagine that what the word "partition" means is partition in general. However, it is customary in these sorts of cases, as shown by the form of affidavit in support of a partition application in Nevill & Ashe, Equity Proceedings with Precedents (Butterworths, Sydney, 1981) page 284, for a person seeking partition to include a proposed scheme of partition so that the Court can see what it is that is being put forward in opposition to sale.

In the present case, the proposed scheme of partition is very nebulous. There is the plan which is exhibit PX03 but the line of division on that plan is drawn in the wrong place in the sense that it is accepted that each party should have equal access to windows facing New South Head Road, which is at the right hand side of the plan PX03. During argument, with Mr Patterson's consent, I hatched in blue an area at the top of the plan of 62 square metres which is proposed to be the area which would be partitioned off and conveyed to the plaintiff, with the balance of 124 square metres retained by the cross- claimants. There may have to be some adjustment because the 62 square metres contains some passage-way space but, in general, that is the proposal.
However, the scheme does not deal with matters that would ordinarily be expected to be dealt with in a scheme such as who owns the partition and other fixtures on the premises; what is the attitude of those owners and whether any owelty needs to be considered because with equal areas, part of the area may still be in a more commercially valuable position. See in general, Mitra at pages 344 and following, and the decision of the Indian Supreme Court in
Swaminatha versus Official Receiver (1957) 44 All Indian Reporter SC 577 at 582.

I consider that the proper construction of the section is that it must be partition in general which would be more beneficial. However, the Court primarily focuses on the scheme for partition propounded by the applicant but bears in mind that proper objections by the opponent may well prevail during the inquiry phase. However, in the instant case, the proposed partition propounded by Mr Mathieson, the engineers retained by the plaintiff, is rejected outright by the cross-claimants as something which would not be fair and equitable. I think the result of this is twofold. First, I must focus solely on the cross-claimants' proposals and secondly, I must take into account so far as time is concerned, that the inquiry phase may well take some time to dispose of.

On the cross-claimants' proposal, there would be a unit of 62 square metres.
The evidence is that a commercial unit in Double Bay of a smaller square metreage sells at a higher rate than one of a larger square metreage. The figures given by Mr James, valuer, in his affidavit of 3 November 1997 are based only on five comparable sales and the figures are a bit erratic, but it seems to be accepted on both sides of this dispute that on those figures, 62 square metres would realise about $235,000. What Mr Patterson's submissions do is to assume that there would be three 62 square metre suites and accordingly one triples $235,000 to get a figure of about $700,000. He then says the evidence suggests that the property as one lot would sell for $550,000, so that there is a pecuniary disadvantage in selling the property at one lot of approximately $150,000. Mr Patterson's submissions were more complicated than that and raised some other figures as well, but, simplistically, that is what it amounts to.

Mr Enright for the plaintiff, however, says that that is not the case that the cross-claimants are putting up. He says the cross-claimants are not at this stage dividing the property into three but into two and that the second unit of 124 square metres is a bigger lot, which would not raise as much, and using the figures in Mr James' proposal, one would get 124 square metres at $2,673 per square metre, which would be a total of $331,452. Adding this to the 62 square metre unit, one would get a gross selling price of $566,452 and so there would be, without looking at anything else, a profit of $16,000.
However, the expenses of the subdivision, on the cross-claimants' case, are $23,000 and on the plaintiff's case, $57,000, so that whichever way one looks at it, there would be a financial loss.

I consider that that submission is correct and that accordingly, unless there are other relevant factors, I could not be satisfied that partition would be more financially beneficial to anybody.

One then has to see whether there are other factors which might go to financial benefit. The English authorities seem to suggest that financial benefits, such as the ability to stay in possession, are not the sort of benefits that one should look at under <case> because if it were otherwise, then the whole purpose of the Act in giving any co-owner the right to opt out of the co-ownership would, for all practical purposes, be lost. This attitude is also reflected in more recent cases in the southern hemisphere; see
Hargreaves versus Fleming [[1975] 1 NZLR 209] and on appeal [[1976] 1 NZLR 12] and Martin-Smith versus Woodhead [[1990] WAR 62.] 
It should also be remembered in this case that the person who appears to be in occupation is not any of the co-owners but rather a company, AAHHS Group Pty
Limited, of which the other cross-claimants are the sole directors, which appears to be in occupation as lessee, though there is no evidence of the terms of the lease. Accordingly, any financial benefit to the personal cross- claimants would flow only indirectly through to them, in a way on which there is no evidence. The evidence, does however, tend to suggest that the cross- claimants are actually paying all the outgoings at present.

Accordingly, I am not satisfied that it would be more beneficial financially to order partition.

It follows that it does not really matter very much that there are other defects in the application as well. I also do not need to consider whether I have any discretion to decline to order partition and, if so, whether to exercise that discretion.

The Court is to appoint trustees for partition with the consent of the incumbrancers of the entirety. Although there is no reported decision on this, it seems to me those words mean that the mortgagees must give their consent to the appointment of trustees for partition. The evidence in this case only goes as far as to show that neither mortgagee (there are two of them) would have any objection to the erection of a gypsum wall in the premises and that one mortgagee would probably be prepared to consent to splitting the title. There is no evidence that a trust for partition was something to which they would consent. There is also no evidence before the Court of anybody consenting to be trustees for partition.

I would have entertained an application for adjournment if these were the only defects, but, in the light of my findings on the main point and the fact that no such application was made, we do not need to consider those matters any further.

There was a fair amount of evidence presented as to the cost of the work that would be needed to effect the partition and the amount of time it would take.
I have already set out the differences in costing of the two parties. The evidence from the cross-claimants appeared to be more guesswork than the evidence of the plaintiff and so I would tend to think that the plaintiff's figure is more likely to be correct than that of the cross-claimants. As to time, I do not really think that this is a necessary factor to consider because it merely goes to hardship rather than to financial benefit. However, if I needed to find a fact on that matter, I would have thought that the plaintiff's estimate of six months was nearer the mark than the cross- claimants' estimate of about 18 weeks.

It follows that the cross-claim should be dismissed. I think it should be dismissed with costs as it is a discrete matter. The order originally made by the Master on the claim should be restored. The exhibits should be retained.
Thus, I make the identical orders to the orders made by the Master numbered 1 to 4 on 13 October 1997.

So far as cost are concerned, I make the following orders: 
That the costs of all parties up to and including 22 September 1997 and the costs not otherwise subject to any special order, be paid out of the proceeds of sale of the subject property.

That the cross-claimants pay the plaintiff's costs between 23 September and 17 October 1997, the costs of 13 October 1997 to be on the indemnity basis, otherwise on the party and party basis.

No order in respect of the cross-claimants' costs before Simos J on 3
October 1997 to the intent that the cross-claimants will bear their own costs thereof.

Cross-claimants to pay the plaintiff's costs of 31 October 1997 on the indemnity basis.

Otherwise, each party to pay his own costs of the appeal.

Order that the cross-claimants pay the costs of the plaintiff on the cross-claim.

Order that the costs payable by the cross-claimants to the plaintiff be paid out of the proceeds of sale of the subject property to which the cross- claimants would otherwise be entitled.

Liberty to apply.

Exhibits should be retained.
 * * * 
