

Sharp versus Holbourn and Anor Matter No 12213/92 [1997] NSWSC 593 (28 November )
 
Sharp versus Holbourn & Anor /92 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /92 - Sharp versus Holbourn & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced in 1992. The plaintiff brings a claim for damages arising out of personal injury. On or about 24 November 1989, the plaintiff was riding a horse supplied by the defendants on their farming property. The horse reared and the plaintiff fell to the ground suffering serious injury. 
There are three Cross-Claims. Only two are relevant for present purposes. The first Cross-Claim has been brought by the defendants against two insurers. The first cross-defendant is MLC Insurance Limited (MLC). The second cross- defendant is GIO Australia Limited (GIO). Indemnity is sought as against the appropriate insurer. The claim for indemnity brought against GIO is founded on
Policy of Insurance No. H1120581WO (the GIO Policy).

The Second Cross-Claim is brought by MLC against GIO. It claims contribution in the event that MLC is held to be liable to indemnify the defendants.

GIO seeks summary dismissal of the Cross-Claims brought against it. Summary dismissal is a discretionary remedy. It is exercised having regard to the circumstances of the particular case before the Court and so that justice is best served between the parties. There is abundant authority for the proposition that the remedy should be granted only in what may be described as clear cases (see Webster versus Lampard <case>; [116 ALR 545).]
The onus rests on the applicant.

At this stage, it is convenient to make general reference to a number of matters. The material placed before the Court may be described as sparse. The position between the parties has been complicated by changes to pleadings. GIO has served Notices to Admit Facts on the other parties. MLC has served a
Notice disputing those facts within the time allowed by the rules. The plaintiff served a Notice after the time allowed by the rules had expired. The defendants have not served any Notice disputing the facts. No application has been made for leave to withdraw any admission. Belatedly, without notice or any process or supporting material, some attempt was made during the course of the hearing of these summary dismissal proceedings to agitate the entertaining of an application. The parties were informed that, in the circumstances, no such application would be entertained during the hearing of this application (if leave is to be sought, an application can be made in the usual course by the filing of a Notice of Motion). GIO had made a previous application to the
Court in these proceedings. This had been heard by Master Greenwood. He delivered a judgment on 26 September 1996.

Largely, the material consists of the pleading (including the admissions to be found therein) and the admissions that arise from the service of the Notices to Admit Facts.

The Court was told that the plaintiff was of youthful age and had sustained brain damage. It was further told that the indemnity provided by the MLC
Policy had a limit of $1,000,000 whereas that provided by the GIO Policy extended to $5,000,000.

The original Statement of Claim was filed on 23 April 1992. It contained the following allegation:- "2. On or about the 24th day of November 1989 the plaintiff, an inexperienced horse rider, was at the request and with the permission of the defendants and each of them preparing to assist one of their servants or agents in mustering cattle. For that purpose the defendants provided her with a horse to ride (`the horse')." 
The original Statement of Defence was filed on 26 March 1996. It contained the following:- "2. The allegations contained in paragraph 2 are not admitted to the extent that the Plaintiff was an inexperienced horse rider. Otherwise the allegations contained therein are admitted." 
The first Cross-Claim was filed on 23 November 1995. It alleges that the defendants are uncertain as to their rights of indemnity under the relevant policies of insurance. It contains the following further allegations:- "AS AGAINST THE FIRST CROSS DEFENDANT: 
The Cross Claimants say: 
By Policy of Insurance No 001049040S, the First Cross Defendant agreed to indemnify each of the First and Second Cross Claimants for `bodily injury' occurring during the period of insurance as a result of an accident and happening in connection with the business.

The Plaintiff was injured on the premises of the First and Second Cross
Claimants during the period of insurance.

The injury occurred and happened in connection with the business.

The business the subject of the policy is farming.

At the time of the accident the Plaintiff was assisting in returning cattle from the property of the First and Second Cross Claimants to another property.

In the event that the Plaintiff is successful against the First and
Second Defendants the First and Second Cross Claimants claim indemnity from the First Cross Defendant pursuant to the terms of the said Policy.' `AS AGAINST THE SECOND CROSS DEFENDANT: 
The Cross Claimants say: 
By Policy of Insurance No. H.1120581WO the Second Cross Defendant agreed to indemnify the First and Second Cross Claimants for `bodily injury' occurring during the period of insurance as a result of an accident or happening occurring within Australia.

The Plaintiff was injured on the premises of the First and Second Cross
Claimant during the period of insurance.

The premises of the First and Second Cross Claimants, being the subject of the Plaintiff's claim, is situate and known as `Park Ridge', Nundle in the
State of New South Wales.

In the event that the Plaintiff is successful against the First and Second
Defendants the First and Second Cross Claimants claim indemnity from the
Second Cross Defendant pursuant to the terms of the said policy." 
On 3 July 1997, the plaintiff filed an Amended Statement of Claim. It, inter alia, deleted the allegation that the plaintiff was preparing to assist one of the defendants' servants or agents in mustering cattle.

On 4 August 1997, the defendants filed a Defence to the Amended Statement of
Claim. It did not contain the admission as to the deleted material which had appeared in the original Defence.

The GIO Policy purports to be "Home Contents Insurance Policy". The legal liability is expressed in the following terms:- "B. LEGAL LIABILITY 
GIO will Indemnify the Insured or Family Member against a Legal Liability incurred as a result of an accident occurring in Australia during the Period of Insurance which causes the death of or bodily injury to any person" 
The Policy expressly excludes, inter alia:- "(3) any Legal Liability incurred as a result of or in connection with ...
 the carrying on of a business, trade or profession other than as lessor of a strata title home unit in which the Home Contents are contained" 
A copy of the Notices to Admit Facts served on the defendants and on the plaintiff are annexed to an affidavit sworn by Mr Griscti (a solicitor in the employ of the solicitors for GIO). For the purposes of this application, GIO relied on the admissions made in respect of the matters specified in paragraphs 1-5 and 8-9 of the Notice. In opposition to the application, particular attention was drawn to the following paragraphs:- "3. On 24 November 1989 in the course of her employment with the First and
Second Defendants, Jodie Coops-Blume was embarking on the task of leading cattle from the First and Second Defendants' property `Parkridge' to another property known as `Koobah'.
The Plaintiff was accompanying and/or assisting and/or preparing to assist
Ms Coops-Blume with the task referred to in paragraph 3 herein." 
It was said that the admissions arising from the service of this Notice lacked the clear and unambiguous characteristics required to found the claim for summary dismissal. There was particular reference made to the words "was accompanying and/or assisting and/or preparing to assist". In my view, there is substance in this submission.

Master Greenwood had been asked in the application made before him to order a separate trial of an issue. As I understand the position, the separate issue concerned the question of whether or not legal liability for the accident was excluded under the GIO Policy. Master Greenwood declined to order a separate trial of that issue.

Counsel for GIO has handed up a written outline of submissions. The case for
GIO is put in the alternative. The first alternative is founded on the pleadings. The second alternative is founded on the admissions that have been made.

GIO bears the onus of clearly demonstrating that legal liability for the accident was excluded under its Policy.

After giving these submissions full consideration, I am not satisfied that GIO has discharged the onus of satisfying the Court that it is entitled to summary dismissal of the Cross-Claims. There is doubt which remains. In the circumstances of this case, it seems to me that justice is best served if the application for summary dismissal is refused.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion filed on 15 May 1997. The applicant (GIO) is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
