

Regina versus Eddie Ile Kaadi [1998] NSWSC 1054 (19 December 1998) 
REGINA versus EDDIE ILE KAADI /97 
Monday 5 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Gleeson CJ, Grove J, Sperling J 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - Crown appeal against sentence - malicious wounding - principles where sentence additional to sentence being served - sentence increased 
Everett [(1994) 18 CLR 295] 
Mansour Aala (NSW CCA, 30 May 1996, unreported) 
RESULT: Appeal allowed 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the judgment of Sperling J. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders.

GROVE J: I agree with Sperling J.

SPERLING J: 
This is an appeal pursuant to [s
D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) brought by the Director of Public Prosecutions from a sentence imposed by Davidson DCJ on 10 January 1997.

The respondent Eddie Ile Kaadi, had been charged with maliciously wounding one
Simon Gaut on 7 August 1993 with intent to cause grievous bodily harm. On 2
December 1996 the respondent was acquitted of that charge by the jury but found guilty of the statutory alternative of malicious wounding.

At the time of the offence the respondent was twenty nine years of age.

The respondent became addicted to heroin about ten years earlier at the age of twenty.

In the period 1985 to 1994 the respondent was sentenced for various offences on no less than ten occasions. The offences included armed robbery, stealing and conspiracy to commit armed robbery. Several of the offences involved violence. Prison sentences were imposed on six occasions in the space of nine years.

The last of that series of offences, conspiracy to commit armed robbery occurred in February 1991. At that time, the respondent had been released from prison on parole as recently as the end of the previous month.

In April 1991, when arrested for the conspiracy offence, the respondent was returned to prison on a revocation warrant issued consequent upon breach of his parole conditions.

The respondent was held bail refused on the conspiracy charge for some twenty two months until released on bail in February 1993.

Six months later, on 2 August 1993, while still subject to parole in relation to an earlier prison sentence and while on bail in relation to the conspiracy charge, the respondent committed the further offence of malicious wounding which gives rise to the present appeal.

On 20 April 1994 the respondent came before Gallen DCJ for sentence after his conviction on the conspiracy charge. His Honour considered a minimum term of five years to be appropriate. He reduced that by twenty two months to take account of time held in custody on that charge. The resultant sentence was a minimum term of three years and two months expiring on 18 June 1997, and an additional term of one year and one month expiring on 18 July 1988.

On 10 January 1997 Davidson DCJ sentenced the respondent following his conviction for malicious wounding. At the time of his trial for that offence and at the time of sentence by Davidson DCJ, the respondent was serving the minimum term under the sentence imposed by Gallen DCJ for the conspiracy offence.

Davidson DCJ sentenced the respondent to a fixed term of imprisonment of nine months commencing on 18 June 1997 and terminating on 17 March 1998. The sentence was thus to be commenced on the last day of the minimum term of imprisonment imposed by Gallen DCJ and was concurrent with the additional term imposed under that earlier sentence.

Davidson DCJ rejected a submission that the sentence imposed by him should be one to be served concurrently with the minimum term imposed by Gallen DCJ. But he took into account the principle of totality, saying that he approached his task on the basis of what would have been appropriate if the respondent had been sentenced by Gallen DCJ for the malicious wounding offence at the same time as he was sentenced for the conspiracy offence.

That was a proper approach, the malicious injury offence having been committed by the time Gallen DCJ sentenced the respondent for the conspiracy offence.

What I have recounted describes Davidson DCJ's rationale for a fixed term sentence to commence on the expiration of the minimum term which the respondent was serving under the sentence imposed by Gallen DCJ.

The Crown does not challenge the objective circumstances of the offence as found by the sentencing judge. These were as follows. The offence arose out of an altercation outside the Royal North Shore Hospital Methadone Clinic on 2
August 1993. The respondent attended the Clinic that day to obtain methadone medication. Mr Gaut was there for the same purpose. Albeit unintentionally, the respondent jumped the queue at the Clinic. Mr Gaut remonstrated forcefully with him and in so doing was unnecessarily offensive to the respondent. A little later, the respondent went over to Mr Gaut at the hospital car park bent on having it out with Mr Gaut. The earlier argument resumed and a physical struggle developed during which the respondent, having begun to get the worst of it, drew a knife and stabbed Mr Gaut in the left lower abdomen.
As a result, Mr Gaut sustained an eight centimetre wound from which part of the bowel protruded. The respondent fled the scene. Mr Gaut was admitted to hospital where he underwent surgery and was discharged seven days later.

Nor does the Crown question the findings made by the sentencing judge in relation to the respondent's subjective circumstances. These were as follows.

The respondent was born on 29 August 1993, being just under thirty years of age at the time of the offence. He was single and had no children. He had become addicted to heroin at about the age of twenty. He committed criminal offences to obtain money to pay for heroin. Between 1985 and 1991 he committed crimes to which I have referred. At the time he committed the subject offence, the respondent was taking methadone in lieu of heroin. The respondent had attended several courses in custody to fit him better for employment and for control of anger and stress. As a result of his good conduct, the respondent obtained classification as a minimum security prisoner. On release from prison he intended to reside with his parent who were strongly supportive of him.

The whole of the history of stealing and armed robbery with attendant violence may predate the respondent's transition from heroin to methadone, the last such offence in the respondent's record having been committed as I have indicated in April 1991. However, it is also to be noted that on the occasion of the subject offence the respondent was carrying a knife and used it. In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the respondent's propensity to violence as disclosed by his criminal record was attributable exclusively to a use of heroin which had now been discontinued. It is apparent that the propensity persisted at least to some extent.

The principles relating to a Crown appeal against sentence were laid in the majority decision of the High Court in Everett <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295.] There, it was stressed that the jurisdiction should be exercised only in the rare and exceptional case because such an application put in jeopardy for a second time the respondent's freedom beyond the sentence imposed. It was said that the jurisdiction should be exercised only to establish some matter of principle or to correct manifest inadequacy or inconsistency in sentencing standards.

The Crown does not submit that the sentencing judge made any identifiable error of principle. The submission is that the sentence is manifestly inadequate and that the inadequacy necessarily implies that the trial judge failed to give sufficient weight to the objective circumstances of the offence.

The maximum penalty for the offence is seven (7) penal servitude. The Crown points to the objective seriousness of the crime, the importance of retribution and deterrence as considerations, the recognised abhorrence which the community has for the use of a knife in the commission of a criminal offence, the fact that the respondent was on parole at the time of this offence, the respondent's criminal record and the importance of not giving undue weight to the prospect of rehabilitation. It is also submitted that there was no evidence of contrition or remorse.

On behalf of the respondent it is submitted that, although the offence could properly be described as lenient, it is nevertheless within the range available for the sound exercise of sentencing discretion and is not so manifestly inadequate as to justify the exercise of this court's discretionary power to uphold the appeal and increase the sentence.

Counsel for the respondent emphasises that the respondent was first to suffer injury in the encounter with Mr Gaut. He required treatment for a torn nose and facial injuries. It was only after receiving these injuries that he produced the knife.

The submission is then made on behalf of the respondent that in acquitting the respondent on the charge of wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm the jury must have found that the respondent was seriously provoked or had acted excessively in self defence or both.

In this regard, counsel for the respondent relies on what I said in Mansour
Alla (unreported, NSW CCA, 30 May 1996) in a judgment with which Meagher JA and Badgery-Parker J concurred: "The jury's verdict, acquitting the appellant of the more serious offences and convicting him of the lesser offence of malicious wounding, fixed certain parameters. These were that the respondent had not inflicted the injuries with the intent to kill or cause grievous bodily harm, but that he had done what he did intentionally and without lawful excuse. The only rationale for such a finding, having regard to the nature and extent of the wounding, was that the appellant had so far lost control of himself and was in such a state of emotional turmoil that, although inflicting the wounds intentionally, he did not appreciate that his acts would cause really serious injury. The implication is one of a substantial interference with cognitive function. The trial judge's findings are conformable with that implication." 
There was considerable delay in bringing the proceedings on for trial, not due to any fault on the part of the respondent. The respondent submits that considerations of delay and totality go to justify the result.

It is also submitted on behalf of the respondent that the plea of not guilty to the offence charged should not be construed as absence of contrition, that offence being one of which he was acquitted.

As I have mentioned, Davidson DCJ intended that the fixed term of nine months imposed by him should be served in addition to the time that the respondent would be in prison under the sentence he was then serving. In that regard, his
Honour impliedly assumed that the respondent would be released on the expiration of the minimum term imposed by Gallen DCJ. That assumption was not necessarily correct. The respondent might not have been granted parole on 18
June 1997 but for the present sentence, with the result that Davidson DCJ's expectation that there would be nine additional months in prison may have been incorrect at least in part.

Apart from that consideration, having regard to the objective seriousness of the offence and taking into account the subjective factors to which I have referred, I am of the view that a sentence of nine months imprisonment was manifestly inadequate. I say that notwithstanding due regard to the delay and to the principle of totality. The inadequacy is exacerbated by the circumstance that part at least of that sentence might not have been truly additional to the time which would have been served in any event.

The sentence by Davidson DCJ should therefore be set aside.

In re-sentencing the respondent, I follow Davidson DCJ's approach of putting himself notionally in Gallen DCJ's position, that is, on an assumption that his Honour was sentencing the respondent for the offence of malicious wounding in addition to that of conspiracy to commit armed robbery.

From that perspective I ask myself by what margin it would have been appropriate to enlarge the sentence for the conspiracy offence to take account of the malicious wounding. I qualify the exercise by recognising that the result should be at the lower end of the discretionary range in recognition of the principle of double jeopardy.

Approaching the matter in this way, I would propose a total sentence of two years and six months for the malicious wounding offence, to commence on 19
June 1997, that being the date on which the respondent would have become eligible for parole under the sentence he is now serving.

Having regard to the length of time the respondent will have been in prison continuously, there is, in the special circumstances of the case, a need for a somewhat longer period of supervision than an additional term computed according to the provisional statutory formula. Accordingly, I propose a minimum term of one year and six months and an additional term of one year.

Accordingly, the orders I propose are as follows:
The sentence is set aside.
In lieu thereof, the respondent is sentenced to a minimum term of one year and six months commencing on 19 June 1997 and expiring on 18 December 1998 (on which date the respondent will become eligible for release on parole) and an additional term of one year commencing on 19 December 1998 and expiring on 18
December 1999.
 * * * 
