

Demolon Pty Ltd (t/as P and T Corfe) versus Parbury Building Products Pty Ltd and Anor Nos. Cca 40769/95; Cc 3754/94 [1996] NSWSC 67 (15 April 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
PRIESTLEY(1), CLARKE(2) JJA AND HUNTER(3) AJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 6 March #DATE 28:3:1996 #ADD 15:4:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant    J N West QC and F F J Davis 
Solicitors for the Appellant
N W Aussel 
Counsel for the Respondent   C O'Connor QC and J Fernan 
Solicitors for the Respondent  P W Turk and Associates
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
PRIESTLEY JA I agree with Clarke JA.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA On 1 August 1985 Warren James
Seccombe ("the worker") suffered an injury to his right knee when he kicked a steel bar and fell down whilst employed as a labourer mill hand by the appellant Demolon Pty Limited ("the first employer"). He was off work, and had four arthroscopies, in the period following the accident and ending on 16 July 1986. Upon returning to work he stayed in the employment of the first employer until
On 20 March of that year he commenced employment with the first respondent, Parbury Building
Products Pty Limited ("the second employer). While in this employment, on 15
June 1989, he suffered another injury to his right knee. Following this injury he had a great deal of treatment but has been continuously unemployed except for a period between September 1993 and March 1994 when he did casual work with Nobel Timbers.
The worker claimed compensation against both employers and on 27 October Neilson CCJ made an award in his favour for weekly payments for total incapacity between February 1990 and October 1991 and for partial incapacity from October 1991 to the date of trial and continuing. His Honour also made awards under [ss 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) ("the Act").
These awards were made against the second employer upon the basis that the workers incapacity and losses resulted from the second injury suffered by the worker. At the same time his Honour reserved his decision upon the question whether he had power to apportion the award between the first and the second employers although he did indicate that if he did have that power he would apportion 60 per cent of the award to the first employer and 40 per cent to the second employer.
On 10 November 1995 Neilson
CCJ gave judgment in which he concluded that he did have power to apportion the liability and he made an award in accordance with his earlier indication, except insofar as the lump sum award under <case> was concerned. It is unnecessary in this judgment to deal with that exception for it has not been the subject of any challenge.
The first employer appealed against the award and raised two discrete grounds of appeal. They were: 
That his Honour was in error in concluding that he had power to apportion the liability; 
That he erred in apportioning 60 per cent of the liability to the first employer. 
In my opinion the first ground of appeal should be dismissed for the reasons which were given in Council of Sutherland Shire versus Baltica General Insurance Co
Ltd and Ors (Court of Appeal, 28 March 1996, unreported).
The second ground, put shortly, is to the effect that the trial judge failed to make a just and equitable apportionment in the special circumstances of the case as, according to the argument, he was required to do pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s22a.html) of the Act (which was introduced by amendment in September 1995). The point is a neat one. The first injury occurred in 1985 before the Act came into law and at a time when <case> of the Worker's Compensation Act 1926 provided a worker's sole entitlement in respect of incapacity and sole remedy for permanent loss. In its written submissions the first employer put this proposition: "He (the judge) could only order the appellant to pay 60 per cent of its separate liability to the worker pursuant to the provisions of the 1926
Act as kept in force by the 1987 Act, Schedule 6 Parts 4(4) and 6(4)'.
Schedule 6 to the Act set out the savings and transitional provisions.
Schedule 6 Pt 4 cl (4)(1) makes provision for the weekly payments of compensation payable under the Act in respect of any period of incapacity for work occurring after the commencement of the relevant division in the Act in respect of an injury received before that commencement. The particularly relevant provision is cl 4(1)(c) which stipulates that <case> (1) of the former
Act applies instead of <case> of the Act.
Part 6 of Schedule 6 deals with the compensation for non economic loss and the first employer relied upon cl (4) which provided that: "Where the loss resulted from an injury received before the commencement of the relevant division of the Act the amount of compensation should be determined in accordance with <case> of the former Act."
Accordingly, it is submitted that the court ought, in accordance with justice and equity, to have required the first employer to pay 60 per cent of the compensation, in respect of incapacity and permanent loss, calculated in accordance with the provision of the old Act.
 .
The difficulty with the first employees submissions is that both the clauses to which I have made specific reference deal with a case of loss and/or incapacity resulting only from an injury received before the commencement of the relevant division of the Act.
They do not deal with the situation which occurs when the loss, or incapacity, resulted both from an injury received before the commencement of the relevant division and an injury received after that commencement. In that situation Schedule 6 Part 4 cl (3), which relates to incapacity, and Schedule 6 Part 6 cl (6)(1), which relates to permanent loss, both provide that the relevant loss or incapacity, as the case may be, should be treated as having resulted from the injury received after the commencement of the relevant division.
In this case the worker received one injury before and one injury after the commencement of the division. The two provisions to which I have just drawn attention apply. The loss and the incapacity are to be treated, for the purposes of determining the amount of compensation, as having resulted from the injury received after that commencement. The instruction given in these sections is clear and they were followed by the trial judge in this case. He determined the amount of compensation upon the basis that the injury from which the incapacity and loss resulted was received after the commencement of the Act. The provisions to which counsel for the appellant drew the court's attention are irrelevant for they were expressly concerned with the case of a single injury.
Having determined the appropriate amounts of compensation for which the second employer was liable to pay the worker the trial judge set about the task of apportioning that liability. Although the word 'apportionment' may not be completely accurate to describe the task which the legislation requires the judge to undertake, the statutory provision required the trial judge to determine what proportion of that liability should be attributed to the first employer. It would, no doubt, have been more simple if the Legislature had spoken of 'contribution' but reference to <case> (which was introduced in
September 1995), in which the word 'contribution' is used, indicates that what the trial judge was required to do was to determine what contribution should be made by the first employer in respect of the liability found against the second employer. In these circumstances there is no basis upon which a judge could pay regard to some other liability such as that which would have arisen if the only injury had been the one which occurred prior to the coming into force of the Act.
I recognise that the result of this construction of the Act may be that the first employer may incur a greater pecuniary liability than if the compensation had been assessed under the 1926 Act. But that result seems to me to flow naturally from the wording and scheme of the Act. This opinion is reinforced by the addition of cl (6) to Pt 2 of Schedule 6 in September wherein it is. expressly stated that the amendments made to <case> made in
September 1995 and the provisions of <case> extend to a situation where one or more of the injuries concerned was received before the commencement of the Act and one or more of those injuries was received after that commencement.
The first employer's submission should be rejected and as a consequence the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
HUNTER AJA I agree with Clarke JA.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/67.html  
