

Wardle versus The Nominal Defendant Matter No 13203/94 [1997] NSWSC 579 (24
November 1997) 
Last Updated: 6 March 1998 
Wardle versus The Nominal Defendant /94 November 1997 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Warren John WARDLE versus THE NOMINAL DEFENDANT 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: By summons dated 19 December 1994 the appellant claimed, pursuant to the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/)") an order granting leave to commence proceedings out of time for damages for injury caused by the fault of the driver of an unregistered and uninsured motor vehicle in the use and operation of that vehicle. On 22 August 1996 Master Malpass dismissed the summons. This is an appeal against the decision of Master Malpass. 
The application was made under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).
The principles governing the exercise of the discretion conferred by that section were stated by Gleeson CJ in Salido versus Nominal Defendant [(1993) NSWLR 524] at 532-533. The test to be applied is whether it is fair and just that leave to commence proceedings out of time be granted. The onus of demonstrating that it is lies upon the applicant for leave. The decision of the Master being a discretionary one, it is not to be disturbed unless it is shown that he was wrong in some relevant respect: Morrison versus Judd (unreported, Court of Appeal, 10 October 1995).

The appellant was born on 19 January 1970. On 1 April 1990, when he was twenty years of age, he was riding a trail bike on an area of land owned by the local counsel at Wetherill Park. Other young men were participating in similar activities. His bike came into collision with another, as a result of which he lost consciousness and was severely injured. He was taken initially by ambulance to the Fairfield Hospital, and thence by helicopter to the Royal
North Shore Hospital. He did not regain consciousness for sixteen days and remained hospitalised for about another fortnight. Thereafter he was an inpatient and outpatient at rehabilitation units at Lidcombe and Parramatta for about two years.

Before his injury he had held regular but unskilled employment to which he briefly returned, part time, after his discharge from hospital. He has had limited employment since then. It is apparent that his education is limited.
There was medical evidence before the Master that he had suffered, inter alia, severe organic brain damage.

The [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) as it stood at the date of the appellant's injury required a claim to be made on an insurer within six months of the date of the motor vehicle accident to which it relates [(s (1)(a))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s43.html), and proceedings to be commenced within three years of the expiration of that period [(s (4))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) unless the court in which the proceedings are to be to be taken grants leave to commence out of time. It was therefore necessary for the appellant, in conformity with the legislation, to give notice to the insurer by 1 October , and to commence proceedings by 1 October 1993. He did not give notice until 18 October 1994. His claim having been rejected by the respondent, he filed the summons seeking the necessary extension of time on 19 December 1994.

The Master rejected the application, essentially, for a combination of two reasons. The first is the tardiness of the appellant and his legal advisers in pursuing the claim. The second is the presumed and demonstrated prejudice to the respondent if the claim were to be allowed to proceed.

Delay 
The appellant first sought legal advice on 14 July 1993. He did this having seen an advertisement placed by his solicitors specifically related to injury by accident on private or residential property, and offering a first consultation free of charge.

The appellant gave a number of explanations for not having sought legal advice at an earlier stage. In an affidavit sworn in February 1995 he said that he believed the trail bike with which he had collided was unregistered and uninsured and that that circumstance precluded any claim. He added that initially he received advice from friends and others that he would not be able to claim but in 1993 he began to receive different advice from others. In his oral evidence before the Master he said that he had discussed the possibility of making a claim with his mother, and also with a police officer. He recounted the advice given by the police officer as: "He told both me and Evan that two wrongs don't make a right" and that, in any event, he probably would be "laughed out of court." It was assumed that the advice by the police officer that two wrongs don't make a right was intended to refer to the possibly unlawful activity of the appellant in riding a trail bike on council land. He also said that he was unable to afford the costs of legal advice and that he was confused and annoyed and frustrated about the conflicting advice he was receiving.

The appellant was cross-examined for the purpose of demonstrating that he was reasonably familiar with the availability of legal aid. He had, on one previous occasion, received the assistance of the legal aid authorities when he had been charged with driving a motor vehicle whilst unlicensed. He said that he had understood that he was entitled to this benefit because he was at the time in receipt of unemployment benefits, and that his understanding was that legal aid was provided for "court sort of matters." 
Although the Master formed an adverse view of the appellant's credibility, he did not specifically reject any particular part of his evidence.

In any event, the appellant did consult his solicitor, on 14 July 1993.
Thereafter there were considerable delays caused both by the appellant himself, and by his legal advisers. It is unnecessary to go into the detail of these delays. It is sufficient to say that the appellant failed on occasions to communicate with the solicitor; failed to attend conferences arranged with counsel; and failed to return essential documents to his solicitor. It is also necessary to say that the solicitors were dilatory in following up these defaults on the part of the appellant. The solicitor explained this in his affidavit. He said that he had been personally involved in an acrimonious partnership dispute involving litigation which consumed virtually all of his time over a two month period in 1994 following which he found it necessary to devote his time to re-establishing his practice and attending to matters that were of more pressing urgency because they had been listed for hearing.

The Master described the delay as "inordinate" and considered the explanation inadequate in many respects.

Prejudice to the Respondent 
The respondent made out a strong case of actual as well as presumed prejudice.
It relied on evidence of its searches to locate the person identified by the appellant as the rider of the motor cycle with which he had collided. That person's name was given as Paul Sammari. Despite substantial efforts made on behalf of the respondent there has been no success in locating this individual. The appellant has no recollection of the accident and has retrograde amnesia to about a week before. There is only one known witness to the collision and that is a cousin and associate of the appellant who was riding with him at the time. There is virtually no opportunity for the respondent to investigate the circumstances in which the accident occurred.
Although there is evidence that the police had been involved and have made some investigations, inquiries made of police have produced nothing in the way of notebooks, occurrence pad entries or other records of contemporaneous investigation.

It seems that another issue was raised before the Master, one he described as "futility". This appears to concern the appellant's prospects of success if he were allowed to pursue the claim, and appears to relate to whether the property on which the appellant was riding was a public street so as to bring his injury within the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). The
Master reached no firm conclusion on this question, merely recognising it as one which would, if there were to be a trial, throw up a serious issue. He did not conclude that the appellant's claim if he were permitted to pursue it, would be futile for this reason. No argument was addressed to me on this matter and I leave it to one side. It is not an issue in relation to which the respondent has demonstrated any prejudice from the delay in bringing proceedings.

Counsel for the appellant recognised the task he faced in seeking to disturb the discretionary decision of the Master. He relied upon two asserted errors in the Master's judgment. The first of these is said to be a plain error of fact. The Master wrote: "Medical reports have not been served. The defendant has been denied the opportunity of medical examination of the plaintiff at an early stage." 
Quite what the Master meant by this is not clear. If he meant that medical reports pursuant to a claim had not been served, he was, presumably, correct.
However there were a number of medical reports which formed part of the evidence before him and which, of course, had been served upon the respondent.
These included a report of Dr Peter Kendall (consultant physician) dated 2
March 1995; three reports of Dr James Grady (psychiatrist) dated 17 August , 10 October 1995 and 7 June 1996; and a report of Dr Arthur Shores (consultant neuropsychologist) dated 10 May 1996. The appellant's entire hospital records were annexed to not one but two affidavits. It was therefore, incorrect to say that medical reports had not been served.

A reading of this material makes clear that the appellant's injuries are said to be severe and permanent; it is difficult to conclude that, in the light of the nature of the injuries alleged, the respondent would be unable to meet a case with respect to the level of damage asserted on behalf of the appellant.
No such claim was made by the respondent. Although it may, strictly, be correct to say that the respondent was denied the opportunity of medical examination "at an early stage", it cannot, on a realistic appreciation of the case, be said that that circumstance gives rise to any real prejudice.

It was next alleged that the Master was in error in finding that: "There was some prospect that the driver of the other vehicle may have been located had notice been given at any early time following the accident." 
It was argued that the evidence disclosed that police had in fact obtained a statement from Sammari but that any such statement cannot now be located, and that it is the fault of the police officers and not of the appellant that has given rise to any prejudice that emerges from the inability to locate that person.

I do not accept this argument. Had the respondent been given early notice of the appellant's claim it may well have been in the position to make its own investigations and to locate Sammari or other witnesses. It may have obtained copies of any police records before they were lost or destroyed. I do not consider this an error on the part of the Master and I accept that the absence of early notice to the respondent constitutes a matter of real prejudice.

Having made the relevant findings of fact it was necessary for the Master to balance the competing factors in the "fairness and justice" equation. It was entirely appropriate that, he take into account the very significant prejudice caused to the respondent by the loss of the opportunity to locate witnesses to the accident. Even if they were now to be located, their recollections could not be expected to be as fresh as they would have been six months, or even three and a half years, after the events.

Against that had to be weighed the appellant's explanation for his delay. In this respect I consider that the error constituted by the Master's belief that no medical reports had been served was compounded. Not only did that belief lead him to an erroneous conclusion about the disadvantage caused to the respondent; it also, in my opinion, led him into further error in assessing the fairness and justice of the appellant's claim. There is no reference anywhere in the judgment to any of the medical reports or other material that
I have mentioned. That in itself is not conclusive that the Master has overlooked their contents. But there are two clear indications to that effect in the judgment. In one passage the Master wrote of the appellant: "The plaintiff himself purports to have no recollection of the accident." 
The passage clearly suggests disbelief, consistent with the Master's earlier expressed view of the appellant's credibility. Later, he wrote: "The prospective quantum of that claim is unclear. It may be that his head injuries have not caused him to suffer brain damage or any significant brain damage." 
It is unlikely that the Master would have written in these terms had he had in mind the strong medical evidence of the plaintiff's condition. Dr Kendall wrote: "He then suffered severe damage as the innocent victim of a motor cycle accident. He had probably one week of pre-traumatic and sixteen days of post traumatic amnesia, and sure index of severe organic brain damage. He was in hospital for a long period and an even longer period as an in-patient and then out-patient at rehabilitation centres.
 ...

Apart from his soft tissue and musculoskeletal injuries, he would have required intensive life support systems and still has the tracheostomy scar.

I think it is quite certain that he suffered cognitive and probably frontal lobe damage but a CT or MRI scan of the brain and formal psychological testing will be required.

I think it is entirely consistent with his type of injury that his failure to pursue his claim would have been the result of faulty judgment, lack of information, lack of initiative and ability to plan and his failure to attend some of his legal appointments the result of an organically based memory defect." 
Dr Grady, in his first report, wrote: "Diagnosis: 
On the history obtained, on the basis of the head injury with multiple facial fractures and a lengthy period of sixteen days of anterograde (post traumatic) amnesia and seven days of retrograde amnesia he suffered a severe degree of concussion and very possibly other type of brain injury such as contusional haemorrhage.
 ...

Clinically at present he appears to suffer from a mild variable expressive dysphasia and problems with concentration and day-to-day memory and personality change with irritability.
 ...

In addition there is a reactive type depression".

Dr Shores wrote: "Mr Wardle has a history of having suffered what appears to have been a significant head injury on the 1st April, 1990. The history he provides indicating a significant period of both anterograde and retrograde amnesia attests to the likelihood of his having suffered a significant brain injury.
 ...

On formal assessment at the present time Mr Wardle does not present with a profile typical of cognitive impairment following traumatic brain injury. His general level of intelligence is in the Low Average range whilst his memory functioning is in the Average ranges. There is evidence of mild impairment on a test of executive function but in light of his low general level of intellect I would not consider this to be a consequence of acquired brain injury.

Mr Wardle would appear to be suffering a significant degree of psychological distress and it is likely that this is a direct result of his injuries sustained in the motor cycle accident." 
The medical evidence was, I consider of great importance both in the consideration of the appellant's explanation for his dilatoriness in pursuing his claim, and in the assessment of what was fair and just in the circumstances. It does not appear to have been taken into account on either question. That, in my view, demonstrates error in the approach taken by the
Master. That being so, it is necessary to consider afresh the exercise of discretion.

That exercise entails a weighing of factors which are, in this case, finely balanced.

Taking into account the injury suffered by the appellant, his part in the delay in commencing proceedings has, I believe, been adequately explained.
While this may not be so in respect of his solicitor's delay, that factor is of extremely limited weight. It can, in justice, only be used as a factor against the appellant if it is considered to give rise to a claim by the appellant against the solicitor and this has been held to be a relevant but minor consideration: Morrison versus Judd, supra. The nature and extent of the appellant's injury is still a matter that has a bearing upon the decision 
Against these considerations have to be weighed the strong case made by the respondent of actual prejudice. I have already noted that this is considerable. Nevertheless, having weighed all factors, I have reached the conclusion that the balance favours permitting the appellant to proceed.

Accordingly, pursuant to [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), I grant leave to the appellant to commence proceedings against the respondent in respect of the motor vehicle accident on 1 April 1990. Such proceedings are to be commenced within one month of to-day's date. I will hear the parties as to costs.
 * * * 
