

Primecall Phoneback Pty Ltd versus Worldxchange Pty Ltd Matter No 5001/97 [1997] NSWSC 623 (8 December 1997) ` 
PRIMECALL PHONEBACK PTY LIMITED versus WORLDxCHANGE PTY LIMITED` ` 5001/97` `8 December 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `  /97 - PRIMECALL PHONEBACK PTY LIMITED versus WORLDxCHANGE PTY LIMITED` ` 
JUDGMENT` `  `

HIS HONOUR: The defendant appears to be a sixty per cent owned subsidiary of an overseas corporation. It would seem that the defendant, through its contacts, is able to provide communication facilities cheaper than they can be procured through the standard methods of acquiring those services. The plaintiff entered into two agreements with the defendant, one on 20 March 1997 and the other on 12 September 1997, whereby the plaintiff became a commission agent, introducing customers to the defendant. 
Both agreements contain, in clause 12.1, provisions for termination, one allowing either party to give 90 days written notice to the other and the second permitting the defendant to terminate immediately if certain things happen. One of those things is: "If: in the opinion of (the defendant), the (plaintiff) fails to perform or observe any material provision of this agreement." 
There are further provisions, also based on the opinion of the defendant, which are sometimes said to be in its absolute discretion. One example is the clause prohibiting the plaintiff conducting business in a manner which contravenes "the standards principals (sic) or ethics practised by the company".

The defendant alleges that one of these events has happened, that it has formed the requisite opinion and that the second agreement has been terminated as at last week. The plaintiff says that any such termination must be invalid and the agreement is still on foot. It is no secret that the defendant intends to exercise its right to give 90 days notice of termination, so that even if its previous purported termination is held to be invalid, the agreement will terminate on Monday, 9 March 1998. It proposes to give notice with respect to both of the agreements.

The case is an odd one in that many of the arguments that have been put to me
I would have expected to have been put by the party opposing the party that in fact put them. I have, however, endeavoured to take this complicating factor on board and I would not be at all surprised, if this matter comes to a final hearing, to find that the argument will be reversed on the next occasion.

Mr Ryan, of counsel for the plaintiff, put together a very concise and compact statement supported by authorities as to what the relevant contracts mean and why the balance of convenience favoured the grant of an injunction. Mr Bannon
SC, who appeared with Mr Habib for the defendant, in extensive oral argument put that this really was a money case and that even if an injunction were granted in the terms sought - that is, if I made orders 4 and 5 in the summons - the plaintiff would in fact get no advantage.

So far as the construction of the relevant contracts is concerned, neither party has asked me to construe them. The contracts are in an extremely odd form and the format bears all the indicia of someone lumping together every protection to the defendant that is possible without very much thought as to the overall effect. They abound with meaningless references: they abound with ambiguities. There is, for instance, one clause that, with two minutes thought, I was able to construct six possible interpretations that could possibly be given to it.

The basal attitude taken by the defendant is that many of what might at first sight appear to be its obligations are matters which it can perform or not perform at its own total and absolute discretion. Whenever one gets into that area, one might get either close to or over the borderline between an illusory contract and a proper contract as discussed in many of the cases, particularly
Biotechnology Australia Pty Ltd versus Pace [(1988) 15 NSWLR 130] at 141 and following.

The most socially objectionable parts of the contracts are clauses 11.3 and .1(a)(4). The latter purports, in the rather nebulous event, "should immediate termination be necessary", to withdraw the agent's right to receive commission. At least on one view of the contract, there is a forfeiture of moneys that have already been earned by the commission agent. Such a construction does not usually appeal to a court; see Tuit versus AMP Society [[1975] 1 NSWLR 158.] However, if that is what the parties really have agreed to, then it may be that that is what the Court has to enforce. Clause 11.3 purports to prevent any action for damages (with certain exceptions) for anything that the defendant has done under the agreement. That may be invalid as an illegal provision to oust the jurisdiction of the Court, but, for present purposes, the plaintiff adopted it as valid and counsel for the defendant did not depart from it and just submitted that "that's what the parties have agreed to".

Accordingly, I think I need to take the case at present as being one where there is no right to damages, so that the only relief that can be given to the plaintiff is an order for injunction or specific performance or equitable compensation or perhaps restitution.

I think this clause 11.3 makes the difference to this case because not only are damages not an adequate remedy, there is no remedy available at law to the plaintiff at all. Clause 11.3 operates to forbid any remedy other than equitable remedies and it is the custom in Equity in such a situation, as Lord
Macnaghten said in Colls versus Home and Colonial Stores Limited <case>; [[1904] AC ] at 193, that if a person is said to evade the jurisdiction of the Court, "In all these cases an injunction is necessary, in order to do justice to the plaintiff and as a warning to others." 
The very detailed submissions of Mr Ryan show that there is a great deal that can be said against the defendant's construction that it is able to do virtually anything it likes under the contracts and in particular, that one of its managers can form an opinion, from some hearsay, that she does not trust the plaintiff any more and that the plaintiff's commercial opportunity should thereby be terminated.

Possible constructions of the contracts are that the person forming the opinion is in the position of having to do justice to the other party, or that the opinion to be formed must be one which is objectively reasonable or that it must be formed on reasonable grounds: there are various other possibilities.

Mr Bannon SC says that if one looks at the contracts as a whole, one can see that they are riddled with expressions which make it clear that the defendant has an absolute discretion to do what it considers best in its own commercial interest and nothing should be implied. That might be right, but certainly it is strongly arguable, and this is reinforced by the view the Courts have taken of these sorts of provisions, that the contrary will apply. As neither side wish me to construe the contracts, then all I can say is that there is an arguable case that the construction put on the contracts by the plaintiff is correct.

Then there is the question of fact as to whether the matter on which the defendant has purported to terminate the contracts in fact is the basis for such termination. The allegation appears to be that one of the senior employees of the plaintiff tried to corrupt one of the senior staff of the defendant. This allegation is denied. It is not possible at this stage to work out who, if anyone, is telling the truth. Mr Ryan says that the allegations are inherently incredible and Mr Bannon SC merely says it is inherently incredible that responsible citizens would have made up such allegations if there is not something in them. So, again, there is a serious question to be tried.

Accordingly, I turn to the balance of convenience, or, as it is sometimes said, the balance of justice. Mr Bannon SC says this is simply a case about money. I thought that was right for a while, but I believe that clause 11.3 shows that it is not. Mr Bannon SC says that clause 11.3 and the question as to whether or not there has been termination of the contract really is not going to affect the parties, in commercial terms, one way or the other, but I do not think this is necessarily so. It might be so, but it is not necessarily so. The plaintiff says that it needs to protect its reputation in the market place. Unfortunately, there is little evidence that it has any reputation, but
I suppose I should conclude from the evidence that it has some. There is then the question of commissions. If the defendant is right, then commissions ceased last week. If the defendant is wrong, then the plaintiff is entitled to commissions in respect of former customers and is also entitled to introduce new customers and get commissions from their business, at least until 9 March
Here, Mr Bannon SC walked a thin line. He put forward the possibility that, under one of the absolute discretion provisions, his client would not accept any new customers introduced by the plaintiff because, he said, it could not trust the plaintiff. He did not go so far as to say that his client would not accept those customers, but gave the firm impression that acceptance certainly would not be automatic. On such basis, there would be no further moneys due to the plaintiff for new customers so that the only detriment suffered by the plaintiff would be in respect of old customers, which could be measured in damages. I think that would have been convincing were it not for clause 11.3.

Another factor is that, ordinarily, Equity does not grant injunctions for a short period of time. Three months is usually considered a short period of time and, where the contract can be terminated properly in three months, it is arguable as to whether Equity should grant the injunction. Here the plaintiff gives some evidence that whilst it acknowledges its financial position is not too wonderful, to put it at its best, the effect of not being an agent of the defendant for three months could very well put it over the brink. The defendant says that this just shows that an undertaking as to damages is not worth powder and shot. To counter this, Mr Ryan proffers an undertaking by the principal of the plaintiff company, Mr Brouard. All Mr Bannon SC can do with that riposte is to say there is no material to show how valuable that undertaking is, but that is the situation with most undertakings as to damages. I had more worries with the policing of an undertaking given by a non-party, but no arguments were addressed to me on that.

Mr Bannon SC also says that the contracts involve trust and personal relationship and cannot continue on without that and that his client clearly no longer trusts the plaintiff. I do not really think that those provisions in the contracts to which Mr Bannon SC took me, which are phrased in terms of personal obligations and attending education and training programs, really do get into the category of trust and personal relationship. The essence of the contracts is merely to introduce customers to the defendant and the defendant accepting them. Many of the provisions in the contracts appear merely to be the sort of provisions one sees in commercial contracts to maintain a commercial profile and hype, rather than having anything to do with the real relationships between the parties.

Accordingly, in my view, I should grant orders 4 and 5 in the summons on the undertaking as to damages reinforced by the undertaking as to damages proffered by Mr Brouard up to the hearing of the case.

I should mention that an early hearing of the case was suggested, but that was not possible because the defendant considered that it would be at least a couple of weeks before it could get itself ready, thus the matter has had to be dealt with as an interlocutory application.

Costs should be costs in the cause in the usual way. In each case orders 4 and , after the word "proceedings" should be the words "or up until 9 March ". Thus there are three events which affect that order, (a) the final hearing; (b) that date occurring; or (c) further order of the Court, whichever shall first occur.
 * * * 
