

Telstra Corporation Ltd versus Capetan P/L and Anor [1996] NSWSC 170 (31 May )

TELSTRA CORPORATION LTD versus CAPETAN PTY LTD & ANOR /96 
FRIDAY 22 MARCH 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 19 March 1996 the plaintiff sought relief from this court in respect of a dispute that it was having in connection with premises at 237 Wharf Road, Newcastle. The plaintiff asserted that it was the sub-tenant of those premises and it was having difficulty in having the first defendant, the registered proprietor of the land and premises, recognise it. I declined to give any interim relief but made an order for the summons to be returnable at two o'clock so that the defendants would have sufficient time to come before the court and make their position known.

At two o'clock or shortly thereafter the defendants appeared. The mesne lessee, the second defendant, has been excused from further attendance and the dispute has carried on between the plaintiff and the first defendant alone. I will thus use the word "defendant" as referring to the first defendant.

On the afternoon of 19 March 1996 a form of undertakings was handed up, signed by counsel for the parties, which is now Ex PX06 in these proceedings. These undertakings provided (a) that the matter would be stood over to today; and that the parties would use their respective endeavours to procure the attendance on the site of their respective experts no later than 10am yesterday. The experts were to meet for the purpose of discussing and of using their best endeavours bona fide to resolve outstanding issues concerning the penetration marks and structural works the subject of the plaintiff's existing plan submitted to the defendant on 8 March 1996.

That all seemed very sensible. It seemed as if the parties realised that they had a commercial dispute and were prepared to solve it in the way in which one expects fully aware business people to solve disputes in the 1990s.

However, things did not work out that way at all. The plaintiff says that there was no meeting until four o'clock and then it was mucked around at that meeting and was told lies. It says by 5.30 yesterday afternoon it was quite clear that the matter could not be settled. The defendant's Mr Paul Doran, on the other hand, says that he was told by representatives of the plaintiff that they would not be stood over and that he is sick and tired of large companies "buggering up" his building and he didn't think it was at all fair that there should be pressure put on him to make a decision as to whether he would consent to the alterations being made to the building: he was entitled to consider that decision calmly and coolly. As to that, the plaintiff says that the defendant is the landlord of their existing premises and Mr Doran will "muck around" just as long as he possibly can so that he gets rent from two sources, from the mesne tenant in respect of 237 Wharf Road and from the plaintiff, which is a tenant of another building owned by the defendant nearby.

Today we have spent some two hours hearing evidence and submissions and again it seemed that the matter was still able to be settled by people of good will and we got close to a situation where the parties would have a mediator mediate next week and solve the problem commercially. However, the defendant says that the plaintiff's offer for mediation gives too little time and the plaintiff says the defendant's counter-offer gives too much time. The plaintiff says that it is essential for the working of the telephone system for northern New South Wales that it have this building and its renovations on line by 31 March 1996. On the other hand, the defendant says that the plaintiff only got its act together on 27 February and has just given too little time to anybody to make proper decisions.

The matters which were raised by the plaintiff's claim have at least for the moment gone away. However, today the defendant put on a cross-claim seeking injunctions preventing the plaintiff making any structural alterations to 237
Wharf Road, Newcastle, or any alterations outside the demised premises. The problem raised by the second part of the claim is that the plaintiff's plan includes making alterations below the leased area for the purpose of ingress of water and other services which it is going to obtain through the soil underneath the building.

The building appears to be a three level glass exterior building on Wharf
Road, Newcastle, across the road from Newcastle Harbour. The lowest level, level 1, is used for parking. Level 2 is the demised premises, which would appear to have an entrance to Wharf Road, and level 3 is apparently used by other tenants, including some courts.

The mesne tenant on level 2 is an insurance company which up until recently has been using the premises for office purposes, which is the use set out in the lease. The plaintiff also wishes to use the premises for office purposes, but it would appear that the plaintiff employs predominantly female labour who need both stronger security and extra toilet facilities. It wishes to completely strip and refurbish the second level, including placing a series of holes through the slab for further air conditioning and toilet facilities, and to project pipes through level 1 into the ground beneath so as to obtain greater water supplies. The plaintiff's activities are going to involve the expenditure of some $800,000 to $1 million.

There is an affidavit by Mr Wilkin that there is urgency in completing the fitout works as it is necessary to relocate from another building of which a company associated with the defendant is the landlord to a building which has a twenty-four hour facility for management of fault and service difficulties for telephone services in all country areas of New South Wales. It will be necessary to move 100 staff to the building soon after 31 March and the plaintiff's current service is such that it receives 6000 calls per day complaining of telephone faults and service difficulties with its services.
The cabling to be transferred to the premises and the non-structural fitout has already been put in place and it is necessary to continue work almost immediately so that the changeover can take place by 31 May 1996. Unless this happens there would be, according to the affidavit of Mr Wilkin, a period of at least four weeks whilst the arrangements for changeover were rescheduled, which would mean additional overtime and additional charges.

The defendant says that it is willing to give an undertaking as to damages which would meet these concerns. The defendant is a mere trustee for some family trust, but it has proffered an undertaking by its alternate holding company, Doran Holdings Pty Ltd, which it says has substantial assets. If, of course, the defendant is wrong in its attitude and obtains an injunction it may need all those assets because under an undertaking as to damages not only will the plaintiff be able to call on its assets, but also it would seem every telephone subscriber in New South Wales. However, that has all been explained and that undertaking is able to be given.

The head lease is registered as E992847. It is not a particularly marvellous document, being one of these modern leases in which various schedules, etcetera, are stitched together in a rather uneven whole. The property leased is shown as being folio identifier 1/747803, being part of level 2 of 237
Wharf Road, Newcastle. The interpretation clause 15 defines "demised premises" with reference to an appendix. When one looks at the appendix one sees that it has: "The Second Level of the building having a net lettable area of 1215.26 m2 (extending to the exterior face of the Office front, if any, and to the centre line of the other walls) including the fixtures, fittings, plant, machinery and equipment if any now or hereafter installed therein." 
Just what this means is quite unclear to me. There is no indication as to what is the "Office front", assuming there is one in that sort of oval building where one finds the boundary being the external face of one wall and the centre line of other walls. Furthermore, the lease does not indicate how much of the ceiling and how much of the floor is said to be included within the words "the demised premises". This is, of course, important when one is dealing with a building which is tenanted on different levels and someone wishes to bore holes in the floor.

Clause 4(a) says, in essence, that the tenant is to submit plans for approval of the landlord before it alters any partitions, fixtures, fittings or equipment and cl 5(d) provides that the tenant is not without the previous consent in writing of the lessor to install: "water, gas or electricity...air conditioning, heating, cooling ...nor...drill or in any way deface any walls, ceilings, partitions, floors..." 
That clause must be read subject to <case> of the Conveyancing Act which, so far as improvements are concerned, reads in a proviso that that consent will not be unreasonably withheld. As has almost been conceded, "improvements" within the meaning of <case> means alterations which are improvements from the lessee's point of view; see F W Woolworth & Co Ltd versus Lambert [[1936]
Ch 415.] 
However, the clause also shows that it is recognised that the tenant has a right, subject to consent, to install water, gas, electricity and air conditioning. This is significant in view of other parts of the agreement. The lease does not deal, apart from cl 5, with alterations of the type which the plaintiff intends to put into the building. However, cl 8(a) is the covenant by the lessor to maintain the common area of the building. "Common area" is defined in cl 15 as parts outside the demised area such as access ways, roads, pavements, entrances, loading bays and other like areas. It is not defined as including floors or ceilings.

There is then an additional piece of paper which is bunged in the front of the document called annexure A, which though inconsistent with other parts of the lease reads as follows: "The Lessor reserves unto himself the following rights and liberties: 
The use of the land upon which the demised premises is erected to install maintain keep use repair alter or replace pipes conduits and wires leading through or upon the land upon which the demised premises is erected..." 
Just what these words mean is completely unclear. It would seem to me that it just recognises that the landlord has a right to do certain works in the soil underneath the building. It says nothing about the tenant's rights, if any, to do anything in that same area and it must be read together with the other provisions of the lease, such as cl 5(d).

Mr Conti QC, who appeared with Mr Cashion for the plaintiff, put that the lease is just another form of contract and that one must read the lease as subject to an implied condition that the tenant have the right to install such water, electricity and air conditioning as it requires, or if that proposition was too wide such water, electricity and air conditioning, etcetera, as were required to meet Australian standards for office buildings of the nature of this particular building. That there must be some implied term to flesh out cl (d) is, I think, clear. It is unrealistic in 1996 to think of a lease of commercial premises in which the tenant is not able to keep the building up to current standards because the business community if asked about the tenant's rights to do these things would say "Of course".

However, the degree to which the implied term is operative is a matter of conjecture. In my view, it is an implied term only that what is necessary for compliance with Australian standards may be done, not that the tenant is able to put in such water, electricity and air conditioning as it considers reasonable for its business. It is for this reason that I rejected as irrelevant many of the questions put to the principal of the defendant.

The evidence really does not do credit to either side. I get the distinct impression that the plaintiff was not in a position to make up its mind as to what it wanted to do to this building until 27 February 1996. When that date came around it was always going to be touch and go whether it would be able to finish the building by 31 March 1996 and it was applying pressure to the landlord to let the plaintiff have its way, and I accept Mr Doran's evidence, which was not cross-examined on, that the representative of Telstra said "We will not negotiate with anyone who has leverage over us".

On the other hand, I do think that the defendant also indicated fairly clearly that it intended to take its time about matters and to satisfy itself about every jot and tittle of this project because it knew time was against Telstra and that it thought it had the upper hand.

Accordingly, in my view, both parties were completely unreasonable about the way they treated each other, but that is not really the matter that I have to consider.

I have to consider whether a reasonable landlord in the shoes of the defendant was acting unreasonably in breach of the proviso to <case> of the
Conveyancing Act in acting the way it did. On the evidence before me at the moment I am not satisfied that this is so. It does seem to me that what has happened since 27 February shows a great unwillingness by the landlord to be reasonable, but things have not yet got to the stage on the evidence before me where one could find that it was unreasonable. In my view, it would need a bit more information and a bit more time than Telstra permitted the landlord to go about its functions.

Accordingly, at this stage I do not consider that the landlord has broken its covenant. I should point out, of course, that I am using the words "broken its covenant" in a loose way. No damages, as I understand it, flow from such a breach, it merely allows the tenant to do without consent and without forfeiting the lease what it otherwise would not be able to do.

Accordingly, on the facts before me at the moment, if those were the facts which were established at the final hearing, it would not be permissible for
Telstra to do what it wants to do. This is an interlocutory application. There has not been a full chance to cross-examine all the witnesses available. What
I have just said creates no issue estoppel. I am merely considering on the evidence before me at the moment whether there is an arguable case for the grant of an injunction and on the first aspect of the landlord's case I must find there is such an arguable case.

So far as the application for injunction that Telstra be restrained from doing anything outside the demised area, I think that the proper construction of the lease, including the implied covenant, does give Telstra some liberty to operate outside the demised premises, but certainly not to the extent that it in its subjective view thinks necessary for its business. Certainly it is to the extent to which it is necessary to comply with building standards, query some grey area in between those two positions. Accordingly, I would not have been prepared to have made in as full terms as set out in para 1(b) of the cross-claim the injunction that was sought.

In considering whether to grant an interlocutory injunction one has to consider three matters; (a) whether there is an arguable case; (b) where the balance of convenience lies; and (c) whether damages are an adequate remedy. I think probably damages are an adequate remedy in the instant case. We all know that it is difficult to quantify damages in this sort of case, but it is able to be done to an acceptable degree by an experienced Master. The defendant says that there is evidence to show that its building may be irreparably ruined by all the holes and patching that are put into it by the plaintiff's activity and if the worse comes to the worst and the building has to be demolished then the plaintiff would appear to be the sort of corporation which would have sufficient moneys to build a new one, so that damages really are an adequate remedy.

So far as the balance of convenience is concerned, prima facie a tenant who has entered into a negative covenant not to make alterations except in accordance with the lease must keep its promise. However, there are at least two factors which tend the other way. First, whilst I would not go so far as to say there were unclean hands, the landlord has made it fairly plain that it is never likely to be satisfied with any detail that was given by the tenant to it and that what will happen, if some injunction is granted, is that there will be a continual request for further information and continual delay. This has also been borne out by the way in which the landlord behaved after giving its undertaking to the plaintiff on Tuesday last.

The second matter is that consistently with cases such as Aristoc Industries
Pty Ltd versus R A Wenham (Builders) Pty Ltd [[1965] NSWR 581] one must look at the whole public interest and weigh the interest of the public in having what is evidently very necessary, a good complaint system for things that go wrong with the telephone service. Accordingly, in my view and in my discretion
I should refuse to grant any injunction.

I know that this decision will mean that the parties will be left to their own devices and it is probably too much to hope that they will ever be sensible about the matter, so doubtless we will see them back in Court in due course.

Costs will be reserved. I stand the matter over to the Registrar's list on 29
March 1996.
 * * * 
