

Regina versus Baldacchino Matter No 70070/97 [1998] NSWSC 723 (7 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
REGINA versus LENNY EMANUEL BALDACCHINO /97 July 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: On 29 June 1998, the prisoner pleaded guilty before me to one count in an indictment that he did on, 7 August 1985 at Greystanes in the State of New South Wales, murder Joseph Farrugia. 
The circumstances of that murder are not substantially in dispute. I take what follows from the statement of facts tendered by the Crown on the plea. There was no objection to the contents of that statement.

On 29 July 1972, the prisoner arrived in Australia from his native country of
Malta. He settled in the western suburbs of Sydney and married his first wife,
Kim Page, in 1973. Their son, Jason Baldacchino was born in 1975. They separated in 1977. The prisoner then moved to Guildford and eventually settled in Pendle Hill in 1982.

At Pendle Hill the accused worked as a carpenter and joiner and was lead guitarist in a band named "Cosmos" which played predominantly at Maltese clubs and functions. In 1982 or 1983 he was approached by the band's promoter,
Silvio Casha in relation to a female singer Doris Marilyn Cardona joining the band. The accused arranged an audition with Ms. Cardona and a week afterwards the two began a relationship.

Ms. Cardona was at this time married to Joseph Farrugia and although separated they were living at the same address, 31A Ettalong Road, Greystanes with their son, David Farrugia. A few weeks after the relationship commenced the prisoner moved into Ms. Cardona's home and Joseph Farrugia moved out the same day.
Joseph Farrugia went to live with his brother, Louie Farrugia at 15 Rowley
Street, Pendle Hill.

According to the accused, Ms. Cardona told him that she had married Joseph
Farrugia 15 years earlier under duress, Farrugia having threatened to kill her and her parents if she didn't marry him. She also told him that her husband had assaulted her prior to their separation.

In June 1985, Ms. Cardona and Joseph Farrugia reached a court ordered property settlement which included the requirement that Ms. Cardona pay her ex-husband $20,000 by August 1985. As the time for payment approached, the prisoner stated that Ms. Cardona spoke to him about not wishing to pay the money and broached the topic of the prisoner either killing Farrugia himself or paying someone to do so. According to the prisoner, Ms. Cardona's son, David, was often present during these discussions. Ms. Cardona showed the prisoner the house where Farrugia was then living at 1/165 Prospect Road, Greystanes.

The prisoner stated that he spoke to an acquaintance, Mario Gatt, about killing Farrugia for $5,000. Ms. Cardona was present during this meeting. Gatt allegedly said that the most he was prepared to do was to bash Farrugia.

The prisoner next approached Ken Roach, a fellow employee. Roach was introduced to Ms. Cardona. Roach agreed with the prisoner that he would kill
Farrugia. Roach met the prisoner at a cake shop named the "Rainbow Queen" owned by the prisoner and Ms. Cardona at Pendle Hill. The prisoner gave Ken
Roach an M1 .30 calibre carbine rifle and a cash cheque for $2,500. The agreement was that Roach would receive a further $2,500 after Farrugia was killed. Roach did not perform his part of the bargain and was not seen by the prisoner again.

According to the prisoner, Ms. Cardona told him that he would have to kill
Farrugia himself and nagged him continually to do so as the deadline for payment of the $20,000 drew near. About the first week of August 1985, the prisoner and Ms. Cardona approached several banks to obtain a loan to pay
Farrugia. The banks declined the application and advised Ms. Cardona to sell her home. On the evening of 6 August 1985, the prisoner and Ms. Cardona had been drinking Bacardi and Spumante and having been nagged to commit the murder by Ms. Cardona, the prisoner took a pair of black woollen gloves, a black beanie and a sawn-off .22 rifle from a wardrobe, watched by Ms. Cardona who advised him about which window to use to gain entry to Farrugia's house.

The prisoner went to the house, forced a window open with a screwdriver and climbed into the house. However he discovered that Farrugia was not at home.
He went home and spoke to Ms. Cardona. After about half an hour, he returned to 1/165 Prospect Road, Greystanes. He saw that Farrugia's car was parked in the carport.

He again entered through the same window which he had previously left slightly open. He found Farrugia asleep in bed, lying on his back. He raised the rifle, which was equipped with a silencer, to the right hand side of Farrugia's head, near Farrugia's ear, looked away and pulled the trigger. The prisoner exited through the window and walked home where he told Ms. Cardona what he had done.
According to the prisoner, David Farrugia overheard and said, "love you mate".

Ms. Cardona then informed the prisoner that she was suffering back pain. The prisoner placed the rifle, beanie and gloves into a plastic bag and placed it into his Holden panel van. He showered and placed the clothing he had been wearing in the laundry. He then drove Ms. Cardona to Westmead Hospital, arriving there around midnight. He left Ms. Cardona at the emergency department and then drove to an area near Westmead railway station. He placed a plastic bag containing the beanie and gloves into a rubbish bin and then drove to a bridge over the Parramatta River in Marsden Street where he threw the screwdriver and rifle into the river. He then returned to Westmead
Hospital, picked up Ms. Cardona and drove home.

At about 6.30 am the next morning, 7 August 1985, Joseph Farrugia was found by his next door neighbour, at his premises with a wound to the right temple.
Police and ambulance personnel attended soon afterwards. Farrugia was taken to the Westmead Hospital where a gunshot would was observed with no exit wound.
At 5.55 pm brain death was noted and the artificial ventilator was subsequently turned off. Life was pronounced extinct at 11.00 pm on 7 August
On 8 August 1985, a post mortem was performed. The wound to the head was found to be consistent with having been caused by the passage of a small calibre projectile discharged with the muzzle held in close proximity to the skin.

On 7 August 1985, police obtained a statement from the prisoner and from Ms.
Cardona and both were interviewed on 8 August 1985. David Farrugia made a statement to police on 7 August 1985 and was also interviewed on 8 August .

On the afternoon of 13 May 1997, the prisoner went to Fairfield Police Station and asked to speak to police. He told police that he wished to confess to the murder of Joseph Farrugia. He then participated in an ERISP interview that day and on 17 July 1997 made a statement containing his version of events surrounding the murder. The prisoner explained that he had been baptised as a
Jehovah's Witness in October 1995 and married his wife Norma, a fellow
Jehovah's Witness in 1996. In April 1997, he confessed his guilt to his wife and the Elders of the congregation, which led to his approach to the police.

The prisoner's electronically recorded interview and his statement dated 17
July 1997 are in evidence and confirm the substance of those facts. In that statement, in his interview and in evidence before me, he has provided further details. He informed police that Ms. Cardona had told him she had been the subject of assaults by the deceased, that she had never loved the deceased "the way he used to do things to me, I hate him", that she had told him that the deceased was stalking her and that he didn't deserve to be paid the property settlement by her since he had taken money from a workers' compensation settlement in her favour and bought property in Malta. The prisoner has asserted that she had nagged him to get rid of the deceased either personally or by retaining someone else or she herself would go to
Kings Cross and find someone to do it. He told the police that she nagged him about getting rid of the deceased most nights and would keep him up until 2.00 am. She further said to him:- "I don't want to pay him, we must get rid of him, kill him or something.", and further said:- "These Gozo's [a reference to the native island of her husband] are like that.
You either get them first or they get you, especially his family." 
He described to the police how she showed him where her husband lived and the detail of the house for the purpose of his describing the house to whomever was retained to get rid of the deceased but that he should be the one to speak to whoever was obtained "because man should talk to man".

After Mario Gatt had refused to kill the deceased, according to the prisoner,
Ms. Cardona said that it was necessary for him to find someone to do something because time was running out "otherwise we have to pay him". He responded, "You pay him, not me, it's your house, not mine"; "You told me before that he threatened you, what has the money got to do with the threat?". She said, "Well sooner or later he will get us anyway. I know his family, you don't.
They are violent and they try to own everything on the island, [ie., where they live in Malta]".

The $2,500 given to Ken Roach came from a joint account held by the prisoner and Ms. Cardona at the Commonwealth Bank at Pendle Hill but was provided by a cash cheque signed solely by the prisoner. The rifle provided by the prisoner to Ken Roach had apparently been purchased by him prior to his association with Ms. Cardona. The weapon that he himself used, he had, he said, purchased with a silencer also prior to meeting Ms. Cardona. In preparation for its use in the intended killing he shortened this rifle and machined its barrel to provide a thread for the silencer.

When Mr. Roach did not perform the agreement and the time for payment of the settlement monies approached quite closely, according to what the prisoner told the police, Ms. Cardona became very emotional, indeed frantic, and was nagging him all the time. Day and night she kept telling him to do something about it. He became so stressed with worry that he was sick and had felt like this for many months since she had started to nag him about doing something about her husband. As a result, he was drinking heavily around the house.

The banks had refused loans to enable the property settlement sum to be paid since, as the prisoner was on workers compensation at this time and she was on a pension, their joint means were not sufficient to service any new loan. The cake shop leased and operated by them both under loan from a bank had burned down insufficiently covered by insurance.

Ms. Cardona, according to the prisoner, became very emotional during this time and would push him and punch him, get angry and vicious, demanding he do something about Joe. He was under stress and depressed.

On the night of the killing, he said, that although he was scared, he agreed to do it. Ms. Cardona offered to let him share the enjoyment of the money to be saved. He carefully dressed and prepared for the killing. When the prisoner returned to Ms. Cardona and told her that the intended victim was not home on the first attempt at the killing, she started screaming saying, "Leave it then, we might as well pay him", but the prisoner offered to try again.

After talking to her about it, further drinking and about half an hour later, he returned to the deceased's premises and killed him.

After returning on that occasion, he informed Ms. Cardona of her husband's death and she commenced to pray that they not be caught. He informed her that after what they had done prayer was not much assistance.

By arrangement, false stories were given to the police. The statements made then by the prisoner, Ms. Cardona and her son have been admitted into evidence.

Some time later, Ms. Cardona showed the prisoner her husband's will leaving her all his property and he assisted her to collect her husband's personal property from the executor, the deceased's brother. Later, with the assistance of solicitors, she obtained title to the deceased's land in Malta and his money in the bank. The prisoner did not receive any direct financial benefit but lived with Ms. Cardona in the home that had been the subject of the property settlement for about two years.

Although they had married at about the beginning of 1986 and had a daughter in
October 1986, at the beginning of 1987 Ms.Cardona told him to move out of the home which she shortly thereafter sold and kept the proceeds. She subsequently bought other property.

The prisoner says that during the years since the killing, he was the subject of an attempted blackmail threat by Mario Gatt.

Some time after leaving the home, he was invited back by Ms. Cardona to make the marriage work, as he thought, and the relationship was resumed. A couple of months after this, Ms. Cardona procured him to obtain a loan through the
Westpac Bank at Campbelltown to enable the purchase of her mother's home in which they were then residing at an advantageous price . Despite Ms. Cardona's wish that his name not be on the title, the bank insisted it should be so since he had the income and was liable for the loan.

Shortly after the loan was entered into and the house purchased, notwithstanding that he was working and paying the mortgage, she insisted he leave, demanding he accept only $3,000 for his share of the house, under threat of informing the police of the murder. It was then that he hit her, resulting in the assault female matter referred to later in these remarks. She sold the house for a sum considerably in excess of the purchase price.

Later, proceedings for a divorce were instituted which only became finalised in 1996. In the property settlement he agreed to take only $9,000 "she ended up with the rest", "to keep the peace", he said. He was the subject of demands for maintenance but ceased exercising access rights since he was worried that "if she used me to kill Joe then she can use someone else to kill me".

Notwithstanding all this, he did not approach the police or the authorities, adhered to the lies that he had told following the commission of the offence and left Ms. Cardona in enjoyment of the profits of their crime.

In about 1989-1990, the prisoner turned to religion and commenced to study the
Bible with the Jehovah's Witnesses. He felt guilty about his sins and in particular felt blood guilt about the death of the deceased. "My conscience wouldn't let me sleep." He felt depressed and started seeing a psychiatrist who he did not tell about killing the deceased.

On 14 October 1995, he was baptised and became a full Jehovah's Witness. He met his wife Norma in 1996 and they married on 28 September 1996. The marriage was troubled because of his guilt. His inability to sleep quietly caused his wife to seek to know the cause and he informed her of the killing.
She advised him to bring the matter to the Elders of the church and that what he had done was "a blood guilt" in God's eyes. He took it to the Elders. He says that he was feeling very guilty and ashamed because of what he had done and in particular that he hadn't told the congregation about what he had done prior to being baptised. He went with an Elder to the Fairfield Police Station where he confessed. That confession made him very happy and relieved about getting everything off his conscience. He said (in his statement at p.26, para.47):- "I feel that Doris and I have to be judged for what we did to Joe Farrugia. I know I've done wrong even though I personally did not benefit from Joe's death. I feel very sorry for him and for what was done to him. I only knew Joe by his face and did not know his background and the type of person he was. I relied on Doris to tell me what he was like and I am sorry I did. I was blinded by my love for her and to keep her happy. I was used by her and now know she never loved me and only used me for what she wanted. I regret all the time I was with her." 
When the prisoner told the police about his conversations with Doris Cardona, in his statement he said:- "Q.47 - And she was aware, was, or was she aware that you shot Joseph
Farrugia? A. Oh yes, I went that day and I said, `It's done', and she start to cry, `You gunna get caught'.

Q.48 - And what was her involvement prior to you shooting Mr. Farrugia? A.
Well, I reckon she, the way she explain to me, she was very terrified of him.
He threatened her ... I said, `Well nobody's gunna threaten me and you because
I'm with you, I'm gunna be threatened also. We must get rid of him because he won't leave us alone. You don't know him, I know him, you don't. I said, `Alright'. That's what's involved and plus she said, and she said, `We'll pay him, we'll have to do it as soon as possible'. Instead we pay him we, we keep it for ourselves.

Q.49 - Whose idea was it to kill the man Farrugia? A. Her, she was planned before to find somebody else. She said, so and so, `If you don't do something about I go downtown myself and find someone.'" 
The electronically recorded interview is to the same general effect. In that interview he informed the police that she had told him that the deceased was violent and cruel and his nickname "Zumbar" evidenced that. In answer to questions from the police, he said:- "Q.122 - Was it your intention when you shot this man in the head to kill him?
A. I didn't want to do it, to be honest. I didn't want to do it.

Q.123 - Well, what was your intention when you shot this man in the head? A. I think it was evil comes around and, evil as, when I was thinking to do it I said, `cause when I saw him I said, `you're not gunna threaten me now', and I went bang. I was whispering in my heart, I said, you see, I said, `you think you're tough. I got you, you didn't got us', and I got him.

Q.124 - So was it your intention to kill that man at that time? A. At the time, actually before it was the money involved, to be honest. It was the $20,000. I said, `Oh, well, 20 grand is 20 grand and most, also is threats and money, to be honest'.

Q.125 - And you shot him to kill him? A. Of course, either you, you do it or you don't." 
Some support for what he told the police at least in general is afforded in the statements provided shortly after the killing by Ms. Cardona and the prisoner to which I have earlier referred, although, in those statements they both concealed their guilt. In those statements there are allegations of mistreatment of Ms. Cardona by the deceased, but there is also material in various of the statements provided by others to suggest that prior to his death the deceased believed that his wife and her boyfriend would arrange to have him killed, that he had purchased a pistol to protect himself (this accords with a statement by the prisoner that he had been informed by Ms.
Cardona that the deceased slept with a pistol under his pillow), and that he had been the subject of threats before his death.

This matter has been brought forward by the Crown on the basis that the charge to which the prisoner has here pleaded guilty embraces the whole of the criminality involved in the events that have been put before me including the soliciting of Messrs. Gatt and Roach and his activities with Ms. Cardona and her son both in preparation for the killing and in concealment of their roles in it.

I turn now to matters of the prisoner's character and background.

The prisoner was interviewed by Dr. Strum who obtained a general history:- "Mr. Baldacchino was born in Malta. In 1972, at the age of 27, he left Malta and came to Australia looking for a better future, at that time. He has two sisters living in Australia. Mr. Baldacchino completed his schooling at the age of 13. He said he was an average student. He had some minor discipline problems at school but he was never suspended or expelled. He left school because his father died. There were eight children in the family and he was required to help 
After he left school, Mr. Baldacchino worked as an off-sider for a truck driver, then in a quarry for one and a half years. He then worked as a driver for Cocoa-Cola (sic) for four years, then as a carrier delivering building stone. In Australia, Mr. Baldacchino was a labourer on roadworks and a machine operator on building sites. He had done some carpentry work overseas although he was never trained. Nevertheless, he is licenced (sic) as a carpenter in
Australia and has worked in that field most of the time he has spent here. He said he holds a job well although he has been out of work for a year because he is suffering from arthritis. He is now on sickness benefits.

At the age of about 19, he was involved in a motor vehicle accident and suffered a head injury. He said he was unconscious for a week. He also suffered a smashed nose and cervical disc problems and wore a collar for four months. He said he never recovered from the accident and still suffers from pain in the neck. It is interesting that he said stress increased the pain he suffered. Since he separated from his wife, he feels he has regained strength in the neck and he is suffering less pain.

Mr. Baldacchino's mother, now aged 83, lives in Malta. His father is deceased but, when alive, worked as a painter on the docks. Mr. Baldacchino said that although his parents got on well, they fought a lot. He said his father had been a gambler and his mother had tended towards depression. There is no history of alcoholism or violence. Apart from his mother's depression, there is a history of psychiatric illness in that an aunt had been in a psychiatric hospital suffering from a depressive illness.

Mr. Baldacchino has seven siblings, three brothers and four sisters. Two of his sisters live in Australia. He said that since he converted to the
Jehovah's Witness religion, his relationship with his siblings has been poor.
The family in Malta does not write to him. He said the family got on well when he was younger but not in later life. None of his siblings received much in way of education. He denied any traumas whilst he was growing up.
 ...

Mr. Baldacchino does not own a house. He said he lost everything after his relationship with Doris. He had planned but everyone had `ripped him off'. He now lives alone in a house rented from a church brother.

Mr. Baldacchino's conversion to the Jehovah's Witness religion occurred in
He said he is happy with his new-found religion. It was because of his religion and the urging of his third wife, that he finally confessed to the killing. He said that whilst he was living with his third wife, he was dreaming and jumping in his sleep. She thought he had something on his conscience. He told her what had happened and she told him to tell the church elders. She told him she would `stick by him' but she did not. He said that, since he came out of gaol (sic), they have not spoken and she has changed her telephone number.
 ...

Mr. Baldacchino has suffered from depression on many occasions.

Mr. Baldacchino said when depressed, he feels dysphoric, mainly in the morning, and suffers from abdominal churning. His appetite is affected. He suffers from insomnia with early morning wakening. He has intermittent suicidal thoughts. His libido is intact. Mr. Baldacchino said he attempted suicide 15 years ago by slashing his wrists. He said he attempted suicide because of the way people were treating him. People were talking about him. He said he hears voices talking about him and, sometimes, he hears voices calling him. He feels that people want to destroy his life and he does not know why.

At the time of the killing, Mr. Baldacchino was depressed and had been so for a couple of years but he had received no treatment for it. He said he had had a band and had to give it up when he met Doris. He said that for a week before the killing, the depression had been worse and he was drinking a bottle of whiskey (sic) a week and one or two bottles of beer a day. He was not taking drugs.

At the time of the killing, Mr. Baldacchino was not eating or sleeping well.
He was disturbed and convinced that the man was going to `get him and Doris'.
At the time of the killing, he was drunk but knew what he was doing.

After the killing, Mr. Baldacchino said he felt sorry for what he had done. He stopped drinking because he felt it had caused him to carry out the actions.
He said his depression lessened after he joined the church. He said the Bible changed his life." 
Dr. Strum concluded that the prisoner was a fairly simple man who suffered from depression at times and who has had problems in his relationships. He pointed out that he had not interviewed the former wife, Ms. Cardona, and has only Mr. Baldacchino's word for what has transpired. Dr. Strum was of the view that the depression and alcoholism at the time of the killing would make the prisoner more liable to the influence that Doris Cardona had over him which she exercised by nagging him into committing the crime.

Dr. Strum referred to the prisoner's remorse and in particular referred to the enormous help given to the prisoner by the Jehovah's Witness Church. Dr. Strum expressed the view that he did not think the prisoner was prone to violence and he would be surprised if the prisoner was a danger to the community at this time.

The prisoner was also seen by Dr. William Lucas to whom he gave a history consistent with former moderate to heavy alcohol abuse. (The prisoner no longer drinks.) Otherwise the prisoner gave him a history substantially in accord with what he had said to others. In referring to his attitude to the killing, he told Dr. Lucas that he felt like a coward, "it was a cowardly job" and that he went in to see the police as he saw authority as representing
God's law on Earth. He was much happier now he had repented. He told Dr. Lucas that he had little contact with his family since having become a Jehovah's
Witness; that he was prepared for whatever sentence might be imposed and he had no regrets about his confession although the problems arising from it had meant a separation from his wife.

Dr. Lucas was of the view that at the time of the shooting, Mr. Baldacchino was not suffering from a psychiatric disorder but did have some symptoms of depression and anxiety and was drinking to moderate excess. Dr. Lucas also does not believe that he will present a danger to the community upon release.

Dr. Mukherjee has also provided an opinion concerning Mr. Baldacchino's arthritis which is worse in cold and damp weather.

The prisoner has given the appropriate undertaking to the Prosecution and has, in the past done, what the Crown has conceded, to be all that he could do in the present circumstances to assist the proper investigation of the role of others in this matter and has evidenced an intent, which I find in his favour to be reliable, that he will do all that he can honestly for the future. I accept these matters. It is clear that his assistance, not only in inculpating himself, is very extensive and of great value.

Mr. Baldacchino gave evidence before me. I was of the view that he was giving his evidence honestly and, in the main, reliably, arising from a deeply held religious conviction on his part of the necessity to assuage his blood guilt by co-operating with the authorities to do what he could to put right matters now after 13 years. I accept that his role in the killing was motivated to a substantial degree by a belief that Ms. Cardona and, to a lesser extent, he also might have been at risk from the deceased, albeit that may well have arisen because of circumstances generated by the relationship between himself and Ms. Cardona. I accept, as was submitted on behalf of the Crown and the prisoner, that the evidence would not allow me to hold that he expected to benefit directly, personally, financially from the killing, although he plainly did expect that Ms. Cardona would benefit at least to the extent of not being liable to pay the $20,000 family law settlement. It must be clear that there was an indirect advantage which did accrue to the prisoner through the commission of the offence and he certainly was not unconscious of the $20,000 benefit to the woman he was about to marry. It may be that his motives for the commission of the offence were confused and multiple and it appears to be the case that he believed that her motives were multiple.

In his evidence before me, he was a most impressive witness. Although I agree with the observation of Dr. Strum that he appears a simple man, nonetheless he was clear, in general, in what he said. I find his expressions of contrition and repentance to be genuine and deeply felt and that he is a man who has come into the bosom of his church in which he finds now his life.

I am satisfied from the evidence of Mr. Fresch and Mr. Carabott, who were called on the prisoner's behalf, that he is a person who is otherwise not violent and indeed the only other matter in which he has been involved with the law arose out of the dispute with Ms. Cardona when she ejected him from the matrimonial home. I accept what Mr. Fresch has said concerning the devotion the prisoner has shown to his church from which, for reasons other than this matter and which do him no discredit, he is presently excluded. I accept the evidence that his marriage appears at least at present to have broken down and that there is a real likelihood that he will have limited contact with his Church whilst in custody. I accept that he has no real prospect outside the Church of support from family or friends. I further accept from the submissions made by Mr. Boulten of counsel who appears on his behalf, that he has, in his willingness to co-operate with the authorities, placed himself in their hands unreservedly without necessarily full awareness of what he may be called upon to undertake, other than, if necessary, the giving of evidence and has displayed already a willingness to undertake measures extending beyond the usual extent of such co-operation. I consider this might well result in him being exposed to harsher custodial circumstances in the event, as is likely, that his co-operation and assistance becomes known within the gaol system within which he must remain for a very lengthy period of time. I accept the submissions of both the Crown and Mr. Boulten that the matter should be dealt with on the basis that the prisoner was manipulated by
Ms. Cardona into soliciting the murder and performing it himself and into providing property benefits to her in due course.

After turning to religion he has come forward with his confessions which I find are full and frank and disclose guilt that might not otherwise have been able to be proved against him. I accept that had the prisoner not approached the police and confessed as has done, there would be no basis for any charges and hence apply the principles referred to in Regina v. Ellis [(1986) 6
NSWLR 603] at 604):- "This court has said on a number of occasions that a plea of guilty will entitle a convicted person to an element of leniency in the sentence. The degree of leniency may vary according to the degree of inevitability of conviction as it may appear to the sentencing judge, but it is always a factor to which a greater or lesser degree of weight must be given.

When the conviction follows upon a plea of guilty, that itself is the result of a voluntary disclosure of guilt by the person concerned, a further element of leniency enters into the sentencing decision. Where it was unlikely that guilt would be discovered and established were it not for the disclosure by the person coming forward for sentence, then a considerable element of leniency should properly be extended by the sentencing judge. It is part of the policy of the criminal law to encourage a guilty person to come forward and disclose both the fact of an offence having been committed and confession of guilt of that offence.

The leniency that follows a confession of guilt in the form of a plea of guilty is a well recognised part of the body of principles that cover sentencing. Although less well recognised, because less frequently encountered, the disclosure of an otherwise unknown guilt of an offence merits a significant added element of leniency, the degree of which will vary according to the degree of likelihood of that guilt being discovered by the law enforcement authorities, as well as guilt being established against the person concerned." 
See also Regina v. McCabe (CCA, unreported 14 October 1991) and Regina v. Dodd [(1992) 57 A. Crim. R. 349] in which the Court of Criminal Appeal referred to the acknowledgment of the Crown in that matter in the following terms:- "The Crown acknowledges that there are powerful subjective circumstances that had to be taken into account in favour of the respondent. His contrition is beyond question. In addition to that he is entitled to the benefit of the fact that he pleaded guilty and saved the community the expense of a contested trial: cf. Shannon [(1979) 21 SASR 442.]
Furthermore, he is entitled to added leniency because of his voluntary disclosure of guilt, which would otherwise have remained undetected. The Crown does not challenge the validity of the principle enunciated by Street, CJ. in
Ellis [(1986) 6 NSWLR 603] ..." 
Those observations, in my view, are also applicable here.

The evidence clearly requires findings of contrition, remorse and repentance.
I accept that his attitude is by reason of an awakened sense of religious duty and not in expectation of some personal benefit nor out of malice or resentment at the way he feels he had been treated by Ms. Cardona. All of these matters, of course, are relevant not only to the general circumstances of the prisoner when he comes forward for sentence but also to the question of special circumstances within [s.5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) to which I will refer later.

The lapse of time in a matter such as this needs to be considered in the light of established principles: see Dodd (supra at 353):- "The length of time that elapsed between the crime and the sentencing proceedings was pointed out. That is a proper matter to take into account in the respondent's favour although its weight is not in the circumstances of the present case as great as it might be in other circumstances. The absence of risk that the respondent will offend again and his personal rehabilitation were properly raised, as was the possible effect upon such rehabilitation of a lengthy custodial sentence." 
See also Regina v. Bawden (Mathews, J., unreported 30 October 1992 at ):- "The next proposition is that the time lapse between the offence and this sentencing - or at least between the offence and the confession - cannot be used as a mitigating feature in reduction of sentence. For it was the prisoner's own failure to come forward which was responsible for this delay.

On the other hand, whilst this is clearly the principle involved, it is impossible to ignore the fact that the prisoner who is to be sentenced today is an entirely different man from the person who murdered Ms. Pohl nearly 20 years ago. Time and guilt have taken their toll upon him." 
Similarly, it was said in Regina v. Shore [(1993) 66 A. Crim. R.
] at 47:- "To allow leniency because of delay alone would be, ... to place a premium on absconding and would be entirely contrary to the public interest. The proper course is that adopted by the sentencing judge in Kukunoski and approved in this court, which allows the sentencing judge to recognise the unhappy condition of an accused person living as a fugitive with always the fear that his crime might be brought against him but not to encourage absconding by affording any additional leniency in relation to it. That is not to say that genuine rehabilitation during such a period is to be entirely ignored:
Thompson. But inevitably it cannot be given the same significance as in a case of the other sort." 
I therefore regard the lengthy period of concealment of the offence as to some degree aggravating the crime. However, the prisoner is entitled to the benefit of the rehabilitation I have referred to and to recognition of his unhappy condition during that time.

I have had regard to the maximum penalty of life imprisonment provided for this offence and for the matters referred to in s.431B of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

I have also had regard to the particular matters referred to in s.442B of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which section provides for reduction of the sentence that would otherwise be imposed, including the acquisition of the deceased's property by Ms. Cardona to the detriment of the deceased's family, the obvious immense significance and utility to the authorities of the offender's assistance and the delay in the furnishing of that assistance.

Both the learned Crown Prosecutor and Mr. Boulten, who appears for the prisoner, have urged upon me that this is a matter in which the court should appropriately afford to the prisoner an unusually substantial reduction by reason of the applicability of this section and his assistance to the authorities, notwithstanding that no charges have presently been laid against any other person but by reason of s.442B(2), however, a court must not reduce a sentence so that the sentence becomes unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and circumstances of the offence.

It has been submitted to me that I should have regard to the pattern of sentencing referred to in McCabe (supra) and to what occurred in the matter of Bawden (supra) in which the prisoner came forward after 17 years to confess to a murder of which the deceased's husband had been convicted and for which he had been serving a life sentence. In that matter, Justice Mathews sentenced the prisoner to a minimum term of imprisonment of eight years, specifying an additional term of seven years, making a total of 15 years.

That case involved an appalling crime in which a woman was strangled in her home after the prisoner had forced his way in, pushing her to the floor. When the deceased started to scream, the prisoner took a shirt and strangled her whilst she struggled. He dragged her body down into the bedroom along the hall. Although there was speculation as to his motive for doing so, her Honour was not prepared to accept any particular motive either by way of sexual interference or robbery. In that case, also, the prisoner appears to have done all that he could do to assist the authorities, including providing the evidence to an enquiry by Mr. Justice McInerney of this court under s.475 of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) into the conviction of the deceased's husband which in due course recommended the pardon that was granted to him after all those years. The reduction principle expressed in s.442B was not directly referred to in the judgment giving rise to a submission here from both counsel that the prisoner would be entitled to a reduction for his assistance beyond that appropriate for the matters expressly mentioned by her Honour.

On my reading of what her Honour said in Bawden, she allowed all that credit to which an accused might have been entitled for assistance to the authorities. Any additional reduction, in my view is not appropriate and would result in a sentence unreasonably disproportionate.

In Bawden, her Honour held that the prisoner, as here, was under severe stress at the time of the killing but again, as here, that the circumstances of the offence were terrible and without mitigation. In that matter, as in this, the victim was entirely innocent and defenceless, the prisoner invaded the sanctuary of the home and attacked the victim without provocation. Both were horrible killings. Her Honour considered that the imposition of a sentence involving a minimum term of well in excess of 10 years would have been appropriate had the prisoner not confessed as he did. Those remarks, in my view, are apposite to the present case, particularly when regard is had to the pattern of sentences for homicide exposed by the Court of Criminal Appeal in McCabe (supra) and in the Judicial Commission statistics.

Here, there was a plain motive to avoid a financial obligation to the deceased, to circumvent the order of a court and to remove a perceived potential risk the continued life of that person might have posed. In addition, there were the further aggravating features of the two attempts to hire others to murder the deceased, the failure of which did not deter the prisoner from seeking to achieve domestic peace by homicide. He committed a cold blooded assassination primarily to satisfy the greed of another. I am persuaded that the prisoner may not have been an enthusiastic participant.
Nonetheless, he was entirely compliant and remained in the relationship which obviously was one in which he was psychologically subservient, notwithstanding the continued nagging to commit the crime. Although it is not right to compare one case directly with another, in my view, if comparison might validly be made, this was a much more serious murder even than that involved in
Bawden.

I do not see any basis on which, under s.442B or otherwise, there is any principle whereby this prisoner should for past assistance, receive any additional leniency or reduction to that which I have already described. The reduction for the matters I have referred to is itself not substantial. I will, however, have regard to his future co-operation as a matter to be taken into account, though not to the extent of providing for any unusual or substantial discount for that alone.

In order that the sentence not be unreasonably disproportionate, it is necessary that the sentence reflect the objective gravity of the crime in the context of all the circumstances as proved before me.

The general principles I must apply were adverted to by the Court of Criminal
Appeal in Dodd (supra at 354):- "As Jordan, CJ. pointed out in Geddes <case>; [(1936) 36 SR 554] at 556, making due allowance for all relevant considerations, there ought to be a reasonable proportionality between a sentence and the circumstances of the crime, and we consider that it is always important in seeking to determine the sentence appropriate to a particular crime to have regard to the gravity of the offence viewed objectively, for without this assessment the other factors requiring consideration in order to arrive at the proper sentence to be imposed cannot properly be given their place. Each crime, as Veen (No.
) <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 465] at 472; <case>; [33 A. Crim. R. 230] at 234 stresses, has its own objective gravity meriting at the most a sentence proportionate to that gravity, the maximum sentence fixed by the legislature defining the limits of sentence for cases in the most grave category. The relative importance of the objective facts and subjective features of a case will vary: see, for example, the passage from the judgment of Street, CJ. in Todd <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 59] at 64; <case>; [36
A. Crim. R. 468.] Even so, there is sometimes a risk that attention to persuasive subjective considerations may cause inadequate weight to be given to the objective circumstances of the case: Rushby [[1977] 1 NSWLR ."](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1977%5d%201%20NSWLR%20594 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Having regard to the serious objective nature of the crime, the attempted involvement of others, the concealment by the prisoner of his own involvement and that of others by concerted lying to the police at the time and the maintenance of that concealment for almost 13 years, I regard the matter as very grave. I must, however of course, in deference to those matters I have referred to above, give proper regard to the recent rehabilitation of the prisoner in the balance of all matters involved, to the assistance, the voluntary surrender, the plea and the other matters in the prisoner's favour, and that the evidence establishes to my satisfaction that this was a man who at the time of the commission of the offence was under the influence of Ms.
Cardona, had been the subject of a considerable degree of stress and whose subsequent conduct during the 13 years in which the offence has lain concealed (and particularly since turning to the Church) does not indicate any likelihood that he would re-offend.

I have concluded that an appropriate sentence in this matter is a sentence of years penal servitude. I am of the view that there are special circumstances under [s.5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) because of the possible effect of such a lengthy sentence on the existing and expected rehabilitation, the estrangement from the prisoner's church where there appear to be no other family or friend support mechanisms operating and the likelihood that custodial circumstances would be harsher because of the assistance that the prisoner has rendered to authorities. I consider there should be an extended period of supervision as submitted by both the Crown and
Mr. Boulten for the prisoner, in both the prisoner's and the community interest. In my view, the sentence should be made up of a minimum term of penal servitude for eight years to date from the date the prisoner went into custody and allowing for the two days he had spent in prior custody, thus dating from 27 June 1998, together with an additional term of eight years.

I direct that the documents that were provided to me in the sealed envelope be once again sealed up in an envelope not to be opened except at the direction of a judge.

Lenny Emanuel Baldacchino, you are convicted and sentenced to penal servitude for a period of 16 years. Such sentence is to consist of a minimum term of eight years commencing 27 June 1998 and expiring on 26 June 2006 together with an additional term thereafter of eight years commencing on 27 June 2006 and expiring on 26 June 2114. The earliest date upon which you are eligible for release on parole is 26 June 2006.
 * * * 
