

Melbourne versus Tisete Pty Ltd Matter No 1752/97 [1997] NSWSC 332 (26 August )

Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
Melbourne versus Tisete Pty Limited` ` 1752/97` `26 August 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 MELBOURNE versus TISETE PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: There are two motions, one by the plaintiffs to vary an order of Windeyer J that the second plaintiff provide security for costs and, the second, by the defendant, under Part 53 rule 4 of the Rules, to dismiss the second plaintiff's claim because it has not given security as ordered. 
The purpose of ordering security for costs is not to stifle litigation, but to make sure that defendants are protected against people bringing claims, losing them and then not being able to pay the costs. The court should not lightly make an order under Part 53 rule 4 that proceedings be dismissed if there is a real possibility of security being provided, even if the plaintiff has not complied with the time limits laid down in the original order. However, a time must come when it would be appropriate to make such an order.

The plaintiffs really are trying to have the best of all worlds. They seem to have only $25,000 and they want to use it for two different purposes. Mr
Angyal, counsel for the defendant, complains about that, I think, with some justification. However, there are other proceedings between the parties involving a statutory demand and an application to set aside that statutory demand and those proceedings are listed on 26 September 1997.

I believe that now there is evidence that there is money available to pay the security, I should extend the time. I extend the time for the first tranche of the security to 30 September 1997. I intend that this be the final extension.
Mr Finch for the plaintiffs, says that once the question as to whether the statutory demand will be set aside or not is determined, then if it is determined in his favour there will be no difficulty about providing the security. He says he has a fear that the matter might not be ready on 26
September 1997. It may well be that if it is not reached, solely because of the court system, that the duty judge on that day might feel inclined to extend the time, but I cannot see any other reason why the time should be extended beyond 30 September 1997.

Accordingly, I will adjourn the defendant's notice of motion to a date convenient to counsel and, on the plaintiffs' notice of motion, make an order extending the time for the $18,000 security to be provided to 30 September
At the moment, I reserve costs.

I stand the current suit into the Master's list on 26 September 1997. I do not consider myself part heard in the motion brought by the defendant.
 * * * 
