

R versus C P K No. 60330/94 Criminal Law - Incest - Crown Duty of Disclosure -
Judge's summing-up [1995] NSWSC 15 (29 August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1), CLARKE(2) AND HULME(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 21 June 1995 #DATE 21:6:1995 #ADD 29:8:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    S. J. Odgers 
Solicitor for the
Appellant:   T.A. Murphy 
Counsel for the Respondent:   R D Cogswell 
Solicitor for the Respondent:  S E O'Connor
ORDER Appeal allowed.  Convictions quashed.  New trial in all three counts on which appellant had been convicted.
JUDGE1
GLEESON
CJ: Although this appeal raises questions of importance, we are in a position to give judgment immediately. We have been assisted by comprehensive written submissions by counsel, and by some concessions that have been very properly made by the Crown.
For the reasons I am about to give, we are of the view that the convictions should be quashed and that there should be a new trial on all of the counts in respect of which the appellant was convicted.
On 31 May 1994 the appellant appeared for trial before his
Honour Judge
Smyth QC and a jury in the District Court at Coffs Harbour. He was charged with four charges, the first two concerning his daughter S and the third and fourth concerning his daughter R. In the case of each of the four charges it was alleged that the appellant had engaged in serious sexual misconduct. The alleged offences occurred between 1 February 1981 and 31 December 1983; that is, between ten and twelve years before the date on which the appellant was standing his trial. The evidence of the two complainants was that, although the conduct had occurred between 1981 and 1983, they had first remembered it on dates between 1990 and 1993.
The first charge against the appellant was that between 1 February 1981 and 30 September 1981 he carnally knew his daughter
S, she then being under the age of ten years. The second charge was that between 1 January 1982 and 30
September 1982 the appellant had sexual intercourse with his daughter S without her consent, knowing that she was not consenting, she then being under the age of sixteen years. The third charge was that, between 30 November 1982 and 1 February 1983, the appellant assaulted his daughter R and at the time of the assault committed an act of indecency upon her, she then being under the age of sixteen years. The fourth charge was that between 30 November 1982 and December 1983 the appellant had sexual intercourse with his daughter R without her consent knowing that she was not consenting, she being then under the age of sixteen years.
The jury found the appellant guilty of the first, third and fourth charges and not guilty of the second charge. The appellant was sentenced to a lengthy term of imprisonment, the details of which are not presently material. He appeals against his conviction in respect of counts one, three and four.
 .
The incident the subject of the first charge was alleged to involve vaginal intercourse between the appellant and his daughter S which took place in her bedroom. The incident the subject of the second charge, in respect of which the appellant was acquitted, was alleged to involve anal intercourse.
That was said to have taken place in a chicken shed. The incident the subject of the third charge was said to involve the appellant indecently fondling the breasts of his daughter R on a particular occasion. The incident the subject of the fourth charged involved alleged indecency whilst the appellant was rubbing oil over the body of his daughter R.
All of the alleged incidents occurred in circumstances where the only persons present were the complainant and the appellant. It goes without saying that the reliability of the complainants was of central importance at the trial.
The circumstances under which the complainants came to remember the sexual abuse to which they said they had been subjected were of importance to an assessment of their reliability.
R was born in January 1970 and S was born in October 1971. Both complainants told the court that they had repressed or blocked out their memory of the events the subject of the charges, until some time after mid
It may be not without significance that at about that time the marriage between the appellant and his wife was breaking up.
The evidence of R was that in about October 1990 she remembered what her father had done to her on the occasions the subject of the third and fourth charges. At about that time she had a conversation with S in which S told R that she felt uncomfortable in the presence of her father. There was some difference between the evidence of S and the evidence of R as to what they said to one another about R's recollection of what her father had done to her, but it is not necessary for present purposes to explore that difference. It appears that R did not report to the police her recollection of the abuse, to which she said she had been subjected, until 1993.
S gave evidence that she first recollected the incident the subject of the first charge in about April 1993. She did not recollect the incident the subject of the second charge until some months.
The circumstances in which S came to recollect the first incident were described by her in her evidence as follows. She went for treatment for tension and stress to a kiniesiologist named
Mr Holdanack. It seems that at some stage she told Mr Holdanack that she had been sexually abused. During the course of her treatment by him there occurred an incident when, as a result of his laying a hand upon her head in a certain manner, and her relaxing, she came to remember what her father had done to her in 1980 or 1981.
There is a degree of ambiguity in her evidence as to what she meant when she said that she recovered her memory. She said: "I had memory but it wasn't memory that I could put in a statement."
And later: "I hadn't felt safe before for the memory to come."
She gave evidence that she had sought treatment from a number of doctors for stomach upsets and related problems.
It emerged in evidence at the trial that in early 1991 S had been on a trip to India and nearby countries but that evidence was treated as being of significance for the purpose of exploring the detail of exactly what passed between R and S when they discussed the father's alleged misconduct towards R.
Part of the evidence concerned an affectionate communication which S had sent to her father in the course of the journey.
Nothing emerged in evidence at the trial to suggest that it was during the trip to India that S had recovered her memory of her abuse at the hands of her father.
The evidence at the trial was that she recovered her memory of that matter in 1993.
In due course the appellant was convicted of the first, third and fourth charges and came for sentence. During the sentencing proceedings the Crown
Prosecutor tendered in evidence, presumably for the purpose of showing the impact upon the victims of the father's conduct, a number of medical reports.
Those reports had not previously been disclosed to counsel for the appellant.
They included a report by a psychiatrist, Dr Davidson, which contained the following statement: "S ... described the realisation of alleged sexual assault by her father two years previously in 1991 after an anxiety provoking train trip in India where she felt isolated and vulnerable. She stated that she began recalling incidents of sexual assault from an early age and subsequently sought counselling and psychotherapeutic therapy from psychotherapists and counsellors first in Melbourne and subsequently in Perth.
The report also showed that she went to a body called the Incest Survivors
Association.
As will appear from what has already been said, if Dr Davidson were correct in recording that S told him that she first recovered her memory of alleged sexual assault by her father during the Indian train trip in 1991, that would have been very important material upon which counsel for the defence might have wished to have cross-examined her. As I indicated, that information was not disclosed during the course of the trial.
The reports tendered on sentencing also contain other matter which might well have been regarded by trial counsel as relevant to the testing of the reliability of the evidence of the complainants. A report of Dr Davidson, for example, said that S: "... showed evidence of serious psychological and emotional problems. Her clinical presentation ... was similar to that of individuals who ... are likely to exhibit a thought disorder with paranoid features. The thought processes of such individuals is often described as fragmented, autistic, tangential, circumstantial, and loose. Their thought content is likely to be bizarre and may include paranoid delusions."
It requires no elaboration to explain the potential significance of material like that for the purpose of cross-examination of a complainant in a case such as the present.
Of course, if counsel had had that material available to him during the course of the trial, he would have been confronted with difficult tactical choices to make. A person appearing for someone charged with child sexual abuse would have to deal very carefully with information that the complainant had presented herself at the Incest Survivors
Association in a psychologically distraught manner. However, it is argued, in my view correctly, on behalf of the appellant that the failure of the Crown to disclose the existence of that material to counsel for the appellant, during the course of the trial, involved a miscarriage of justice.
The principles concerning the obligation on the part of the prosecuting authorities to disclose relevant material to the defendants are discussed, for example, in Reg versus Maguire  <case>; [(1972) VR 758] the court in the course of referring to a
Privy Council decision, said, at 761: "In our opinion the decision of their Lordships amounts to no more on this aspect than that in the special circumstances disclosed the prior statement should as a matter of practice, and in the interests of justice, have been produced and that the failure to produce it coupled with the other defects in the trial involved a miscarriage of justice in the circumstances of that particular case."
In my view the same applies in the present case to the material which was only disclosed to the defence in the course of the sentencing proceedings.
I turn now to what I would respectfully regard as other defects in this trial.
The first charge against the appellant was an offence commonly described as carnal knowledge. The offence was of such a nature, and was committed at such a time that, as the Crown concedes, it was not affected by the provision of s405C of the Crimes Act. It follows that a warning of the kind referred to in Kelleher versus The Queen <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 534] should have been given to the jury.
As to the third and fourth charges, there was a very long delay between the time of the alleged events and the time when the appellant was first given an opportunity to comment upon and contest the charges. Furthermore, depending upon the precise view that might be taken of the evidence concerning the circumstances in which the complainants, to put it neutrally, came to have their memories of the events the subject of the charges, there was additional reason for giving an appropriate warning to the jury. The kind of warning to which I refer is what is referred to in the case of Longman versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) CLR 79] at 91.
The only observation made by the learned trial judge that could possibly be regarded as a warning was the following: "In relation to S there is no corroboration of her allegation. Now it does not mean that a jury cannot convict when there is no corroboration but when there is no corroboration your own common sense would indicate to you that you have to look very carefully at the evidence because it is one word against another word. So it is a matter you will have to give serious consideration to."
I take that observation to mean little, if anything, more than that, bearing in mind the onus of proof, and the fact that what was involved was a consideration of oath against oath, the jury should look very carefully at the evidence. That does not appear to me to approach the level of warning required by any of the authorities to which reference has earlier been made.
It is true that trial counsel made no application for further warnings or directions and in fairness to the trial judge this fact should be mentioned.
However, in the circumstances of the present case the need for a warning was fundamental and leave should be given to rely on this ground of appeal under the provision of r4 of the [Criminal Appeal Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/).
Of course, at the new trial which the court proposes to order, the precise warning or warnings to be given will depend upon the evidence which emerges at the trial. It may well be that, at a new trial, there will be a much closer examination of the medical and other issues involved in recovered memories than occurred before Smyth DCJ. Consideration will also need to be given to what, if any, evidence is capable of being regarded as corroborating either or both of the complainants.
A further serious defect in the trial arises from the circumstance that no instructions were given to the jury as to the use which it could make, in considering the Crown case against the appellant in relation to the charges concerning one of the complainants, of the evidence led in relation to the charges concerning the other complainant. In this respect, the case is very similar to that of R versus Mitchell (CCA, unreported, April 1995). The jury were left without assistance as to the approach that they should take in evaluating, for example, the evidence of S, towards the fact that they had before them evidence of misconduct towards R. It was incumbent upon the trial judge to give them appropriate directions in that respect. The nature of the competing possibilities is discussed in the judgment in R versus Mitchell.
Counsel for the appellant concedes that in the event that this court should quash these convictions there should be a new trial. Plainly it is a matter for a jury to decide whether the evidence of the complainants warrants a conviction of the appellant.
The evidence which the complainants gave at the trial, if accepted, proves the guilt of the appellant of these offences but of course would have to be evaluated by a jury properly instructed following a trial, free from problems of the kind already mentioned. Counsel also accepts that if the court is in favour of the appellant on the points which I have discussed, it is not necessary to deal with any of the other grounds of appeal.
I would propose that the following orders should be made. The appeal should be allowed, the convictions and sentences should be quashed and there should be a new trial in respect of each of the three counts on which the appellant was convicted.
The orders of the court will be as I have proposed.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA: I agree.
JUDGE3
HULME J: I also agree.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/15.html  
