

Environment Protection Authority versus Sydney Water Corporation Limited Matter
No 60426/97 [1997] NSWSC 658 (17 December 1997) 
Environment Protection Authority versus Sydney Water Corporation Limited /97 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Ireland J, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v SYDNEY WATER CORPORATION LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a case stated by Talbot J of the Land and Environment Court pursuant to [s5A(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5a.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) . 
The Environment Protection Authority (EPA) has commenced a prosecution against
Sydney Water Corporation Limited (Sydney Water) in the summary jurisdiction of the Land and Environment Court. It is alleged that, in March 1995, Sydney
Water contravened Condition L4 of Licence No. 000378 issued pursuant to s17D(9) of the Pollution Control Act 1970 , and thereby committed an offence against the Environmental Offences and Penalties Act 1989 . The proceedings are part heard before Talbot J.

The prosecution arises out of an occurrence, in March 1995, following extensive rainfalls which resulted in unusually high flows of water into
Sydney Water's sewage treatment plant at Manly. For technical reasons explained in the stated case, the result was that substantial quantities of raw sewage were discharged into the sea at the shoreline.

Condition L4 of the licence under the Pollution Control Act 1970 which was held by Sydney Water provided: "Pollution control equipment, fuel burning equipment or industrial plant installed in or on the premises must be maintained in an efficient condition and operated in a proper and efficient manner." 
The EPA, before the commencement of the hearing, provided particulars of the alleged breach of Condition L4, specifying the respects in which Sydney Water had failed to maintain industrial plant in an efficient condition. Those particulars were provided on the basis that the sewage treatment plant was regarded "as a single entity wherein the free flow of liquids is interrupted by individual items of plant." There were five items said not to have been maintained in an efficient condition. They were, first, certain identified penstocks, second, certain identified penstock controls, third, an item described as "7-Section Siphon and stopboards", fourth, a particular raw sewage pump, and fifth, electrical control equipment which powered the raw sewage pumps. The particulars also specified the respects in which those five items had not been maintained in an efficient condition. It is unnecessary to go into the detail of that.

In a preliminary ruling, which has not been challenged, Talbot J held that it was appropriate for the prosecution to be conducted upon the basis that only a single offence was being alleged, and rejected a submission that the alleged failure in respect of each of the above items must be regarded as a separate offence. In his ruling on that point, Talbot J said: "Evidence of lack of maintenance in respect of any one or more components of the plant might be used to show that the industrial plant as a whole was not maintained in an efficient condition.

It is open for the prosecution to establish that the individual items ...
form part of the industrial plant which is subject to the obligation created by condition L4. (The prosecutor) particularised the allegation of breach of condition L4 by identifying parts of the industrial plant which the prosecution claims were not maintained in breach of the condition." 
Charging a single offence in such circumstances is consistent with authority and practice in criminal cases. (See, for example, Director of Public
Prosecutions versus Merriman [[1973] AC 584]; R versus Hamzy [(1994) 74 A Crim R 341).] 
When the substantive hearing commenced, EPA led evidence which established a prima facie case of failure to maintain in an efficient condition four of the five items particularised. However, in its case in chief, EPA did not succeed in making out a prima facie case of failure to maintain in an efficient condition one of the five items, that is to say, the 7-Section Siphon and stopboards. We were told in the course of argument that the reason for this was that a document which was relied upon by EPA as containing an admission was held to relate to a time later than the events the subject of the charge, and therefore to be inadmissible in evidence.

At the end of the prosecution case, senior counsel for Sydney Water sought and obtained from Talbot J a ruling to the effect that Sydney Water could thereafter no longer place any reliance upon the particular relating to the -Section Siphon and stopboards.

It is that ruling which is the subject of the stated case.

It was common ground that, having regard to the evidence which had been called in the prosecution case, Sydney Water could not maintain a submission that there was no case to answer. EPA had made out a prima facie case of failure to maintain in an efficient condition four of the five specified items. However, senior counsel for Sydney Water was anxious to protect his client against the possibility that, in the course of the defence case, there might emerge evidence which would support the particular relating to the 7-Section Siphon and stopboards. It seems that he was especially concerned that one or more of his witnesses might be cross-examined about that subject. It should be said, however, that to the extent to which such a concern was valid, there is no reason why it should have been limited to information that might emerge in cross-examination. Exactly the same problem would arise if, for example, it was desired to tender in the defence case a document which contained some material supportive of the defence, but which also contained an admission in relation to the 7-Section Siphon and stopboards.

There is nothing unusual about a situation in which, in criminal proceedings, the prosecution case is strengthened by material which emerges in the defence case. It happens all the time. It is not inconsistent with either an individual's right to silence, or the prosecution's onus of proof, that, in deciding whether to give evidence, an accused may be confronted with the dilemma that part of his evidence might assist the defence, but another part might assist the prosecution.

Talbot J accepted the submissions made by Sydney Water, and ruled accordingly.
He did so on the basis of what he described as fairness to the accused. There is nothing in his Honour's reasons for judgment, or in the stated case, which suggests that the unfairness was based upon anything other than the general proposition that, if the Crown has failed in its case in chief to establish one particular of an alleged offence, it should not be permitted, by cross- examination or otherwise, to seek to rely on material in support of such a particular which only emerges in the defence case. That is the basis upon which the matter was argued at first instance and in this court. It is not suggested, for example, that there was some unfairness arising out of surprise, or failure to give the defence an opportunity to meet an allegation.
It was simply asserted, and accepted, that it would be inherently unfair to permit the prosecution to rely upon a particular which it had failed to establish in its case in chief.

The stated case, after reciting the matters set out above, asks the following questions: "a) Did I err in law in holding that the prosecutor could no longer rely upon particulars 1(a)(iii) and 2(c) in exhibit B? b) Did I err in law in holding in the exercise of the Court's discretion that the prosecutor could no longer rely upon particulars 1(a)(iii) and 2(c) in exhibit B? c) Would I err in law in holding that: the prosecutor is not allowed to cross-examine on whether the 7-Section
Siphon and stopboards leaked? and the prosecutor is not allowed to rely on the fact that the 7-Section
Siphon and stopboards leaked where the prosecutor's cross-examination on other particularised items might reveal that fact?" 
Particulars 1(a)(iii) and 2(c) relate to the 7-Section Siphon and stopboards.

Although the decision of Talbot J was discretionary, the basis upon which he exercised his discretion emerges clearly from the stated case, and the documents attached to it, and was not in dispute in argument. It was that his
Honour took the view, as a matter of principle, that when, in a criminal proceeding, the prosecution fails in its case in chief to establish a particular of the offence charged, then it should not be permitted to seek to rely on material which later emerges in support of that particular.

This view, with respect, is heterodox. It involves a misunderstanding of the nature and function of particulars.

In a criminal proceeding, what the prosecution is required to establish are the essential elements of the offence charged.

It is often appropriate, in order to provide an accused with fair notice of the case to be met, and in the interests of efficiency and economy in the conduct of the proceedings, for the prosecution to be obliged to provide further and better particulars of the allegations made in the charge, whether the charge take the form of a count in an indictment, or an allegation in a summons (Stanton versus Abernathy [(1990) 19 NSWLR 656).] 
There may be circumstances arising out of the nature of the evidence in a particular case, or the manner in which the case has been conducted, which will make it unfair or oppressive to an accused person to permit the Crown to depart from its particulars. Subject to that qualification, however, what the
Crown needs to establish in order to obtain a conviction are the essential facts alleged in the indictment, or the summons. Failure to establish a particular is not fatal (R versus VHP CCA unreported 7 July 1997).

The single offence alleged in the present case is a contravention of Condition
L4. According to the particulars, the prosecution relies upon five aspects of the failure to maintain the sewage plant in an efficient condition. In order to succeed, the prosecution only needs to establish one of those aspects. It was consistent with the requirements of fairness, and of the orderly conduct of the litigation, that the prosecution should be required to state, in advance of the hearing, the aspects of failure to maintain plant in an efficient condition upon which it intended to rely. Fairness to Sydney Water, however, does not require that the prosecution should be precluded from relying upon evidence which may emerge during the course of the defence case.
Nor does it require that a distinction be drawn between evidence which strengthens the Crown case in respect of a particular that was made out to a prima facie level in chief, and evidence relating to a particular which the
Crown did not succeeded in establishing to that level in chief. There is no basis in legal principle for such an artificial distinction.

The ruling of Talbot J on this point was, upon analysis, inconsistent with his earlier pre-trial ruling that EPA was entitled to proceed upon the basis that what was alleged against Sydney Water constituted only one offence. The corollary of that ruling was that the allegations in relation to individual pieces of equipment, considered separately, were mere particulars, and not essential elements of the charge. Ultimate success for the prosecution does not depend upon EPA establishing the particular in relation to the 7-Section
Siphon and stopboards at any stage, let alone before the end of the prosecution case.

Question (c) asked in the stated case is hypothetical, and should not be answered. Furthermore, the issue, if and when it does arise, will not necessarily be limited to cross-examination. For the reasons earlier mentioned, there may be a variety of circumstances in which something will happen in the course of the defence case to provide material upon which EPA could rely in support of its allegation about the 7-Section Siphon and stopboards. Furthermore, it is impossible to say in advance whether a particular line of cross-examination of the kind referred to in question (c) would or would not be unfair. However, it would not be unfair for the reason so far relied upon by Sydney Water.

I propose that the questions in the stated case should be answered as follows: "a) Yes.
 b) Yes.
 c) This question, being hypothetical, and general in form, should not be answered." 
The matter should be remitted to the Land and Environment Court to be dealt with according to law.
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v 
SYDNEY WATER CORPORATION LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
IRELAND J: I agree with the answers to the questions posed in the Stated case by the Chief Justice, for the reasons given by him. 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v 
SYDNEY WATER CORPORATION LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
BRUCE J: I agree with the answers to the questions posed in the Stated case proposed by the Chief Justice, for the reasons given by him. 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v 
SYDNEY WATER CORPORATION LIMITED 
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - PARTICULARS - Criminal prosecution for an environmental offence - prosecution charged one offence and gave a number of particulars - at close of prosecution case one particular not made out to prima facie level - judge rules prosecution cannot seek to establish particular from evidence emerging in defence case - HELD - ruling erroneous - nature of particulars considered. 
O R D E R S Questions in Stated Case answered as follows: 
Q Did I err in law in holding that the prosecutor could no longer rely upon particulars 1(a)(iii) and 2(c) in exhibit B? 
A Yes.

Q Did I err in law in holding in the exercise of the Court's discretion that the prosecutor could no longer rely on particulars 1(a)(iii) and 2(c) in exhibit B? 
A Yes.

Q Would I err in law in holding that: the prosecutor is not allowed to cross-examine on whether the 7-Section
Siphon and stopboards leaked? and the prosecutor is not allowed to rely on the fact that the 7-Section
Siphon and stopboards leaked where the prosecutor's cross-examination on other particularised items might reveal that fact? 
A This question, being hypothetical, and general in form, should not be answered.
 Matter remitted to Land and Environment Court to be dealt with according to law.
 * * * 
