

Environment Protection Authority versus Cleary Bros (Bombo) Pty Ltd Matter No
Cca 60498/97 [1998] NSWSC 153 (20 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 May 1998 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY versus CLEARY BROS (BOMBO) PTY LTD /97 April 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Simpson J, Bell AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
ENVIRONMENTAL LAW - LICENCE - AIR POLLUTION - Licence granted to use scheduled premises in an operation causing air pollution - condition added to licence purporting to control noise pollution from quarrying operations conducted nearby - finding of fact that land on which quarrying was conducted was physically separate - finding that such land was not part of the premises the subject of the air pollution licence - conditions held invalid - questions of law stated - HELD - no error of law; the issue was essentially one of fact. 
O R D E R S 
Questions as to whether there was an error of law answered in the negative. 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Pursuant to [s5A(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5a.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) Bignold J of the Land and Environment Court has submitted two questions of law said to arise in these proceedings. 
The questions of law arose in the following circumstances. The respondent,
Cleary Bros (Bombo) Pty Ltd, occupies an area of about ten hectares of land having a frontage to Princes Highway, Albion Park Rail. On that land there are conducted a number of activities. Those activities, which were found by
Bignold J to be separated from each other, were as follows: A quarry from which is extracted basalt rock.
 Quarry stock piles and a crushing plant.
 A concrete batching plant.
 Transport workshops.
 A construction depot.
 A parking area.

The activities which are of present relevance are the quarry, the crushing plant and the concrete batching plant. In relation to those activities,
Bignold J found that the quarry supplies raw materials both for use in the crushing plant and the concrete batching plant and, in addition, to other consumers having no relationship to the respondent. The crushing plant in turn also receives materials from other quarry sources, and the product of the crushing plant is used in the concrete batching plant.

The quarry operations, although noisy required no licence from the Environment
Protection Authority, because they were not covered by the relevant provision of the Noise Control Act 1975 . We were informed that the reason for this was that, at the relevant time, no proclamation has been made pursuant to s17 of the Noise Control Act 1961 . On the other hand the crushing and batching operations, which emitted air pollution, required a licence by reason of the provisions of the Clean Air Act .

At the relevant time <case> of the Pollution Control Act 1973 provided as follows: "A person may apply to the Authority for a licence in respect of any one or more of the following: 
Scheduled premises or scheduled equipment within the meaning of the
Clean Air Act 1961.

The pollution of waters within the meaning of the [Clean Waters Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/).

A drain which discharges or is likely to be used for discharging any pollutants into any classified waters within the meaning of the [Clean Waters
Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/).

Scheduled premises within the meaning of the Noise Control Act 1975." 
Section 17D of the Pollution Control Act 1961 empowered the applicant to grant an application for a licence either subject to conditions or unconditionally. In exercising it's powers under the section the appellant was obliged to have regard to the pollution likely to be caused by the applicant for the licence, and the impact of that pollution on the environment.

The respondent made an application for a licence pursuant to the provisions of s17A(a). The form of application was not attached to the stated case, and the matter has been argued in this Court upon the basis that nothing in the application would assist the resolution of the questions which have been raised.

The appellant issued a licence to the respondent, and in so doing imposed, or purported to impose, a condition aimed at controlling the noise emanating from the respondent's quarry operation, in addition to various conditions aimed at controlling air pollution from the crushing and concrete batching operations.

The condition aimed at controlling the noise pollution from the quarry operations was condition L14. It is unnecessary for present purposes to examine the terms of this condition.

There was an alleged failure on the part of the respondent to comply with condition L14. A prosecution for breach of the condition was commenced in the
Land and Environment Court. The respondent took the point that condition L14 was beyond power and invalid. Bignold J upheld the point. The appellant then required the judge to submit questions of law for the consideration of this
Court.

The respondent required no licence in respect of its quarry operations, and applied for none. The respondent required a licence in respect of the crushing and concrete batching operations because of the air pollution they caused. An application was made pursuant to s17A(a) of the Pollution Control Act.
Pursuant to s17D of the Act the appellant was then empowered to grant such a licence subject to conditions.

Bignold J held that the relevant scheduled premises for the purposes of s17A(a) constituted that portion of the land on which the crushing and concrete batching operations were conducted, together with that portion of the land necessary for or ancillary to those uses, such as the access way from the highway, the transport workshops, construction depots and parking areas.

His Honour held that the scheduled premises did not include that physically separate part of the land on which quarry operations were conducted. He held that the appellant had no power under s17D of the Pollution Control Act to impose, as a condition of the licence rendered necessary by the Clean Air
Act in respect of the crushing and concrete batching operation, a condition relating to the noise emanating from the quarry operations carried on on land which was not part of the scheduled premises.

An important aspect in the reasoning of Bignold J was his findings that the premises on which the quarry operations were conducted were physically separate from the premises on which the crushing and concrete batching operation were conducted and that the former did not constitute part of the scheduled premises in respect of which the licence under s17D was applied for and granted. Although, in reaching this conclusion, Bignold J had to take account of relevant principles of law, and had to construe legislation and documents, the ultimate finding was essentially one of fact. It was substantially grounded upon his Honour's appreciation of the nature of the land occupied by the respondent and of the relationship between the various activities carried out upon this land. It is not within the jurisdiction of this Court, in dealing with proceedings of the kind presently before it to overrule such a finding of fact, and there is no question of law raised for our consideration which deals with any particular steps in the reasoning with which Bignold J came to that conclusion.

The questions of law submitted are as follows: "1 On the finding of fact set out above did I err in law in finding that condition L14 of licence number 55299 granted pursuant to the Pollution
Control Act 1970 was invalid? Notwithstanding my finding of fact referred to in paragraph 2 (o) above, did I err in law in finding that the only part of the defendant's landholding at Albion Park Rail which operates "scheduled premises" was that on which the crushing and concrete batching plants are erected?" 
The prescribed use classification under the licence granted to the respondents was "grinding and milling works". The finding of fact in paragraph 2(o) referred to in question 2 was in the following terms: "The only part of the defendant's landholding at Albion Park Rail used for grinding and milling works comprises the crushing plant and concrete batching plant." 
Both parties to the proceedings in this case agreed that it was convenient to approach the matter by dealing with question 2 first.

Before going to question 2, it should be mentioned that there was an additional ground for the decision of Bignold J referred to in question 1. The reasoning which forms a basis of that second ground has since been overtaken by amending legislation enacted by the New South Wales parliament following and in the light of the decision of Bignold J. Bignold J found that, quite apart from the issue concerning the identity and location of the scheduled premises, to which reference has already been made, there was a further reason why it was beyond the power of the appellant to impose condition L14 in the respondent's licence. Shortly stated, the reason was that, on the true construction of the relevant legislation, it was not within the powers of the
Authority to impose a condition seeking to regulate noise pollution in a licence made necessary by and granted by reason of the provisions of the
Clean Air Act 1961 . Amending legislation passed after the decision of
Bignold J is expressed in terms which would negate the effect of that aspect of his Honour's judgment. It is common ground that, in the event that this
Court is in favour of the respondent in relation to the first part of the reasoning of Bignold J, it is unnecessary for the Court to deal with the second aspect of the reasoning. In my view it would be inappropriate for the
Court to do so. Accordingly I return to that aspect of the case concerning the question of "scheduled premises".

As Mr Macfarlane QC, for the respondent, observed at the commencement of his submissions, the starting point of the reasons of Bignold J was the well established proposition that in a case such as the present the power of a licensing court to impose conditions is not unconfined; it is a power to impose conditions reasonably related to the licensing function being exercised. (See Allen Commercial Constructions Pty Ltd versus North Sydney
Municipal Council [(1970) 123 CLR 690]; Newberry
District Council versus Secretary of State For The Environment [(1981) 1 AER ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281981%29%201%20All%20ER%20731 "View LawCiteRecord" ); Protem (Holdings) versus Environment Protection Authority (1976) 40 Local
Government Reports of Australia 189.) 
In the present case there was no attempt in the licence that was issued to the respondent to define the premises the subject of the licence. All that appeared was the address of the land occupied by the appellant. However, as was noted earlier, the licence contained a statement of what was called "prescribed use classification". That statement was in the following terms, "Grinding and milling portion processing more than 250 tonnes per annum". That was the use which attracted the need for the licence that was applied for and granted.

The premises were scheduled premises because they were premises being used for grinding and milling works within the meaning of the Clean Air Act. (See
Clean Air Act ss10, 11 and the Schedule.) 
The critical portion of the reasoning of Bignold J was expressed as follows, including some references to decided cases which it is not necessary to repeat: "In rating and town planning laws it is often necessary and legitimate to distinguish between uses of the whole or different parts of land, even where there is unity in ownership or occupation of the land, unit or premises. So here (where the question is what relevant premises are used for "scheduled premises") it is both necessary and legitimate to determine what part or parts of the defendant's landholding is really "premises used for the prescribed facilities or works" (which is the exclusive quality which creates "scheduled premises" within the meaning of the Clean Air Act 1961). For the reasons given
I would hold that "the premises" are those parts of the landholding which are used for the prescribed facilities and works which include not only the parts physically so used but also parts necessary for or ancillary to those eg the access way from the highway, the transport workshops, construction depots and parking areas. However, I would hold and so find on the evidence that the "premises" do not relevantly include that part of the defendant's landholding that constitutes the quarry".

Insofar as this conclusion involves matters of factual judgment it is not a subject for reconsideration by this Court.

In the course of argument it appeared that the only issue of law identified on behalf of the appellant arose out of the proposition, to which counsel for the appellant adhered, that, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, it was as a matter of law inevitable that Bignold J should have found that the scheduled premises included the quarry. In my view, that proposition is untenable.

It is not difficult to imagine a variety of facts or circumstances in which, to use the words of Bignold J, it may be both necessary and legitimate to embark upon a fact finding exercise for the purpose of identifying what are relevantly the licensed premises in the case of a licence such as that with which we are here concerned.

I see no error of law in the approach taken by Bignold J, although I can well understand that there might have been room for argument at first instance as to whether his Honour's factual appreciation of the situation was appropriate.
That, however, is not a matter for this Court.

Once it is concluded that as a matter of law it was open to Bignold J to conclude that the quarry was not part of the scheduled premises for the purposes of the licence then it does not seem to be disputed that it was open to Bignold J also to hold that condition L14 was invalid. Counsel for the appellant informed the Court that she accepted that, if Bignold J was correct in his conclusion that the quarry was not part of the scheduled premises for the purpose of the licence, then he was also correct in holding that condition
L14 was invalid.

I would propose that the questions would be answered as follows: Question 1: "No" 
Question 2: "No" 
Is there anything further either counsel wants to say before we deal with the question of costs? 
KELLY: No, your Honour.

MACFARLANE: No, your Honour.

GLEESON CJ: In the light of the decision of this Court in Environment Protection Authority versus Cook [(1996) 88 ACrimR 84] it appears that the Court has no power to make an order as to costs. 
The matter should be returned to the Land and Environment Court to be dealt with according to law.

SIMPSON J: I agree. 
BELL AJ: I also agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed. * * * 
