

Sas Trustee Corporation versus State of New South Wales Matter No Ca 40778/97 [1998] NSWSC 164 (24 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 June 1998 
SAS TRUSTEE CORPORATION versus THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
CA 40778/97 April 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Hodgson CJ in Eq 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: SUPREME COURT - BRYSON J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40778/97 
DELIVERED: 24 APRIL 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 24 APRIL 1998 
PARTIES: SAS TRUSTEE CORPORATION V THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P; PRIESTLEY JA; HODGSON CJ in Eq 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: T F BATHURST QC; V KERR 
Respondent: F M DOUGLAS QC; PETER BRERETON 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: FREEHILL HOLLINGDALE & PAGE 
Respondent: MALLESONS STEPHEN JAQUES 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 15 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: It is practical to give judgment forthwith. This case has been expedited and the Court is in a position to adopt the reasoning of Bryson J which effectively addresses most of the arguments which have been advanced for the appellant. Indeed I do not think that the trial judge's reasoning could be better expressed were we to take time in an endeavour to do so.

The proceedings relate to a dispute as to the criteria to be adopted by the parties and nominated valuers in relation to the rent review of a lease. The lease commenced in 1994 and created a term of twelve years commencing on January 1995 (with three successive options for renewal for further terms of five years). It covers twenty five floors and a secure area in the Governor
Macquarie Tower, Sydney. The rent reserved, referred to in the lease as the minimum rent, was $13,224,7891 per annum and in the original term there were to be five rent review dates occurring two-yearly, the first being 1 January
At or about the commencement of the lease the lessor made an incentive payment to the lessee of $68 million.

The procedure for rent review involves notices, negotiation in good faith and the appointment of valuers. At this stage the two nominated valuers are endeavouring to determine jointly the rent applicable to the first review.

Detailed provisions in Part 2 of the Lease state the meaning of "current annual market rental value" and control the manner in which the determination is to be made. The determination is to be final and binding on the parties (cl .7(b)) and the valuers must comply with cl 2.11 (cl 2.7(c)). This is subject to a qualification imposed by clause 2.14 as regards the Review Date for the tenth anniversary of the commencement date of the Lease.

Clause 2.11 should be set out, emphasising certain parts: .11 Criteria to be taken into account on Rent Review 
The expression "current annual market rental value" means the best rent that can be reasonably obtained for the Premises by a willing lessor from a willing lessee and must be determined by having due regard to the following criteria: without limiting the criteria that may be taken into account, there must be taken into account other current annual market rental values actually being paid or payable by other occupiers for comparable premises both within and outside the Complex whether those values arise from the letting of vacant space, the renegotiating of rent upon the termination of a previous lease or from rent reviews; notwithstanding clause 2.11(a) the Lessor, Lessee, Valuer and Nominee must take no account of (meaning there must be disregarded and ignored for all purposes): the value of any improvements or fixtures erected or installed at the
Lessee's expense which the Lessee is permitted to remove at the termination of the Lease; any deleterious condition of the Premises if that condition results from any breach of any provision of this Lease by the Lessee; any rental, fee or moneys received under any sublease or other subtenancy agreement or occupational arrangement for the Premises; and the effect of any abatement, lessor finished fitout, concession, incentive, inducement or other allowance allowed, granted or paid (or likely to be allowed, granted or paid) to secure a lessee or occupier or any special rent agreed to be any lessor to assist a cash flow problem of any lessee or occupier (as it is expressly agreed that the Lessee is to pay the face rental current in the market, not the effective rental after incentives are taken into account); and where any rental is being determined by reference to a rate per square metre per annum or otherwise on an area basis for an area greater than one
Level, the Minimum Rent must be determined in relation to the Net Lettable
Area of each Level (ie the Minimum Rent will be determined on a floor by floor basis, not total area).

So far as relevant cl 2.14 states: .14 Clause 2.11(b)(4) and 2.12 not to apply in certain circumstances 
Clause 2.11(b)(4) will not apply in the determination of the current annual market rental value of the Premises pursuant to this Part 2, for the
Review Date referred to in Item 2(5), being the tenth anniversary of the commencement date of the Lease granted pursuant to the Agreement for Lease (ie for the eleventh year of the Lease), the intention being that incentives and the other matters referred to in clause 2.11(b)(4) must be taken into account.
 
At the trial the parties called expert evidence in an attempt to establish the meaning of key words in cl 2.11(b) as a matter of usage. The learned trial judge concluded that he should interpret the Lease according to his understanding of the ordinary usage of words having regard to the context in
Pt II and the Lease. Neither party's case was, in his view, assisted by any finding based on the evidence of the valuers. This finding was challenged in the Notice of Appeal but that challenge has not been pressed.

The parties agreed upon the issues and these were addressed in the form of questions. The answers to those questions were translated into the following declarations: (a) The nominated valuers and the determining valuer, in determining the "current annual market rental value" of the Premises and in having due regard to the criteria set forth in Clause 2.11(a) and (b) of lease 0415695 ("the
Lease") are not required to have regard to leases of comparable premises within the meaning of Clause 2.11(a) of the Lease only when any such lease contains provision for an abatement, lessor financed fit-out, concession, incentive, inducement or other allowance allowed, granted or paid (or likely to be allowed, granted or paid) to secure a lessee or occupier or any special rent agreed to by any lessor to assist a cashflow problem of any lessee or occupier (hereinafter referred to as "incentives"); or incentives are otherwise provided at the time of entering into the lease.
 (b) The nominated valuers and the determining valuer, in determining the "current annual market rental value" of the Premises and in having due regard to the criteria set forth in Clause 2.11(a) and (b) of the Lease must have regard to all leases of comparable premises within the meaning of Clause .11(a) regardless of whether those leases contain provisions for the payment of incentives or incentives are otherwise provided at the time of entering into the Lease.

A The nominated valuers and the determining valuer are neither entitled nor bound to adjust the rental payable in respect of leases of comparable premises within the meaning of clause 2.11(a) in respect of which there is no provision for incentives or in respect of which incentives are not otherwise provided at the time of entering into the lease by assuming that incentives then current in the market had been paid or allowed to the lessee and as a consequence the rental payable by the lessee to the lessor is a rental arrived at after incorporating the value of such incentives.
 The expression "face rental" as used in Clause 2.11(b)(4) of the Lease is a reference to the rent agreed between the lessor and lessee stated on the face of the lease, whether or not incentives are provided for in any such lease or are otherwise provided at the time of entry into the lease.
 The expression "effective rental" as used in Clause 2.11(b)(4) does mean the real underlying rental or rental worth of comparable premises after adjustment of the face rental (as that expression is used in the Lease) for any incentives.

A The phrase "face rental current in the market" in clause 2.11(b)(4) does not mean the rental incorporating incentives current in the market in respect of comparable premises.
 Clause 2.11(b)(4) of the Lease neither requires nor entitles the nominated valuers and determining valuer under the Lease to give greater weight to leases which contain provisions for the payment of incentives or where incentives are otherwise provided at the time of entering into the lease. The incentives must be disregarded and when they are disregarded, the weight given to leases with them will not be distinguished from the weight given to leases without them.
 Clause 2.11 of the Lease neither requires nor entitles the nominated valuers and determining valuer under the Lease to assume that the "willing lessee" (as that expression is used in Clause 2.11 of the Lease) will receive incentives as part of the hypothetical leasing transaction.
 Clause 2.11 of the Lease neither requires nor entitles the nominated valuers and determining valuer under the Lease to take into account any incentives which may have been received by the Plaintiff at the time of entering into the Lease.

The learned trial judge's reasoning turns, essentially, upon textual considerations. Because I am respectfully in full agreement with this reasoning - and its force in dictating the outcome of the proceedings - I shall set out the relevant passages from pp 6, 10-11, 20-21 and 23-26 of the judgment of Bryson J.

On general principles an incentive will not necessarily lead a valuer to make an adjustment for a determination of market rent. A small incentive may be nominal and have no bearing on rental valuation, while a large incentive may conceivably be of a capital nature and have no bearing on the market rental valuation for that reason. These general principles do not apply to a rent review. Under cl.2.14(a) the incentives must be taken into account and it is not left as a valuing question to decide whether they have a bearing on current annual market rental value and should be taken into account for that reason. Under cl.2.11 they must be ignored for all purposes.

The provision in cl.2.11 to the effect that the current annual market rental value "... must be determined by having due regard to the following criteria ..." means, in my opinion, that valuing principles which would lead to consideration of matters inconsistent with the criteria do not apply. "Having due regard" to the stated criteria requires the exclusion of regard for principles inconsistent with the stated criteria even if those principles might otherwise be of great importance. It would not in my view be correct to hold that the imperative requirement to have due regard the stated criteria left any room for having regard to inconsistent criteria. ...

The second parenthesis in para 2.11(b)(4) has an importance which is not well shown by the manner in which cl.2.11 is set out. Notwithstanding the way in which the expressions are arranged, the parenthesis is, in my opinion, not a qualification of the words immediately preceding it in subpara(b)(4); it stands at a higher level of statement of which the subparagraphs including (4) are particularisations. The words and ideas in this parenthesis show that it is not in its true meaning subsidiary to the subject of incentives of which no account is to be taken with which subpara.(4) deals. The express agreement that the lessee is to pay the face rental current in the market, not the effective rental after incentives are taken into account is an agreement of the same level of importance as the two provisions which introduce cl.2.11 by stating a definition of "current annual market rental value" and prescribing criteria for its determination. The agreement in the parenthesis governs cl.2.11 and every provision in Pt.2 relating to what is to be determined on a rent review (except at the tenth-year review). In doing so they introduce the expressions "face rental" and "effective rental" which are not found elsewhere in Pt.2 and are pitched at a different and less technical level of expression than that found elsewhere. They seem to be a bit of layman's language with an unfortunate resonance of a well-known constitutional provision, perhaps sharing with it the characteristic of late interpolation.
 ...

The defendant's counsel observed that the words in parenthesis are positive, the only positive criterion in a series of negatives. He contended that the words in parenthesis explain what is intended by cl.2.11(b)(4). He contended that it can be inferred having regard to cl.2.14 that the parties to the lease took the view that the benefit of the incentives would be amortised over the first 10 years of the lease, and that this could only occur if rental were adjusted having regard to face rental in the sense of rental payable for comparable premises where tenants were provided with incentives to induce them to enter into the lease. I see that it is possible that the parties adopted the provisions now in question as part of some scheme to amortise incentives, but there is no necessary inference from the terms of Pt.2 that they had any such scheme in mind or framed their agreement to give effect to such a scheme.
The parties did not express any underlying purpose which would be served by cl.2.14(a) and I am unable to see clearly what that purpose was. There seem to be several possibilities, and taking incentives into account at the fifth review may be a compromise between two different positions; or it may be an attempt to correct any undue departure from actual market behaviour which may emerge in the course of a decade. It is foreseeably possible that over a long period periodic rent payments may become relatively less important than at present and that premiums or other capital payments may become more important.
 ...

Defendant's counsel suggested that the reference to due regard in cl.2.11 requires that greater weight be placed on premises leased on the incentive basis. In my opinion those words do not have that effect. 
Defendant's counsel contended that when "face rental current in the market" is used in contradistinction to "effective rental" it can only mean the rental in a transaction where incentives have been granted, as it is only in that way that the parenthetical words can be given work to do. He contended that the plaintiff's construction gives no operation to the words in parenthesis, and that the effect for which the plaintiff contends would be produced even if the parenthesis were not there. 
In the construction for which defendant's counsel contended the only way in the clause can be given effect is to construe it so as to require non- incentive-based leases to be disregarded. He pointed to the artificiality of requiring a valuer to treat as comparable premises leased on quite different bases without making any adjustment. The defendant's primary position was that non-face-rental premises are ignored wholly. A second and alternative position was that the valuer is entitled to adjust the effective rental to provide a face rental arrangement, but that he is not in doing that taking into account the effect of the incentive but that he is rather making an adjustment necessary for carrying out his task, and that this is impliedly permitted by the parenthesis.

In my view the expressions under consideration have to be understood according to the ordinary use of language in the context of Pt.2, there being no special meaning for them which has been established by evidence.
Significant matters in the context include provisions which establish that the determination is to be on a basis chosen by the parties which differs in several respects from the application of general valuation principles. Under subcl.(a) rental values actually being paid which arise from rent reviews are relevant, although they would not otherwise be so regarded when established by some expert or arbitral process. Exclusions 1 and 2 in subpara.(b) are not highly artificial but exclusion (c) is artificial because advantages from subtenancies could otherwise have some bearing on rental valuation. It is therefore not surprising to see when Exclusion 4 is reached that the natural meaning of the words used leads to an unusual and artificial outcome. 
The express terms of Pt.2 tell the reader nothing about the meaning of "face rental" current in the market except that it is "not the effective rental after incentives are taken into account." Implied in this is that the effective rental after incentives is the result of a process of calculation or evaluation and that process is not to be employed to ascertain the face rental. To my mind this shows that Mr McIntosh's meaning of "effective rental" cannot be applicable. 
My view substantially upholds submissions by plaintiff's counsel and gives the disputed expressions meanings close to what Mr Jones said they have in industry usage. My view is that the face rental is the rent on the face of the lease, which is the face rental whether or not there are any other advantages for which the lease or any other arrangement provides. Whatever those advantages are, they are not part of the face rental; this is so even if they too are on the face of the lease. This view is based on reading "face rental" in what I regard as its ordinary meaning as a piece of English. Further, looking at the other advantages to determine whether there are incentives so that the lease falls within Mr McIntosh's definition of face rental is a process expressly forbidden to the Lessor, Lessee, Valuer and Nominee by the opening words of subpara (b); incentives must be disregarded and ignored for all purposes, and those purposes include identifying the relevant transactions for comparison as well as perceiving what effect they have. 
I see no difficulty in the possibility that "effective rental" has a meaning in which the effective rental would equal the face rental if there were no incentives. This could not produce an internal inconsistency, as this would not be the excluded case. Nor do I see any real problem in the supposed surplusage: all words in cl.2.11(b)(4) have some part in understanding its meaning.

In my opinion, for any purpose relating to the rent review, the rental appearing on the face of a lease of comparable premises is relevant, and this is so whether or not the lease also contains provisions for an incentive or whether or not there is some collateral arrangement for an incentive. The existence of the incentive arrangement must be disregarded for all purposes, as if it had never been, and those purposes include the identification of the matters for comparison.

Senior counsel for the appellant advanced in various forms the submission that the valuers are only required to disregard incentive factors in comparable leases which are subject to incentive offsets, whether expressed on their face or negotiated dehors the Lease. In my view these submissions are answered in the passages I have already set out from the judgment below and which I respectfully adopt.

In this Court, as below, the appellant's case was sought to be bolstered by arguments based on context and reasonableness, as well as submissions touching practicality.

Some of these arguments were based on inferring a purpose lying behind the exclusion of incentive factors for the purposes of rent reviews during the first ten years of the Lease, and the categorical inclusion of such factors effected by cl 2.14(a) as regards the Review Date referred to in Item 2(5), being the tenth anniversary of the commencement date of the Lease. In particular, it was submitted that it could be inferred having regard to cl .14, that the parties to the Lease took the view that the benefit of the incentives would be amortised over the first ten years of the Lease. It is submitted that cl 2.14 shows that the parties intended that for the first ten years of the Lease the lessor was to have the benefit of having the rental calculated by reference to the rental of comparable premises where incentives were provided to tenants to enter into the Lease, whilst in the last two years an adjustment to arrive at what is described in cl 2.11(b)4 of the Lease as "effective rental" is to be made.

The learned trial judge found that he was unable to discern from the Lease, construed in context, the rationale for the exclusion and inclusion of incentives: see pp 7 and 20-21 of the judgment. I respectfully agree. I agree with the respondents's submission that the Court is not in a position to judge which construction makes commercial sense, at least beyond addressing the phenomenon (well known, I think, to the parties) of the difficulty of gathering evidence as to the existence or extent of incentive offsets in the market place. Cf Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd versus Crooks Michell Peacock Stewart
Pty Ltd (1992) 5 BPR [97415] at p 11,875. It is certainly not possible to infer the suggested amortisation reason for cl 2.14 and then use such inference as a means of construing cl 2.11 restrictively. Not only are the necessary indicators of such an implication absent. But more specifically, there is nothing to show that the appellant's construction would recoup the $68 million within the first ten years of the Lease. The fact that cl .11(b)(4) would govern rent reviews during any renewed term of the Lease is a further indication why the amortisation argument ultimately founders.

I think that cl 2.11 is clear in its imperatives. No one has suggested that the construction placed upon it by the declarations under challenge is unworkable. The parties have chosen to express their intent without disclosing their possibly discordant motives in doing so.

In challenging the reasonableness of the clause as construed below, senior counsel for the appellant urged that it means that the valuers will be driven to take account of the face value in leases of comparable premises without adverting to whether or not incentive allowances were made between the parties to those leases. This will occur whether or not the valuers have been able to ascertain the nature and extent of any such incentive allowances; and even though normal valuation practice as disclosed in publications such as that entitled Leasing Incentives issued in April 1992 by the Australian
Valuation Standards Board and Australian Institute of Valuers and Land
Economists would take account of such matters. The corollary is that valuers may be driven to disregard an adjustment touching comparable provisions which would normally be made. This may be acknowledged, but it is open to the parties to adopt an artificial basis for their rental determination.

I have considered anxiously the argument that the words "the effect of" at the start of cl 2.11(b)(4) confine the valuers to comparable leases when an incentive factor is operative. I do not think that these words carry this meaning. The clause is general. It produces what the appellant concedes to be an arguably artificial result, but contains nothing to indicate that the artificiality is to be confined as the appellant contends. The first parenthetical clause in cl 2.11(b)(4) is indeed a counter-indication since it contemplates that the valuer will have to disregard the effect of any abatement, et cetera in leases which are unaffected by incentive offsets but which are merely likely to be affected by such offsets. Given that valuers will be expected to be looking only at extant leases, this factor tends to reinforce the generality of the preclusion and to point towards a reason for the clause's existence being the difficulties of discovering the existence or extent of incentives. See also Ropart Pty Limited versus Kern Corporation
Limited [(1991) NSW Conv R |P55-594 (Rolfe]
J) and |P55-598 (Court of Appeal).

One effect of the appellant's argument, were it to be accepted, is that were incentive payments driven from the market by market forces, or legislation, then there would be nothing to which recourse could be had by parties or valuers seeking to determine a future rent review. Given that cl 2.11(b)(4) will be part of any future Lease in the event that successive options for renewal are exercised, this is outcome is not lightly to be inferred.

For these reasons I propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree. 
HODGSON AJA: I agree with the reasons of the learned President and also with his adoption of the reasons of Bryson J. I would just add a few remarks of my own. 
One contention of the appellant was that the commercial basis of the clause was the intention to amortise the incentive payment of $68 million over the first ten years of the Lease. However, accepting that commercial purpose, it seems to me that both the rival contentions, to some extent or other, further that commercial purpose. The only difference is a matter of degree to which that commercial purpose is furthered, and in my opinion one cannot choose between those two contentions on that ground.

It seemed to me that the most persuasive construction point made for the appellant was the argument that the words towards the end of para 4 of cl .11(b), "not the effective rental after incentives are taken into account", carried with them the implication that the only leases to be considered were those involving incentives. However, in my view, that possible implication is insufficient to overcome the generality of the earlier words, namely "the face rental current in the market"; and as pointed out by the learned President, it appears inconsistent with the words earlier in that paragraph indicating that the valuers may be considering leases where it was not clear that an incentive had been granted, so long as it appeared likely that an incentive had been granted.

The construction adopted by the trial judge was also supported by the words in the early part of para (b) requiring certain matters to be disregarded and ignored for all purposes. It would appear that that would require the valuer to disregard and ignore the very distinction between leases in respect of which incentive payments were made and leases in respect of which no such payment was made. A possible argument against that view, using the commencing words of para 4, namely "the effect of", was advanced; and had there been other material in support of the appellant's contention, may have assisted that case. However, on the whole, taking into account all these matters, in my opinion the view of the trial judge was correct and the appeal should be dismissed.

MASON P: The order is Appeal dismissed with costs. * * * 
