

Toga Building Co P/L versus Karhugh P/L and Anor [1996] NSWSC 299 (25 July )

TOGA BUILDING CO PTY LTD versus KARHUGH PTY LTD & ANOR /93; CL 14503/85 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY P, CLARKE JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS: Negligence - Personal injuries sustained on building site by employee - apportionment of liability - Conditions of subcontract - Whether breach of site safety requirements - Whether head contractor indemnified by subcontractor (employer) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
Negligence - Claim by employee for injuries sustained in accident on building site - Finding by trial judge of liability in negligence and for breach of regulations on part of employer and head contractor - Apportionment of liability by trial judge, 70% employer and 30% head contractor - Appeal against dismissal by trial judge of claim by head contractor against employer for indemnity in respect of amount apportioned to head contractor - Clause in subcontract relating to site safety in the use of ladders - Whether breach of subcontract so as to attract indemnity clause in subcontract - Whether compliance with condition relating to ladders waived -
Held, appeal dismissed, there was no error in the trial judge's allocation of responsibility between the two negligent defendants.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: This is an appeal against a judgment or portion of a judgment of McInerney J given on 9 March 1993. The judgment was given in the context of a claim by the plaintiff in respect of injuries suffered by him on 15 August 1983. The plaintiff was employed by a subcontractor, the first defendant in the proceedings, to do work for which the subcontractor had contracted with the second defendant, Toga Building Company Limited, on a building site in Palmer Street, Woolloomooloo. (The work is described in his Honour's judgment and I will not repeat the detail of it).

There were under construction small one bedroom units consisting of a ground floor and an attic bedroom and bathroom. Access to the upstairs portion, the attic bedroom and bathroom, appears to have been contemplated to be by a timber stairway. During the course of the work it was expedient that access be had from the ground floor to the upper section. It appears that the plaintiff was climbing up a ladder from the ground floor towards the upper section when he fell and suffered the injuries in question.

At the trial his Honour found a verdict for the plaintiff and, having considered the relative position of the subcontractor and the general contractor, divided the liability as between the two of them upon the basis of per cent against the subcontractor and 30 per cent against the general contractor Toga. No appeal is now pressed against the right of the plaintiff to damages and the appeal against the plaintiff has been dismissed with costs.

The Court is only concerned with, as I may describe it compendiously, the claim for contribution or indemnity made by the head contractor Toga against the subcontractor. The details of, as it is described, the second cross-claim are contained in the appeal papers and I will not retail them. The defences to them are set forth also in the papers and have been referred to in the course of argument.

Two bases were advanced by Mr Parker for the appellant, the general contractor, for the appeal. These have been described conveniently as the general law basis and the contractual basis. It was claimed that his Honour's assessment of the contribution upon the 70/30 per cent basis to which I have referred was wrong or alternatively that by reason of the matters referred to in the cross-claim a different adjustment should be made.

It is not necessary for me to pursue in detail the arguments which would be advanced to achieve these results. In order to understand the appeal it is sufficient to go to the findings of the trial judge both on the original proceeding and subsequently in relation to the claim under the cross-claim for contribution and indemnity. None of the findings of fact have been contested.
I mean by this the primary findings of fact. The conclusions to be drawn from them were to an extent examined in argument and contested by Mr Parker.

The subcontractor had entered into an agreement with the head contractor, the main contractor, in relation to the doing of the work. A copy of that contract dated 3 June 1983 is before the Court. The contract made provision in respect of various matters relating to the doing of the work and contained in addition a set of, as they were described, Site Safety Instructions which were attached to the contract.

What happened in relation to the doing of the work may be described (I use the broadest of terms and I do not descend to the precise details) generally as his Honour described it in his judgment. (I interpolate at this point that his
Honour indicated that the evidence in relation to some of the relevant matters was by no means clear. He referred to those in question directly or by implication on more than one occasion. I can but express my own assent to his
Honour's statements in that regard. Having perused the evidence I found the same difficulty that the judge found in coming to precise conclusions as to what was done on the site). It appears from the findings made by the judge that the ladders in question were essentially to provide access to, as I have indicated, the upper area of the individual units and that that access was to be provided not merely for the subcontractor here in question and its employees but also for other persons such as electricians, carpenters and the like. That means of access was as the judge found provided by the head contractor. His Honour found specifically that it was the responsibility of the head contractor Toga to provide access to where the first defendants, the subcontractor's employers, were required to work and, as I infer, to the place where others were to work both before and perhaps after them.

The way in which that access was provided was by the supply of ladders and those ladders appear to have been borrowed by the head contractor from other subcontractors. The ladders were as his Honour said brought upon the site by the head contractor Toga and taken away each morning and each night. It was necessary for the plaintiff to go up the ladder to do the work in question. (I do not pause to consider why he was there or whether he should have been there at the particular time. The findings of the trial judge cover these matters).

In this context, I come to the case which Mr Parker has argued before this
Court. In relation to the contractual basis of the claim, his argument I think essentially is to the following effect. The subcontractor and the head contractor had entered into a contract under which the subcontractor was to supply all labour, tools, machinery and ancillary material required to perform the work in question; the work related of course to gyprock work which the plaintiff and his fellow employees were to do.

The contract contained a number of clauses relating to the kind of work to be done and the doing of it and it is not necessary to refer to these in detail.
Clause 15 provided for the subcontractor to bear certain liabilities; in particular it provided, in relation to injury to persons on the site, for the subcontractor to be "solely liable for" and to indemnify the head contractor in relation to various matters "unless due to any act of neglect of the general contractor" (see cl 15(a)).

A claim was originally based upon cl 15 but Mr Parker in the course of his argument before this Court abandoned any reliance upon that clause. It is sufficient to indicate, if it be relevant, that I do not think that in giving up that clause he gave up any substantial chance of success.

The basis under the contract which was relied upon by Mr Parker derived from cl 17. That clause provided.
 "The subcontractor shall comply with the Site Safety Regulations of Toga
Building Company Pty Limited attached to this contract." 
As I have said, those site instructions were attached to the contract. They provided for a multitude of different matters, many of which were obviously not relevant to the work of this particular subcontractor. One of the many clauses provided: "15. Ladders must be to regulation standard and tied off at all times".

In the cross-claim the claim was made - I am referring to clauses 6 and following in the cross-claim - that the subcontractor had not "tied off at all times" the ladder which was being used. Upon the basis of this it was claimed: "In the event that the plaintiff recovers damages against it, the second cross-claimant claims damages in equivalent sum against the second cross- defendant together with interest thereon pursuant to <case> of the [Supreme
Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/)." 
An earlier clause not relating to the contract had claimed both contribution, awards or indemnity against: "any damage for which it (that is, the head contractor) is held to be liable to the plaintiff". I think that related to the general law basically claimed but I refer to it because reference was made to it by Mr Parker in his argument. The claim that was here made in relation to the breach of contract was that the subcontractor was bound to comply with cl 17 and therefore to tie off all of the ladders in question. It was said that the injury to the plaintiff derived essentially from the failure to tie off the ladder and accordingly derived from the breach of condition 15.

I shall assume, although I do not completely accept, that the damage to the plaintiff arose from the failure to tie off the ladder. I think it may well be argued that it arose from other matters, in addition or alternatively. But, however that be, I shall consider whether in fact there was a breach of the subcontract by the subcontractor in that regard.

The learned judge came to the conclusion that compliance with this obligation, insofar as it bound the subcontractor, had been, as he described it, "waived".
In the context of the judgment given by the judge and his findings, what I think he meant by "waiver" was that the parties, the subcontractor and the head contractor, had in fact proceeded with the work, as it were, in disregard of the contractual structure which had been set up by the subcontract, at least in relation to this matter. Clause 15 appears to assume that the ladders to be provided were to be provided by the subcontractor and, accordingly, that the subcontractor was to ensure that they were "to regulation standard" and were tied off. In fact, the ladders here in question were not those to be provided by the subcontractor but, as I have indicated, were provided as a means of access to another part of the work by various of the people concerned. It was obviously not the obligation of the subcontractor to provide these ladders or to ensure that they were to regulation standard. I do not think that under the subcontract the subcontractor assumed the obligation to ensure the ladders which in fact were put in place by the head contractor for its own purposes, that is the general purposes to which I have referred, were of the appropriate standard.

Having regard to the purposes for which those ladders were provided, it was for the general contractor to deal with them and to ensure that they were made safe in the appropriate way. This would involve that they were to be tied off.
Therefore, I do not think that the particular clause was relevant to what was here in question. I think it was in that sense his Honour used the word "waiver"; what was involved here was something quite different from what the subcontract itself envisaged in cl 17.

However, there is another matter arising from the terms of the subcontract. It arises under cl 28. That clause provided that should the subcontractor fail to comply with the site safety regulations, the subcontractor would be given one written warning that he must comply with such instructions. Following that warning, the "policy carried out will be" that a penalty would be provided for each and every time the subcontractor failed to "work required safety conditions". The clause provides finally: "Failure to provide safety equipment and/or work in a safe manner, Toga
Building Company Pty Ltd will provide equipment and the cost shall be deducted from the Contract sum." 
I think the intention of the parties to the subcontract, as indicated by cl , was not that there should be imposed on the subcontractor an ordinary obligation in damages for breach of the obligations falling within cl 28. One of those would have been cl 17 and the provisions consequent upon it. I think cl 28 was intended to operate as the means of enforcing cl 17 and so to provide the consequence to follow upon a breach of the present kind. Should cl become applicable, the subcontractor was to be given one written warning to comply with its obligations. After that warning, the contractor would exercise the powers given by cl 28 or, perhaps, sue for damages. But no such warning was given. Therefore I am not satisfied that there was in fact an actionable breach of the clause relied on, cl 17.

However, assuming that there was a breach of the clause, the question arises whether it should affect the obligations of the subcontractor in this regard and lead, as it was claimed at the hearing, to a full indemnity. Mr Higgs, for the subcontractor, has pointed out that at the hearing it was conceded by Mr
Parker: "That if his client had been aware the plaintiff was going into the roof in an improper manner there was some liability in the second defendant".
His Honour recorded that concession and said that he found not only "did the second defendant know that but through their employees they provided the ladders and means of access for the plaintiff". Accordingly, his Honour concluded - in my opinion correctly - that there should be no complete indemnity as claimed in relation to the contractual liability.

I do not think that, if damages were to be given in relation to the breach of contract, there were any damages to be awarded which were not, as it were, taken into account by the order made by the judge in providing for contribution upon the 70/30 per cent basis. I do not find that there would be any basis for a separate and additional award of damages in this regard or a claim for contribution on a contractual basis.

I come then to what I have called the general law basis of the plaintiff's claim. It is sufficient to say that, having regard to the findings of fact made by the judge in this regard, I do not think that there is any sufficient basis for varying the contribution of 30 per cent which his Honour ordered against the head contractor. His Honour detailed the basis of his assessment and referred to the various liabilities of the subcontractor and of the head contractor in respect of the plaintiff. I see no reason to doubt that 30 per cent was an appropriate apportionment of the damages as between the two defendants.

In all the circumstances I see no reason to interfere with the orders made by the trial judge, the subject of the present appeal. I would propose, therefore, that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

CLARKE JA: I agree.

COLE JA: The second respondent, Reino Karhunen, was employed by the first respondent, Karhugh Pty Limited, which was a subcontractor on a building site on which the general contractor was the appellant, Toga Building Company Pty Limited. The employee was injured when he fell from a ladder whilst seeking to gain access to an attic bedroom being constructed on site. He sued his employer and the general contractor in negligence and for breaches of regulations under the Construction Safety Act 1912 as amended. McInerney J on 9 March 1993, found both the employer and the general contractor liable in negligence and for breach of the regulations and apportioned responsibility for the damages awarded, 70 per cent to the employer and 30 per cent to the general contractor. In doing so, the trial judge found that the ladder in question was not of regulation standard, and was not tied off as required. His Honour found that the ladder was borrowed by the general contractor's employees from other subcontractors and was placed in position by those employees. He also accepted it was the responsibility of the general contractor to provide access to the places of work where, relevantly, the plaintiff was required to work: Appeal Book, p.181Q. That finding meant providing safe access.

This initial decision has not been challenged on appeal. However, on 16
December 1993, McInerney J dismissed a third party claim by the general contractor against the employer for indemnity in respect of the amount it was obliged to pay under the initial judgment. The claim for indemnity had two bases. First, that pursuant to the subcontract between the general contractor and the employer, the employer agreed to indemnify the general contractor in respect of any liability for personal injury arising out of or in the course of execution of the subcontract works. Second, the injuries arose in consequence of the employer failing to comply with site safety instructions stipulated in the subcontract. The damages suffered by the general contractor in consequence of this breach of contract were the damages it was held liable to pay to the employee and, accordingly, an equivalent sum should be awarded to the general contractor by way of damages.

McInerney J dismissed each contention. Regarding the first, his Honour held that cl 15 of the subcontract related only to "injury which was not due to any act or neglect of the general contractor". That decision was clearly correct.
Clause 15(a) dealt specifically with "injury to persons". It rendered the subcontractor solely liable for such injuries and provided an indemnity to the general contractor in respect of any injury to persons "unless due to any act or neglect of the general contractor". McInerney J had found in his initial decision that the general contractor had been guilty of neglect and thus was liable to damages. Accordingly that ground claiming indemnity failed.

Regarding the second ground based on cl 17 which required the subcontractor to comply with site safety regulations attached to the contract, his Honour held it was the general contractor who had failed to comply with the safety regulations. His Honour also held that there was "a waiver of the contractual term or a forbearance by the second defendant in respect of the alleged breaches under cl 17 and this was designed to suit the convenience of both parties". This finding was attacked on appeal, it being contended that waiver was not pleaded nor argued. Further, it was contended that the measure of damage for the breach of contract was the general contractor's contribution in damages.

In my opinion it is unnecessary to consider the submissions regarding waiver.
Although cl 17 requires the contractor to comply with site safety regulations, cl 28 provided the agreed consequences for breach of that clause. It provided: "Should the subcontractor fail to comply with required safety regulations the subcontractor will receive (1) written warning that he must comply with such instructions.

Following this warning the policy carried out will be: - $10 penalty for each and every time the subcontractor fails to work required safety conditions - Safety helmet etc will be provided to all men at $10/item.

Failure to provide safety equipment and/or work in a safe manner, Toga
Building Company Pty Ltd will provide equipment and the cost shall be deducted from the Contract sum." 
The agreed remedy was thus not in damages other than those specified in cl 28.

The Site Safety Instructions (No 15) required that "ladders must be to regulation standard and tied off at all times". Those regulations were breached by the general contractor who was found to have provided the ladders as a means of access for the subcontractor's employees. Accordingly, the second ground fails.

Additional argument was put that the contribution between the joint tortfeasors should have been 100 per cent contribution awarded against the employer. I see no error in the trial judge's allocation of responsibility between the two negligent defendants. Accordingly, I agree that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

MAHONEY P: The order of the Court is that the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
