

Dennis Valassis versus Colin J.T. McCabe and Ors [1996] NSWSC 96 (6 May 1996) 
Dennis VALASSIS versus Colin J T MCCABE & ORS /96 
MONDAY 6 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 15 April 1996 pursuant to leave granted by Newman J, the plaintiff has filed an amended summons in which he claims costs in respect of a number of proceedings which are referred to and described in the summons. It is not necessary for me to here repeat the contents of the summons. It is sufficient for me to identify that costs are sought in respect of five separate proceedings. Obviously, there is a considerable background to the claims made by the plaintiff. For the purposes of considering the defendants' motion it is not necessary to review the history that lies behind the plaintiff's proceedings. The applicant appears in person today and it appears as though on 15 April Newman J made an order that the applicant, in fact, be in a position to proceed on this date.

I have before me a notice of motion that has been filed on behalf of the first and second defendants. A submitting appearance has been filed on behalf of the registrar of the third defendant. However, in addition to filing a submitting appearance, the Crown seeks to support the relief that is sought in the first and second defendants' notice of motion.

I have read the affidavit in support of the motion that has been filed on behalf of the first and second defendants. I have considered the relief that is sought by the first and second defendants in the notice of motion which is, essentially, to the effect that the summons be dismissed generally and judgment be entered for the defendants forthwith.

It is not necessary for me to repeat the matters that are referred to in the first and second defendants' affidavit. It is sufficient for me to say that having regard to those matters it seems to me that the first and second defendants have made out their case that the relief sought in the first and second defendants notice of motion should be granted.

It is not necessary at this point of time, having regard to the nature of the matter before me and the fact that it appears in a long motions list, to provide greater details for the orders that I am about to make in respect of the notice of motion filed on behalf of the first and second defendants. Nor is it necessary for me to distinguish between what has been submitted to be those cases where it might be thought that there is clearly no jurisdiction in relation to entertain any of the cost applications, by reason of the fact that they are cost applications in respect of proceedings before either the Local
Court or, alternatively, the Court of Appeal and cases concerning costs in other court proceedings involving the plaintiff.

I am satisfied that, clearly, I do not have jurisdiction to consider matters relating to cost orders made against the plaintiff, Mr Valassis, in either or both of those courts. Likewise, having regard to the matters that are referred to in Mr Rosier's affidavit, I am satisfied that I either do not have jurisdiction in relation to any of the costs orders that have been made in this Court. Further, I am satisfied that having regard to the matters that are referred to in par 11 of Mr Rosier's affidavit that the relief that as sought in the notice of motion should be granted.

The orders that I make is that the summons be dismissed generally and judgment be entered for the defendants forthwith.

I order that the plaintiff pay the costs of the first and second defendants on an indemnity basis.

I order that the plaintiff pay the third defendant's costs on an indemnity basis.
 * * * 
