

Holland versus Nixons Transport Pty Ltd Matter No 12953/97 [1997] NSWSC 647 (15
December 1997) 
Sharon Holland versus Nixons Transport Pty Ltd /97 December 1997 
Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 SHARON HOLLAND V NIXONS TRANSPORT PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
This is one of a number of stated cases brought by the prosecution from decisions of a magistrate dismissing charges for offences contrary to <case> of the State Roads Act 1986. Each of the stated cases raises the same matter for determination and the parties were content to make submissions on this matter alone, accepting that the determination of this stated case would determine each of the other matters before the Court. Although there were some slight differences in the facts of each of the stated cases, the parties accepted that those differences were irrelevant to the determination of the issue raised by the stated cases. In each of the stated cases the offence with which the particular defendant was charged was the same and in each case the magistrate dismissed the charge for identical reasons. Although the defendants are not the same in each of the matters, they are related companies which operate under the same business name.

Section 99(1) relevantly provides that, where a vehicle is driven in contravention of the Act or Regulations, the owner and the person in whose name the vehicle is registered is guilty of an offence. For the purposes of the section, Ordinance No 30C of the Local Government Act 1919 is deemed to be a regulation made under the State Roads Act, see State Roads Act <case> and
Schedule 3 Clause 12 of the Act. In each of the matters brought to this Court by way of stated case, the relevant clause of the Ordinance was clause (2A)(c)(iii). That clause relevantly provides: 
A person shall not drive or draw or cause to be driven or drawn on any main road a conforming vehicle.....
 ....
 having a tandem axle group ......
 where each axle in the group is fitted with single dual pneumatic tyres or four or more single pneumatic tyres-if the sum of the axle load exceeds 15 tonnes in weight...

The facts before the magistrate were not in dispute and in each of the matters it was conceded on behalf of the defendant that a prima facie case had been proved by the plaintiff in relation to the offence charged. In each case the defendant relied upon the statutory defence provided by <case> of the State
Roads Act. The magistrate found that the defence was proved and for that reason he dismissed each of the informations before him. The facts in each case being virtually identical, it is not surprising that the magistrate was consistent in the way he dealt with each of the informations. Nor is it surprising that his reasons for dismissing each of the informations were identical. The contention on the part of the plaintiff in each of the stated cases is that on the evidence it was not open to the magistrate to find that the statutory defence had been made out. As the matter was argued before me, the resolution of this issue depends substantially upon the proper construction of <case>(a).

The provisions relating to the statutory defence relied upon before the magistrate are contained in the following subsections of <case>: 
It is a defence in any proceedings for an offence under this section if the defendant satisfies the court that the defendant: did not know of the contravention and could not reasonably be expected to have known of it; and had taken all reasonable steps to prevent such a contravention.

In order to satisfy the court, for the purposes of a defence under subsection (3), that the defendant did not know and could not reasonably be expected to know of a contravention, a defendant corporation must satisfy the court that: no director of the corporation; and no person having management functions in the corporation in relation to activities in connection with which the contravention occurred, knew of the contravention or could reasonably be expected to have known of it.

In a case where the contravention resulted from the fact that the weight of the vehicle or part of the vehicle, together with the weight of any load on the vehicle or part, exceeded any limit prescribed by or under this Act, the court should not be satisfied that the defendant took all reasonable steps to avoid the contravention if it is not satisfied that the defendant took all reasonable steps to cause the weight of the load carried on the vehicle to be ascertained at the commencement of the journey during which the contravention occurred.

Subsection (5) does not apply if the defendant satisfies the court that at all material times the defendant did not, either personally or through any agent or employee, have custody or control of the vehicle.

For the purposes of subsection (5), the court should not be satisfied that the defendant took all reasonable steps to cause the weight of a load to be ascertained if it is not satisfied that either: the load had been weighed; or the defendant, or the driver of the vehicle, was in possession of sufficient and reliable evidence from which that weight was calculated.

The facts as found by the magistrate and set out in the stated case in considerable detail can be summarised as follows. The defendant was a company involved in a partnership which engaged in the business of carrying refrigerated goods, including meat and meat products, by road. That partnership was generally known as Nixons. The defendant owned vehicles which were used by Nixons in carrying out its business. The goods transported were in the main produced by the Blayney Abattoir which was situated about one kilometre from the premises operated by Nixons. The general arrangement was that the Abattoir would notify Nixons each day how many trucks were required that day and where the trucks would be going. No other information was supplied to Nixons. Late in the afternoon the loading of the defendant's trucks commenced at the Abattoir. For various reasons over which Nixons had no control, no employee of Nixons could take part in the loading of the trucks and only one driver was permitted on the premises of the Abattoir during the loading of the trucks. This driver's function was to take empty trucks to the
Abattoir and full trucks back to the premises of Nixons.

The loading of the trucks was organised by staff of the Abattoir. The placement of items into the truck depended largely upon where the item was going and the convenience of unloading the item from the truck at its destination. As loading progressed dockets were prepared indicating what item was to be delivered and to where. Although each item loaded was individually weighed, not all the dockets given to the driver of the truck indicated the weight of the item loaded. Once each truck was loaded it was driven by the
Nixon employee to the premises of Nixons from where the truck left for its ultimate destination. The loading of trucks continued throughout the night.
The next day the documentation prepared by the Abattoir staff during loading was tallied. By the time the tallies were made at the Abattoir, the trucks had departed Nixons and in some cases had already delivered the load. There was no weighbridge at the Abattoir and a weighbridge at the premises of Nixons had been inoperative for many years. By the time any truck departed from the
Abattoir each of the items loaded had been weighed, however the total weight of the load on the truck had not been ascertained. Although the driver of the truck may have had information as to the weight of the items loaded available from the dockets prepared at the Abattoir, no attempt was made to calculate the weight of the load from those dockets.

There was statistical information in evidence before the magistrate indicating that between November 1988 and July, 1994 of the 33,143 loaded journeys undertaken by Nixons' trucks from the Abattoir, 99.747% of those journeys were found to comply with the requirements imposed by the Act and Regulations for loading of vehicles. However, it is clear that Nixons was unaware of the weight of the load on any truck or whether any particular truck complied with the Act and Regulations when it commences its journey from the Abattoir or even when it left the premises of Nixons. Mr Darrell Nixon, who was a director and shareholder in the defendant companies and who was the person responsible for the day to day management of the partnership, had been in contact with the
Abattoir and those responsible for the loading of the trucks in an endeavour to avoid the risk of overloading but no other steps had been taken to set up a system of weighing the trucks, before they left the Abattoir or Nixons. Health regulations would not have permitted the trucks to return to the Abattoir if they had been found by Nixons to have been overloaded.

The grounds of determination stated by the magistrate are unfortunately very unsatisfactory in that they fail with any clarity to indicate the basis upon which the magistrate found that the defence under <case> had been proved.
They are as follows: GROUNDS OF DETERMINATION .1 I found that the load had been weighed on the basis that the individual items loaded onto the truck were weighed by staff at the abattoir.
 .2 I found that the legislation does not require the truck plus the load to be weighed .3 I found that for practical purposes it is not reasonable, in relation to the loading of the particular truck, for the truck and the load to be weighed.
 .4 I found that the Defendant has taken reasonable steps in loading his trucks.
 .5 I accepted that the statistical evidence of the defendant carried some weight.
 .6 I found that the defendant satisfied the provisions of section 99 of the
Act.

Were the stated case to be determined strictly upon the basis that these were the extent of the magistrate's findings, there would be a good argument that either the magistrate had failed to determine the matters which he was required to determine in order to find the defence had been proved, or that the case fails properly to disclose the basis upon which the matter was determined by him. At least two of the matters stated, being 3.2 and 3.3, have no relevance to the determination of the defence under the section. The ground numbered 3.4 also, if taken literally, has nothing to do with the defence to the offence charged in the information. Nor is it clear to what use the magistrate put the statistical information, particularly in light of a finding of fact he made that it was flawed. Further, it is quite inadequate for the magistrate to make a finding that the provisions of <case> were satisfied by the defendant without indicating how it was that they were satisfied. However, the matter was argued before me on the basis that the fundamental finding of the magistrate was that contained in 3.1 of the grounds of determination and this finding raised the issue which the parties wished to have ventilated and determined by the stated case. The plaintiff argued that this finding could not amount to compliance with <case>(a).

Before dealing with that matter I should dispose of the only other ground argued by the plaintiff. It was submitted that the magistrate failed to find that there was evidence which would satisfy <case> - on the facts in this case that is that no director of the defendant company and no person having management functions in the company in relation to the carriage of meat and meat products from the Abattoir knew of the over-loading on the axel or could reasonably be expected to have known of it. True it is that the magistrate made no such finding. He did not even make any specific finding about the knowledge of Darrell Nixon, who was a director and the person involved in the day to day management of the business of Nixons, see Lee versus Haxton Haulage
Pty Limited (Barr AJ, 23 December 1994, unreported). But it is clear from the facts found by the magistrate that Mr Nixon was the person connected with the defendant who was likely to have any knowledge of the overloading of the truck and there was no suggestion that he knew that it failed to comply with the regulation nor could he have reasonably known of it. He could not know what the situation was in respect of any particular truck except that, to the extent that the statistical material had any weight, the trucks leaving the
Abattoir normally complied with the loading requirements when they were checked by State Road Authority personnel. I cannot see how any other person connected with Nixons could have had knowledge that any truck did or did not comply with the relevant provisions nor could any other person reasonably be expected to know of any contravention. Even if there were an error in the magistrate failing to refer to this matter in his grounds for determination, there was ample evidence to satisfy this aspect of the defence and I would not remit the matter to the magistrate on this basis.

However, it is clear that both legs of <case> have to be proved by the defence: Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW versus Timothy David Bettington (Wood J, unreported, 9 May 1994). The more significant matter argued before me is whether the magistrate could have been satisfied of <case>(b), that is whether the defendant, through Mr Nixon, had taken all reasonable steps to prevent the truck being overloaded on the tri-axel group. The resolution of this issue requires consideration of subsections (5) and (7) of <case>. These subsections were introduced by the State Roads and Traffic (Offences and
Penalties) Amendment Act 1991. In the Second Reading Speech of the relevant
Minister in relation to the bill (to which I was referred by both parties) reference was made to a perception that there had been a reduced effectiveness of prosecutions by reason of the defence contained in the section and that the courts had "adopted a very broad approach" to the defence. The defence was, therefore, to be amended "to give clear guidance to the courts as to what will be required to satisfy a defendant owner's obligation to show diligence in order to avoid contravention of the Act". It seems clear that by "guidance to the courts" what was intended was that a constraint should be put upon the fact finding of the court when determining whether the defence provided by the section has been proved. Clearly there was a concern that the primary obligation of the owner to show diligence in ensuring compliance by the vehicle ought not to be undermined.

It was accepted by the parties that <case> applied in this case. This is clearly correct because the contravention alleged was concerned with the weight of part of the vehicle together with weight of part of the load exceeding the limit prescribed for the sum of the axel load. Therefore, the magistrate should not have been satisfied of that part of the defence contained in <case>(b) if he were not satisfied that the defendant took all reasonable steps "to cause the weight of the load carried on the vehicle to be ascertained at the commencement of the journey during which the contravention occurred"; Hansard, 2 July 1991, pg 86. The "weight of the load carried on the vehicle" for the purposes of that section, must mean, in my view, the total weight of the load carried. In order to ascertain the weight of the load carried where the load is made up of a number of individual items, either the load as a whole must be weighed or the weight of the individual items must be ascertained and their combined weight must be determined.

So in this case, before the magistrate could be satisfied that the defendant, through Mr Nixon, had taken all reasonable steps to avoid the breach of the ordinance, he had to be satisfied that it had taken all reasonable steps to cause the weight of the load, that is the total weight of the meat and meat products loaded onto the truck, to be ascertained before the truck left the
Abattoir. In light of the evidence that each of the items were weighed as they were loaded but that the total weight of the load on the truck was not ascertained (if it were ascertained at all) until the next day, a real question had to arise as to whether the magistrate could be satisfied that the defendant had taken all reasonable steps to ascertain the weight of the load before the truck left the Abattoir. This is especially so in view of the factual finding that the individual weight of items contained in the load were sometimes made available to the driver of the truck before it left the premises but no attempt was made to ascertain the total weight because of the time involved in undertaking this task 
However that may be, it is unnecessary to determine this matter, because of the terms of <case>. That section, relevant to the present case, provides that for the purposes of <case> - that is for the purposes of determining whether the defendant took all reasonable steps to cause the weight of the load to be ascertained at the commencement of the journey- the court should not be satisfied of that matter if it is not satisfied that "the load had been weighed'. Much of the argument before me was whether this section required that the load be weighed by the defendant. The plaintiff contended that in light of the other provisions in <case>, the provision can only be sensibly read if the word "by the defendant" are inserted. On the other hand it was submitted by the defendant that the section appearing as it does in a penal provision should be read strictly.

In my view the section must be read in its terms and that is that the load has been weighed by somebody. Section 99(5) refers to the defendant taking steps to ascertain the weight of the load, and it would be curious in those circumstances that <case> would require that, before <case> can avail the defendant, he should actually himself have weighed the load. In many, if not most, cases the defendant would not himself weigh the load but would rely upon someone else to do so at his request or direction. I do not see any requirement or justification to read words into the section which are not there requiring that the defendant weigh the load. The purpose of <case> is to insist that either the load be weighed or the weight of the load be calculated from sufficient and reliable evidence before the vehicle commences its journey.

But the real question that arises in this matter, in my view, is what is meant by the words "the load had been weighed" as they appear in <case>(a). As I have already indicated the subsection applies in cases where the contravention relied upon is to the effect that the vehicle has been overladen before it commenced its journey on a public road. The overloading can be general or in respect of some part of the vehicle, as was the allegation in this case. The section imposes a requirement that, before the defence provided by <case> can be relied upon in respect of that type of contravention, reasonable steps be taken to ascertain the weight of the load before the vehicle commences its journey. I consider that in such a context the section intends that the load must have been weighed as a load. In my view it cannot be said that the load has been weighed if only the individual items which make up the load have separately been weighed, especially where the total weight of the items has not been ascertained. However, I do not believe that it could be found that the load had been weighed even if the weights of the individual items had been totalled. By totalling the individual weights of the items the weight of the load may have been calculated, but the load had not been weighed.

This view of the words in <case>(a) is supported by the provision of s (7)(b). The subsection refers to "possession of sufficient and reliable evidence from which that weight was calculated". That provision, when read with <case> requires implicitly that, in a situation where the load has not been weighed, two things must have occurred before the vehicle commenced its journey: firstly, that there was in possession of the defendant or driver of the vehicle sufficient and reliable means by which the weight of the load could have been calculated; and, secondly, that the weight of the load had been calculated by those means. I cannot conceive of any reason in logic or policy why one of the alternatives in subs 7 could be satisfied only where the weight of the load had actually been determined before the vehicle departed on its journey yet the other alternative could be satisfied merely by the performance of some formalistic ritual serving no purpose in actually determining whether or not the vehicle was overloaded before it departed.

Barr AJ (as he then was) came to a similar view of <case>(a) in Lee v
Haxton Haulage Pty Limited. His Honour was of the opinion that it was not sufficient for the purposes of <case>(a) that the vehicle and the load had been weighed together. In that case the vehicle with its load were weighed before they left the colliery. Although the gross weight of the vehicle and the load was thereby ascertained, there was no other evidence as to the weight of the load nor was there any method by which the weight of the load could be calculated. His Honour held that the subsection had not been complied with in that factual situation. However, Barr AJ was of the view that, had there been material from which the weight of the load could have been determined (for example by knowing the unladen weight of the vehicle), <case>(b) may have been satisfied. As there was no such evidence on the facts as found by the magistrate, his Honour held that the magistrate erred in finding that the defence under <case> had been satisfied.

I was referred by counsel for the defendant to two decisions of the District
Court upholding appeals by defendants against determinations of magistrates in almost identical factual situations to the present. Those decisions of course were as a result of de novo rehearings of the informations. In each case it was found that the defence under <case> had been satisfied. In the first of those matters the judge found that <case>(a) was not complied with where the total load had not been weighed. However, there was no dispute in that case that <case>(a) had not been complied with. His Honour seems to have determined the matter in favour of the defendant on the basis of <case>(b) or that generally the defendant had done all it reasonably could do to avoid a contravention. However, the reasoning of the learned District Court Judge in that matter is of no concern in determining the present matter. The second decision to which I was referred, merely followed the earlier decision as a matter of comity.

It may be thought that this interpretation of <case>(a) cannot stand with the fact that the subsection as a whole is concerned with the defendant taking "reasonable steps to cause the weight of a load to be ascertained". It may be suggested that a requirement that the weight of the load be determined leaves nothing for the rest of the section to do. But the section is concerned with the ascertainment of the weight of the load, that is the true weight of the load. If a person weighs a load or causes a load to be weighed, the weight so determined may be erroneous. However, that does not mean that the load was not weighed. For example, the fact that the person weighing the load knew that the set of scales on which the load was weighed was inaccurate would not mean that the load had not been weighed. But the fact that the person knew that the weight obtained would not be an accurate measure of the weight of the load would be a very significant matter in determining whether the person had taken all reasonable steps to cause the weight of the load to be ascertained. It does not follow that a court must conclude that all reasonable steps have been taken to ascertain the weight of the load simply because it concludes that the weight of the load has been determined by weighing it or that it has been calculated from sufficient and reliable information in the possession of the owner or the driver. But unless a defendant establishes that the weight of the load has been so determined or calculated, a court cannot find that he took all reasonable steps to cause the weight of the load to be ascertained.

In argument it was pointed out that the determination of the weight of the load could not help the defendant in determining whether there was an overloading on a particular axel. That may be so. But the section requires reasonable steps to be taken to ascertain the weight of the load generally. It may well be that if the court is satisfied that the load had been weighed or calculated under <case>, that the defendant will be able to satisfy the court that he had taken all reasonable steps to avoid the vehicle being overloaded on a particular part of the vehicle.

Therefore, in my opinion <case> envisages that, before the vehicle departs on its journey, the weight of the load will have been determined by weighing the load as a whole or, if the load as a whole has not been weighed, by calculating the weight of the load from sufficient and reliable material in the possession of the defendant or the driver. The contention of the plaintiff is that on the facts as found by the magistrate the load had not been weighed for the purposes of <case>(a). In my opinion that contention should be accepted. Although the individual items placed in the truck had been weighed before being placed in the truck, no calculation had been made of the load in the truck before it left the Abattoir. The facts as found do not even make it clear that the weight of the items placed on any particular truck was ever ascertained or calculated by the Abattoir. Section 99(7)(b) clearly cannot avail the defendant because not only did the driver never calculate the weight of the load from the material supplied to him, it was not shown that the material in his possession was sufficient to calculate the load because the weight of some items loaded was not recorded on dockets handed to the driver.

Although the question of whether a load had been weighed is normally a matter of fact, in this case the evidence upon the question of whether the load had been weighed for the purposes of <case>(a) gave rise to only one conclusion, that being that it had not been weighed. In coming to a different conclusion on that issue, the magistrate erred in law: Hope versus Bathurst City Council <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 1] at 7. The magistrate must have misdirected himself on the ultimate finding of fact that he had to make for the purposes of that section: Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] at 156;
Commissioner of Police versus District Court of NSW (1993) 31 NSWLR 606 at 619, -637.

As on the evidence the magistrate could not have been satisfied that the load had been weighed, the magistrate could not have been satisfied that the defendant took all reasonable steps to cause the weight of a load to be ascertained. As he could not have been satisfied of that fact it follows by reason of <case> that he could not have been satisfied that the defendant took all reasonable steps to avoid the contravention. It further follows, therefore, that he could not have been satisfied that the defendant had taken all reasonable steps to avoid the contravention and the defence in <case> failed. As it was conceded that the offence charged had otherwise been made out by the evidence before the court, the magistrate ought to have found the offence proved.

The stated case poses no question to be answered as to the correctness of the magistrate's determination, but it is obvious, for the reasons I have given, that I am of the view that the determination of the magistrate in dismissing the information on the basis that the defence under <case> had been satisfied was erroneous as a matter of law. I remit the matter to the magistrate to be determined according to law. I order the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
