

Regina versus Stanley Bruce Cameron [1996] NSWSC 283 (18 July 1996) 
REGINA versus STANLEY BRUCE CAMERON /95 
THURSDAY 18 JULY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, SULLY J, ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: On 9 October 1995 Mr Stanley Bruce Cameron, to whom I shall refer as the appellant, was presented for trial in the District Court at Narrabri and before Backhouse DCJ upon an indictment charging him with having, between 1 January 1992 and 6 April 1992 near Narrabri, cultivated prohibited plants, namely, cannabis plants. To that charge the appellant pleaded he was not guilty and he was put upon his trial accordingly. The trial lasted for some seven days and culminated in the return by the jury of a verdict of guilty. Subsequently there was imposed upon the appellant a non-custodial penalty and no challenge is made in the present proceedings to that particular aspect of the matter.

The grounds of appeal, as originally notified, were as follows:
That the evidence of identification was so unsatisfactory that it should have been excluded in the exercise of the Judge's discretion.
That, in the alternative, the quality of the evidence of identification before the jury was such as to render the jury's verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.
That there has been a miscarriage of justice by reason of the Prosecutor's decision not to call the witness, Roland Eather.
That the verdict of the jury in all the circumstances is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

At the hearing of the appeal the grounds numbered 1 and 2 were abandoned. In my opinion that was a correct stance, given the views expressed by the High
Court of Australia in Maric versus The Queen [(1978) 52 ALJR 631] per Gibbs
ACJ at 634 (Mason, Jacob, AickIn JJ concurring).

The relevant facts are as follows.

At all material times the appellant leased and occupied a homestead on a property known as "Wilga Field" which property was situated in the vicinity of
Narrabri. The property was owned by a family named Haire.

On Sunday 5 April 1992 Mr Michael Haire, Mr Peter Haire and Mrs Catherine
McEachern were pig hunting at "Wilga Field". Dogs with which they were hunting strayed on to the adjoining property, named "Silverleigh", and the three hunters followed the dogs on to that adjoining property. As they attempted to round up their dogs they came upon a cannabis plantation. It contained seventy-five plants in various stages of growth.

At trial it was not disputed that such a cannabis plantation had been discovered. The issue, and the only issue, at trial was whether it could be proved beyond reasonable doubt that it had been the appellant who had been the cultivator.

The Crown case against the appellant was a circumstantial case. It was put in two ways. First, it was sought to establish, by positive visual identification, a relevant connection between the appellant and the plantation. Secondly, it was sought to demonstrate that certain physical items found at the plantation were identical with items found at the appellant's homestead; and that this identity of items, coupled with the finding in the appellant's kitchen cupboard of some cannabis seeds, and with the finding in the tray of the appellant's utility truck of traces of cannabis leaf, sufficiently identified the appellant with the plantation.

The appellant did not give sworn evidence at trial but he did make a brief and unsworn statement to the jury. It was as follows: "Members of the jury, I wish to make a statement about this alleged marihuana crop that I am supposed, or have had, something to do with. My name is Stanley
Bruce Cameron, commonly known as Bruce Cameron. I am forty-four years of age and at the time, in January 1992, I was approached by John Kelly about sub- letting a house off him so he could be keep it until he was ready to move into it, which I agreed on the condition that I wouldn't have to pay rent because where I was at that time, I was staying with my mother-in-law and we had been looking at properties around the area that we were going to buy. So he put to me that I could paint the house because he had mentioned to Mr Haire, because it was in a run down position, in lieu of rent. So I agreed to that and I agreed to be ready to move out when he was ready to move in. That was how I come to be at Yarrie Lake and when we looked about and decided that we had found a place that we wanted to buy, well I informed John and it was arranged that he was ready to move back in so we changed over like that.

Eight months later I was at my property at Brolga Downs when it was first put to me about this marihuana crop.

I stated to Detective Ridley, which I can only state now, that I know nothing of this crop. I don't grow marihuana and I don't smoke marihuana. Thank you.
That's all." 
The appellant's unsworn statement made no mention of any alibi defence, but there was called in his case at trial evidence that was capable, if accepted by the jury, of establishing an alibi.

Furthermore, evidence was called in the defence case, and in circumstances to which it will be necessary to return in more detail, from a Mr Roland Eather, which evidence, were it accepted by a jury, would be evidence strongly exculpatory of the appellant, in that it was evidence suggesting, and intended to suggest, that it was Mr Eather, and not the appellant, who had been sighted by, in particular, Mrs McEachern, according to the evidence in that behalf which she gave in support of the Crown case at trial.

Against that background of fact, it is convenient to attend, first, to the ground of appeal which challenges the appellant's conviction on the basis that the conviction is, in the requisite legal sense, unsafe and unsatisfactory and such as should be set aside by this Court.

The first basis upon which that attack upon the conviction is made is that the identification evidence given - one could say in practical terms, entirely - by Mrs McEachern, was so inherently unreliable that it ought not to have been accepted by the jury. It is, I think, expedient, in dealing with that submission, to recall with some care the relevant principles of law. They are stated in the decision of the High Court in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR ], as examined and explained by a differently constituted Bench of this Court in the matter of Thomas McKnoulty [(1995) 77 ACrimR 333.] In that latter case Hunt CJ at CL, delivering the principal judgment of the Court, makes the following observations: "It is clear from the context in which this question was formulated in M that it is for the appellant to persuade this Court that it was not so open to the jury. In order to provide content to that inquiry, and to provide authoritative guidance in answering it, the following propositions were also stated by the High Court: 
In most cases, a (reasonable) doubt experienced by an appellate court, after making its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence, will be a doubt which a jury ought also to have experienced.

It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving such a doubt experienced by that appellate court that it may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred - that is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, the reasonable doubt experienced by the court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced.

If, from the record itself, the evidence contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the appellate court to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence.

I have added emphasis to the word "ought" used in M because, to my mind, it emphasises the sense of obligation which was made clear in the test as it was originally stated, for example, in Whitehorn <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 657] at 687; <case>; <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 521] at 534, and as it was also often stated (but substituting the word "must" for "ought", apparently interchangeably), in Whitehorn at 688; , in Chamberlain at 534 and in Morris <case>; [(1987) 163 CLR 454] at 461; <case>; [28
ACrimR 48] at 53 or (substituting the phrase "bound to" for "must"), for example, in
Chidiac <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 432] at 451; <case>; [52
ACrimR 119] at
It is also important to emphasise that the High Court in M has not stated that the mere existence of discrepancies or inconsistencies in the evidence is sufficient to lead to the verdict being held to be unsafe or unsatisfactory. If they exist, they must be of such a nature as to persuade this Court that there is "a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted"." 
In the present case it is, as I think, not easy to form a view about the reliability of Mrs McEachern's evidence, in the sense that this Court has not seen or heard her and, to that extent at least, does not have an advantage, - and, as I think, a clear advantage, - available to the jury at trial.

It is true that things can be pointed to in the totality of Mrs McEachern's evidence which might be thought to be imprecise or even, in some particular instances, contradictory or otherwise insubstantial. As the decision in
McKnoulty makes clear, however, it is not sufficient to be able to raise what I might describe as forensic debating points about evidence of this kind.
What has to be shown is that, if there are discrepancies, they are of such a number and kind that any reasonable mind would see them as going to the very heart of the reliability of the general thrust of the evidence, and so that there can be discerned a rational basis upon which an appellate Court might fairly conclude that no reasonable jury could have accepted the totality of the challenged evidence.

It is, as I think, relevant to note that, at the conclusion of the Crown case at trial, and therefore at a point in the trial when the jury had had the benefit not only of hearing what Mrs McEachern herself wanted to say, but of seeing and hearing that version tested thoroughly in cross-examination, the learned trial Judge was asked to invite the jury to discharge the appellant, and to give to the jury in that regard what is conventionally described as a
Prasad invitation. Her Honour gave such an invitation to the jury, and did so in terms which, in my respectful view, appear to have put the invitation to the jury in a way which gave the maximum proper advantage to the appellant in that regard.

The transcript does not show how long it took the jury to decide that it would reject the invitation; but I think it is a fair inference, from a reading of the relevant portions of the transcript, that it did not take the jury any great length of time; and the jury, having considered the invitation, declined to take it up. One must be careful, of course, not to speculate impermissibly about the factors that might have operated in the collective mind of the jury in coming to that conclusion; but it seems to me, as a matter of elementary commonsense, that one may draw at least two inferences as follows:
That the jury was not prepared simply to disbelieve 
Mrs McEachern, and that the jury wished, before coming to a final view on the ultimate question of proof of guilt as charged beyond reasonable doubt, to have the benefit of seeing and hearing the appellant.

The jury did, in fact, see and hear the appellant in the form of the brief statement earlier quoted.

It is, as I think, beyond question that the verdict of the jury entails that the jury accepted the identification evidence, and did not accept the fairly peremptory denial embodied in the appellant's short and unsworn statement.

It is then necessary to ask where there might be found a rational basis upon which this Court can now intrude upon that finding of the jury, and set it aside upon the basis that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt. For myself, and applying the principles stated in M versus The Queen and
McKnoulty earlier cited. I cannot see such a basis. I do not think that any inconsistencies shown in the evidence of Mrs McEachern, or any imprecision shown in that evidence, or indeed any other criticisms now made of that evidence, are of such a combined obvious strength as alone would justify this
Court in saying that a jury, which saw and heard the relevant witnesses, got it wrong.

I have not taken time to dictate onto the present record the fine detail of the evidence given by Mrs McEachern and the fine detail of the criticisms now made of it. I propose that when what I am now saying has been transcribed, there will be added to it, as an appendix, pages 1-7 of the written submissions put in by learned counsel for the appellant commencing at a paragraph which I have marked at the foot of page 1, and continuing to a point, which also I have marked, at about the middle of page 7.

If it cannot be now held that the verdict ought to be set aside as unsafe and unsatisfactory because of deficiencies in the identification evidence as such, it is necessary to consider as well the other evidence in the Crown case. This is set out in paragraph 2 of the Crown submissions and it is common ground that what is there set out fairly summarises the relevant material. That material is as follows: "The physical items pointing compellingly to the guilt of the accused included: 
Cannabis found in the rear of the appellant's utility. The evidence of the police was unchallenged in this respect but absolutely no innocent explanation was offered by either the appellant or any of the witnesses called on his behalf.

Cannabis seeds were found in the house occupied by the appellant and his family. Hearsay evidence was called from the appellant's wife (whose veracity was challenged by the Crown) to the effect that the appellant's son had admitted ownership of the seeds. The appellant's son was not, however, called to give evidence.

The cannabis crop was surrounded by fencing material identical to fencing material found near the house occupied by the appellant.

A watering can was found in the rear of the appellant's utility, although no garden was found near the house. The appellant's wife gave evidence that she had borrowed the watering can from her mother. This was supported by the evidence from her mother. The appellant's wife suggested that she wanted to water trees that she had planted, yet her occupation of the house was only ever going to be for a short time.

A trowel was found in the rear of the utility. Again, there was no garden discovered near the house. There was evidence from the appellant's wife and mother-in-law that the trowel belonged to her.

At the crop site a 25-litre tin made into a bucket was discovered. A bucket constructed in an identical way was discovered near the house. The discovery of identical home-made buckets was of particular importance. Unlike some of the other physical items, for example the fencing wire, there was no attempt to suggest that these buckets were other than unique in design and fabrication.

The green garden hose discovered at the crop site was identical with similar hose found near the house.

Thin black hose found at the crop site was also identical with thin black hose at the house.
 -gallon drums were used to store water for the purpose of irrigation at the crop site. At the time the appellant moved into the house similar -gallon drums were on the property nearby.

The crop site was mulched with sorghum hay. Similar hay was discovered on the property occupied by the appellant and it was possible that the hay had come from the same paddock as the hay at the crop site.

The appellant and a man named Laurence Kelly had together purchased irrigation drippers. These were identical to drippers found at the crop site.
There was nothing to suggest that the appellant had used drippers for a lawful purpose. No innocent explanation was offered in the appellant's case." 
It seems to me that two in particular of the items of evidence there referred to were of very great significance in the present case. They are the items denominated (a) and (b).

No explanation consistent, if accepted, with innocence was offered in relation to either of those matters. That traces of cannabis leaf had been found in the table of the appellant's utility; and, in particular, that a number of cannabis seeds had been found in the appellant's then home, having been placed in an envelope and stored in a kitchen cupboard, were items of evidence which, if unexplained in any sensible kind of way, were entirely available to the jury in aid of the Crown case that the appellant had been correctly identified, in the requisite legal sense, with the plantation in question.

Apart from the matters to which I have thus far referred, I have done my best to take, as the law requires I should do, an independent overall view of the totality of the evidence at trial; and I am unpersuaded that the totality of that evidence was such that this Court is entitled, in the proper application of correct principle, to say that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt.

The ground of appeal that postulates an unsafe and unsatisfactory verdict has not been, in my opinion, established.

The ground of appeal that deals with the evidence of Mr Eather raises two related questions. The first is the question whether, indeed, there has been shown to have occurred at trial an irregularity deriving from the way in which the Crown Prosecutor dealt with the calling of that evidence.

The second and related question is whether, assuming for the purposes of argument that some such irregularity can be demonstrated, it has been shown to have been an irregularity of so cogent a kind as to entail a conclusion that the trial as a whole miscarried.

Strictly speaking, the view that I take on the second of those questions does not make it necessary to canvass the first of them: for it is my view that, even if it be allowed that there was an irregularity of the kind now suggested, it simply has not been demonstrated that there was, in any real sense, prejudice to the appellant at all, let alone prejudice of so compelling a kind that it should lead this Court to intervene and set aside the conviction.

Mr Eather, as I understand his evidence, which I have read, gave precisely the version which everybody thought he would give. It is true that he was cross- examined at some length by the Crown Prosecutor; but it does not seem to me to be demonstrable simply from a reading of the cross-examination that the Crown
Prosecutor derived from the mere fact of being able to cross-examine an advantage so stark and so important as to entail a conclusion that there was occasioned to the appellant unfair prejudice from the events that happened at trial concerning the taking of Mr Eather's evidence.

As I have said, that conclusion renders it unnecessary to say anything about the first of the two questions which I have posed above, but I do wish, for the sake of completeness and because the point raised by that first question is, as I think, a very important one in terms of principle, to make some short observations as follows.

It is very difficult, in the present case, to say much about the stance taken at trial by the particular Crown Prosecutor except that it is clear that the
Crown Prosecutor did not have a conference with Mr Eather before taking the decision not to call him as a Crown witness. There being before this Court practically nothing, apart from that bare evidence, I confess to some discomfort by reason of my inability to see, as at present advised, how the learned Crown Prosecutor was able, in the absence of a conference with Mr
Eather, to form an independent, informed, responsible judgment on the question of the reliability of that prospective witness.

The very important question for the Crown Prosecutor was, in practical terms, whether the Crown should call Mr Eather in its own case, even if only for the purpose of calling him formally so he might be cross-examined by learned counsel then appearing for the appellant. I do not say that in a way intended to imply a concluded view that there is some criticism rightly to be made of the Crown Prosecutor at trial. It would, I think, be quite unfair to do any such thing, if only because the Court has not heard from the Crown Prosecutor at trial. It is that aspect of affairs which draws the present observations from me; for I think that, in a case of the present kind, if an apparently sensible and plausible question is raised as to something done by a Crown
Prosecutor at trial, then it would be desirable, at least as a general rule, that there should be placed before this Court, in some proper form, a version from the Crown Prosecutor whose conduct has been questioned, as to whatever it might be that he or she might wish to say in explanation of what occurred at the particular trial.

It is no less true for being trite that it is always important that justice must not only be done in fact but be seen to have been done. That means, seen not by judges and lawyers, but seen by ordinary sensible observers in the community at large, to have been done.

I find some difficulty, I must own, in seeing how that principle can be given effect in such a context as the one I am now discussing, if the Court is left all but completely ignorant of the views and motivations and reasoning of the
Crown Prosecutor at trial; and is asked to deal with an apparently sensible question by, as it were, simply stepping around it on the basis that it is possible to argue plausibly that even if there has been some irregularity, no prejudice has been shown to flow from it.

I should say that I am very conscious that the observations I have just made represent a view as to which reasonable minds, including reasonable minds on the Court, might differ. I do not seek to impose them upon anybody else; but I would not think it right, having regard to the way in which that question has arisen in the present appeal, simply to let it pass without expressing the discomfort of which I have spoken; and without suggesting a possible remedy along the lines that I have just now been canvassing.

As matters stand, however, it seems to me that the ground of appeal that takes a particular point about Mr Eather's evidence has, for the foregoing reasons, not been established. It follows, in my view, that neither of the grounds upon which the appellant has relied at the present hearing has been made good.

I would dismiss the appeal against conviction.

STUDDERT J: I agree with Sully J that the grounds of appeal that have been argued have failed and they fail for the reasons that Sully J has expressed. I too would dismiss the appeal.

ABADEE J: I agree with the proposed orders of Sully J and his reasons therefor. 
STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court therefore are those proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
