

Gattellari versus Meagher Matter No 20813/96 [1998] NSWSC 679 (20 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
ROCKY GATTELLARI versus REBA MEAGHER /96 March 1998 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Defamation List 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: The plaintiff in these proceedings by statement of claim (with annexures) sues for defamation arising out of five alleged publications by the defendant. 
Only one of those is in issue in relation to the present application. That is a press release which, it is common ground, was issued by her on the 2
February 1995 in the course of an election campaign in which the plaintiff and the defendant were opposed.

The press release purports to refer to a book said to be the plaintiff's published autobiography and contains in its text a number of passages said to be quotes from that book. That is as far as the material pleaded in the statement of claim goes.

The defendant argues that the material annexed to the statement of claim does not represent the entirety of the press release which she says contained a bundle of pages photocopied from the book in question including the cover, the title page bearing the date and publication details and selected pages chosen to support the points that she sought to make in the press release.

Counsel for the plaintiff accepts that if this material was in fact annexed to the press release it would be proper that he be required to include it in the material pleaded. The only issue therefore that I have to decide is whether that material was in fact annexed to the press release when it was issued to the media on 2 February 1995.

The defendant has sworn an affidavit in which she deposed that the material was annexed and she has given sworn evidence today to the same effect and been cross-examined. She outlined how the press release was prepared and the manner in which it was distributed by her during the course of a press conference.
She explained that she annexed those pages because they supported the point that she sought to make in the press release.

It was put to her that she had added this material after the plaintiff commenced his proceedings in order to enhance her position in the litigation.
Two particular aspects of the evidence were pointed to as supporting that contention. One is that one only of the pages said to have been photocopied from the autobiography is imperfectly photocopied, such that the page number cannot be deciphered, but the press release itself in its text takes a quote from that page and identifies the page from which it comes.

I am unable to see that this argument advances the plaintiff's contention in relation to the factual issue I have to decide. There seems to be no issue that that was page 184 and it was taken from the plaintiff's autobiography. It is merely a matter of whether or not that page was, as the defendant said, annexed to the affidavit.

The second matter which it is argued gives rise to an inference that the extracts were not annexed to the press release is the material annexed as page from the autobiography. Although some of the other pages are referred to in the body of the press release no mention was made of the material on page .

The defendant gave an explanation for this which it is argued was implausible.
I do not find that explanation implausible. There are a number of pages which the defendant says were annexed but which are not specifically referred to in the body of the press release.

I am satisfied that the material drawn from the autobiography referred to in the defendant's affidavit was in fact annexed to the press release when it was issued on 2 February. The consequence of that, as I understand the concession of counsel for the plaintiff, is that an order should be made that that material be pleaded.

I order the plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs of and incidental to this application.
 * * * 
