

Jd versus Director of Public Prosecutions and Anor Matter No 10538/98 [1998]
NSWSC 352 (27 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 September 1998 
JD versus DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS & ANOR /98 March 1998 
Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By amended summons filed with leave in court on 23 March 1998, the plaintiff seeks the following relief:- "1. That the criminal proceedings brought pursuant to two informations alleging offences of sexual assault against his daughter Johanna are an abuse of process,
That the proceedings brought by the defendant referred to in paragraph 1 above be permanently stayed." 
The matter was argued before me on 23 and 24 March 1998. The material before me consisted of the following:- 
P1 An affidavit sworn by the plaintiff on 22 March 1998; 
P2 An affidavit of the plaintiff's present wife sworn 22 March 1998; 
P3 An affidavit of Gregory Alexander Walsh sworn 20 March 1998; 
P4 An affidavit of Brent Waters affirmed 20 March 1998; 
P5 An affidavit of Gregory Alexander Walsh sworn 25 February 1998; 
P6 An affidavit of Gregory Alexander Walsh sworn 18 March 1998; 
P7 An affidavit of Leisha Ann Johnstone sworn 20 March 1998; 
P8 An affidavit of the former wife of the plaintiff and the mother of the two relevant children sworn 23 March 1998; 
D1 An affidavit of Helen Christine Langley sworn 20 March 1998; 
D2 A copy of a search warrant executed on the plaintiff's premises on 8
February 1998.

Some relevant dates relating to this matter are as follows:- August 1998 Isabel born January 1992 Johanna born August 1993 Custody of Isabel and Johanna granted to the plaintiff.

September 1995 Plaintiff marries his present wife.
 January 1998 Isabel makes 000 call complaining of sexual abuse by the plaintiff involving herself, her brother and her sister.
 January 1998 Isabel complains to Denise Lafferty, a teacher at school.
 January 1998 Isabel interviewed by Kate Manning, Department of Community
Services District Officer and Detective Bassingthwaighte. Johanna interviewed on the same day. Children taken into care by Department of Community Services.
 February 1998 Applications for order (Child in Care) filed with Childrens'
Court.
 February 1998 Isabel interviewed again by Detective Bassingthwaighte.
 February 1998 Plaintiff arrested; search warranted executed; plaintiff charged.
 February 1998 Johanna and Isabel interviewed again by Detective
Bassingthwaighte.
 March 1998 Notice given that the defendant has taken over proceedings.
 March 1998 Submission on behalf of the plaintiff to the defendant inviting defendant to direct no further action against the plaintiff.
 March 1998 Plaintiff gives consent to provide a blood sample.

To date, no determination has been made by the defendant in relation to the request in the letter of 12 March 1998. In her affidavit, D1, Ms. Langley says the complete police brief of evidence has not been received by the defendant and that she has been informed that the police investigation of the matter is still continuing. On 3 March 1998, the matter came before the Local Court at
Hornsby. The court was notified about this application and accordingly stood the matter over to 31 March 1998 for mention.

Initially, a point was taken by counsel for the defendant that there were no current proceedings. However, in the light of Allerton v. Craig [(1991) 53
A. Crim. R. 33] at 39-40, the submission was withdrawn and it was acknowledged that proceedings had been commenced by the arrest of the plaintiff. Nevertheless, it is clear from the sequence of events set out above that these proceedings are in a very early stage.

I was referred to a number of cases on the exercise of the court's jurisdiction to stay proceedings as an abuse of process but both counsel agreed that the current law is accurately summarised in Regina v. Smith & Ors <case>; [(1995) 1 VR 10] and in particular in the passage in the judgment of Brooking,
J. at p.15:- "The decision of the High Court in Walton v. Gardiner <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 378] shows that whether the proceedings are civil or criminal the test is the same when one is considering whether the proceedings are an abuse of process by reason of the fact that they cannot succeed. Civil or criminal proceedings are an abuse of process, not if it can be said of them only that they will very likely fail, but if it can be said of them that it is quite clear that they must inevitably fail. So it was laid down in Walton v.
Gardiner by Mason, CJ., Deane and Dawson, JJ. at 393 that proceedings will constitute an abuse of process if they can be clearly seen to be foredoomed to fail. This formulation does not differ in substance from that of Brennan, J.
at 411: ('proceedings which will inevitably and manifestly fail')." 
I also bear in mind the following passage from the judgment of Clarke JA. in
Nolan v. Curby (unreported 20 December 1995, p.9):- "In the High Court, Gaudron, J. also expressed doubt as to the right of a civil court to intervene in criminal proceedings, saying (at p.7):- 'It is by no means clear that civil proceedings will lie to prevent the laying of criminal charges. But, if they do, it will only be because it will be an affront to justice if the proceedings were to be instituted or, and this may be an aspect of the same thing, because the safeguards available in criminal proceedings are clearly inadequate to protect against the injustice involved.' 
In my respectful opinion, Gaudron, J. has fastened on the nub of the matter.
The proposed proceedings, or the proceedings commenced, are criminal proceedings and it is for the criminal courts to exercise the control necessary to prevent an abuse of their processes. It is because the criminal courts are invested with wide powers to prevent an abuse of their processes and to provide an adequate remedy when oppression amounting to abuse has occurred that the courts in Elliott spoke of exceptional circumstances. It is primarily for the criminal courts to take action to prevent abuses of their process. It may be that there are circumstances in which a civil court will interfere in the criminal process but I am unable to accept that, except in extraordinary circumstances, such interference is justified in situations where there are adequate remedies in the criminal courts themselves. In this context it is worth citing the observations of Richardson, J. in Moevao v.
Department of Labour [(1981) NZLR 464] (which were expressly approved by Mason, CJ. in Jago v. District Court  <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 23] at 30):- 'The justification for staying a prosecution is that the court is obliged to take that extreme step in order to protect its own processes from abuse. It does so in order to prevent the criminal processes from being used for purposes alien to the administration of criminal justice under the law. It may intervene in this way if it concludes from the conduct of the prosecutor in relation to the prosecution that the court processes are being employed for ulterior purposes or in such a way (for example, through multiple or successive proceedings) as to cause improper vexation and oppression. The yardstick is not simply fairness to the particular accused. It is not whether the initiation and continuation of the particular process seems in the circumstances to be unfair to him. That may be an important consideration. But the focus is on the misuse of the court process by those responsible for law enforcement. It is whether the continuation of the prosecution is inconsistent with the recognised purposes of the administration of criminal justice and so constitutes an abuse of the process of the court.'" 
The first issue I turn to consider is whether the proceedings against the plaintiff are foredoomed to failure. Counsel for the plaintiff submits that they are because the only direct evidence of the commission of any offence is in the evidence of Johanna and in his submission that evidence will have to be excluded in any trial by reason of all or some of the following matters:-
The improper motivation of the mother.
The coaching of Isabel by the mother.
The pressure on Johanna to tell a false story.
The questioning of Johanna by her mother.
Improper questioning of Johanna by the police officer and the Department of Community Services worker.
Improper support given to Johanna and Isabel by the teachers involved.
Breaches of protocol relating to the questioning of young complainants.

For the above reasons it is submitted that at common law and/or pursuant to s.137 and/or [s.138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), Johanna's statement will inevitably be ruled inadmissible and there being no other evidence, the case must therefore fail.

In my view, it is not unusual in cases such as this for criticism to be raised about the motivation of one or other of the parents of the child or children concerned. Further, it is not unusual, in my view, for children particularly of the age of Johanna, to be reluctant to make allegations such as are made in this case.

Counsel for the plaintiff is asking me to make a determination about the above matters on paper and without having seen any of the witnesses involved either give evidence or be cross-examined.

A further contention on behalf of the plaintiff is that in committal proceedings by reason of [s.41(8A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s41.html) of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) the magistrate would not be able to exclude Johanna's evidence pursuant to [s.137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s137.html) and/or [s.138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) and in addition, that the plaintiff was unlikely to be granted a direction pursuant to s.48E of the same Act that Johanna should attend the committal proceedings for cross-examination. In relation to these further matters, I say two things.
First of all, they do not appear to me to be matters coming within the test to be applied as set out in Smith (supra) and secondly, it has not yet been decided whether this matter will be tried summarily or upon indictment and it is common ground between counsel that with the consent of both parties this matter could be tried summarily.

The fundamental contention on behalf of the plaintiff is that Johanna and
Isabel have been indoctrinated by their mother to make false accusations against the plaintiff.

I have read all the relevant material surrounding the circumstances in which it is said Johanna in particular has come to make the allegations. When reading that material I have borne in mind the criticisms maintained on behalf of the plaintiff about the quality and nature of that evidence. Having read the material bearing those criticisms in mind, I cannot say that I am satisfied that it is inevitable that the evidence of Johanna will be ruled inadmissible and that no other conclusion is possible.

The contentions on behalf of the plaintiff about Johanna's evidence will no doubt be considered firstly by the responsible officer of the defendant in deciding whether or not to proceed with the prosecution, and in the event that a decision to proceed is made will no doubt be considered by the magistrate should the proceedings be summary, or the trial judge should the proceedings be on indictment.

I have read the various authorities set out in the outline of the plaintiff's legal submissions and I am grateful for the assistance. However, none of them, in my judgment, establish any of the absolutes contended for on behalf of the plaintiff and indeed many of the propositions contended for involve the exercise of a discretion. It seems to me to be quite inappropriate to exercise that discretion in advance in favour of the plaintiff.

It was argued on behalf of the plaintiff that the situation in this case was unusual or exceptional because the actions of the mother of the children have resulted in orders of the Family Court being thwarted, and in the children now being cared for by others than their father. This proceeds on the premise that the mother is motivated by malice and has caused the children to invent false allegations. The material before me does not warrant such a finding and as for the consequences of such allegations being made to the responsible authorities, namely the removal of the children from the care of the plaintiff, these are regrettable but usual consequences in such matters and no doubt very distressing for all concerned.

Accordingly I am not satisfied that the prosecution case, even assuming it is presently in its final state, is foredoomed to failure nor do I regard the situation herein as being properly described as exceptional or unusual.

I would like to emphasise that the views I have expressed about the material before me are only those which I have regarded as necessary to express in order to deal with the application for relief before me. They should not be taken as influencing any other person who may come to deal with this matter, in particular the responsible officer of the defendant and/or any magistrate.
It may be in due course that some or indeed all of the contentions raised on behalf of the plaintiff are made out. Equally, it may not be. It is impossible for me to say one way or the other at this stage.

Accordingly, I make the following orders:-
The summons is dismissed with costs.
That nothing be published which might identify the alleged victim and that the plaintiff be known by the pseudonym "JD".
 * * * 
