

Regina versus Diamond Matter No Cca 60258/97 [1998] NSWSC 232 (19 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
REGINA versus JACK VICTOR DIAMOND 
CCA 60258/97 June 1998 
Priestley JA, Grove J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence (Armitage DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60258/97 
DELIVERED: 19 June 1998 
HEARING DATE: 27 May 1998 
PARTIES: Regina versus Jack Victor DIAMOND 
JUDGMENT OF: Priestley JA, Grove J, Sperling J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - T A Game SC 
RESPONDENT - L M B Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - T A Murphy 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal against conviction allowed 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - error in rejection of evidence relevant to motive - verdict not unsafe and unsatisfactory - new trial ordered - no question of principle involved. [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html), [s (4)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s104.html) 
M  <case>; [(1997) 149 ALR 598] 
No. of pages: 20 
REGINA versus Jack Victor DIAMOND 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: The appellant, Jack Victor Diamond, was indicted before Armitage DCJ at the Sydney District Court on 17 March 1997 on two charges: first, that on 15 September 1994 he wounded one Peter Brooks with intent to murder him; and, secondly, as an alternative to the first charge, that he maliciously wounded Peter Brooks with intent to do grievous bodily harm to him. 
The appellant pleaded not guilty and was tried before Armitage DCJ and a jury.
On 26 March 1997, the jury returned a verdict of guilty to the alternative charge of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm.

On 9 March 1997, the appellant was sentenced to a minimum term of six years and nine months penal servitude and an additional term of two years and three months. The minimum term was specified to commence on 18 November 2000, that being the date on which the appellant was expected to be released after serving earlier sentences.

The Crown case may be summarised as follows. The victim, Peter Brooks, the appellant and the appellant's alleged co-offender, Michael Tresize, were inmates at the Long Bay gaol complex. They were housed in 9 Wing in the
Industrial Centre within the complex. The victim had been transferred to Long
Bay from Lithgow gaol on 14 September 1994. Both the appellant and Mr Tresize were known to Mr Brooks. At about 9.30 am on 15 September 1994, the appellant asked Mr Brooks if he could "still get on to the gear", meaning heroin, to which Mr Brooks replied, "I am not going to ring my mate from gaol. If someone comes to visit me I will see what I can do." Mr Tresize was present when this conversation took place. (The Crown relied on the evidence of that conversation as providing a motive for the attack on Mr Brooks by the appellant. After that conversation, Mr Brooks was in Mr Tresize's company when the latter showed the former a shiv which he had concealed in his pants. After lunch, the appellant asked Mr Brooks whether he was going to the sports oval.
Mr Tresize was present. (This evidence was relied on by the Crown as part of a course of conduct on the part of the appellant and Mr Tresize to locate Mr
Brooks in a place where he could be attacked.) The appellant and Mr Tresize were later seen by Mr Brooks, to be sitting together around the yard. While Mr
Brooks was playing cards, the appellant and Mr Tresize left the yard, possibly together and possibly not. Mr Brooks thought they went to the oval. Mr Brooks continued to play cards. The appellant and Mr Tresize were again observed in the yard walking up and down together. The person with whom Mr Brooks was playing cards suddenly moved away from the table and left the yard, whereupon
Mr Brooks was attacked. Mr Brooks said that, while lying on the ground, he saw the appellant and Mr Tresize crouching over him and stabbing him. He did not see what implement the appellant was using but he saw that Mr Tresize was using the shiv which had been shown to him that morning. Mr Brooks said he was unable to see from his right eye. The vision from his left eye was blurred but he said he was able to see exactly what was happening. Mr Brooks also said that during the attack he was in and out of consciousness. As well as being stabbed, he was kicked. He saw no-one apart from the appellant and Mr Tresize at the time. He estimated that the attack lasted for about three or four minutes. When the attack stopped, he saw the appellant and Mr Tresize run from the 4 yard, where the attack took place, to 3 yard.

Following the attack, Mr Brooks was conveyed to hospital. He was operated upon. The shiv, which had been embedded in his chest, was removed. He remained in that hospital for nine days, was transferred to another hospital and then to Long Bay prison hospital. Dr Melman, a prison medical officer, said that he examined Mr Brooks on 28 September 1994 and observed that the torso was covered with more than fifty small round stab marks.

Following the attack, possession was taken of items of clothing belonging to the appellant and Mr Tresize. Blood on the appellant's shoes and Mr Tresize's shoes had DNA characteristics in common with Mr Brooks' blood. Only one person in 4,100 would have had the DNA characteristics that were in common.

The appellant was spoken to by the police at 8.00 pm on 15 September 1994. He said he had been on a legal visit at the time when the stabbing occurred and after that had been in 3 and 4 yards. He denied hearing anything suspicious and denied that he had any further information about the offence.

The appellant's case may be summarised as follows. The appellant gave evidence. He denied any involvement in the attack on Mr Brooks. He denied that he had had a conversation with Mr Brooks on the morning of 15 September 1994 about drugs or about going to the oval. He said he did not got to the oval that day. After lunch he had gone for a legal visit. That was confirmed by gaol records. He said the visit had ended some time after 3.00 pm and that he then went back to 3 and 4 yards. When he went to 4 yard to put his legal papers in his bag, he saw Mr Brooks lying on the ground with blood on him. He went over to see what he could do for him. He picked Mr Brooks up by the shoulders but had to let him go because he was too heavy. Another inmate, Jack
Murray, told the appellant that he now had blood on him and he should get away. The appellant was concerned that he would be a suspect. He grabbed his bag, went through to the other yard and had a shower. As he went through the gate between the yards he called out to the prison officer that there was someone in the yard who needed help.

Mr Murray gave evidence which was substantially in keeping with that of the appellant. He said he was in 3 yard when there was a commotion and inmates started to come through the gate from 4 yard into 3 yard. He saw Mr Brooks lying on the ground. He saw the appellant come into 3 yard. There was a discussion about the appellant getting his bag out of the other yard. Mr
Murray also had to recover a bag from that yard. The appellant and Mr Murray went into yard 4 together. Mr Murray said he saw the appellant go over to Mr
Brooks, kneel down and try to pick him up. He said he told the appellant to get away, and that he had in fact pulled the appellant away. He and the appellant grabbed their bags. He said he saw the appellant go to the gate and heard him call out to the prison officer to get a nurse. Mr Murray also said he saw the appellant had blood on him and that he told the appellant to get the blood off. They both went to the shower area and showered.

The appellant has appealed against conviction and has sought leave to appeal against severity of sentence.

There are three grounds of appeal.

Ground 1: His Honour erred in not permitting the accused to call the witness Attard.

There was no examination of Mr Attard on the voir dire and there is no affidavit or other evidence as to what Mr Attard would have said if called.
However, it is apparent from the cross-examination of Mr Brooks that counsel for the appellant had instructions that Mr Attard would say that, prior to his transfer from Lithgow gaol to Long Bay, Mr Brooks had said to Mr Attard that he (Mr Brooks) was worried about some of the prisoners at Long Bay, that he had a friend there by the name of the appellant, and that he was glad the appellant would be there to back him up.

It appears to have been accepted by the Crown at the trial and on appeal that, if called, Mr Attard would have given that evidence. In view of the basis on which the proceedings were conducted below and on appeal, I make that assumption.

Under cross-examination, Mr Brooks did not concede that he had had a conversation with Mr Attard. However, he conceded that he had told another prisoner at Lithgow gaol that he had a friend at Long Bay by the name of the appellant. Having at first conceded that he "might" have made all the alleged comments in conversation with the other prisoner, Mr Brooks later disputed saying he was glad the appellant would be there at Long Bay gaol to back him up or that he had enemies there.

The trial judge ruled that the appellant could not call Mr Attard because, in the trial judge's opinion, the evidence which it was contemplated he would give would go only to Mr Brooks' credit and would not be otherwise relevant to matters in issue at the trial.

The appellant submits on appeal, as was submitted to the trial judge, that the evidence was relevant to show that there was a friendly relationship between
Mr Brooks and the appellant which would militate against the appellant having become motivated to harm Mr Brooks. It was also argued that the evidence was relevant to show that there were prisoners at Long Bay gaol, not including the appellant, who were interested in harming Mr Brooks.

The proposed evidence was both relevant and admissible.

It was relevant because it militated against the appellant, as an alleged friend of Mr Brooks, becoming motivated to harm Mr Brooks as a result of the alleged conversation about heroin. It does not matter that Mr Brooks conceded in cross-examination that he had told another prisoner that the appellant was his friend. If admissible, the appellant was entitled to have evidence of the same statement being made to another prisoner as well, in order to add weight to the point. Furthermore, the proposed evidence by Mr Attard went further than friendship simpliciter. It went to a kind of a friendship that was particularly relevant.

The proposed evidence was also relevant because it ascribed a motive to persons other than the appellant to harm Mr Brooks. That contributed to the plausibility that one at least of the assailants was someone else and that Mr
Brooks' identification of the appellant was mistaken.

Both points went to the issue as to whether the appellant was truly one of Mr
Brooks' assailants.

The proposed evidence was hearsay but it was admissible pursuant to [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). The alleged statements by Mr Brooks were previous representations within the meaning of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html), being "first hand" hearsay as defined in [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s62.html) Mr
Brooks, the maker of the alleged representations had been called as a witness.
Mr Attard was a person who had, according to his proposed evidence, heard the representations being made. The facts allegedly asserted by Mr Brooks were current facts. Accordingly, no question arises but that such facts would have been fresh in Mr Brooks' mind. These factors satisfy the conditions for admissibility of the evidence pursuant to [s (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) 
The Crown relied on the proviso to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). I do not consider that no substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred. The evidence of motive was not strong and there was a serious issue at the trial concerning identification of the appellant by Mr Brooks. In this context, evidence which militated against motive on the part of the appellant and which ascribed motive to others might have affected the result.

It follows that the appellant is entitled at least to a new trial.

Ground 2: The trial judge erred when he ruled that cross-examination of Mr Brooks on his criminal history and on the account he gave to the police in that regard, would entitle the Crown to cross-examine the accused on his record.

This ground of appeal turns on [s (4)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s104.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) which provides that leave must not be given for cross-examination by the prosecutor about any matter that is relevant only because it is relevant to the appellant's credibility unless evidence adduced by the appellant has been admitted that tends to prove that a witness called by the prosecutor has a tendency to be untruthful and that is relevant solely or mainly to the witness' credibility.

Counsel for the appellant sought a ruling from the trial judge that he should be permitted to cross-examine Mr Brooks concerning his criminal history and the account of that history given by Mr Brooks to the police without incurring the penalty of exposing the appellant, if called to give evidence, to cross- examination about any matter relevant only to the appellant's credibility.

That question turned on whether the proposed cross-examination of Mr Brooks would be relevant solely or mainly to Mr Brooks' credibility.

The concessions which counsel for the appellant contemplated obtaining from Mr
Brooks by cross-examination were that he had been convicted of raping his ex- wife in circumstances involving considerable abuse and cruelty; and that, when spoken to by the police, Mr Brooks had dishonestly said he was serving a sentence only for abduction and arson.

The trial judge ruled that the contemplated cross-examination of Mr Brooks would expose the appellant to cross-examination about matters relevant only to the appellant's credibility.

The contemplated cross-examination of Mr Brooks in relation to the alleged understatement to the investigating police went solely to Mr Brooks' credibility. The trial judge was unquestionably correct in his ruling in relation to that aspect of the contemplated cross-examination of Mr Brooks.

As to the contemplated cross-examination to establish the nature and extent of the offences for which Mr Brooks was serving his sentence, the appellant's argument on appeal (as it was at the trial) is that, by reason of the nature and extent of those offences, Mr Brooks was particularly susceptible to being harmed by other prison inmates having regard to the prevailing gaol culture.
The approach was advanced as contributing to the plausibility that one at least of the assailants was a prisoner other than the appellant.

On what was put before the trial judge, there was however no reason for the trial judge to find that the prevailing gaol culture was as asserted. The offences committed by Mr Brooks are to be contrasted with sexual offences against children which are known to attract reprisals in gaols.

Accordingly, the trial judge was right to rule that the contemplated cross- examination of Mr Brooks would be relevant to prove that the witness had a tendency to be untruthful and would be relevant solely or mainly to the witness' credibility, thereby exposing the appellant to cross-examination as to credit.

This ground of appeal is, therefore, not upheld.

Ground 3: The verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory 
The appellant's case under this ground of appeal focused on the ultimate question in issue at the trial. That was whether the appellant was one of the assailants. Mr Brooks' evidence, implicating the appellant, was impugned by reference to circumstances which arguably reduced Mr Brooks' capacity for accurate observation at the time of the attack. Other evidence against the appellant included the evidence of motive, and the physical evidence of the victim's blood on the appellant's clothing. As against that, there was the appellant's denial on oath that he was involved and his explanation for blood on his clothing, all of which was supported by Mr Murray.

The appellant argued that the evidence of motive was weak. That is true. It is an important consideration which I bear in mind. A jury could not reasonably have found that the appellant had a strong reason for causing Mr Brooks physical harm.

In these circumstances, proof that the accused was one of the assailants depended very substantially on Mr Brooks' evidence. The conviction could not be sustained as a circumstantial evidence case based on the other evidence such as it was.

Conformably, the appellant's argument on appeal was directed principally to the identification evidence given by Mr Brooks. It was argued that it was not reasonably open to the jury to be satisfied that the appellant was one of the assailants because Mr Brooks' evidence that he recognised the appellant at the time of the attack was unreliable. Reasons were given. I will review those reasons.

First, the attack was initially from behind, so that Mr Brooks had no opportunity to identify the assailants before he was injured.

Secondly, the injuries received at the commencement of the attack prevented Mr
Brooks from seeing from his right eye at all, and the vision in his left eye was blurred.

Thirdly, the assailant alleged to have been the appellant was said by Mr
Brooks to have been wearing a hood which partially obscured his face, and cast a shadow over the whole of his face.

Fourthly, Mr Brooks was rendered unconscious before he first saw his attackers. Thereafter, he was in and out of consciousness during the attack.
This, it was argued, was liable to have affected his cognitive capabilities.
That was said to be confirmed by Mr Brooks' inability to say whether the assailant alleged to be the appellant had a beard or a moustache.

Fifthly, Mr Brooks was severely injured. He was, therefore, likely to have been pre-occupied by his injuries and the threat of further injury during the attack, rather than taking notice of who his assailants were or trying to identify them.

Sixthly, he was in fear - terror, one would think - of further injury - of death, one would think - as the attack proceeded, which again, it was argued, was liable to have affected his cognitive capabilities and to have been a distraction from observing who his attackers were.

Seventhly, there was the possibility of honest confabulation by Mr Brooks, filling in the gaps in his actual observations in a way that could be unreliable.

Eighthly, there was evidence of actual confusion of mental processes when the appellant was aggressive towards ambulance officers who were attempting to assist him. If he thought they were a threat to him, what then of the reliability of his asserted recognition of his assailants? 
Ninthly, there was no article of clothing found with a hood attached of the kind Mr Brooks says the appellant was wearing.

Tenthly, there were a number of inconsistencies in Mr Brooks' evidence. I have noted them. I also note that Mr Brooks had arguably lied about whether or not he had read his statement.

The Crown advanced answers to these points. I will summarise them.

The appellant was someone the appellant knew well. This was not a case of a victim attempting to identify a stranger. The appellant had only to recognise the appellant.

Mr Brooks had said on oath that, despite the impediments, he was able to recognise the appellant and to see what was going on. In particular, the vision in his right eye was, on his evidence, only "slightly" blurred, described by the witness in terms of not being able to read fine print. The attack was in daylight and Mr Brooks' observations were made at close quarters.

The appellant might have had his sloppy joe pulled over his head and that could have been mistaken by Mr Brooks for a hood. (Of course, that does not negate the point that the wearer's face was partly concealed and in shadow.) 
A beard and moustache could be no more than short stubble, so that a failure to notice or to remember whether the particular assailant had a beard or a moustache was neither here nor there. There was no suggestion that the appellant was wearing a distinctive beard or moustache.

The attack on the ambulance officers came later, when the witness was more likely to have been experiencing the cumulative effects of his injuries, including pain.

It was not necessary to construe the evidence as involving a lie by Mr Brooks about whether he had read his statement. The point was not a substantial one anyway. The asserted inconsistencies in Mr Brooks' evidence and an inconsistency with prior evidence were not substantial, some were contentious as being inconsistencies at all, they were not fundamental and they were not indicative of untruthfulness or unreliability in relation to the aspects of his evidence that mattered.

What I have recorded are the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant and the Crown respectively concerning the reliability of Mr Brooks' evidence.

The trial judge gave extensive and careful directions to the jury concerning the issue of identification, including the asserted shortcomings in Mr Brooks' testimony.

Having considered the foregoing aspects of the evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole and of the summing up, and having considered the arguments that have been advanced on the hearing of the appeal, I consider that it was open to a jury to be satisfied of the appellant's guilt beyond reasonable doubt. The trial turned principally on whether Mr Brooks' evidence identifying the appellant was to be accepted as against his denial as supported by Mr
Murray. Other evidence was sparse. The jury had the advantage of seeing and hearing Mr Brooks give his evidence, and of seeing and hearing the appellant and Mr Murray give their evidence which was diametrically opposed to it.
Despite the shortcomings in Mr Brooks' evidence, it was open to the jury to accept Mr Brooks' evidence identifying the appellant, in preference to that of the appellant and Mr Murray, as reliable beyond reasonable doubt.

That being so, on the principles laid down in M [(1994) 181 CLR 487], as explained in Jones <case>; [(1997) 149 ALR 598], this ground of appeal must fail.

Conclusion 
I propose the following orders.
Appeal against conviction allowed.
Conviction quashed.
Order a new trial.

GROVE J: I agree with Sperling J. 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Sperling J. * * * 
