

Regina versus Darkin Matter No 60191/97 [1997] NSWSC 391 (10 September 1997) 
Regina versus Christopher Lee DARKIN /97 September 1997 
Smart J, Sully J 
The Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Christopher Lee DARKIN 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Christopher Lee Darkin seeks leave to appeal against the severity of a minimum term of four years and an additional term of two years for the offence of robbery with use of corporal violence, taking into account the offence of fail to appear. 
On 12 October 1996 the victim and his fiancee were in Hyde Park near the
Archibald Fountain. He was taking some photographs of two tourists whom they were accompanying. A large group of young persons approached the victim and his fiancee. I shall not rehearse what happened to her. He was set upon by a group of male persons variously estimated to be six or eight persons, punched in the face and kicked numerous times. Some young men were pulling at the bag around his neck. The victim swung a few punches in self defence but the males continued to punch and kick the victim. Suddenly he felt a sharp pain to his right leg; he had been stabbed. The young men continued to punch and kick him.
Indeed, they held him up and kept punching him. He ended up on the ground in pain. He screamed for help. There were two stab wounds to the upper right thigh, swelling and bruising to his right cheekbone, sore back and chest and pain to his right lower leg. As a result of these injuries, he spent two days in hospital. Two mobile telephones, two wallets and an expensive camera were stolen. In all, the loss was of the order of $3,000.

Darkin was one of those who attacked the victim and one of the two instigators. Physically he is a solid young man. A witness said that Darkin punched and kicked the victim and "flipped" him on to the ground. Darkin was initially charged with robbery with wounding but that charge was not pressed and he was charged with robbery with violence. Thus the wounding with a knife cannot be taken into account against him. The material suggests that another person used a knife and there is no evidence that Darkin knew that that person had a knife.

In a written statement, Darkin expressed his sorrow and remorse and asserted that the offence was caused by his drug abuse which had commenced when he was fourteen years of age. He had given way to peer pressure and had been living on the streets. He had started to straighten out his life since his arrest and to overcome his heroin habit. He was attending alcohol and other drug sessions at the Remand Centre and had undertaken a reading expression course.

The pre-sentence report indicated that Darkin had a stable up bringing and had been well provided for, with both parents remaining supportive. When Darkin commenced high school, he began to display some behaviour problems. He increasingly ran away from home and began to get into trouble at school, eventually being diagnosed as suffering from dyslexia. He was placed in a special class. He left school at the age of fourteen because he was unhappy.

The report stated that Darkin had had difficulty in addressing emotional problems. He was easily led and had some anti-social traits including damaging his parent's home. He was assessed as being of low average intelligence. He received a Newstart allowance of $150 a fortnight.

The officer was dubious about venturing an opinion on Darkin's future. She felt that he had little insight into issues relating to personal responsibility or responsibility to his family. He had failed to appear when granted bail and thus placed in jeopardy his mother's main asset.

Darkin was born on 30 June 1977, being aged 19 at the time of the offence. In
December 1992 he was sentenced to 18 months for maliciously damaging property by fire/explosives and using a weapon be resist arrest. In February 1992 he was sentenced to a control order for 12 months for robbery. The period was reduced to six months on appeal but the additional term was increased to 12 months. The sentencing judge attached importance to the offences involving violence. He was fined for two larceny offences in 1996. There were matters subsequent to the robbery with violence but they should not be taken into account on this hearing.

The Judge took into account the plea of guilty and Darkin's age and the contents of the pre-sentence reports. He was alert to Darkin's problems and difficulties. The Judge was guarded about rehabilitation, preferring to wait and see what happened. He regarded the episode as one of high criminality and determined correctly that the sentence had to contain a significant element of deterrence despite the youth of the offender and the importance of rehabilitation. The Judge rightly held that it was intolerable that people could not walk in a major park in the centre of Sydney, without being subjected to a severe personal attack.

The Judge found that there were special circumstances. I agree.

The applicant contended that the judge did not attach sufficient weight to the applicant's age and his rehabilitation and attached too much weight to general deterrence. This Court has stated that with young offenders (and that would include Darkin) rehabilitation is of great importance and general deterrence of lesser weight than with mature adults. Nevertheless the nature and gravity of the offence may result in general deterrence having to be given significant weight even with young offenders. This is such a case. It needs to be realised by all that attacking and assaulting people in public places will not be tolerated and that young people are no exception to this rule.

The applicant further contended that although the judge stated that he took into consideration the applicant's plea of guilty as a substantial factor in his favour, the Judge had not reflected such consideration in the sentence imposed. The Crown case was not a weak one but a substantial allowance had to be made for the plea of guilty. Counsel stressed that the plea of guilty had been entered at an early stage. It was shortly after the present charge was preferred on 27 February 1997 that the plea of guilty was entered.

The applicant contended that the judge had not given sufficient weight to the applicant having commenced rehabilitation and become drug free in gaol.
Accordingly, one of the contributing factors in the attack, namely the applicant's drug dependency, had been and was being addressed.

I am unpersuaded that the judge made any of the errors suggested by Darkin's counsel. In my opinion there was no error of fact or of law and no error in the exercises of the Judge's discretion. The judge had to deal with conduct which evinced much criminality. This robbery with corporal violence was a serious crime. The sentence imposed was not manifestly excessive. The sentence imposed sufficiently allowed for the subjective features while rightly emphasising the objective gravity of the offence.

If the matter had stood here, I would have dismissed the appeal. However, a parity argument was addressed to this Court. The applicant pointed out that a co-offender, Anthony Bartlett, had received a minimum term of three years and an additional term of two years. The sentencing judge in Bartlett's case regarded the criminality of Darkin and Bartlett as about equal. The materials before us suggest that Darkin was one of the two leaders in the attack. Both
Bartlett and Darkin seemed to be about equally involved in the kicking and punching and putting the victim on the ground. While there is not much difference, I think that Darkin's criminality is a little higher than that of
Bartlett. In Bartlett, the sentencing judge regarded Darkin as having a poorer record because of his prior offences of violence to the person, that is using a weapon to resist arrest and robbery. In Bartlett the Judge did not have to take into account the offence of fail to appear. That judge regarded the sentence of the Judge in the present case as correct.

Counsel, in reliance upon Postiglione v. The Queen (High Court of Australia, July 1997) contended that Darkin would have a justifiable sense of grievance. Such differences, it was submitted, as existed, did not sufficiently warrant the sentence and the minimum term being one year longer.
Darkin seems to have been involved in more serious crime than Bartlett but he was fifteen when dealt with for the malicious damage by fire/explosive and using a weapon to resist arrest, and sixteen when he was dealt with for robbery. While the records of Darkin and Bartlett are different, both had poor records. Too much emphasis should not be placed on the differences, especially as Bartlett appears to have had more offences and more serious dishonesty offences.

The question is do the differences between the situations of Darkin and
Bartlett sufficiently justify the difference in the head sentence of six years as against five years and the minimum term of four years as against three years.

The Crown submitted that in addition to the slightly higher criminality of
Darkin, the differences in their antecedents and the taking into account of the offence of fail to appear, Bartlett had psychiatric difficulties. The materials before us indicate that Darkin had considerable emotional and personal difficulties. The consumption of drugs is in no way an excuse for what happened.

I have come to the conclusion that the difference of a year both in the overall sentence and in the minimum term leads to a justifiable sense of grievance and points to a degree of difference which does not exist. In my opinion leave to appeal should be granted and the appeal should be allowed to a limited extent. The appropriate difference was one of six months.

I propose that leave to appeal be granted; that the appeal be allowed; that the sentences imposed be quashed and that the applicant be resentenced to a period of five and a half years to be served by way of a minimum term of three years, six months from 27 February 1997 to 26 August 2000 and an additional period of two years to commence on 27 August 2000.

SULLY J: Although I agree with the orders proposed and with what has been said by his Honour the presiding Judge, there are five things that I should like to say for myself. They are as follows: 
In my opinion this was, in objective terms, a very serious offence. I wish to say plainly that I consider it an outrage that any member of the public should be at risk of any form of assault when going about his or her lawful affairs in such a place of public resort as Hyde Park in the centre of the city. For myself, I would not wish anybody to be under any illusion that the approach which the Court proposes to take in this particular case signals any weakening whatsoever in what various benches of this Court have repeatedly said about the gravity of the present kind of offence; and about the proper severity with which those who commit that kind of offence can expect to be dealt by the Court.

Absent the parity point, I would not have countenanced any interference with the sentence imposed by the learned primary Judge. I need not add in that regard to what has been said by his Honour the presiding Judge.

I agree for the reasons given by the presiding Judge, and in the limited sense to which his Honour the presiding Judge has referred, that there is a parity point which requires the consideration of the Court. I take the view in that regard, as his Honour the presiding Judge has explained, for one reason and one reason only, and that is because I consider myself compelled to take that view by the reasoning of the High Court of Australia in the matter of
Jones versus The Queen (1993) 67 ALJR at 376.

I do not believe that a judge should dissemble about his process of reasoning; and so I will say yet again that, to me, it does not make sense that a sentence imposed upon the first of a number of co-offenders to be sentenced, and conceded on all hands to be in its own terms a sustainable and proper sentence, somehow becomes unsustainable and improper because of something done after the event by another Judge in the case of the sentencing of a co- offender. I said as much in the matter of Jones when it was before this
Court, and the High Court of Australia said that that was an erroneous view of the parity principle as established by the High Court in Lowe versus The Queen <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 606.] I am, of course, constrained to give dutiful effect to the law as stated by the High
Court; but I wish to say again that that is the only reason why, for my part,
I would countenance at all the notion that there is in a real and logical sense a parity point arising at all in the present case.

As to the way in which that parity point is to be analysed and dealt with when it is established that such a point exists, I say no more than that I am in respectful agreement with the presiding Judge.

I think that when this Court interferes in the way that it now proposes to do, that is to say by reducing a minimum term by as little at six months, the
Court should be mindful of the fact that such a single and particular decision of the Court is all too apt to blossom into a precedent, later placed before the Court in aid of similar minor reductions in cases which are not perhaps on all fours with that now being considered. I should have thought it very important for the Court to make it absolutely clear that nothing that is being done in the present case should give any encouragement to other people who have been sentenced to what may be colloquially described as a low range minimum term, to think, if I may be permitted a further colloquialism, that it is worth having a go in the Court of Criminal Appeal, on the basis that one might be lucky and that the Court might be persuaded, if some seemingly plausible argument or other can be cobbled together, to trim one or two months off here and there from an otherwise sustainable sentence.

It should be stated that in a case where there are co-offenders to be sentenced, it is in the highest degree desirable that one Judge should deal with all sentences, if that is possible. Time and time again this Court is asked to consider parity points of greater or less particular merit, when the source of the availability at all of such an argument rests largely upon the fact that different Judges have been called upon to sentence, on different occasions, different co-offenders, in relation to common facts. It is in my respectful view a most desirable state of affairs that this be avoided.

Subject to those matters, which I have thought it proper to state with emphasis, I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour the presiding Judge.

SMART J: The orders are as proposed. * * * 
