

Fermentation Industries (Aust) Pty Limited and Anor versus Burns Philp and Co
Limited (No 2) Matter No 50210/97 [1998] NSWSC 176 (1 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
FERMENTATION INDUSTRIES (AUST) PTY LIMITED & ANOR v BURNS PHILP & CO LIMITED (NO 2) /97 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: FERMENTATION INDUSTRIES (AUST) PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus BURNS PHILP & CO LIMITED (NO 2) 
Proceedings: 50210/1997 
Dates of Hearing and Mentions: 13, 19, 20 February, 13 March and 21 April 1998 
Date of Judgment: 1 May 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr D J Hammerschlag/Mr H S Packer 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Dunhill Madden Butler 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr J S Hilton SC 
Solicitors for Defendant: Clayton Utz 
Construction of a one-off agreement.

Whether construction leads to a "capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unique result".

Whether two constructions open.

Australian Broadcasting Commission versus Australasia Performing Right Association Limited <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] and Urica Library Systems BV versus Sanderson Computers Pty Limited (Court of Appeal - 2 October 1997 - unreported) referred to.

Whether the Court in the exercise of its discretion should answer the question.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
These proceedings were commenced by a Summons filed on 31 October 1997 and proceeded on the basis of the Statement of Agreed Facts and Issues filed on 5
December 1997, and the Statement of Issues filed on 30 December 1997.

On 5 February 1998 I heard argument on the questions propounded by paragraphs (a) and (b) of the Statement of Issues filed on 30 December 1997, and, on 12
February 1998, I gave judgment holding that the answer to each of those was in the negative. I stated that it did not seem necessary to answer the remaining questions, as to which, in any event, I had not heard submissions. However, I reserved to the parties the right to seek further answers, and the plaintiff now seeks an answer to the third, viz:- "Whether the defendant is obliged to provide to the first and/or second plaintiff details of the Current Large User Price." 
For the purpose of considering that issue I shall assume that the reader is familiar with my earlier judgment. However, it is convenient to repeat some matters and to adopt the description of the parties I used there. The litigation arose out of a Supply Agreement entered into on 1 March 1978 between the plaintiffs, ("FI"), and the defendant, ("MBT"), whereby MBT agreed to sell yeast to FI at a price to be determined, from time to time, by the formula in the Schedule. Central to applying the formula was MBT's selling price of compressed yeast to "largest users", which were defined "as those parties buying over 50,000 kg of compressed yeast per month". The price for cream yeast was determined by reference to the price for compressed yeast. The provisions of the Supply Agreement were replaced by the provisions of a Deed from 7 June 1985 to 30 June 1994, after which the Supply Agreement again became the operative contract.

The only method the Supply Agreement provided for determining the price was set out in the formula. An essential ingredient of the formula was the "MBT selling price to `largest users'". The formula stated that the selling price to largest users was 49.6 cents per kilogram as at 13 February 1978. It was obviously contemplated that that price and other figures to be inserted in the formula would vary from time to time.

The Supply Agreement was not a simple one for the sale of yeast. It was worked out by the parties in circumstances where FI had agreed to sell to MBT its yeast manufacturing business, and MBT had agreed to supply to FI its yeast requirements for domestic and export markets, so that FI and MBT would be wholesaling yeast in competition with each other. Hence the Supply Agreement was very much a "one-off" agreement making detailed provision for these special circumstances. It was no doubt drafted with the competition provisions of the Trade Practices Act in mind. In all these circumstances it would be inappropriate, in my opinion, to seek to circumvent the words used by the parties by applying standards of reasonableness, or those which may otherwise be externally acceptable, or by implying terms, save in the most obvious instances.

The determination of the issue proceeded by the parties furnishing to me an affidavit of Ms Jacqueline Marie Deane, a solicitor employed by the solicitor for MBT, sworn 5 March 1998, to which no objection was taken and on which there was no cross-examination, and written submissions, which were supplemented by oral submissions.

The Issue 
The words "the Current Large User price" are accepted as being equivalent to "largest users" price in the formula. The formula also provided that the price for cream yeast was to be "equal to the compressed yeast price minus" certain costs. Therefore, to determine the price from time to time of cream yeast it is necessary to determine the price of compressed yeast and, for that to be done, it is necessary to know MBT's selling price to "largest users". The main question, which has been argued, is whether, as MBT contended, the definition contemplated, in its terms and in the context in which the Supply Agreement was worked out, the actual selling price from time to time to a "largest user"; or, as FI contended, if MBT was not making sales to a "largest user" because none was buying the amount per month necessary to qualify as such, the price at which MBT would sell to a hypothetical "largest user", i.e. a party, which requested MBT to sell it the necessary amount per month to classify as such. It was submitted that this result flowed either from a proper interpretation of the Supply Agreement, or that such a term should be implied because MBT was obliged to do all things necessary to enable FI to have the benefit of the Supply Agreement.

The following paragraphs of the Statement of Agreed Facts, to which I did not refer in my earlier judgment, are relevant:- "5. On 7 June 1985 the defendant MBT and the first plaintiff entered into a Deed pursuant to which, inter alia, the pricing provisions of the Supply Agreement were varied in the manner set out in the Schedule to that Deed.
 . Effective 30 June 1994 the variation so ceased to have effect and the prices for the supply of bakers' yeast by the Defendant to the First Plaintiff reverted to those calculated according to clause 8 and the Schedule to the Supply Agreement.
 . Until 27 January 1995 bakers' yeast supplied by the Defendant to the First Plaintiff was in compressed and cream yeast forms.
 . On or about 27 January 1995 the First Plaintiff sold its compressed yeast business to an Australian company known as Bakels LeSaffre Yeast Pty Limited.
 . After 27 January 1995 all of the First Plaintiff's requirements of bakers' yeast were purchased from the Defendant in the form of cream yeast.
 . On 31 March 1996 the First Plaintiff ceased to purchase cream yeast from the Defendant and has made no such purchases since that date.
 ...
 . From about 4 March 1996 until the First Plaintiff ceased to purchase cream yeast from the Defendant (31 March 1996) cream yeast was invoiced to the First Plaintiff at the price which prevailed on 4 March 1996." 
The material to which I shall refer nextly comes from the correspondence annexed to Ms Deane's affidavit. By letter dated 29 March 1996 the solicitors for FI sought from MBT various information and, in addition, confirmation that the Large User Price to FI under the Deed, being the Deed entered into on 7
June 1985, (paragraph 5 of the Agreed Statement of Facts), and which ceased to be effective on 30 June 1994, (paragraph 6 of the Agreed Statement of Facts), would be adjusted to reflect a specified rebate.

This led to various correspondence as to the basis on which the parties were then obliged to deal, a principal submission put forward on behalf of MBT being:- "That formula" (in the Supply Agreement) "itself is no longer workable due to the fact that the principal element for use in the calculation of yeast prices no longer exists and in BPC's letter to your client of 4 March 1996 it drew FIA's attention to the need for a new pricing basis to be agreed. Pending that agreement BPC advised FIA that it would continue to invoice FIA's cream yeast requirements at the price prevailing on 4 March and suggested that, as a priority, the pricing dispute between the parties should be resolved." 
On 4 July 1996 the solicitors for FI wrote to the solicitors for MBT requesting:- ".. a current price for cream yeast to enable our client to supply its customers." 
The letter asked for details of the calculations "in accordance with the formula of the Supply Agreement of 1 March 1978".

The solicitors for MBT responded that the formula contained in the Schedule was no longer workable and that, accordingly, there was no question of any price "which might be quoted to your client being calculated in accordance with that formula". The reason set forth in the letter of 4 March 1996 was:- "An essential element in the calculation of the compressed yeast price was the `MBT selling price to "largest users" ... defined as those parties buying over 50,000 kg of compressed yeast per month'. But because recently, the purchaser buying the largest quantity of compressed yeast from us has requirements of less than 50,000 kg per month, the formula is no longer workable." 
The point simply made was that MBT's selling price to "largest users" was defined "as those parties buying over 50,000 kg of compressed yeast per month", that there were no such purchasers and, therefore, there was no price by reference to which a price could be calculated in accordance with the formula.

It is not in issue, as I understand it, that there are no longer any "largest users" as defined. In those circumstances the question arises whether MBT is obliged to provide the information referred to in the question.

FI's Submissions 
FI has submitted that for it to have the benefit of its agreement it is necessary to have that information, which forms the principal component of the formula in the Schedule to the Supply Agreement, and that there is "a corresponding implied obligation" on MBT to provide it from time to time to ensure that FI obtains the benefit of its agreement. Reliance was placed upon
Secured Income Real Estate (Australia) Limited versus St Martin's Investments Pty
Limited (19;79) <case>; [144 CLR 596] and
Mackay versus Dick [(1881) 6 App Cas 251] at 263. It was also submitted that this conclusion was supported by clause 10 of the
Supply Agreement, which stated:- "The Auditors of FI shall be entitled at any time and from time to time to have reasonable access to the basic records of MBT from which the prices hereinbefore provided are being calculated and in the event that it shall become necessary for the respective Auditors of MBT and FI to adjudicate upon a dispute or difference of opinion as hereinbefore mentioned such Auditors shall if they consider it reasonably necessary have access to all production costs and calculations in connection therewith." (My emphasis.) 
The submissions note MBT's position that there is no such obligation because there is no party to which it is presently selling compressed yeast in the required quantity and, on the assumption that that is the fact, the submissions were made that the construction, which is contended for by MBT, would produce the unreasonable result that the agreement would have no operation; that the construction for which FI contended is commonsense particularly in a commercial contract and gives the contract operation; and that the MBT selling price is the price at which it would now sell the quantity, which would make the purchaser a "largest user". The submission continued that this could be objectively ascertained and left nothing to be determined by reaching outside the confines of the Supply Agreement. Reference was made to Trawl Industries of Australia Pty Limited versus Effem Foods Pty
Limited [(1992) 27 NSWLR 326.] The submission continued that it is for MBT to provide the information, and that if there is a dispute an expert determination could and would resolve it. In the alternative it was submitted that the MBT selling price "is the last price at which the relevant quantity was sold by the defendant".

MBT's Submissions 
MBT has submitted that it has no obligation "in the abstract" to provide the information at which it sells yeast to its customers, and that FI does not now have in place, nor has it at any time since 31 March 1996 had in place, an order with it for the supply of any yeast. It was further submitted that FI has not, since 31 March 1996, complied with any of the provisions of the
Supply Agreement relating to the procedures for the placing of orders, no doubt because no yeast is being purchased. Therefore, it was submitted, there was no factual basis provided pursuant to which MBT was obliged to furnish its price to FI, which is a competitor.

MBT has submitted that the question raised is, accordingly, hypothetical or academic, and that the intervention of the Court is not required because there may be no dispute between the parties as to the calculation of the price at which MBT would be prepared to sell to FI, if FI bona fide wished to purchase yeast from it. In these circumstances it has been submitted that before the Court intervenes it should allow the parties the opportunity to reach agreement on the manner in which the Supply Agreement should now operate. It further submitted that as the last occasion on which MBT sold more than 50,000 kg of compressed yeast was prior to March 1996, that that price was not necessarily relevant to and certainly should not determine the price payable for cream yeast in March 1998 and onwards.

Conclusions 
The issue raised may be stated shortly. It is whether, in the event of MBT not selling to a "largest user", so that there is no actual negotiated price to which reference can be made, there can be substituted for that actual negotiated price a figure at which it is believed that MBT would sell and the hypothetical "largest user" would buy. The submission for FI is that if its submissions on the issue of construction are not accepted it will be deprived of the benefit of its agreement unless a term is implied that the price should be furnished. The submission of MBT is that FI was only to have the benefit of the agreement for so long as there was a "largest user" buying yeast, and that in the event of that no longer happening there is no basis for calculating the price. If that construction is correct one cannot have an implied term, which contradicts the express terms of the agreement.

In my previous judgment I said, p.29:- "The purpose of taking the selling price to the `largest users', which it may be permissible to infer is the most favourable selling price, is to provide a price certain from which the calculations commence ..." 
On this hearing the parties agreed this was correct.

I set out a number of reasons why it seemed to me that, on a proper construction of the Supply Agreement, the parties contemplated that the selling price would be based on actual figures, although I did so in the context of considering other questions. None-the-less, I am satisfied that on a proper construction of the Supply Agreement, in the context in which it was entered into as appears from the recitals, the "selling price" to which the formula makes reference is the actual selling price. Therefore, there can be no question that that is a price an expert can determine.

That view is supported by a consideration of what had happened and what might happen. There is no doubt that the initial selling price was an actual price.
Whilst the parties continued to trade it remained so, save towards the end when it was fixed, but by reference to an actual price. The reason for this, so it seems to me, is clear. The price would obviously be reached after negotiation. A "largest user" would, one may infer, be in a position to bargain for a better price than that which MBT may want. MBT, as a major manufacturer, would, one may infer, be in a position to insist on a higher price than the purchaser may want to pay. Depending on the parties' relative strengths and weaknesses a price would be negotiated. There is no external standard, which would, or which would necessarily, dictate that price.

The conclusion is also supported by the words in clause 10, which I have emphasised. In my opinion they are speaking of actual prices, which have been, or are being calculated. This predicates a factual, rather than an hypothetical, position.

In the result I consider that the proper construction of the agreement demands that the price to be paid by FI is the price being paid by a "largest user" or the "largest users" to MBT. If there are none there is no price on which the formula can operate.

There is no basis on which the Court can imply a term as to how the price should be calculated in the face of the very precise method the parties have laid down for its determination. For the same reason it would be inappropriate to hold that the price should be a "reasonable" price. That was clearly not contemplated by the Supply Agreement and contradicts its express provisions.
Finally I do not consider that it can be argued that the proper course is to require MBT to nominate a price at which, if there was a "largest user", it would sell to it. I am satisfied that on a proper construction of the Supply
Agreement the price to a "largest user" was that which MBT was able to negotiate in the market place, not an hypothetical price which it may consider it would obtain, nor a hopeful price, which it would wish to obtain.

In the result I am of the opinion that the parties have failed to direct their minds to the position which would apply if MBT was not selling to a "largest user" and, conformably with accepted principles, there is no basis on which the Court can remedy the matter by resort to a "reasonable price", or by reference to any external standard.

I should add expressly, although I think it is implied in what I have said, that when one has regard to the definition in the formula reference is being made to the price at which transactions of sale and purchase are taking place, not to hypothetical or theoretical sales. It is, of course, only by adopting this approach that the necessary element of certainty is brought to bear and the contractual intention, considered objectively, is ascertained.

Does This Lead To A Capricious Or Unreasonable Result? 
A question arises as to whether this construction, which does have the effect of precluding FI from seeking to enforce the Supply Agreement in the existing circumstances, should be adopted. In making this statement I appreciate that the Court is required to construe the words used and is not authorised to make an agreement, which it thinks the parties may have made if they had appreciated the difficulties with the words they have adopted. One must also, in construing the Supply Agreement, view the words objectively to determine the contractual intention.

In Australian Broadcasting Commission versus Australasia Performing Right
Association Limited <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] Gibbs J, although dissenting on the point of construction, said, at p.109:- "If the words used are unambiguous the court must give effect to them, notwithstanding that the result may appear capricious or unreasonable and notwithstanding that it may be guessed or suspected that the parties intended something different ... On the other hand, if the language is open to two constructions, that will be preferred which will avoid consequences which appear to be capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unjust, `even though the construction adopted is not the most obvious, or the most grammatically correct' to use the words from earlier authority cited in Locke versus Dunlop [(1888) 39 Ch 387] at 393 ..." 
This passage was applied by the Court of Appeal in reversing my construction of an agreement in Urica Library Systems BV versus Sanderson Computers Pty
Limited (Court of Appeal - 2 October 1997 - unreported). Of course, for it to apply there must be at least two available constructions, which, in my opinion, there are not in this case. Sheller JA, with whom Mason P and Meagher
JA agreed, said, after noting that the appellant's submissions did not strike him, on first impression, as correct:- "Bearing in mind the appellant's argument as to the consequences of construing the clause as the respondent submitted, I think one can fairly say that this is a case where two constructions are open but the appellant's is the one which avoids consequences which appear to be capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unjust, even though the construction may not be the most obvious." 
The Court must, of course, draw the line in proceeding on this path between construing, on the one hand, and re-writing, on the other, the agreement to avoid a result, which it perceives to be undesirable in the sense to which
Gibbs J referred. In the present case I consider that the "selling price" was that at which MBT was selling to a "largest user", and that to seek to construe the agreement to mean the price to an hypothetical purchaser would not be an exercise in construction, but in re-writing the agreement.

As I have said there is no reason to assume that the price to a "largest user" would not be the most advantageous price by dint of the ability of the "largest user" to negotiate most effectively as low a price as possible. It seems to me inherently probable that this is the price FI would want as the starting point for its formula. Equally FI may very well not to have been left with an hypothetical, academic or "wish" price in circumstances where it could not be verified by market place negotiations. Accordingly, I do not consider that to adopt the actual selling price to a "largest user" leads to a capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unjust result, any more than would a desire by MBT to impose an hypothetical, academic or "wish" price on FI if MBT had no "largest user" actual price and FI wanted to buy. The parties in either event have not provided for a price or the means of calculating one in their present agreement.

Result 
Accordingly, it seems to me, firstly, that on the Agreed Statement of Facts, and upon the assumption that it is accepted that there are no "largest users" as defined in the Schedule, there is no information to be provided. Secondly, assuming that FI now wishes to make purchases the agreed method of fixing the price cannot be applied. Therefore if the parties agree that there should be future sales they will have to agree on the price or a method for ascertaining it.

I am also of the opinion that the present proceedings do not raise the issue for decision in an appropriate way. The Court is being asked to decide a serious question on limited facts and some assumptions and hypotheses. The remedy of FI, if it has one, is to formulate a case which allows the Court to make factual findings as to whether, for example, one party or the other is in breach of contract in consequence of those factual findings and what is the legal result flowing from that breach, once again having regard to the facts as found. The failure of FI to present such a case would, in my view, provide a discretionary reason for refusing to answer the question. However, I propose to answer it.

I consider the question must be answered "No". I order the plaintiffs to pay the defendant's costs of the determination of this issue.
 * * * 
