

Global Communications Group Pty Limited versus Midbeam Pty Limited Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 773 (28 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 1 February 1999 
GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS GROUP PTY LIMITED versus MIDBEAM PTY LIMITED /98 July 1998 
Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
This is a case stated by Mr John Williams L.C.M. arising out of proceedings before him in the Downing Street Local Court. The plaintiff in the District
Court was Midbeam Pty Limited Trading as C & C Personnel of North Sydney and the defendant was Global Communication Group Pty Limited of 31 Market
Street Sydney. The plaintiff carries on business as human resource consultants. Although it is the defendant in the proceedings before me it is convenient to refer to it as the plaintiff. The principal of the plaintiff is
Mrs Cheryl Maloney. The defendant (Global) carries on a marketing business, both by telephone and by field sales. It employs persons categorized variously as telemarketers, sales executives, sales representatives and the like. Some employees are engaged solely in the selling of products over the telephone whilst others, who are paid at a higher rate, are engaged in selling at the field level. The principal of the defendant is Mr Mark Winnett.

The plaintiff claims that during June and July 1996 it referred personnel to the defendant, both as telemarketers and sales representatives, at an agreed rate and was not paid by the defendant for such referrals. The plaintiff filed a Statement of Liquidated Claim in the Local Court, on 27 August 1996 claiming the sum of $23,000.00, being in respect of two referrals of telemarketers at an agreed fee of $2,500.00 per referral and six sales representatives at an agreed fee of $4,500.00 per referral, between 11 June and 17 June 1996.

The matter was set down for hearing on 12 May 1997, and on 5 May 1997 the solicitors for the plaintiff wrote to the solicitors for the defendant stating that at the hearing the plaintiff would be seeking to amend the Statement of
Claim to increase the amount claimed to $48,000.00, to encompass the referral of 5 sales representatives and 1 telemarketer between 4 July and 15 July 1996.
As the maximum claim justiciable in the Local Court was $40,000.00, the plaintiff stated that it would abandon the excess. On 12 May 1997, the Local
Court granted the plaintiff leave to amend the statement of claim as proposed 
The defence filed by the defendant denied any liability to the plaintiff and denied entering into any contract with the plaintiff, and, alternatively, "if it were established that the defendant had entered into a contract with the plaintiff, the defendant says that there was no concluded contract and that any purported contract is unenforceable for uncertainty and vagueness." The logical difficulties with the alternative defence do not concern this Court because the sole argument on the Stated Case was that it was not open to the learned Magistrate to find, on the evidence, that there was a contract between the plaintiff and the defendant. Thus it was a `no contract' case.

It is convenient to note, at this stage, that the proceedings before me are not in the nature of a rehearing. Nor indeed could they be, because I do not have before me the totality of the evidence which was before the Magistrate.
The material before me is confined to the Stated Case together with certain documentation which was, by agreement between counsel, placed before me having been part of the evidence in the Local Court, together with the full judgment of the Magistrate. The only question before me, therefore, is whether it was open to the Magistrate, upon the evidence before him, to hold that there was a concluded contract between the parties. It is common ground that if it were, then the plaintiff is entitled to the verdict, in toto, awarded to it by the
Magistrate together with the interest thereon.

The evidence was concluded in the Local Court on 12 May 1997 and his Worship sat on after 4 pm to deliver an ex tempore judgment.

The facts found by the Magistrate are set out concisely in paragraph 2 of the
Stated Case. It is appropriate, I think, that I set them out verbatim, albeit with certain comments in square brackets.
 "2. Facts .1 The plaintiff trades as C & C Personnel and its principal is Mrs.
Cheryl Maloney. The defendant is in the business of telemarketing and its principal is Mr. Winnett.
 .2 A document headed `C &C Personnel' and referred to as the terms and conditions document, became Exhibit 1 in the proceedings. This document sets out the plaintiff's services, terms of business, invoicing, fees, terms and conditions which included a replacement guarantee. If the invoice for the placement fee was paid within 14 days and the personnel were terminated or left the defendant within the guarantee period, then the plaintiff guaranteed to replace the personnel for no fee. In any event, the plaintiff's fee was not refundable.
 .3 In late May/early June 1996 Mrs Maloney and Mr Winnett had discussions which resulted in resume's for possible personnel being sent to Mr Winnett.
 .4 On 6 June 1996 Mrs Maloney and Mr Winnett met at Mr Winnett's office and discussed Mr Winnett's personnel requirements.
 .5 Between 11 June 1996 and 15 July 1996 twelve personnel referred by the plaintiff to the defendant were employed as telemarketers and sales representatives.
 [6 persons were referred on or before 11/6/96 and 7 between 4/7/96 and /7/96. All referrals were the subject of invoices] .6 Prior to 20 June 1996 the defendant company had received a copy of the terms and conditions document being exhibit 1 and discussions took place between the plaintiff and defendant in relation to the fee for certain placements.
 .7 On 20 June 1996 the defendant received a letter from the plaintiff enclosing a number of invoices in regard to the first six persons who had commenced with the defendant. The letter of 20 June stated `Further to our telephone discussion and our subsequent meeting, I would like to confirm in writing a mutually beneficial recruitment arrangement.' The letter continues `My suggestion is that fees be discounted for telemarketers to a set fee of $2,500 and an eight week guarantee provision and sales executives to a set fee of $4,500 with a five week guarantee provision subject to negotiation.' The letter continued `Replacement provision will be provided and all other conditions pertaining to our normal terms and conditions are applicable.' .8 On 20 June 1996 Mr Winnett telephone (sic) Mrs Maloney and said words to the effect `The fee structure' - that is, in the letter - `is acceptable to me if we can reach agreement in relation to the period and terms of the guarantee. I am not getting the calibre of people I thought I would. I believe we should be looking at 12 weeks for commission only field sales and telesales people and about eight weeks for telemarketers.' (My emphasis.) .9 During the telephone discussion between Mrs Maloney and Mr Winnett on 20
June 1996, Mr Winnett stated that Mrs Maloney said `I will consider the period and terms of the guarantee and get back to you.' .10 On 16 July the defendant wrote to the plaintiff advising `Cheryl, it has become readily apparent that the calibre of personnel being forwarded is not of the standard required, most have been terminated or failed to show up and as previously advised to you during out (sic) initial brief, I believe this is a direct reflection of the recruiting process. The recruitment process we undertook ourselves has previously produced significantly better and most cost effective results. Your suggestions regarding this situation and possible remedies would be appreciated'.
 .11 On 18 July 1996 the plaintiff replied to the defendant's letter in terms which included `You agreed that payment would be made against invoices number
P008 for Patrick Gallagher and P014 for Jill Morton respectively in the sum of $9,000.'' The letter continued on '`I trust we can conclude this matter .....
and we will put forward a new proposal to you taking into consideration your financial constraints for future recruiting services. I confirm we are negotiable on all points from this date however I must stress that all fees billed for previous personnel remain fixed at the previous negotiated rate.
My suggestion would be that all telemarketing people be appointed by C & C
Personnel and the fee remain at $2,500 with the same guarantee provisions. (My emphasis.) 
However, in lieu of more volume business, I am prepared to offer you a substantial discount on telesales and field sales personnel, that is from $4,500 down to $3,000 with the same guarantee provision'. Whilst we have settled on an arrangement for placements already billed, I do not want to go down this track again, wondering whether I am going to be paid or not.' (My emphasis.) .12 On 23 July 1996 the defendant wrote to the plaintiff and terminated the arrangement with the plaintiff for referral of personnel stating `You are advised that we no longer wish to take advantage of your firm's services. The arrangement between your firm and this company may be considered at an end as at this date.' (My emphasis.) .13 On 31 July 1996 the defendant again wrote to the plaintiff advising `since the date of that letter the 2 remaining persons employed from applicants referred by your company, for which this company at that time indicated that it was prepared to pay, have also resigned. As these persons were employed by this company for less than 3 months no fee is payable to your company for their procurement whatsoever'." 
The Grounds of Determination (excluding paragraph 3.3 which is now no longer of relevance) are in the following terms in the Stated Case: "3.1 It was submitted on behalf of the defendant that no agreement had been reached on some essential terms of the contract and the contract therefore failed.

I did not accede to this submission and held there was agreement between the parties that was basically reflected in the plaintiff's terms and conditions as amended by the plaintiff's letter of 20 June 1996 and a reduced fee set for the two types of personnel and a certain length of guarantee provision applicable to those two types of personnel.
 .2 It was submitted on behalf of the defendant that the defendant was not bound by the terms and conditions as they were not received until after staff commenced employment and the defendant was still attempting to negotiate an appropriate guarantee.

I did not accede to that submission and held that there was an implied acceptance of the terms and conditions by the actions of the defendant to continue to accept candidates from the plaintiff - a fairly common situation in commercial practice where quite often people become bound by terms and conditions when they accept goods or services that are provided on the basis of conditions stipulated by the persons supplying them. It is not necessary for there to be any mutual agreement in those particular types of circumstances and that it was not necessary for there to be any mutual agreement in these circumstances.
 .4 It was also submitted for the defendant that if I found a concluded contract, the contract failed for uncertainty.

I did not accede to this submission and held that the contract was not unenforceable for uncertainty or vagueness, the only aspect of the contract that could be regarded as being uncertain was the period guarantee applicable to the sales executives and the contract in any event was terminated well inside any period proposed by either the plaintiff or the defendant.
 .5 It was submitted for the plaintiff that there was a concluded contract between the plaintiff and defendant and the defendant was estopped by the implied acceptance of the contract from denying the contract.

I acceded to this submission and held that the plaintiff's terms and conditions were received by the defendant on a date prior to 20 June and the defendant impliedly accepted those terms." 
Those Grounds of Determination were supplemented by Further Grounds of
Determination in the following terms: "4.1 It was submitted by the defendant that the guarantee is an essential part of the contract.
 .2 I stated that I had no difficulty with that. However the guarantee was comprised of three parts. Firstly there was to be a replacement where a person was terminated. Secondly the replacement had to occur within a specified period. Thirdly the whole arrangement only applied if the fee had been paid within fourteen days of the account.
 .3 I further held that there had been no suggestion, in any way, that the basic fundamental of the guarantee was ever the cause of any concern - that is, that the replacement would be provided where a person had been appointed and terminated within a guaranteed period. Further that the guarantee was only valid if the original invoice had been paid within fourteen days.
 .4 I further found that the principal for the defendant stated that he was not actually greatly concerned about the question of the guarantee. He preferred to have quality people to begin with.

Counsel for both parties agreed that I should take into account two passages from the Magistrate's judgment. The first is in the following terms: "Mr Winnett, in his statement, at paragraph 11, acknowledges that he received the letter of 20 June and, consequent upon that, he rang Mrs Maloney and said words to the effect: `The fee structure' - that is, in the letter - `is acceptable to me, if we can reach agreement in relation to the period and terms of the guarantee. I am not getting the calibre of people I thought I would. I believe we should be looking at twelve weeks for commission only field sales and tele sales people and about eight weeks for telemarketers.' 
And she is alleged to have said: `I will consider the period in terms of the guarantee and get back to you.' 
So that the proposal that was put back, as it were, to Mrs Maloney, if I accept that that conversation took place - and it has not been suggested that(sic) the plaintiff that it did not take place - that agreement had been reached in regard to the telemarketers, as far as the guarantee period was concerned, which was eight weeks, and the fee of $2,500. As far as the sales executives were concerned, the fee was agreeable, the plaintiff's five-week guarantee provision, subject to negotiation, the length of that was being put back by the defendant to suggest that twelve weeks was more appropriate." 
The second passage is in the following terms: "There is an implied acceptance of the terms and conditions by the actions of the defendant in continuing to accept persons from the plaintiff's company, and that's a fairly common situation in commercial practise (sic) where quite often people accept - people become bound by terms and conditions when they accept goods or services that are provided on the basis of conditions stipulated by the person supplying them. It is not necessary for there to be any mutual agreement in those particular types of circumstances." 
The standard terms and conditions of the plaintiff were before me and there are three aspects of those terms and conditions to which I should make special reference. Firstly, the introduction fee is specified to be related to a percentage of the annual salary. The scale ranges from 12.5% of an annual salary up to $24,999.00 to 18% of an annual salary of $45,000.00 or more.
Secondly, the standard terms provide: "Acceptance of a candidate referred by C & C PERSONNEL constitutes agreement to our fees, guarantee and terms - whether it be permanent or temporary staff." 
Thirdly, the guarantee period for staff ranges from eight weeks for an annual salary of up to $24,999.00 to twenty four weeks for a salary of $45,000.00 or more.

As is apparent from paragraph 2.6 of the "Facts", set out in the Stated Case, the Magistrate held that the defendant received a copy of those terms and conditions prior to 20 June 1996, the date upon which the letter referred to in paragraph 2.7 was written by the plaintiff to the defendant.

Counsel for the defendant submitted, as I have indicated, that the Magistrate erred in holding that there was a concluded agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant. He submitted that the Magistrate fell into error in this regard by undue emphasis upon the fact that after 20 June 1996 the defendant continued to accept personnel from the plaintiff. It was submitted that his
Worship gave insufficient weight to the telephone conference detailed in paragraph 2.8 of the "Facts". This demonstrated positively, according to counsel for the defendant, that no agreement had been reached because the absence of any consensus ad idem as to the terms of the guarantee for salespersons was a critical aspect of any potential agreement between the parties. Detailed submissions on behalf of the defendant were set out in a helpful five page summary of the defendant's outline of submissions, all of which have been noted.

In Scammell versus Ouston [[1941] A.C. 251] (at 254) Viscount
Maugham said: "It is a regrettable fact that there are few, if any, topics on which there seems to be a greater difference of judicial opinion than those which relate to the question whether as the result of informal letters or like documents a binding contract has been arrived at.
 ....

The reason for these different conclusions is that laymen unassisted by persons with a legal training are not always accustomed to use words or phrases with a precise or definite meaning. In order to constitute a valid contract the parties must so express themselves that their meaning can be determined with a reasonable degree of certainty. It is plain that unless this can be done it would be impossible to hold that the contracting parties had the same intention; in other words the consensus ad idem would be a matter of mere conjecture. This general rule, however, applies somewhat differently in different cases. In commercial documents connected with dealings in a trade with which the parties are perfectly familiar the court is very willing, if satisfied that the parties thought that they made a binding contract, to imply terms and in particular terms as to the method of carrying out the contract which it would be impossible to supply in other kinds of contract: see Hillas & Co. v. Arcos, Ltd. <case>; [147 L T ."] 
It is important to refer, for present purposes, to the well-known case of
Hillas & Co versus Arcos Ltd, which is also reported in (1932-1933) 38
Com.Cas.23. That case involved the question whether a certain option, dated
May 21 1930, constituted a valid contract or a mere agreement to make an agreement. The House of Lords (reversing the Court of Appeal) held that a contract had been concluded.

The various speeches emphasize the importance of the subject option being a commercial document (as I would categorize the plaintiff's terms and conditions here) and the fact that the parties believed that they had an agreement: see, for example, per Lord Thankerton at p 34.

In a well-known passage, Lord Wright said at pp 36-37: "The document of May 21, 1930, cannot be regarded as other than inartistic, and may appear repellent to the trained sense of an equity draftsman. But it is clear that the parties both intended to make a contract and thought they had done so. Business men often record the most important agreements in crude and summary fashion: modes of expression sufficient and clear to them in the course of their business may appear to those unfamiliar with the business far from complete or precise. It is accordingly the duty of the Court to construe such documents fairly and broadly, without being too astute or subtle in finding defects; but, on the contrary, the Court should seek to apply the old maxim of English law, Verba ita sunt intelligenda ut res magis valeat quam pereat. That maxim, however, does not mean that the Court is to make a contract for the parties, or to go outside the words they have used, except in so far as there are appropriate implications of law, as for instance, the implication of what is just and reasonable to be ascertained by the Court as matter of machinery where the contractual intention is clear but the contract is silent on some detail. Thus in contracts for future performance over a period, the parties may neither be able nor desire to specify many matters of detail, but leave them to be adjusted in the working out of the contract. Save for the legal implication I have mentioned, such contracts might well be incomplete or uncertain: with that implication in reserve they are neither incomplete nor uncertain. As obvious illustrations I may refer to such matters as prices or times of delivery in contracts for the sale of goods, or times for loading or discharging in a contract of sea carriage.
Furthermore, even if the construction of the words used may be difficult, that is not a reason for holding them too ambiguous or uncertain to be enforced if the fair meaning of the parties can be extracted." (My emphasis) 
If one applies these principles to the instant case, it is clear, firstly, that the parties believed they had a contract. One notes, from the plaintiff's point of view, the letter dated 18 July 1996 in which Mrs Maloney stated "I must stress that all fees billed for previous personnel remain fixed at the previous negotiated rate" and further: "Whilst we have settled on an arrangement for placements already billed, I do not want to go down this track again, wondering whether I am going to be paid or not". (para 2.11) 
And, from the defendant's point of view, one notes that the letter from the defendant to the plaintiff dated 23 July 1996 contains this statement: "The arrangement between your firm and this company may be considered at an end as at this date". (para 2.12) 
It is true that there was no specific agreement on the part of the defendant to the proposal in the plaintiff's letter dated 20 June 1996 with regard to the guarantee period for sales executives (or commission only field sales and telesales employees) (para 2.8) but it was open to the Magistrate to conclude (as he did) that the guarantee period was not of real concern to the defendant (para 4.4). Thus, to use Lord Wright's words, "this was a matter of detail to be adjusted in the working out of the contract" - a contract which was one for future performance over a period. And, of course, it was open to the
Magistrate to hold that in the absence of specific agreement in this regard - the plaintiff's standard terms and conditions would apply, because his Worship found that the defendant employed the various persons referred to it by the plaintiff, after having been provided with a copy of that document. The telephone conversation of 20 June 1996 can only be assessed in the light of all the surrounding facts and circumstances. Thus in my view it was open to the Magistrate to make the finding that there was a concluded contract.

Thus I would answer the question posed by him in the of the Stated Case: `Whether my determination was erroneous in point of law' in the negative.

The defendant is to pay the costs of the Stated Case.
 * * * 
