

Regina versus Heyne Matter No Cca 60496/97 [1998] NSWSC 429 (18 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 October 1998 
REGINA versus IAN ERIC HEYNE 
CCA 60496/97 September 1998 
Handley JA, James J, Levine J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence in the Criminal Division of the Supreme Court (Hulme J) 
FILE NO/S: 60496/97; 70037/95 
DELIVERED: Friday 18 September 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: Monday 17 August 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Ian Eric HEYNE 
JUDGMENT OF: Handley JA, James J, Levine J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: S R Norrish QC/A Pearman 
Respondent: M M Cunneen 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: T A Murphy 
Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - manslaughter - unlawful and dangerous act - appeal and new trial - directions of trial Judge as to accused's credibility 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 20 
REGINA versus Ian Eric HEYNE 
CRIMINAL LAW - manslaughter - unlawful and dangerous act - appeal and new trial - directions of trial Judge as to accused's credibility 
The appellant was tried for the manslaughter of his wife, who died when she was trapped inside their burning house. The appellant had poured petrol around the interior of the house but the cause of its ignition was unknown. The Crown case was that the appellant had caused the death of his wife by an unlawful and dangerous act or by criminal negligence. The jury convicted the appellant and he was sentenced to a fixed term of 18 months' penal servitude. He challenged the trial Judge's directions on manslaughter, causation, and the interest of the accused, his Honour's decision to give further directions to the jury after they had commenced their deliberations, and claimed the conviction was unsafe or unsatisfactory. Leave to appeal on sentence was also sought.

HELD: Dismissing the appeal, (1) The jury was not required to choose one head of manslaughter on which they found the appellant guilty. (2) Despite the technicalities of the doctrine of unlawful and dangerous act in this case (notably "temporary functional derangement"), the trial Judge's directions to the jury were correct. (3) The trial Judge's directions on causation were appropriate following models approved by the High Court in Royall versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 378.] The onus was on the Crown to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased did not break the chain of causation by deliberately starting the fire. (4) The trial Judge's decision to give further directions after the jury had begun to consider their verdict was not erroneous. He was responsible for ensuring that the jury received a proper summing-up, and this could involve further directions on his own motion. (5) Directions about the interest of an accused in being acquitted, and the impact this might have on his credibility, should not be given. However there was no conflict between the appellant's evidence and that of the witnesses for the Crown, there had been no substantial miscarriage of justice, and the proviso to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act could properly be applied. While there had been a misdirection, it was of marginal relevance, and incapable of affecting the jury's verdict. (6) The trial Judge had a discretion to impose a fixed term sentence and there was nothing to show that his exercise of discretion miscarried. (7) The Crown's reliance on unlawful and dangerous act in addition to criminal negligence had complicated and greatly lengthened what was essentially a simple case. The Crown should have had the courage and confidence to limit its case to criminal negligence. 
ORDERS 
Appeal against conviction dismissed.

Leave to appeal against sentence refused.

JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: The appellant stood trial before Hulme J and a jury on 25 August 1997 on a charge that, on 11 November 1994 at Lightning Ridge, he did feloniously slay Pirkko Helena Heyne. He was convicted and sentenced to a fixed term of 18 months' penal servitude to expire on 3 March 1999. He appealed against conviction and sought leave to appeal against sentence. 
The appellant and the deceased, his wife, lived in a house (known locally as a camp) at 4 Mile Flat Open Field, Lightning Ridge. On the day in question they had been arguing inside the house. She had been drinking, and was significantly affected by alcohol. The autopsy revealed a blood alcohol concentration of .203. He was a member of Alcoholics Anonymous and had not consumed alcohol for some years. He went outside, obtained a can of petrol from his car, returned and splashed it around the living room in her presence.
Shortly afterwards the petrol ignited. The appellant was able to escape but his wife was trapped and died. The appellant said he attempted to rescue his wife through a window but was beaten back by the flames, and in the process received severe cuts and burns to 35% of his body. He went to the nearest house (camp) some 250 metres away to report the news. The neighbour called the police and rode his motor bike to the appellant's house finding it well ablaze. The appellant was taken for treatment to the accident and emergency centre at Lightning Ridge and later to Concord Hospital.

The Crown case was that the appellant had caused the death of his wife by an unlawful and dangerous act, or by criminal negligence. The dangerous act relied upon was the pouring of the petrol inside the house and this was said to be unlawful because it was accompanied by a threat of damage to the house and its contents, or involved malicious damage to property owned by his wife, or by the two of them jointly.

The appellant's grounds of appeal challenged the Judge's directions on manslaughter, causation and the interest of the accused, his decision of his own motion to give further directions to the jury after they had commenced their deliberations, and claimed that the conviction was unsafe or unsatisfactory.

Manslaughter 
Both heads of manslaughter were left to the jury, and a suggestion in written submissions that the Crown should have been required to elect was not pressed.
Objection was taken to the Judge's direction that the jury did not have to agree on a single basis for a verdict of guilty. The Judge said: "If you are satisfied the accused's act was either both unlawful and dangerous on the one hand or criminally negligent on the other, then paragraph (iv) (in his Honour's written directions) is made out and you do not all need to hold the same one of those two views".

This direction was not directly challenged, but was said to leave open the possibility that an individual juror may not have been able to choose between either head of manslaughter in circumstances which would not have allowed satisfaction of guilt beyond reasonable doubt. There is no substance in this suggestion.

The directions on the "unlawful and dangerous" basis for manslaughter were challenged as insufficient because criminal damage had not been established, and because the jury were not directed that the unlawful act had to be directed to the deceased. The Judge gave written directions on the issues and explained them at some length.

On the question whether the spreading of petrol in the house was unlawful because it involved a threat of damage, the Judge reminded the jury that the accused had said in evidence that he did not intend to scare his wife. However if they accepted his statement in Exhibit O, his handwritten letter to the
Director of Public Prosecutions of 23 May 1997, that he poured the petrol around the house to stop his wife wrecking the place, and because he merely wanted her to go outside and calm down, "you might take the view that a threat of damage with a relevant intention had occurred". He referred to other evidence given by the accused and told the jury to consider, in terms of his written directions, whether the accused had committed an unlawful act because it involved a threat of damage. This involved no error.

His Honour then directed the jury on the question of malicious damage to property and invited them to consider this on at least three bases adding that "others may occur to you". The three specifically referred to were the wetting of the carpet with petrol, which was only temporary, any permanent staining of the carpet from the petrol, and what was referred to as the temporary functional derangement of the house because of the presence of the petrol. The first two bases for a finding were clear enough although the jury, or any other member of the public, might wonder why criminal responsibility for the death of a human being should depend on the temporary or permanent staining of an old carpet.

The mystification of the jury can only have been increased when the Judge directed them, as he was bound to, that it was open to them to find that the pouring of the petrol may have been unlawful because it caused a "temporary functional derangement" of the house by making it unusable until the vapour dispersed.

In Samuels versus Stubbs [(1972) 4 SASR 200] Walters J held that the respondent, who had stamped on a policeman's hat during a demonstration and temporarily put it out of shape, could be convicted of wilful damage to property, "temporary functional derangement" being sufficient for this purpose. Mr Norrish QC submitted that this case should not be followed, but I see no reason to doubt its correctness. It is cited without criticism in Johnson & Howie, "Criminal Practice and Procedure ", para 8820.20, and in Watson, Blackmore and Hosking, "Criminal Law ", para .27710, and is consistent with other authority. This includes Hardman v
Chief Constable of Avon [(1986) Crim LR 330-1] (whitewashing footpath damage although rain would eventually wash it away), and Morphitis versus Salmon [(1990) Crim LR 48], 49 where
Lloyd LJ and Auld J said: "whether damage ... was caused in any particular case was a question of fact and degree and could be of various kinds ... It included not only permanent or temporary physical harm but also permanent or temporary impairment of value or usefulness".

This challenge therefore fails. I suspect, and would hope, that the jury ignored the technicalities of the Crown case on unlawful and dangerous act, and decided the case on criminal negligence. The prosecution would have done well to rely only on criminal negligence. One wonders if any jury that rejected criminal negligence would convict because there was some temporary or permanent damage to an old carpet, or because the house was made unusable for a time. The Crown should have had the courage and confidence to confine the prosecution case to criminal negligence in the interests of a shorter and simpler trial. As it was, the trial was substantially lengthened by this unnecessary and complicating element in the Crown case and lasted 9 days.

There is no substance in the submission that the unlawful act must have been directed towards the deceased. The discharge of a firearm in a public place for the "fun" of it, or to frighten someone which unintentionally killed a third person, would be a sufficient unlawful and dangerous act for the purposes of manslaughter, although it was not directed towards the deceased.

The Judge's written directions on criminal negligence were also criticised but they followed directions approved in Nydam versus The Queen <case>; [(1977) VR 430], 445 and R versus Taktak [(1988) 14 NSWLR 226], 250.

Causation 
The Crown had to prove that the act of the accused in pouring the petrol onto the carpet caused the death of the deceased. The Judge's written directions on this issue included the following: "You could not conclude that any act of the Accused contributed significantly to the deceased's death unless you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that she did not implement a deliberate decision to ignite the petrol (or petrol vapour) or remain in the premises after the fire broke out".

In his oral directions he said: "... you might think there were three possible causes of ignition of the fire which you should consider; the pilot light (in the gas refrigerator in the room), an accidental lighting due to the (deceased's) smoking or lighting a cigarette and thirdly, a deliberate lighting by her ... you do not need to decide between the first, that is the pilot light and the accidental lighting of the petrol as an incident of smoking. You do have to address specifically the third possibility, ... this deliberate lighting of the vapour or petrol by the deceased either by way of an attempt to commit suicide or a dramatic gesture".

The Judge reviewed the evidence relating to the third possibility in some detail, and concluded by telling the jury that it was a matter for them whether they were satisfied on this question of cause "and in particular whether you are satisfied the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased did not deliberately start the fire".

Counsel for the appellant referred to Royall versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 378] and submitted that in this case it was appropriate for the jury to consider the question of foreseeability and directions should have been given accordingly. This was because the source of ignition could have been a new intervening act which would have broken the chain of causation between the spilling of the petrol and the death, and foreseeability was relevant to such a question.

In the civil law, foreseeability is not a test of causation but of remoteness to determine the limits of legal responsibility. See Chapman versus Hearse <case>; [(1961) 106 CLR 112], 122 and
March versus Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506], 510.

The High Court in Royall strongly discouraged trial judges from giving directions to juries which invited them to consider questions of foreseeability in relation to issues of causation. See Mason CJ at 390, Deane and Dawson JJ at 412, and Toohey and Gaudron JJ at 425. The trial Judge's directions on causation followed the models approved in Royall. He left causation to the jury to be decided by them as a matter of commonsense but added the written direction previously referred to that they could not find causation unless the Crown established beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased did not deliberately light the fire. This was an appropriate direction which focussed the attention of the jury on the real question they had to decide on this issue. Compare Alford versus Magee <case>; [(1952) 85 CLR 437], 466. There was no need for the Judge to give further directions on causation if they were satisfied that the fire was started either by the pilot light or by an inadvertent act of the deceased.

Further directions 
The Judge completed his summing-up and the jury retired to consider its verdict at 3.10 pm on 3 September. They were released for the night at 4.13.
The next morning, before the jury assembled in court, the Judge informed counsel that he had overlooked a matter in his summing-up and was considering whether to give the jury further directions on that topic. After a brief discussion the Judge decided, over the objection of counsel for the accused, to give the further directions.

Note 3 in his written directions dealt with malice as a component of the unlawful act of malicious damage to property. In his oral summing-up the Judge covered the questions of intent and recklessness but had said nothing about the possibility of a bona fide claim of right by the accused. The note stated in effect that an act is not done maliciously if it is done "under a reasonable belief by the doer of the act that he has a right to do the act".

In the further directions the jury were taken to this part of the note, and the Judge then referred to the state of the evidence. He said that there was no direct evidence in the Crown case that the accused did not have such a belief, and pointed out that the accused had not said that he did have that belief. The jury were told that it was a matter for them what inference they drew from this, and they were reminded that the onus was on the Crown to show that the accused did not have a reasonable belief that he had the right to spread the petrol inside his house.

It was argued on behalf of the appellant that the Judge erred in giving any further directions on his own motion after the jury had retired to consider their verdict and that his actual directions were erroneous. There is nothing in the first point. The trial judge is responsible for ensuring that the jury receive the benefit of a proper summing-up. He may invite the assistance of counsel on particular questions, and it is the duty of counsel to draw his attention to particular errors or omissions. However the assistance he is entitled to receive from counsel does not diminish his personal responsibility for ensuring that the jury are properly instructed.

It was suggested that the Judge's remarks about the state of the evidence on this question involved some criticism of the case for the accused but this is not so. The accused had no case on this question. His Honour merely referred to this element in the Crown case which he had overlooked, and explained how it related to the evidence.

Mr Norrish also complained about the Jones versus Dunkel direction. Such a direction is to be given sparingly in a criminal case particularly when the inference, if drawn, would be adverse to the accused and related to his failure to call some other witness. See R versus Buckland (1977) 2 NSWLR 452,
Such a direction may also be given when a witness who has been called is not asked any questions about some topic by the party calling him. See R v
Beserick [(1993) 30 NSWLR 510], 532.

The accused gave evidence in his trial but said nothing about acting under a claim of right. In this case no other person could have given that evidence.
In these circumstances the Jones versus Dunkel direction was entirely appropriate.

Direction as to interest of accused 
The Judge, in giving general directions to the jury on the approach they should adopt to the evidence, said: "You should consider whether any witness has any incentive not to be objective in his recollection or evidence. That could arise through friendship, for example, Mr Tape, antipathy - for example the deceased's son, or the accused's natural interest in the result of the proceedings. Of course any such factors do not mean that the evidence of the person affected by them is not reliable.
It is merely something you should take into account in considering whether you are satisfied that their evidence is reliable".

At the first opportunity, counsel for the accused drew attention to the fact that the High Court had held that such a direction, in relation to the accused, should not be given. In Robinson versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 180 CLR 531], 536 the Court said: "... to direct a jury that they should evaluate evidence on the basis of the interest of witnesses in the outcome of the case is to strike at the notion of a fair trial for an accused person. Except in the most exceptional case such a direction inevitably disadvantages the evidence of the accused when it is in conflict with the evidence for the Crown.

It follows that, if, as we think was the case, the jury would have understood his Honour's directions as meaning that the evidence of the appellant had to be scrutinised more carefully than that of any other witness, there was a serious misdirection in the summing-up which went to the fairness of the trial of the appellant and which undermined the presumption of innocence".

The High Court refused special leave to appeal in Stafford versus The Queen [(1993) 67 ALJR 510] where the Queensland Court of Criminal Appeal had upheld the conviction despite such a direction because, on the facts of that case, it was favourable to the appellant. In Ramy versus The Queen [(1994) 68 ALJR 917], the High
Court refused special leave to appeal from this Court because the terms of the summing-up did not raise the problem "with sufficient clarity" but said: "There can, and should, be no mistake as to the application of the principle laid down by this Court in Robinson versus The Queen ... It is not to be eroded by Courts of Criminal Appeal nor, a fortiori, by trial judges by failing faithfully to apply the prohibition against the giving of a direction to evaluate the evidence of the accused on the basis of the accused's interest in the outcome of a case".

When counsel for the accused was asked by the Judge whether he sought any redirection he replied "it's not a matter that I think can be redirected on".
Later, after further discussion with counsel, the Judge said "my feeling is that the best course now is to leave what has been said as said and not to advert to the topic again". Counsel for the accused agreed, and the Judge acted accordingly. It was not suggested that this was an error, but as a result the original error remained uncorrected.

This is an unusual case because the basic facts in the Crown case were not in dispute. The Crown case included medical evidence about the condition of the accused, the result of the autopsy, and evidence about the state of the house and the gas appliances in it. This objective evidence was not challenged.
Apart from this, the Crown case consisted of evidence of the relationship between the deceased and the accused, and evidence of statements made to the witnesses by the accused either on the day of the fire or shortly afterwards.
There was some inconsistencies between the various accounts given by the accused, but the Judge reminded the jury that he was severely burnt himself, was in a state of shock, and had been given painkilling drugs. He added: "However these factors do not mean you must disregard the statements attributed to him, particularly if he said the same thing on a number of occasions or the reliability of what he said is supported by other evidence.
Furthermore his statements at the Centre or on the next day did have the possible advantage that his memory was fresh at the time".

The evidence as to the relationship between the deceased and the accused was substantially consistent. The accused had become a total abstainer. His wife however was a binge drinker, behaving normally sometimes for weeks on end between episodes of binge drinking which could last for several days. Their relationship was a loving and harmonious one in between her binges but during those episodes she become abusive, aggressive and violent.

The accused admitted the factual substratum of the Crown case in his letter to the Director of Public Prosecutions of 23 May 1997 (Exhibit O). He did not deny any of the statements attributed to him by witnesses called in the Crown case. He said he could not remember what he said to his stepson and could have said the things his stepson recalled him saying. He also said he could not recall what he said to Superintendent Hoolahan, Nurse Dunn, Nils Tape, and
Nurse Taylor. There was therefore no direct conflict between the evidence of the accused and that of any other witness.

The jury had to decide the question of causation, but apart from that the questions for their consideration turned on an evaluation of the conduct of the deceased, the extent of the danger he created in the house, and whether he acted with criminal negligence. At the end of his evidence-in-chief he said "I don't think it was her intention to start it" (the fire). He said much the same thing in Exhibit O.

If the jury accepted these admissions, and there was no reason why they should not, they would have had no difficulty in deciding the issue of causation in favour of the Crown. The interest of the accused in the outcome of the trial could not affect the jury's considerations of these admissions which were not repudiated by the accused.

In Robinson the High Court said of the direction under consideration that it "inevitably disadvantages the evidence of the accused when it is in conflict with the evidence for the Crown" (at 536). There was no such disadvantage in this case. The question is whether the Court can properly apply the proviso to s 6(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act and dismiss the appeal because "no substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred".

Glennon versus The Queen [(1994) 179 CLR 1] establishes that this error was not so fundamental that the accused has not had a proper trial. See at 8, 12-13. It remains to consider whether the error was such that, had the misdirection not occurred, the jury must inevitably have reached the same verdict. The following remarks of Deane and Gaudron JJ in Glennon at 12-13 are relevant: "A misdirection as to the use or evaluation by a jury of properly admitted evidence does not ordinarily result in there not being, overall, a fair trial according to law ... Rather, a misdirection of that kind is ordinarily one that must be evaluated in the light of the issues in the trial and the way in which the trial was conducted before it can be ascertained whether it might have affected the jury's deliberations ... So it is with a misdirection which wrongly impugns the credibility of the accused. A misdirection of that kind may be of little significance because, for example, it is confined to some discreet matter that was not really in issue at the trial or, if it was, it proves, on analysis, to have been of marginal relevance and incapable of affecting the jury's verdict".

In my judgment the application of this analysis to the facts of the present case demonstrates that the misdirection was of marginal relevance and incapable of affecting the jury's verdict. The proviso should be applied.

Verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory 
On the facts of this case, the rejection of all the other grounds of appeal must lead to the rejection of this ground also.

Sentence 
The only submission by way of challenge to the fixed term of 18 months' penal servitude fixed by the Judge was that he erred in not fixing a minimum term.
This must be rejected. The Judge had a discretion to sentence the prisoner to a fixed term and there is nothing to indicate that his exercise of that discretion miscarried.

The orders of the Court should be: 
Appeal against conviction dismissed.

Leave to appeal against sentence refused.

LEVINE J: I agree with the orders proposed by Handley JA and his reasons therefor. 
B M JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of Handley JA. * * * 
