

Ferrcom Pty Ltd and Ors versus Aloisio; Ferrarese and Ors versus Aloisio Matter No /95 [1997] NSWSC 429 (24 September 1997) 
Ferrcom Pty Ltd & Ors versus Aloisio 
Ferrarese & Ors versus Aloisio /95, EQ 5357/88 /95, EQ 5356/88 September 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Powell JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
Catchwords: 
VALUATION - land and buildings specially constructed and used for specialised purpose in on ongoing business enterprise - choice between capitalised net rental value method and depreciated replacement cost method - former method assumed buildings used for warehouse purposes and paid no regard to specialised use or to the ongoing business enterprise - latter method held appropriate. 
Fire and All Risks Insurance versus Rousianos [(1989) 19 NSWLR 57], Franke v
CIC General Insurance Ltd [(1994) 33 NSWLR 373] applied.

Orders 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

FERRCOM PTY LTD & ORS versus ALOISIO 
FERRARESE & ORS versus ALOISIO 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: These are appeals from a judgment of Brownie J in the Equity Division, who in turn had before him, and who allowed, an appeal from Master Macready. 
The issue that was litigated before Brownie J was much narrower than the issues litigated before Master Macready. It concerns the appropriate method of valuation of certain real estate, which in turn affected the value of certain shares in a company.

The respondent, Mr Aloisio, and the four personal appellants, Messrs
Ferrarese, Vereran, Bizzanelli and Maccarone, were the shareholders in, and directors of, the appellant company, Ferrcom Pty Ltd. They each owned two of the ten issued shares in the capital of Ferrcom.

At all material times Ferrcom has carried on a business of steel fabrication, at South Penrith. The business is conducted from a factory, and an office building, erected upon three adjacent parcels of land. Two of those parcels are owned by a subsidiary of Ferrcom, and the third was owned by the individual shareholders of Ferrcom as tenants in common. The original factory premises were constructed in about 1980, with additions in 1982 or 1983.
Further additions were commenced in 1985 but were not completed at the time.
Subsequently, between 1989 and 1994 the factory was enlarged. It is common ground that the construction of the factory building was more substantial than would be necessary for an ordinary industrial building, and that the nature of the construction reflected the specialised needs of the enterprise.

In 1988 the respondent, Mr Aloisio, fell into dispute with the other shareholders and directors. He alleged oppression. He commenced proceedings for compulsory acquisition of his shares in Ferrcom, and for an order under [s66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) for the compulsory sale of the land held in common.

In 1989 the proceedings were substantially settled. The following orders were made by consent: "1 Order that the shares of the plaintiff in the capital of the first defendant be purchased by the defendants or any combination of them for an amount and at a time to be determined upon inquiry before the Master.
 Direct that there be an inquiry before the Master as to the amount which should be paid by the defendants for the plaintiff's shares in the first defendant and the time that the purchase should be completed." 
It was agreed between the parties, for convenience, to ignore the fact that title to some of the subject land was held by the individual shareholders, and to proceed upon the basis that the land, and the factory premises and office building, belonged to the company.

The matter came before Master Macready in 1994. The object was to value Mr
Aloisio's shares in Ferrcom. That valuation was undertaken in a context in which Ferrcom's business was being conducted as a going concern, and the majority shareholders were buying out a minority shareholder. Master Macready was required to determine a number of issues relevant to the valuation of Mr
Aloisio's shares in Ferrcom. The Master's decision in relation to most of those issues was accepted by the parties, and was not called in question before Brownie J.

Having regard to an argument advanced on behalf of the appellants in the present appeal, it is important to note one aspect of the evidence before the
Master, although it was of principal relevance to issues that were not litigated before Brownie J. The accountant who set out to value the shares in
Ferrcom on behalf of the respondent said that the accounting records and financial statements of Ferrcom were, in certain respects, unreliable and inadequate. Whilst there was evidence as to the profits that had been earned by Ferrcom over the five years prior to 1994, that evidence suggested considerable fluctuation in the profits year by year, and the accountant expressed scepticism about the reliability and completeness of the material on which the profit figures were based.

The one issue decided by Master Macready, which became the subject of an appeal to Brownie J, concerned the valuation of the real estated referred to above. That real estate consisted of the factory premises and office building, and the various parcels of land upon which the premises were erected, ignoring the individual ownership of part of the land, the whole being treated as owned by the company.

The witness whose evidence formed the focal point of the appeal before Brownie
J was a valuer, Mr Rosenstrauss. In brief, Mr Rosenstrauss expressed the opinion that the appropriate method of valuing the real estate was the depreciated replacement cost method of valuation. On that basis, he valued the real estate at $4.85 million. He also expressed the opinion that, if one were to use a different method of valuation, described as the capitalisation of net rental value method of valuation, then that would produce a figure of $2.85 million.

Master Macready concluded that the appropriate basis of valuation was the capitalised net rental basis, rather than the depreciated replacement cost basis, and then went on, taking other matters in account, to value Mr
Aloisio's shares in Ferrcom accordingly.

The sole question raised in the appeal to Brownie J was which of the two methods of valuing the real estate was appropriate. Brownie J, upholding the appeal, determined that the depreciated replacement cost method, which was the method favoured by Mr Rosenstrauss, was appropriate. The parties then agreed between themselves on the consequential increase to be made in the value of Mr
Aloisio's shares.

The question in issue in the present appeal is whether Brownie J was justified in reversing the decision of Master Macready as to the appropriate basis of valuation of the real estate.

Before the Master, before Brownie J, and in this court, all parties accepted as authoritative a publication by The International Assets Valuation Standards
Committee of the Australian Institute of Valuers and Land Economists Inc., entitled "Guidance Notes and Background Papers for the Valuation of Fixed
Assets for Financial Statements". That publication represents the Institute's views concerning the valuation of fixed assets for use in corporate financial statements. It was published in pursuance of the objective of formulating, in the public interest, valuation standards and procedural guidance for the valuation of assets for use in financial statements. Fixed assets are defined as assets intended for use on a continuing basis for the activities of a business undertaking.

The Guidance Notes include the following: "Guidance Note 3 
The Valuation of Land and Buildings The basis of valuation of land and buildings as fixed assets for financial statements must reflect the fact that these assets are in continuing use by the undertaking for the purpose of its current activities.

In accountancy terms the value of a fixed asset to an undertaking is: net current replacement cost, or, if a permanent diminution in value to below net current replacement cost has been recognised, recoverable amount.
 Net current replacement cost represents the cost of replacing or recreating the particular asset in its existing condition. Conceptually, the valuer should approach the assessment of net current replacement cost of land and buildings on the basis of : value in the open market, or, where a market value cannot be assessed, depreciated replacement cost.

The basis of valuation will normally be determined by the nature and use of the property.
 Recoverable amount is the amount that can be recovered from the future use of the asset including its net realisable value on disposal. Recoverable amount, where applicable, will normally be assessed by the management of the undertaking.
 As the basis of valuation must reflect the continuing use of the asset for the business of the undertaking it is not appropriate, in the case of a property occupied by the undertaking, to value for some other use, whether resulting in a higher or lower value. To value for a different use would contemplate the business giving up occupation of the property and would not accord with the concept on which financial statements are prepared. Market valuations of property owned and occupied by the undertaking should, therefore, carry the qualification `for existing use'.
 When the difference between the value for the existing use and another use would be material, the asset valuer should also report the alternative figure - described as the `alternative use value'." 
One of the Background Papers includes the following: "Background Paper 3 
The Valuation of Land and Buildings Guidance Note No 3 emphasises that the valuation of land and buildings for financial statements is for the particular purpose as stated in paragraph 1.
It is not necessarily the same amount as the asset might be expected to realise if sold on the open market separately from the undertaking which owns and uses the asset in its business.
 Properties for which a market value can be ascertained are those which may be bought or leased in the open market for their current or similar use, referred to as existing use. Market transactions relating to similar properties provide the comparable evidence on which a valuer relies to support the opinion of value. Examples of such properties are houses and apartments, shops, retail stores, office blocks, standard industrial and warehouse buildings, and agricultural holdings.

For convenience, this general category of assets may be described as `non- specialised properties'.
 There are certain types of land and buildings which are rarely (if ever) sold for a continuation of their current use, except by way of a sale of the business in occupation, due to their specialised nature. This may arise from their construction, arrangement, size, location or a combination of these factors. Uniqueness may be due to the nature of the plant and machinery and items of equipment the buildings or other structures are designed to house.
Examples are oil refineries, chemical works, buildings which are no more than cladding for a special plant, and traditional buildings in isolated or unusual locations. In these cases it is not practicable to ascertain a market value as no evidence is likely to exist of transactions involving comparable properties. Therefore such assets generally fall into the category known as `specialised properties', to be valued on a `depreciated replacement cost' basis.
 A depreciated replacement cost basis of valuation requires an estimate of the market value of the land in its existing use and an estimate of the new replacement cost of the buildings and other site works, from which deductions may be required for age, condition, functional obsolescence and other factors which result in the existing property being worth less than a new replacement.
It is usual for a depreciated replacement cost valuation to include acquisition costs relating to the land and fees, finance costs and carrying charges relating to the buildings and other site works, where these are capitalised by the undertaking.
 The valuer should qualify any valuation by reference to `depreciated replacement cost' with the words `subject to adequate potential profitability' for it may be necessary for the undertaking to recognise some permanent diminution in the value of the asset to a sum lower than that based on depreciated replacement cost. In that event the `recoverable amount' would be appropriate for financial statements.
 Certain types of property, designed or adapted for particular uses, such as hotels, cinemas, theatres, petrol filling stations, casinos and other specialised leisure and sporting facilities, may change hands in the open market at prices based directly on trading potential. Background Paper D - `Valuations having regard to Trading Potential', deals with this topic." 
For purposes of the present appeal, particular reference was made to par 4 of Guidance Note 3 and also to par 4 of Background Paper 3. As was mentioned above, it was common ground that we are here dealing with buildings of a specialised nature, and there were no comparable sales to which reference could be made.

The evidence of Mr Rosenstrauss was to the effect that, applying the above standards of valuation, this was clearly a case which called for valuation on a depreciated replacement cost basis.

The alternative method of valuation which Mr Rosenstrauss also undertook was based upon capitalising the net rental value of the premises. That is a method commonly employed to establish market value where it is appropriate to seek to ascertain market value in accordance with par 3 of Background Paper 3 but where there are no comparable sales. What is to be noted, however, is that this method of valuation involved the assumption that the premises were available for rental, not for the specialised use to which Ferrcom was putting them, but for use as a warehouse. That was why Mr Rosenstrauss regarded the method as inappropriate.

As the valuation standards recognise, there is nothing unusual about a circumstance in which land and buildings are being put to a specialised use, as part of an ongoing business undertaking, and have a value, for that purpose, which is substantially higher than the value that would be commanded in a market which took no account of that specialised use. To take a simple example, an electricity supply authority, which may enjoy a statutory monopoly in a particular area, may use buildings specially constructed and adapted for the purposes of its business. Valuing those buildings, as part of the ongoing business, requires recognition that the use for which the buildings are specially adapted will continue. It would be contrary to principle, and commonsense, to value those buildings on the assumption that the relevant market for purposes of valuation is a market for storage space, although no doubt the buildings could, if necessary, by used for that purpose. Whilst value is a concept that only has meaning by reference to a market, definition of the relevant market, and the assumptions that should be made as to the purposes of a potential buyer of the property, will often be of critical importance.

These considerations, in the somewhat different, but related, context of insurance, were considered in Fire & All Risks Insurance versus Rousianos [(1989) 19 NSWLR 57] and Franke versus CIC General Insurance Ltd [(1994) 33 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%2033%20NSWLR%20373 "View LawCiteRecord" )

In the former case, at 65-66, the following was said: "Counsel for the appellants insisted that in a context such as the present, `value' means `market value'. That submission, however, is question-begging.
...

Where one is constrained to ascertain the `value' of an item of used plant or equipment which forms part of the infrastructure of a business being carried on by an insured person, it is of little assistance to insert the adjective `market' before the noun `value'. It then becomes necessary to identify the `market' to which reference is being made. There may or may not be a `market' in which regular dealings in goods give a true reflex of the value of the item of equipment concerned. Moreover, there is no justification for assuming that, when it comes to valuing items of machinery plant and equipment used in connection with a business which is operating as a going concern, the relevant `market' is identified by proving what would occur if the business were closed down and the items in question were sold on site at auction by a liquidator." 
What I there said in the context of plant and equipment, and insurance, applies equally to the valuation of fixed assets, adapted for specialised use in an ongoing business, in the present context. In my understanding, it is substantially the same as what is said in the valuation standards quoted above.

On the face of it, the capitalised net rental value basis of valuation was, as
Mr Rosenstrauss considered, inappropriate in the present case. That method was based upon the assumption that the relevant rental market was the market for warehouse space. It took no account of the ongoing business. In that connection it may be mentioned, in passing, that a substantial portion of the expenditure on the development of the buildings in question had been incurred in recent years and, indeed, during the currency of the disputes between the parties to the present litigation. It was common ground that the majority shareholders intended that the business of Ferrcom would be carried on in the future.

However, Master Macready preferred the capitalised net rental value basis to the depreciated replacement cost basis. He gave two reasons for that. First, he said that the latter method was "an arbitrary approach which does not involve a market element". Second, he referred to guideline 3, and the reference to the matter of adequate potential profitability. He said: "As is apparent from cross-examination of (the accountant) the returns on the company using the depreciated replacement cost to determine the value of the company would show a return of profitability of about 1.95%. As was basically agreed to by (the accountant) this is an unsatisfactory return on any view. In my view this shows that the requirement for adequate profitability for the adoption of the depreciated replacement cost has not been demonstrated.
Accordingly, in my view the preferable valuation is the capitalised net rental value of Mr Rosenstrauss of $2,850,000." 
As to the first reason, it is important to recognise the ambiguity involved in the concept of "market element". As was observed above, the concept of value is bound up with the concept of a market, but it can be of critical importance accurately to identify the relevant market. When one is valuing an asset specially adapted for use as part of an ongoing business undertaking, it is usually inappropriate to select as the relevant market one which takes no account of that use. No doubt a steel fabrication plant could be used solely for storage purposes, but it does not follow that the relevant market for determining the value for the premises in question is the market for warehouse space.

It was the second reason given by Master Macready which formed the principal basis of the argument relied upon by the appellants.

Before dealing with the reasoning of Brownie J, and the argument advanced by the appellants in this court, it is necessary to mention one further aspect of the context in which this appeal arises.

What we now have before us is a relatively narrow issue. There is a degree of artificiality in deciding that issue separately from other questions which at an earlier stage arose between the parties. To their credit, at various stages in the litigation the parties have resolved aspects of their dispute, and have attempted to narrow the issues requiring judicial determination. As appears from his reasons for judgment, and as was acknowledged in this court by senior counsel for the appellants, the matter was argued before Brownie J upon the basis that he was confronted with a stark choice between the figure of $2.85 million resulting from the capitalised net rental figure and the figure of $4.85 million resulting from the depreciated replacement cost method. Neither side argued before Brownie J for an intermediate alternative. The present appellants contended for the figure of $2.85 million, which had been accepted by Master Macready. It was not argued before Brownie J that, even if the depreciated replacement cost method were adopted, the figure of $4.85 million should be reduced by some amount to allow for the low profitability of the enterprise. The argument, which had been accepted by Master Macready, was that such low profitability made the depreciated replacement cost method completely inappropriate, and required acceptance of the capitalised net rental method.
When the matter came before Brownie J that approach was pursued, and it was not suggested, on behalf of the appellants, that whilst it may have been appropriate to adopt the depreciated replacement cost method, the proper application of that method should have resulted in a figure somewhat less than $4.85 million.

Bearing that in mind, I turn now to the principal argument relied upon by the present appellants which was, in substance, the second of the reasons given by
Master Macready for rejecting the depreciated replacement cost method.

It was pointed out that par 6 of Background Paper 3 included a qualification relating to "adequate potential profitability". It was further pointed out that, if one were to take at face value the financial statements and accounts of Ferrcom over the five years leading up to 1994, acceptance of a figure of $4.85 million as the value of the land and buildings would lead to the conclusion that the average annual rate of profit of the company was only .95%. (It might be noted that it would still be only 3.32% if one adopted the alternative figure of $2.85 million). This, it was argued, was not "adequate profitability" and thus falsified, or rendered inappropriate, the depreciated replacement cost method.

Counsel for Mr Aloisio, and Brownie J, met that argument at two levels.

First, at a factual level, reference was made to the uncertainty and unreliability of the figures as to profitability, upon which the assumption of .95% was based. Second, it was observed that the valuation standards did not indicate that the depreciated replacement cost method should be abandoned if its use produced a value which gave rise to a less than adequate return on capital. The concept of "adequate potential profitability" was primarily related to the continuing viability of the business, and to the assumption that the assets in question would be used as part of an ongoing business undertaking. Furthermore, as par 6 shows, an absence of adequate potential profitability might indicate the need to recognise some permanent diminution in the value of the asset to a sum lower than that based on depreciated replacement cost. It is not difficult to imagine the circumstances in which some particular event, or market conditions generally, might require a recognition of a permanent diminution in the value of an asset. However, as
Brownie J held, there is nothing in the standards which would require, or justify, the conclusion that, in the present case, the profit experience of
Ferrcom over the five years up to 1994 was such that the depreciated replacement cost method should be abandoned, and resort should be had to the wholly inappropriate capitalised net rental value method.

In my opinion, Brownie J was correct. The fundamental flaw in the capitalised net rental value method adopted by Master Macready was that it dealt with the land and buildings in a manner which took no account of their specialised use as part of an ongoing business undertaking. In the circumstances of the case the depreciated replacement cost method was appropriate. Whether, consistently with the use of that method, the resulting figure should have been moderated by considerations related to the potential future profitability of the business is not an issue that was litigated before Brownie J.

It was argued on behalf of the appellants that this was a case in which
Brownie J should have deferred to the decision of Master Macready on what was ultimately a question of fact. However, the issue that was squarely raised before Brownie J was a question of the method of valuation to be adopted, and there was no reason why Brownie J should have been inhibited about giving effect to his own views on that question. Brownie J adopted the view preferred by the valuer Mr Rosenstrauss. The basis of his decision was that the reasons given by Master Macready for rejecting the opinion of Mr Rosenstrauss were inconsistent with the relevant valuation standards. There was no error in the approach taken by Brownie J to the exercise of his functions.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Gleeson CJ. 
POWELL JA: I agree with Gleeson CJ. * * * 
