

Regina versus James Anthony Vella No. 60675 of 1994 Criminal Law [2004] NSWSC (18 November 2004) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
MAHONEY JA(1), GROVE(2) AND SPERLING(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 23
August 1995 #DATE 15:12:1995 #ADD 15:2:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant      T A Game 
Solicitors for the Appellant  
Arden Associates 
Counsel for the Respondent     W G Roser 
Solicitors for the Respondent    S E O'Connor
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
MAHONEY JA On 5 May 1994 Allen J found the applicant Mr James Anthony Vella guilty of manslaughter. On November 1994 he sentenced him to fourteen years penal servitude. The sentence comprised a minimum term of ten years commencing on 18 November 1994 and an additional term of four years commencing on 18
November 2004. Mr Vella seeks leave to appeal to this Court against that sentence.
The appeal as originally filed was an appeal against both conviction and sentence. The appeal against conviction was withdrawn and should be dismissed.
The Court has been concerned only with the application for leave to appeal against the sentence.
The appeal sought to be brought against sentence has been based essentially upon two grounds: that the sentence was in itself excessive; and that his Honour, contrary to the principle enunciated in De Simoni versus The Queen <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383], took into account matters which should not have been taken into account in formulating the sentence.
The sentence is a substantial sentence. It is proper that the basis of it be examined. In order to understand the submissions made by Mr Game for the applicant
Mr Vella and by Mr Roser for the Crown, it is necessary to refer to the circumstances of the trial, the nature of the offence and the basis upon which the trial judge acted.
The parties consented to the trial proceeding before a judge without a jury. Therefore, it fell to Allen J to hear the evidence and determine the contested issues.
Late on the night of 27 January 1993 or in the early hours of the following morning there was a noisy disturbance at a house, 21 Waitaki Street,
Lethbridge Park. At the house at the time were Mr Vella, Mr Noel Arthur Hudson and others.
The person who was killed, a Mr Sommerville, had come to the house earlier in the evening and there had been an exchange of words between him and Mr
Vella. One witness said that during the first visit
Mr Vella was "playing" with a knife and that Mr Sommerville "went off his head about him". He said, "Never pull a knife out on me again". It was suggested that he had sought to buy drugs at the house and as he left he said, "Shove you dope up your arse".
 .
Mr Sommerville subsequently returned to the house. Mr Vella opened the door for him and as he, Mr Vella, was walking from the door,
Mr Sommerville, from behind, hit Mr Vella two hard blows on the top of the head with an iron bar. At the time he did this he said words like, "I've got something for bastards like you".
Mr Vella fell to the ground and Mr Sommerville commenced to fight with him. What then happened is not completely clear. Witnesses heard "a lot of yelling" and some "big thumps and things like that" coming from the house. Mr
Sommerville was heard saying, "Stop, stop" and one of the witnesses said, "You would just hear a thump and then you would hear something and a bit of a moan and then another thump and just between each thump you heard someone singing out".
His Honour found that Mr Vella, who was a large and powerful man, had overpowered Mr Sommerville "in the sense that, quite possibly aided by Mr
Dunne and Mr Williams kicking into Mr Sommerville, he had rolled him off his back and regained his feet. At that point there's no doubt that Mr Vella, a very big and powerful man, was in the dominant position and knew it. Mr
Sommerville was at his mercy. He showed him none". Mr Vella then struck Mr
Sommerville with the metal bar which Mr Sommerville used to strike
Mr Vella on the head. According to the different versions of the evidence, the striking of
Mr Sommerville by Mr Vella continued for some ten minutes or more.
The injuries which Mr Vella inflicted on Mr Sommerville were very severe.
The judge said: "Dissection of the face (of Mr Sommerville) revealed fractures of the inner and outer ends of the right cheek bone, cominuted fractures of the right maxillary sinus and floor of the right eye socket, an oblique fracture through the angle of the right side of the lower jaw and a vertical fracture of the left side of the lower jaw between the left canine teeth and the first pre molar tooth. These were extensive fractures.

It is manifest that the deceased had received a sustained and a gross bashing with a hard object and that it is consistent with his injuries that the object was the gate peg left with his body."
These blows were struck while Mr Sommerville was still alive. The judge concluded that it was these blows which killed Mr Sommerville.
He said that it was probable that he died within minutes of the blows, although he could not exclude the possibility that he died from them subsequently.
After Mr Vella had finished beating Mr Sommerville, he and others in the house set about the disposal of his body. It was driven in a car to a place described as Howes Swamp and an attempt was made to burn it. His Honour was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Vella was one of those who drove the body to Howes Swamp and burnt it and he proceeded on that basis.
He said: "I do find, however, that he participated otherwise in the draconic efforts, made after the bashing by Vella of
Sommerville ceased, to conceal the fact that the bashing had occurred in the house of Mr Williams. This included participation with those who assisted him in the aftermath of the bashing to prepare Sommerville's body, whether or not life still lingered in it, for its removal to be disposed of far from the scene of the crime. It was a joint enterprise to bind with materials, and encase in a sleeping bag, the already gagged body of
Sommerville so that there was no prospect of him offering any resistance to his fate or so acting as to attract the attention of any innocent person. I am satisfied that when Sommerville's body was trussed up Vella did not know whether Sommerville was alive or dead and that he appreciated that the wrapping of cloth around Sommerville's face (coupled with the earlier gagging of him) by itself substantially jeopardised any remaining prospect of survival. He was aware that those dealing with the aftermath of his bashing intended to make sure that Sommerville would not live to tell what had happened. By his own conduct
Vella did more than acquiesce in that plan. He supported it -
notwithstanding that he did not go in the car when the body was driven away. He did not do anything in any way to discourage the others from ensuring that Sommerville, if not already dead, would soon die. It is quite unlikely that Sommerville, in the light of the viciousness of the bashing he had received, would have survived even if medical attention had been sought with reasonable promptness. That does not alter the fact that Vella chose to ignore any prospect that Sommerville's life could be saved. It was far from evident at the time that it could not be. His conduct in that respect was callous and selfish.
In the choice between seeking aid for Sommerville and acting in self-protection to save himself from punishment Vella made and adhered to the selfish choice well knowing that the implementation of it made Sommerville's early death, if he was still alive, inevitable. I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he knew that the others would burn the body. That is of little consequence to the sentence which must be imposed upon Vella. What matters is that he participated in insuring that Sommerville, if not already dead, soon would die. In sentencing him regard must be had to the role Vella played after the bashing and before the car, with the body in the boot, was driven away as planned. It all formed part of the total criminality and it is in accordance with what was stated by the High Court in The Queen versus De Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383] that regard be had to it."
The judge added: "Beyond reasonable doubt Vella did nothing at all to assist
Sommerville.
On the contrary he accepted that Sommerville, if not already dead, was to die and he participated in a course of conduct which, if Sommerville was not already dead, ensured that he would not survive. I am satisfied further that this conduct of
Vella was not the product of any temporary panic or confusion. He had ample time after the bashing of Sommerville was over to calm down, reflect and decide what to do - and that, beyond reasonable doubt, is what he did. Indeed before participating in giving effect to the decision that Sommerville, if not already dead, would have to die he had showered and changed his bloodied clothing.

The maximum penalty for the crime of manslaughter is penal servitude for 25 years (Crimes Act 1900, s ).

It is urged in mitigation that the provocation by Sommerville was gross. So it was. But the loss of self-control induced by it was of relatively short duration. Thereafter Vella pursued a long course of methodical bashing which went on for at least a quarter of an hour. That bashing was not committed in a frenzy.
It was calculated, sadistic conduct inflicted by way of punishment upon a man pleading for mercy between the blows."
The accuracy of the facts taken into account by the trial judge in sentencing Mr Vella is not in question: the present application has proceeded upon the basis that his Honour's statement of them is accurate.
WAS THE SENTENCE EXCESSIVE?
Mr Game, for Mr Vella, submitted that, taking into account the facts proper to be taken into account in imposing sentence, the sentence was excessive.
Reference was made before the judge to, as they have come to be described, the "subjective factors". It was said that Mr Vella had had a "severely disadvantaged life" and that his capacity to deal with the attack made upon him by Mr Sommerville "was greatly limited by his intellectual capacity, his conditioning, and his poor self-esteem".
His Honour did not accept that Mr Vella's intelligence "although below average is outside the normal range". He took into account "his below average intelligence, his significant deafness, his gross build and forbidding appearance, and his inappropriate upbringing" which created "substantial difficulties in social adjustment". The judge referred to his lack of self-confidence, of a firm of set of values and self-discipline. He took into account his use of marijuana, although he was "far from satisfied" that that was "a major contributing cause". His Honour concluded that his personality explained "to a significant measure the sustained calculated ferocity of his bashing of Sommerville and his ensuing acceptance that Sommerville would have to die rather than that he, Vella, answer for what he had done". It was put, and the judge accepted, that Mr Vella was "not a man by nature disposed to violence in ordinary circumstances", that he was "disposed more to placidity than aggression" and that the killing "was completely outside the pattern of his ordinary behaviour".
The judge dealt with the pre-sentence report at some length.
He referred to his lack of serious criminal record and to the evidence given for him by those at a Family Centre which he had attended.
The "subjective considerations" which the judge detailed were, he said, "overall strongly favourable".
His Honour also accepted that there was "a substantial element of genuine contrition". His Honour said: "No doubt he genuinely very much regrets that he acted as he did. The distress, however, is not by any means caused solely by recognition of guilt. it is apparent from the pre-sentence report that he is still looking for excuses and still seeking to shift the blame onto others."
Mr
Game's submission was to the effect that, considered by reference to other cases of manslaughter and the sentences there imposed, the present sentence was excessive.
As the judge pointed out, the statutory maximum sentence for manslaughter is twenty-five years. The maximum sentence is, of course, reserved for the worst offence, but it is to be recognised that, in some cases, a sentence of or approaching twenty-five years will be justified.
Upon the basis of the facts found by the judge, this was a bad case: a
case warranting a heavier rather than a lighter sentence. The statement of what the applicant did demonstrates this: his actions were deliberate, vicious, persistent and violent.
In assessing sentence the judge and this Court must take into account the overall criminality of what was done. It must consider the "objective gravity" of the offence and the sentence must have regard to that gravity: see generally Veen versus The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 465] at 472. There must be a reasonable proportionality between a sentence and the circumstances of the crime and a proper balance is to be maintained between the objective facts and the subjective features of the case: see generally R versus Dodd (1991) 57 A Cr R at 354 and the cases there referred to. A sentence of fourteen years with a minimum term of ten years for a crime the maximum sentence for which is twenty-five years is not, at first sight, outside the range appropriate to the exercise of a proper sentencing discretion in such a case as this.
But Mr Game's submissions suggested that it is a principle of sentencing that there should be consistency in the level of punishment imposed for particular offences and that in this case that consistency has not been maintained.
 .
It is, of course, proper in assessing the sentence for a particular offence, to bear in mind the need to maintain consistency; consistency in sentencing is an important principle: see R versus Visconti [(1982) 2 NSWLR 104]; R v
Ellis (1993) 68 A Cr R 449. If the same offence with the same incidents attracts different sentences - at least, sentences outside what is appropriate to the exercise by a judge of a proper sentencing discretion - there will be a justified feeling of injustice or at least dissatisfaction.
But the problem in applying this principle lies, of course, in the phrase "with the same "incidents".
In that phrase I include all of the aspects of an offence which may warrant a difference in the period of imprisonment. In relation to the same offence, such incidents may vary widely. But in some offences, the range within which such incidents vary and the effect that such variation should properly have upon the sentence will lie within a narrower rather than a wider band. Manslaughter is an offence where the incidents may vary over a wide range; it is an offence which comprehends both the circumstances which have substantive differences and cases in which the individual features of the offence, subjective and otherwise, may vary greatly. It should, in my opinion, be accepted that, in the case of manslaughter, the incidents of an offence and so the sentence appropriate to it may vary over a wide range. I do not see the present case as outside the permissible range. This submission should not be accepted.
THE DE SIMONI SUBMISSION
In assessing the sentence appropriate for a particular offence, the sentencing judge can and should take into account not merely the inherent or objective gravity of the offence but also the circumstances in which and the manner in which the offence has been committed. The sentence must be proportionate not merely to the nature of the defence but the circumstances and manner of it. But, as Mr Game has submitted, "no-one should be punished for an offence of which he has not been convicted": The
Queen versus De Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383] at 389. In principle, this means that he may not be punished even for a lesser offence; the sentence must be formulated by reference to the offence that was committed.
But this principle has a particular application in, as it has been described, the principle of aggravation. In De Simoni at 389 Gibbs CJ, with whom Mason and Murphy JJ agreed, said: "However, the general principle that the sentence imposed on an offender should take account of all the circumstances of the offence is subject to a more fundamental and important principle, that no one should be punished for an offence of which he has not been convicted. Section 582 reflects this principle. The combined effect of the two principles, so far as it is relevant for present purposes, is that a judge, in imposing sentence, is entitled to consider all the conduct of the accused, including that which would aggravate the offence, but cannot take into account circumstances of aggravation which would have warranted a conviction for a more serious offence."
However, difficulties may arise in the application of the principle of aggravation in a particular case. In De Simoni, the High Court dealt with statutory offences and a statutory provision in respect of "circumstances of aggravation". As the report indicates, where an accused has been convicted of robbery in the course of which he has wounded the victim and the indictment has charged that he used actual violence to the person, the judge is entitled to take the actual violence into account. But he is not to take into account that the wounding was caused by the violence, because, within the statute, the wounding was a circumstance of aggravation not an element of the robbery itself and had it been charged would have involved "a more serious offence".
The principle of aggravation may be readily applied where, as in that case, the factor taken into account in sentencing would, if it had been charged as part of the indictment, have constituted a charge of an offence having a higher punishment. But, in my opinion, the principle of aggravation is not limited to cases in which what is involved is the mere addition of a factor to that which has been charged in the indictment. The principle may be applicable also where the difference between the offence charged and the "higher" offence is a matter of degree. Problems of this kind were discussed in R versus Overall A Cr R 170.
The present case provides, on Mr Game's submission, a different illustration of the application of this principle. Mr Game's submission was, or suggested, that the judge had taken into account in sentencing not merely that there had been a killing by Mr Vella but that the killing was of a particular character and that that character, had it been charged, would or should have justified a conviction for murder. His submission was that the trial judge took into account that the killing involved "a long course of methodical bashing which went on for at least a quarter of an hour", not "committed in a frenzy" but calculated and sadistic. Accordingly, the submission suggested, the judge took into account as part of the conduct which made the offence an aggravated one conduct which, had it been charged as part of the offence, would have constituted the charge one of murder. This, the submission suggested, was contrary to the principle of aggravation.
This submission has considerable force but, in my opinion, it should not be accepted. If the case had been an ordinary one in which the facts were that
Mr Vella had killed Mr Sommerville and had done it in a calculated and sadistic manner, the proper verdict would have been murder, not manslaughter.
if, on a trial by judge and jury, the jury had returned a verdict of manslaughter, arguably it would have been wrong to sentence the prisoner on the basis that the killing had been done in a calculated and sadistic manner.
That remains to be determined in an appropriate case. But that was not this case. In order to understand what the trial judge did and why he did it, it is necessary to refer to the way in which the trial proceeded and why the trial judge held the offence to be manslaughter rather than murder.
In the present case, the contest at the trial was of a different kind. Mr
Vella had been attacked by Mr Sommerville and beaten about the head with a metal bar. The killing of Mr Sommerville by Mr Vella took place following that and the altercation between Mr Sommerville and Mr Vella which then took place.
Mr Vella's defence did not, I think, suggest that if the killing was calculated and sadistic as the judge found, the proper verdict was not murder but manslaughter. His case in this regard was that he had acted either in self-defence or following provocation and that it was those defences, if established, which, by operation of the statutory provisions, required a verdict not of murder but of manslaughter.
The judge rejected the defence of self-defence but he accepted the defence of provocation. [Section 23(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) relevantly provides that an act causing death is done under provocation where: "(a) the act ... is the result of a loss of self-control on the part of the accused that was induced by any conduct of the deceased (including grossly insulting words or gestures) towards or affecting the accused; and that conduct of the deceased was such as could have induced an ordinary person in the position of the accused to have so far lost self-control as to have formed an intent to kill, or to inflict grievous bodily harm upon, the deceased, whether that conduct of the deceased occurred immediately before the act ... causing death or at any previous time."
The effect of [s 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23.html) is that provocation, if proved, "shall" reduce to manslaughter what otherwise would have been murder.
The problem in the present case arises because of the effect which the provocation had upon Mr Vella and the extent to which what he did resulted from it. As
I have indicated, the altercation between Mr Sommerville and Mr
Vella commenced when Mr Sommerville, with a accompanying remarks, struck Mr
Vella from behind. The events which occurred included Mr Vella falling to the floor, his struggling with Mr Sommerville, his obtaining the upper hand, his gaining possession of the metal rod, and his beating and otherwise assaulting
Mr Sommerville during a period of some ten or fifteen minutes. His Honour held that the provocation did not cause all of what Mr Vella did to Mr Sommerville but only part of it: more accurately, his Honour held that - the onus being upon the Crown to exclude provocation - it had not established beyond reasonable doubt that all of the acts which Mr Vella did were not provoked by
Mr Sommerville's conduct.
In order to understand the precise finding made by the trial judge, it is necessary to refer to the detail of his reasoning.
His Honour was satisfied that Mr Sommerville's conduct towards Mr Vella was such as satisfied the requirements of [s 23(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23.html) His Honour then said: "Accordingly the Crown has failed to discharge the onus of proof that the fatal blow or blows were not struck by Mr Vella in provocation within the meaning of [s 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23.html) unless it has established beyond reasonable doubt that the blow or blows so struck were not the result of a loss of self-control on Mr
Vella's part induced by that conduct of Mr Sommerville.

The blow or blows that matter are the ones that caused his death. Blows thereafter struck otherwise than under provocation within the meaning of [s 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23.html) do not negate Mr Vella's entitlement to acquittal of murder if the fatal blows were so struck. The difficulty which confronts the Crown, one of many difficulties, is that it cannot establish beyond reasonable doubt that it was not a very early blow struck with the gate peg, indeed perhaps even the first, which was fatal. I am wholly unpersuaded that the Crown has established beyond reasonable doubt that the fatal blow or blows struck with the gate peg were not struck by Mr Vella under provocation.

It follows that Mr Vella must be acquitted of murder. In the absence of any defence to manslaughter I must convict him of the lesser, yet serious, offence of manslaughter."
Accordingly, his Honour's reasoning and his sentencing proceeded upon the basis that - I state the matter somewhat inaccurately - the death of Mr
Sommerville was or may have been brought about by blows struck early in Mr
Vella's beating of him; that those early blows were acts which were the result of the loss of self-control produced by Mr Sommerville's provocation; that Mr
Sommerville did not die immediately but lived on for some time; that blows were struck thereafter which were not the result of any loss of self-control produced by that provocation; and that those subsequent blows were struck in the calculated and sadistic manner on which the judge remarked in his sentencing remarks. Accordingly, though the acts which were the result of the provocation were the acts which caused the death, the other acts not caused by provocation were part of the surrounding circumstances appropriate to be taken into account in assessing sentence but they, because of the operation of [s 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23.html), did not have the effect of making the killing what otherwise they would have made it, namely, murder.
It was not argued by
Mr Game that these subsequent acts outside the effect of the provocation were not proper to be taken into account in assessing sentence; clearly, they formed part of the overall criminality of what was done and were to be taken into account. But they could not convert the killing into murder because of two things; because (I shall for simplicity reverse the onus) the death resulted from the acts done as the result of provocation; and because the statute required that, those acts being the result of provocation, the killing should be manslaughter and not murder.
It is, therefore, necessary to determine whether, in those circumstances, the principle of aggravation applies as Mr Game has submitted. I do not think that it does. The approach to such a case as the present commences,
I think, with the fact that the calculated and sadistic nature of the beating is prima facie part of the circumstances of the killing which ordinarily is to be taken into account. The effect of the statutory requirement that the killing be manslaughter rather than murder has the effect, in my opinion, that those acts which were done as the result of the provocation and which, the statute apart, would have meant that the killing was murder, are not to be taken into account. But what was done after the provocation had ceased to have effect is in my opinion not subject to that restriction. The fact that a person, having committed manslaughter, then does calculated and sadistic acts which make the manslaughter a worse rather than a better case may in my opinion be taken into account.
Those acts are not acts which, had they been contained in the indictment, would have enabled the Crown to have a conviction for a higher offence, murder. They do not fall within the rationale of the aggravation principle.
In my opinion, therefore, this submission should not be accepted.
Approaching the case in this way, the sentence imposed by the trial judge was within the bounds of a sound discretionary sentencing judgment. I do not think that the judge erred in what he did.
In these circumstances,
I would grant leave to appeal and I would dismiss the appeal. Time served should count.
JUDGE2
GROVE J I agree with Mahoney JA.
JUDGE3
SPERLING J I have had the benefit of reading in draft the judgment of Mahoney
JA and of noting that Grove J agrees with him.
The conviction for manslaughter was based on the following findings: The appellant had beaten the victim mercilessly for about fifteen minutes, inflicting severe injuries. The victim died at least from the earliest of the blows. It was not found affirmatively that the later blows had resulted in death. The earliest blows were struck under provocation. Hence the conviction for manslaughter.
The relevant passage in the judgment on conviction is as follows: "The blow or blows that matter are the ones that caused his death. Blows thereafter struck otherwise than under provocation within the meaning of [s 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23.html) do not negate Mr Vella's entitlement to acquittal of murder if the fatal blows were so struck. The difficulty which confronts the Crown, one of many difficulties, is that it cannot establish beyond reasonable doubt that it was not a very early blow struck with the gate peg, indeed perhaps even the first, which was fatal. I am wholly unpersuaded that the Crown has established beyond reasonable doubt that the fatal blow or blows struck with the gate peg were not struck by Mr Vella under provocation"
The mental element which would have made out the offence of murder but for provocation was an intention to cause grievous bodily harm. There was no finding of intention to kill in relation to the beating. The relevant passage from the judgment on conviction is as follows: "The blows were inflicted methodically and with tremendous power over an extended period. The nature of them is such that
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the inference to be drawn is that Mr Vella intended at least to cause grievous bodily harm to Mr Sommerville. There is no other reasonable explanation."
On sentence, the whole of the beating, including the later blows, which were not delivered under provocation, was taken into account. The relevant passage in the remarks on sentence is as follows: "It is urged in mitigation that the provocation by Sommerville was gross. So is was. But the loss of self-control induced by it was of relatively short duration. Thereafter
Vella pursued a long course of methodical bashing which went on for at least a quarter of an hour. That bashing was not committed in a frenzy. It was calculated, sadistic conduct inflicted by way of punishment upon a man pleading for mercy between the blows."
The appellant says that the findings on sentence, insofar as they included the later blows, constituted the offence of attempted murder or at least the offence of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm. It was submitted that, because the appellant was not convicted of any such offence constituted by the later blows, the trial judge erred in principle in taking that conduct into account on sentence.
The appellant's conduct in continuing to beat the victim after the initial blow or blows could not amount to murder on the findings made by the trial judge because he was not satisfied that the subsequent blows caused the death.
Nor could that subsequent conduct have amounted to an offence of attempting to murder the victim because intention to kill is a necessary element in any such offence, and the trial judge found only an intention to inflict grievous bodily harm in relation to the whole of the beating.
 .
It is true, however, that on the findings of the trial judge the subsequent blows amounted to the offence of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm of the most extreme kind. The offence carries the same maximum penalty as for manslaughter and for attempt to murder.
In Reg. versus De Simoni <case>; [(1980-1981) 147 CLR 383], De Simoni had pleaded guilty to robbery (stealing with actual violence) before a judge of the District
Court of Western Australia.
On sentence, the Crown referred to the factual nature of the violence, a blow to the head with a piece of wood which had caused a wound to the victim's scalp. The facts, so stated, were not disputed.
The judge sentenced De Simoni to 7 years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 4 years. The Court of Criminal Appeal (WA) set aside the sentence on the ground that the wounding was a circumstance of aggravation not charged in the indictment and, on that account, could not be relied upon because of the provisions of <case> of the Criminal Code (WA). The Court reduced the sentence to 3 years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 18 months.
The High
Court in De Simoni unanimously granted special leave to appeal and unanimously allowed the appeal, but for reasons which differed as between the members of the court. Gibbs CJ (with whom Mason and Murphy JJ agreed) held that the trial judge had not taken the wounding into account, and would have erred if he had. Wilson and Brennan JJ held that the trial Judge had taken the wounding into account, and was not wrong in doing so, indeed being bound to do so.
The decision turned on the proper construction of <case> of the Criminal
Code (WA) which has no present relevance in itself. What is relevant are observations made about common law principles relating to sentencing.
Gibbs CJ said (at 389): "At common law the principle that circumstances of aggravation not alleged in the indictment could not be relied upon for purposes of sentence if those circumstances could have been made the subject of a distinct charge appears to have been recognized as early as the eighteenth century."
He referred to cases dating from that time in which it had been held that a prisoner should not be sentenced for an offence more serious than that for which he had been charged, notwithstanding that the evidence established the more serious offence (at 389-91). Gibbs CJ acknowledged (at 392) that this principle gave rise to artificiality, in that the judge was precluded from taking into account circumstances of aggravation which he was satisfied were the fact. But his Honour regarded that as tolerable. It was not a unique situation. For example, a judge sitting with a jury was precluded from acting on a view of the facts inconsistent with the jury's verdict; similarly, where the Crown accepted a plea of guilty to a charge less serious than the facts appeared to justify (also at 392).
It may be noted that one of the cases cited by Gibbs CJ was Reg. v
Huchison [(1972) 1 WLR 398.] In that case it was held that it was not right for the judge, in imposing sentence on a charge of incest, to have taken into account other related acts of incest with which the defendant had not been charged. The underlying principle is not therefore limited to putting a more serious offence out of account. The appellant in the present appeal also refers the Court to R versus Hansen [(1961) NSWLR 929] in which conduct subsequent to the facts constituting the offence was ruled out of account.
The principles as enunciated by
Wilson J (at 395-6) were: "The primary rule is that the judge must sentence the prisoner for the offence of which he has been convicted. He must not, even though the actual sentence may be within the range allowed for that offence, sentence for some other more serious offence which he is satisfied has been committed ... On the other hand, the judge is not only entitled but bound to take into consideration the circumstances surrounding the offence of which the prisoner has been convicted, so long as those circumstances are not inconsistent with the plea or verdict ... But he must not punish the prisoner for additional offences with which he has not been charged ..." 
As authority for the last sentence, Wilson J cited Reg. versus Reiner [(1974) 8 SASR ] and Reg. versus Huchison (supra).
It would be difficult to extract from De Simoni a comprehensive set of principles capable of application generally to all cases of this kind.
However, it is a feature of the present case that, on the trial judge's findings, the appellant's subsequent conduct was more heinous than the conduct which was found to constitute the offence for which he was convicted.
The subsequent blows were no less vicious than those which constituted the offence. The intent was the same. And they were delivered without provocation.
Furthermore, the longer the beating went on, the more wrongful the conduct because of the compounding of injuries inflicted on a person already severely wounded, his cries for mercy and his increasing inability to protect himself.
These features of the subsequent conduct impressed the trial judge and contributed to his assessment of an appropriate penalty.
Whatever may be the precise ambit of the principle in De Simoni, it seems to me, with the greatest respect to those who have come to a different opinion, that the present case is caught by it. The result is artificial and, to my mind, unsatisfactory. But it seems to me that
De Simoni requires that conduct subsequent to the acts constituting the offence for which an accused person has been convicted cannot be taken into account if the subsequent conduct amounts to some further offence or offences for which the accused has not been convicted.
At the least, that appears to be so where the subsequent conduct is more heinous than the conduct constituting the offence for which the accused has been convicted, as in this case.
If that is right, as I think it is, the trial judge erred in taking the subsequent blows into account as he did.
The sentence was for fourteen years penal servitude, comprised of a minimum term of ten years commencing on 18 November 1994 and an additional term of four years commencing on 18 November 2004. Since I find myself in the minority, it is sufficient for me to say that I would grant leave to appeal and would substitute a sentence of ten years penal servitude, comprised of a minimum term of seven years commencing on 18 November 1994 and an additional term of three years commencing on 18 November 2001.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2004/1339.html  
