

Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Mace Matter No 12479/94 [1997] NSWSC 462 (8 October 1997) 
Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Mace /94 October 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Name of Case: COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA versus MACE 
Proceedings: 12479/94 
Dates of Hearing: 23, 24, 25 September 1997 
Date of Judgment: 8 October 1997 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Ms R Sofroniou 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Shaw McDonald 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr I M Neil 
Solicitor for Defendant: Macedone Christie Willis 
Essentially an issue of fact.

Plaintiff precluded from enforcing guarantee and mortgage in accordance with their terms because of representations made by its manager to the defendant. 
I N D E X 
PAGE 
Introduction 1 
The Present Proceedings 5 
A Critical Factual Issue 12 
Subsequent Conduct By Mr Mace 35 
The Bank's Internal Documentation 48 
The Bank's Position As Disclosed In The Internal 
Memorandum of March 1994 Pages 75-79 Of Exhibit 1 53 
Is There An Estoppel? 55 
Did Mr Mace Rely Upon The Representation? 63 
Did Mr Mace Act To His Detriment? 63 
What Is The Estoppel? 63 
The Position Thus Far 64 
A Further Way In Which Mr Mace Seeks To Put His Case 67 
Proposed Orders 69 /1994 - COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA versus MACE 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
On 28 June 1985 the first cross-defendant, Mr Phillip Russell John Sharman, and the second cross-defendant, Ms Maureen Robyn Rochester, purchased a property at 26 Thorp Road, Woronora as joint tenants in which they resided until early March 1993. Mr Sharman had banked with the plaintiff, Commonwealth
Bank of Australia, ("the Bank"), for which Ms R. Sofroniou of Counsel appeared, for many years and, at all relevant times, he did so at the Engadine
Branch of which Mr D.N. Robinson was the manager from 1989 until his retirement on 20 April 1993. The Bank, through that branch, provided Mr
Sharman and Ms Rochester with a loan to purchase 26 Thorp Road. It also provided financial assistance to Mr Sharman to carry on a plumbing business through a company he controlled, Trygrate Pty Limited, ("Trygrate"), and it took a mortgage over 26 Thorp Road to secure the home loan and the business loan.

The defendant, Mr Brett Ronald Mace, who was born on 20 January 1962 and for whom Mr I.M. Neil of Counsel appeared, lived, at all relevant times, at 22
Thorp Road, Woronora and, in these circumstances, he came to know Mr Sharman.
Mr Mace inherited an interest in an hotel at Bathurst on the death of his father in 1984, although he took no part in its day to day conduct. He was employed, for approximately eight years as at early 1991, as a sales manager for ACI.

Mr Mace and Mr Sharman became the sole directors of and shareholders in Ad-
Glass Pty Limited, ("Ad-Glass"), in September 1990, and started to carry on business through it of supplying imported glassware to hotels and clubs. Mr
Mace, who at the time was not a customer of the Bank, was introduced by Mr
Sharman, in about October 1990, to Mr Robinson and to another officer of the
Bank at its Engadine Branch, Mr Andrew John Peter West.

In January 1991 Mr Mace and Mr Sharman applied to the Bank on behalf of Ad-
Glass for a finance facility of $90,000. This was granted and each gave a personal guarantee to support the lending. Ms Rochester may have joined with
Mr Sharman in giving the guarantee but nothing turns on this. I shall, therefore, refer to the guarantor as Mr Sharman. Mr Mace's guarantee, which he gave on 31 January 1991, was supported by his lodging $66,000 on term deposit with the Bank. Mr Sharman's guarantee was supported by a second registered mortgage over 26 Thorp Road. Accordingly, that property was security for moneys borrowed from the Bank to acquire it, the debts of Trygrate and the guarantee of Mr Sharman. The terms upon and circumstances in which Mr Mace gave his guarantee, and further security by way of a mortgage over 22 Thorp
Road, will have to be explored in detail because they are central to the litigation. However, it is convenient, at this point, to trace through certain further dealings in relation to Ad-Glass.

In about June 1991 the Bank approved an increase in the loan facility of some $20,000 and, in September 1991, a further increase was sought to bring the total amount borrowed to approximately $175,000. The Bank required further security from Mr Mace and, on 2 October 1991, he executed a memorandum of mortgage, registered number E36296, over the whole of the land comprised in
Certificate of Title Folio Identifier 1/5670 being 22 Thorp Road. This mortgage incorporated a memorandum filed in the Land Titles Office registered number T340042. It was a third party mortgage to secure the indebtedness of
Ad-Glass to the Bank. In about January 1992 Ad-Glass sought a further loan of approximately $25,000.

In early 1993, unbeknown to Mr Mace, Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester contracted to sell 26 Thorp Road and, on 5 March 1993, settlement of the sale was effected, the purchasers paying approximately $271,000. From this amount approximately $126,000 and $104,000 was paid to the Bank to discharge the home loan and the indebtedness of Trygrate respectively. In an affidavit sworn on 3 December Mr Robinson said that the remaining $40,000 "was held to the credit of the Trygrate account towards the settlement of the Queensland purchase". This was a reference to the acquisition by Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester of a house at Elanora in Queensland. Part of the purchase price for that property was borrowed from the Bank.

It was not in issue that Mr Mace was not made aware until mid 1993 of the sale of 26 Thorp Road, nor of the failure to offset any of the proceeds of sale against the indebtedness of Ad-Glass. Subsequently Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester were declared bankrupt and their Queensland home was sold, I assume either by the Bank exercising its power of sale as mortgagee or in consequence of the requirement of the Bank that it be sold to discharge the indebtedness. The precise details do not matter, but it was expressly conceded by the Bank, for the purposes of these proceedings, that the proceeds of the sale of that property were used to discharge their indebtedness to the Bank, but that none of the proceeds was credited against the indebtedness of Ad-Glass.

On leaving New South Wales Mr Sharman ceased to have anything to do with the business of Ad-Glass. It seems he set up a business in competition to it and, in March 1995, Ad-Glass was wound up on the petition of the Bank.

The Present Proceedings 
On 13 October 1994 the Bank instituted proceedings against Mr Mace seeking possession of 22 Thorp Road and a monetary judgment, the amounts sought being those owing to the Bank by Ad-Glass. It was asserted by the affidavit of Mr
Peter John Kupresak that as at 19 September 1997 the amount due and owing, including interest, by Ad-Glass to the Bank was $282,101.20 on which interest continues to accrue at the rate of $103.15 per day. It was asserted that pursuant to his guarantee Mr Mace was liable to the Bank for that amount.

Mr Mace did not dispute the giving of his guarantee on 31 January 1991 and the mortgage on 2 October 1991. It was not in issue that on 12 April 1994 and 16
August 1994 the Bank obtained payments of $512.10 and $51,159.98, which latter amount represented the balance of the term deposit of $66,000, respectively by its withdrawing those moneys from his accounts. The essential defence pleaded was that he is only obliged, in consequence of discussions he had with Mr
Robinson, to pay one half of any money owing to the Bank by Ad-Glass. In his affidavit evidence and on the hearing Mr Mace asserted that Mr Robinson made a representation to him to that effect and to the effect that he would only be obliged to pay the full amount if the real property security given by Mr
Sharman was rendered valueless by an act of God. Ms Sofroniou did not object to an expansion of the representation to include the assertion that he would only be obliged to pay the full amount in such event, notwithstanding that it differed from the representation as pleaded, and the case was conducted on the basis that the representation in issue was that Mr Mace was only obliged to pay one half of the money owing by Ad-Glass unless the real property security given by Mr Sharman was rendered valueless by an act of God, in which event Mr
Mace would be liable to pay the full amount. Mr Mace further asserted that in reliance on that representation he entered into the guarantee and mortgage.
Subject to a further matter, which has now been raised, Mr Mace has never denied that in the circumstances which occurred he is liable to pay the Bank one half of any moneys owing by Ad-Glass, from which the sums of $512.10 and $51,159.98 should be deducted.

Paragraph 5 asserted that if, contrary to the facts and matters raised by his
Defence, the Bank was entitled to demand and recover from him "the full amount of any money owing" to the Bank on the account of Ad-Glass, then:- ".. by reason of the guarantee referred to in paragraph 2 of this cross-claim, the first and second cross-defendants are jointly and severally liable with him for the full amount of any money owing to the plaintiff on the account of Ad-Glass." 
This cross-claim made it clear that Mr Mace was accepting his liability to pay one half of any such indebtedness.

On 16 January 1997 Mr Mace brought a second cross-claim against the Bank. It alleged, firstly, that the Bank was guilty of negligence in that before he entered into his guarantee "and at all material times" the Bank represented to him that the obligations of Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester under their guarantee were fully secured by a mortgage to the Bank over 26 Thorp Road. The particulars asserted reliance on a conversation deposed to in paragraph 16 of
Mr Mace's affidavit of 24 May 1996 and the letters comprising Annexures C, E and F to it. It was pleaded that the Bank, without informing Mr Mace, also held the mortgage over 26 Thorp Road as security for debts owed to it by
Trygrate and that, as the Bank knew or ought to have known, Mr Mace relied upon the representation as to the security and was induced by it to give his guarantee and from time to time to increase the amount borrowed by Ad-Glass.
It was not in issue that Mr Mace was not told that the mortgage over 26 Thorp
Road secured the indebtedness for the home loan and of Trygrate.

It was pleaded that on the sale of 26 Thorp Road the proceeds were applied in the discharge of the indebtedness to which I have referred. Reference was made to clause 10 of the guarantee given by Mr Mace, which provided:- "The Bank is under no obligation to hold or take any other or further guarantee or security for the payment of the moneys hereby secured and this Guarantee shall be in addition to and independent of and shall not affect or be affected by any other further guarantee or security now or hereafter held or taken by the Bank or by any arrangement or transaction between the Bank and the Debtor or any other person or by any loss release discharge abandonment or transfer either in whole or in part and either with or without consideration of any other guarantee or security now or hereafter held by the Bank from the Debtor or from any other person or by any act forbearance or omission by the Bank or by any other act matter or thing." 
It is also convenient to set out clause 11:- "The Bank shall not be under any obligation to resort to any other guarantee or security it may hold for payment of the moneys hereby secured in priority to this or any other guarantee or security." 
It was pleaded by Mr Mace that the Bank owed him a duty to use reasonable care and skill in exercising its power under clause 10 to preserve his right of subrogation against Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester and not to prefer their interests, or the interests of Trygrate, to his, or to confer an advantage on
Mr Sharman, Ms Rochester or Trygrate to his detriment, which duty it is alleged the Bank breached. The particulars asserted, inter alia, that the breaches arose from a failure to inform Mr Mace that the mortgage over 26
Thorp Road was held as security for the debts of Trygrate, and of the intention to discharge the mortgage, and by failing to obtain his consent to do so and to notify him of its intention to apply the proceeds of sale to the discharge of debts owed by Trygrate. It was also pleaded that Mr Mace was not informed, warned or advised of the legal or practical effect of clause 10, or of the legal or practical effect of the discharge of the mortgage over 26
Thorp Road until after it had been discharged, and that the Bank did not obtain any or any adequate security in place of that mortgage to secure the obligations of Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester under their guarantee.

In these circumstances it was pleaded that Mr Mace lost the value of his right of subrogation, which he quantified as the difference between the amount he would have been able to recover by the exercise thereof against that mortgage and the amount he is otherwise able to recover.

The cross-claim pleaded nextly, and in the alternative, a claim under s.52 of the Trade Practices Act, which relied, essentially, upon the same facts. It then pleaded a claim under the Contracts Review Act asserting that clause 10 was unjust in the circumstances at the time the guarantee was entered into. In addition to asserting the clause was not subject to negotiation, it was pleaded that it was not reasonably practicable for Mr Mace to negotiate for an alteration or to reject it; that it was not reasonably necessary for the protection of the Bank's legitimate interests and was unintelligible; that its legal and practical effects were not explained to Mr Mace and he did not understand them; and that reliance was placed on the conduct of the Bank. The relief sought was an order pursuant to s.7(1)(b) avoiding clause 10 and, consequent on that order, a declaration that in the events that have happened
Mr Mace is entitled to be discharged from any liability under his guarantee.

The Bank's defence to this cross-claim, in addition to denials of essential matters of fact, was, firstly, that in so far as the claim was brought pursuant to the Trade Practices Act the cause of action accrued in excess of three years prior to the filing of the Amended Second Cross-Claim and was, accordingly, statute barred; that the claim under the Contracts Review Act did not arise by reason of the provisions of s.6(2) thereof and that, in answer to the whole of the Amended Second Cross-Claim:- "the Bank relies on the terms of the memorandum of mortgage referred to in its Default Statement of Claim particularly at paragraphs 25, 26 and 27 and on the terms of the guarantee referred to in its Default Statement Claim particularly at paragraphs 10, 11 and 12.

No submissions were made in support of the limitation defence, and the defence raised pursuant to s.6(2) was hardly pressed.

Prior to the hearing the solicitors formerly acting for Mr Sharman and Ms
Rochester filed Notices of Ceasing to Act and there was no appearance by or on their behalf. I was informed from the Bar Table that each has been made bankrupt and Mr Neil stated expressly that Mr Mace was not seeking any relief against either of them. Mr Neil also stated that if Mr Mace's liability was limited to one half of the amount owing by Ad-Glass to the Bank he was not asserting that this is an amount, if paid by Mr Mace, in respect of which Mr
Mace claimed that he was entitled to recover contribution from Mr Sharman and
Ms Rochester as co-sureties. I think that if Mr Mace's principal defence is correct this is not a case in which contribution would be appropriate because
Mr Mace, on the one hand, and Mr Sharman, on the other, were not guaranteeing the same indebtedness. Each was guaranteeing one half of it, save in the event of an act of God destroying the real estate security provided by Mr Sharman.

On one view this reduced the essential issue between the parties, so far as Mr
Mace was concerned, to a relatively short point, namely whether, notwithstanding the terms of the guarantee and the mortgage given by him, his liability thereunder was, by virtue of the representations allegedly made by
Mr Robinson and in the events which occurred, confined to one half of the amount owing by Ad-Glass. In the event of that being so Mr Neil submitted that it emerged from a memorandum of Mr West dated 7 July 1993 that, as at that date, the amount owing by Ad-Glass was $195,998 of which half is $97,999. As a matter of fact the extent of the indebtedness, at that time, was not in issue.
Mr Neil submitted that from that amount the two amounts debited to the accounts of Mr Mace, which totalled $51,672.08, had to be deducted leaving, as at that date, an amount owing of $46,326.92. He submitted that if Mr Mace was liable it was for that amount, and that as Mr Mace had offered to pay half of
Ad-Glass' total debt from mid 1993, which offer the Bank refused, he should not be liable to pay interest from the date of his offer. It was not in issue that the circumstances in which the Bank refused the offer was its non- acceptance of the assertion that Mr Mace only owed one half and, therefore, its refusal to consent to discharge the mortgage over 26 Thorp Road unless it received from the proceeds of sale the amount it alleged to be owing, rather than the amount Mr Mace asserted was owing.

When one has regard to the rate at which interest was accruing it is unfortunate, in view of the issues propounded by the parties, that an agreement was not reached long ago for the sale of 26 Thorp Road, the payment to the Bank of the amount then admittedly owing, and the retention of the balance in an interest bearing account pending the resolution of these proceedings.

A Critical Factual Issue 
I propose to deal immediately with the issue as to the conversation or conversations held between Mr Mace and Mr Robinson in January 1991. Paragraph (a) of Mr Mace's Defence stated:- "13. As to the whole of the plaintiff's statement of claim, the defendant says that the plaintiff is estopped from demanding or recovering from the defendant any more than one-half of any money owing to the plaintiff on the account of Ad-Glass by reason of the following facts and matters: 
The plaintiff, by David Robinson, who was then the manager of the plaintiff's branch at Engadine, represented to the defendant before he entered into the Mortgage and the Guarantee, and thereby caused the defendant to believe, that by doing so he would not be securing or becoming liable for any more than one half of any money owing to the plaintiff on the account of Ad-Glass." 
In paragraph 13 of his affidavit of 24 May 1996 Mr Mace said that in or about
January 1991 he and Mr Sharman had a conversation with Mr Robinson in which Mr
Robinson said:- "You'll have to secure the loan by each giving a personal guarantee and an adequate security. Phil, we already have a mortgage over your property at Woronora, and that should be enough. Brett, we'll need a mortgage or other security from you." 
In paragraph 16 he stated that in January 1991 he had a conversation with Mr
Robinson in which the following was said:- "ME: `How will our loan be structured? Can we do it by each taking out a loan in equal amounts? That way each of us will know the amount for which we have to be responsible.' 
ROBINSON: `No. The normal practice of the Bank is not to grant two individual loans but to grant a joint loan secured by assets from both directors.' 
ME: `What sort of security will you want from each director?' 
ROBINSON: `Both directors must provide full security against the total amount advanced to Ad-Glass. Each individual can only borrow against 70% of their unencumbered securities. The Bank already holds a registered mortgage from Phil and Maureen over 26 Thorp Road, Woronora as his half of the security against Ad-Glass loans. We need you to give a similar security.' 
ME: `What will happen if something goes wrong with the company?' 
ROBINSON: `In the event of the business failing each director will be liable for 50% of the amount due which, if necessary, will come out of the security that each of you have given'." (My emphasis.) 
In paragraph 6 of his affidavit of 31 July 1996 Mr Robinson referred to paragraph 13 of Mr Mace's affidavit of 24 May 1996 and agreed he said:- "You will have to secure the loan by each giving a personal guarantee and adequate security. Phil, we already have a mortgage over your property at Woronora, and that should be enough. Brett, we'll need a mortgage or other security from you." 
In paragraph 7 Mr Robinson referred to a preliminary application for finance for Ad-Glass, which he filled in and, in paragraph 8, he said that Mr Mace told him that he could provide security in the form of a term deposit of $66,000 and he said he recalled the following conversation:- "MACE: `How is the loan structured? Does it have to be one loan? I think we should only be responsible for half of the debt.' 
ME: `I'm afraid that with a company structure that is not so. If you have any doubts about that you should not proceed because we're talking about you each signing joint and several directors' guarantees for the company's business.' 
SHARMAN: `Don't worry about it, Brett. You know that we'll make a success of it. We can go ahead with it.' 
MACE: `OK'." 
Whilst Mr Mace stated, in paragraph 13 of his affidavit of 24 May 1996, that
Mr Sharman was present at that conversation, with the terms of which conversation Mr Robinson agreed, he did not state in paragraph 16, and indeed the reference to the conversation being "the January 1991 Conversation" in that paragraph would tend to indicate it was a different conversation, that Mr
Sharman was present at the latter conversation. However, the version given by
Mr Robinson would tend to indicate that the conversations referred to by Mr
Mace in paragraphs 13 and 16 in fact constituted one conversation and, certainly, that Mr Sharman was present.

In paragraph 9 Mr Robinson said he agreed Mr Mace "made the query set out in the third and fourth lines of paragraph 16" of his affidavit of 24 May 1996, and he denied saying the words attributed to him in that paragraph. This, he agreed, was not a completely accurate statement. He said that to the best of his recollection the conversation was in the terms "I have set out immediately above" meaning, as I understand it, in paragraph 8. He continued:- "I can be certain that I did not respond to Mace in the manner set out in the final two lines of paragraph 16 of the Mace affidavit since such words did not then and have never accorded with my understanding of, nor my practice of, approving loans to a company applicant. The Bank considered a company applicant as a single entity and in approving the loan to the Company in this case I considered myself to be dealing with a single applicant, which was opening an account in its own name. The loan to the Company would be supported by the directors jointly and severally. It accordingly would not have made sense to divide the loan, especially in the form it took, namely, overdraft and trade facilities in the Company's name, between its directors." 
In an affidavit he swore on 27 September 1996 Mr Mace, in response to paragraph 7 of Mr Robinson's affidavit of 31 July 1996, said he recalled a conversation with Mr Robinson and Mr Sharman in which Mr Robinson said to Mr
Sharman:- "My calculations are that you've got plenty of equity in your property to cover your share of the loan." 
In paragraph 4 of the same affidavit Mr Mace referred to paragraph 8 of Mr
Robinson's affidavit and said:- "I recall having a conversation with Mr Robinson in or about January 1991 in the presence of Mr Sharman in which I said, `can I make a term deposit of $66,000 to secure my share of the loan'. This was the same conversation to which I have deposed in paragraph 3 of this affidavit. I am confident that Mr Robinson did not say any of the words that he has attributed to himself on page 4 of his Affidavit. (Words to that effect would have made a forceful impression on me and I would have acted on them if Mr Robinson had said them to me.) The conversation that I called the January 1991 Conversation in paragraph 16 of the affidavit that I swore on 24 May 1996 and that has been filed in these proceedings on my behalf (`my First Affidavit') was a different, and, to the best of my recollection, later, conversation. The January 1991 Conversation did not occur in Mr Sharman's presence. Instead I used the opportunity of a transaction or query at the plaintiff's Premises at Engadine to seek Mr Robinson out and talk with him privately as I thought that I would have a franker discussion in the absence of Mr Sharman. Since I made my First Affidavit I have reflected further on the January 1991 Conversation. I can now recall that during that conversation Mr Robinson also said, `This is a joint and several loan. The way it is structured means that each partner can only be held responsible for 100% sign of the debt if some unlikely act of God occurs rendering the other partner's security valueless - such as a lightning strike or mud slide'. I had no idea then, and not at least until the conversation that I called the January 1994 Conversation in paragraph 57 of my First Affidavit, what a `joint and several loan' was. I accepted what Mr Robinson said to me in the January 1991 Conversation (his words made me quite confident that, as I deposed in paragraph 22 of my First Affidavit, I would be liable to repay one half of any amount then owing by Ad-Glass Pty Limited (`Ad-Glass') to the plaintiff if Ad-Glass failed. Mr Robinson's words - both those to which I deposed in paragraph 16 of my First Affidavit and those that I have now recalled - put my mind at rest on this point. I had no difficulty excluding the possibility that an `act of God' as Mr Robinson described it would destroy Mr Sharman's property)." (My emphasis.) 
The portions of this paragraph which I have placed in brackets were portions to which Ms Sofroniou objected and which I admitted subject to objection.

Mr Robinson swore a further affidavit on 3 December 1996. He made no reference to the material set forth in Mr Mace's affidavit of 27 September 1996 and, in particular, to the conversation attributed to him.

The parties agreed that Mr Robinson would give his evidence before Mr Mace. Mr
Robinson did not advance any further evidence in chief. He was referred to the preliminary application, which showed that an overdraft of $20,000 and trade finance of $70,000 was being sought and that each of Mr Sharman and Mr Mace was to give a guarantee "unlimited" and, in the case of Mr Sharman, supported by a registered second mortgage over 26 Thorp Road, and, in the case of Mr
Mace, by a term deposit of $66,000.

Perhaps not unnaturally, Mr Robinson had difficulty in recalling the interview with Mr Sharman and Mr Mace. He had, it will be recalled, retired from the
Bank in April 1993 and, Tp.13, he said it was not until December 1995 he was asked to recall what happened at that interview. From an internal Bank memorandum it appears that his recollection on this point may be faulty, and that he was asked to recall the events early in 1994. He said he was assisted in his recollection because he thought the project was interesting, the directors seemed experienced in their business and it seemed feasible.
However, I am of the opinion that unaided by the version of the conversation appearing in Mr Mace's affidavit and the preliminary application, which he completed, Mr Robinson would have had little, if any, recollection of what transpired. He said he took no other note of the interview and that it was not the practice of bank officers, at that time, to do so. An internal Bank memorandum was, however, somewhat critical of the absence of contemporaneous notes.

At Tp.17 Mr Robinson said the conversation to which he referred in paragraph 5 of his affidavit of 31 July 1996 with Mr Sharman and Mr Mace was the conversation in consequence of which he filled out the preliminary application.

Mr Robinson said that he recalled that Mr Mace called at the Bank some time in
January 1991 after the first interview with him and Mr Sharman to deliver his term deposit, but that he did not "really" recall whether he spoke to him on that occasion, although he said he may have done so: Tp.20. He could not recall any other occasion in January 1991 when he spoke to Mr Mace but he did not exclude "at all" "the possibility that you did speak with him on another occasion during January 1991", although he said he simply had no recollection of that. His inability to deny that conversation assists me in concluding that a second conversation took place between Mr Mace and Mr Robinson in January at which Mr Sharman was not present. He said that paragraphs 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 was as much as he was able to recall of the interview with Mr Sharman and Mr Mace.

Mr Robinson said he told Mr Mace that the loan was to the company and that as directors "they were jointly and severally liable for any debt of the company". He based this on "normal practice" and, in answer to whether he had a clear recollection of having said it, he responded:- "I do know that Brett was concerned, so I definitely mentioned that his security would be subject to the debt of the company." 
He said he realised that Mr Mace was concerned because he asked whether separate loans were possible to which he replied that it was not policy in relation to a company: Tp.22. Mr Robinson said he did not know about what Mr
Mace was concerned and he was quite surprised. It became clear that his denial in paragraph 9 of his affidavit of 31 July 1996 of having said the words attributed to him in paragraph 16 of Mr Mace's affidavit of 24 May 1996 was not accurate in so far as it related to certain matters appearing in that paragraph.

Mr Robinson said that his denial in the third sentence of paragraph 9 of the words attributed to him by Mr Mace in the concluding two lines of paragraph 16 of his affidavit of 24 May 1996 was based, in essence, upon such a statement not according with his understanding or practice in approving loans to a company. These two lines are, of course, critical and I shall repeat them:- "In the event of the business failing each director will be liable for 50% of the amount due which, if necessary, will come out of the security that each of you have given." 
In the absence of contemporaneous notes a person in the position of Mr
Robinson is usually obliged, in what appear to be routine matters, to give evidence by reference to his usual practice. It should be remembered, however, that Mr Robinson gave some evidence as to why he was able to recall other details of this transaction.

Mr Robinson was then referred to paragraph 4 of Mr Mace's affidavit of 27
September 1996 and, in particular, to the conversation Mr Mace attributed to him. He said he did not recall saying the sentence commencing "The way it is structured", but it was possible he did and:- "Q. Are the words that I am asking you about now, that is, the words that appear in the sentence that begins, `The way it is structured' an accurate description of the liability that Mr Mace was about to assume under the guarantee that he was to give the bank, as you understood those liabilities? 
A. Yes": Tp.27. 
If this answer be accepted, which, in my opinion, it should be, Mr Robinson's understanding was that each of Mr Mace and Mr Sharman could only be held responsible for the whole of the debt in the event of an act of God rendering the other's security valueless. The question was very precise in asking about a "description of the liability that Mr Mace was about to assume under the guarantee". In my view this was an important concession by Mr Robinson as to his understanding and makes it the more probable that he said what Mr Mace attributed to him. When one adds his inability to recall having said it, his concession that it was possible he did, and what I consider was the credible evidence of Mr Mace that Mr Robinson did say it, I am satisfied that Mr
Robinson did make that statement. That finding assists in deciding that the earlier statement that the liability was restricted to one half was also made.
The one follows naturally and logically from the other.

Mr Robinson said, Tp.30, that Mr Mace was concerned about security in general and that he did not ask questions about the security Mr Sharman would give.
However, he said that it was discussed that Mr Sharman would give a second mortgage over his home and that Mr Mace would provide a term deposit.

In paragraph 16 of his affidavit of 31 July 1996 Mr Robinson said that in about September 1991 Mr Sharman and Mr Mace sought an increase in the loan to $175,000 by way of an overdraft of $40,000 and a bill discount facility of $135,000. He discussed the proposed increase during a visit to them at Ad-
Glass's premises in about late September 1991 when he asserted the following conversation took place:- "ME: `The security you've given is already over-extended. The Bank will need more security from you.' 
SHARMAN: `I don't have anything more I can offer'.

MACE: `Well, I have my house, which you could use as security. Can't this secure half the debt, just in case something goes wrong?' 
ME: `No, the Bank can't separate the loan because it's to the company. If you are unhappy with that, go to a solicitor and get agreements between you and Phil to claim against him if anything were ever to go wrong. As far as the Bank is concerned this is a debt to the company. You're both liable for the whole amount'." (My emphasis.) 
Even if one were to accept Mr Robinson's version of this conversation, Mr Mace was enquiring about securing one half of the debt, which is consistent with a belief that that was all for which he was liable.

In paragraph 8 of his affidavit of 27 September 1996 Mr Mace said he could recall the conversation and that he had deposed to his recollection of it in paragraph 37 of his affidavit of 24 May 1996, in which he said Mr Robinson said to him:- "Brett, if the Bank is to extend the credit facility, you will have to give us additional security, as your term deposit will not (sic) longer be enough to secure your half of the loan." 
At Tp.35 it was put to Mr Robinson that he did not say what is set forth in the concluding passage in paragraph 16 of his affidavit and he replied:- "I don't remember the exact words, but I know that that was one of Brett's feelings, and we have had to tell him a few times if he didn't have any confidence then he shouldn't be in it.

Q. I want to suggest to you in particular that you never advised Mr Mace, either in your conversation with him in September 1991 or during any earlier conversation with him, that he should go to a solicitor? 
A. I did say that." 
It was clear that Mr Robinson did not have a full recollection of the conversation, and it is to be noted that when the critical conversation was put to him in the question I have quoted at Tp.35, his answer did not assert, in terms, that he used the words set forth in his affidavit. I prefer Mr
Mace's version of the conversation.

Mr Robinson did not deny the words set forth in paragraph 4 of Mr Mace's affidavit of 27 September 1996, and, as I have noted, conceded that the sentence contained an accurate description of the liability he was about to assume under the guarantee. Nor did he deny the use of those words in his affidavit of 3 December 1996. Mr Robinson was re-examined about that answer,
Tpp.57-58, and asked to elaborate and explain what he understood by the words "only be held responsible for a hundred per cent of the debt if some unlikely act of God occurs rendering the other partner's security valueless". He replied:- "In a guarantee, loan guarantee, the debt is equal to both of the guarantors for the whole of the debt and if there is security on both sides, then the Bank would pursue that to get the amount of money they wanted by selling up or by making some arrangement.

Q. So what did you mean by the reference to the unlikely act of God in that regard? I am not suggesting that you said this. You were asked whether that accorded with your understanding. So in that regard what would happen if some unlikely act of God had occurred rendering the other partner's security valueless? 
A. Then the Bank would proceed for the whole debt to the other guarantor.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Or alternatively, if the Bank exercised its rights to proceed against one guarantor, that guarantor, as you understood it, could proceed against the other guarantor for contribution.

A. Correct.

Q. And that would be the position unless the other guarantor's property was rendered valueless? 
A. That's right." 
This answer confirmed the evidence Mr Robinson had previously given, and his view that the debt was "equal to both of the guarantors of the whole of" it, and that if both parties provided securities the Bank "would pursue that" i.e.
the security "on both sides". However, if an act of God occurred rendering the other guarantor's security valueless "then" the Bank "would proceed for the whole debt to the other guarantor". In the two answers Mr Robinson gave to the questions I asked at Tp.58, he made it clear that he could distinguish between that situation and the alternative situation of the Bank exercising its rights against one guarantor and leaving that guarantor to proceed against the other for contribution. It was expressly put to Mr Robinson as an alternative to that about which he had been speaking and I have no doubt that the understanding he had expressed in cross-examination and to which I have referred, coupled with the evidence he gave at Tp.57, showed an intention that in this case he regarded the debt as being equal "to both of the guarantors for the whole of the debt". This, in my opinion, is totally consistent with his having said to Mr Mace, as I am satisfied he did, that his liability was for fifty per cent of the amount due. I am satisfied of that notwithstanding the initial express denial by Mr Robinson. However, it becomes the more probable when one has regard to his failure to deny what was said by Mr Mace in his affidavit of 27 September 1996. The liability would only be for the whole amount of the debt in the unlikely event of an act of God destroying the security.

At Tp.73 Mr Mace was cross-examined about paragraph 16 of his affidavit of 24
May 1996. He said it was his understanding that both he and Mr Sharman had the liability in respect of the loan, Tp.74, and that the use of the word "equal" meant to him "50-50 fair and equal. We were both there together".

Mr Mace was cross-examined as to whether Mr Robinson told him that if he had any doubts he should not proceed "because we are talking about you each signing joint and several directors' guarantees". He agreed it was said at some time and that he did not take advice or re-think the matter because he was not uncertain nor did he feel any confusion and he had no doubt. He agreed he did not tell Mr Robinson he did not know what a joint and several arrangement was and:- "Q. You were prepared, I suggest to you, as at that date, to give an unlimited guarantee on the basis that it would be secured by your term deposit and you knew that the amount of that term deposit was fixed at $66,000? 
A. And it was secured also by the company and by Mr Sharman's property." 
He said on that basis he was prepared to give an unlimited guarantee: Tp.78.

Mr Mace was referred to a letter dated 31 January 1991 to the Bank, which he signed and which recorded:- "1. So long as any moneys remain or may become owing or payable to the Bank by the Debtor on any account whatsoever whether as a principal or surety (all of which moneys are hereinafter called the money owing) the Bank shall be under no obligation to prepay and may from time to time renew for such period and at such rate of interest as the Bank may determine the Deposit(s) described in the Schedule hereto (the said Term Deposit(s) and any renewal thereof is hereinafter called the Deposit); the Bank may without prior notice to me/us prepay and apply the whole or any part of the Deposit and interest accrued thereon in or towards payment of the moneys owing or any part thereof.
 . This agreement shall not be considered as wholly or partially satisfied by payment by the Debtor at any time hereafter of any of the moneys owing or by any settlement of account or by the granting to the Debtor of any time or indulgence or by any other matter or thing whatsoever." 
The "Debtor" is a reference to Ad-Glass.

Mr Mace agreed it made no reference to a fifty per cent liability, although on a reading of the letter as a whole there is no reference, or no express reference, to the question of liability at all. Mr Mace said that he was under the impression that Mr Sharman signed the same document and "that would have represented his fifty per cent". He was referred to a letter from the Bank to the directors of Ad-Glass dated 1 February 1991, which he agreed he received and read. He said he certainly read the paragraph headed "Security", which stated that it had to be to the Bank's satisfaction and would comprise:- " Guarantee (unlimited as to amount) by Phillip Sharman and Maureen Rochester fully supported by securities already held by the Bank in their private names.

Guarantee (unlimited as to amount) by Brett Ronald Mace fully supported by Term Deposit securities held at this office in his name." 
It was put to him that when he read that the guarantee was unlimited he understood that each would give a guarantee that would support the entire amount advanced to Ad-Glass. He said that was "with restrictions". He agreed,
Tp.81, that there was no reference to a fifty per cent share and:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. Did it occur to you that the words `unlimited as to amount' were inconsistent with what you say your understanding was, that you would only be liable for half the amount? 
A. My understanding was that words such as unlimited were used by the Bank such as if there was an act of God and Phil's house was hit by a meteor, they could claim under special circumstances. The Bank once made a State insurance on components of stock unlimited. I thought the word unlimited was excessive. They could have said `Phil's house is' - through some bizarre accident - `is worth nothing so there you are now, if the company is in default, liable', but only under those circumstances.

Q. Liable for the full amount? 
A. Correct.

SOFRONIOU: Q. You did not seek that reference to act of God, if I can summarise it that way, to be included in this document? 
A. No, but I discussed it with Mr Robinson." 
Mr Mace was then referred to Annexure "D" to his affidavit of 24 May 1996, which is dated 1 August 1991, and stated:- "I hereby acknowledge that the Bank has granted or may be granting from time to time to Ad-Glass Pty Limited (the Debtor) accommodation and otherwise permitting the Debtor to incur liabilities to the Bank not exceeding an aggregate amount at any one time and from time to time of $150,000 against the security of my mortgage(s)/guarantee(s) to the Bank referred to in the Schedule below.

I clearly understand that my mortgage(s)/guarantee(s) will also secure the payment to the Bank of interest and any costs, charges and expenses with which the Bank shall be at liberty to debit and charge the account of the Debtor or for which I am liable under my mortgage(s)/guarantee(s)." 
He agreed that document was accompanied by the letter at page 19 of Exhibit A from the Bank to him dated 3 July 1991, which stated:- "We enclose relative third party consent document in connection with the above for your signature.

Prior to signing the document/s you should satisfy yourself that you understand the full nature and effect of your liabilities to the Bank and obtain appropriate advice, legal or otherwise, if you at all uncertain of your position.

Your signature to the document should be witnessed by an adult person who is not related to the borrowing in either a debtor/mortgagor or Guarantor basis.

Kindly return the document/s, executed, as soon as possible." 
He said he read the letter and he did not seek any advice because he did not feel uncertain of his position, although he agreed that the letter told him to seek advice if he was uncertain. It is clear why Mr Mace was not uncertain, namely because there was no express statement that there was liability as to the whole amount and, I am satisfied, he was proceeding in reliance on Mr
Robinson's statement that he was only liable for half the amount save in the event of an act of God.

Mr Mace was nextly cross-examined about providing a mortgage over 22 Thorp
Road, which he said he understood was because Mr Sharman had put up his house, which was worth $280,000 "and obviously I felt that my security was not sufficient to cover that". By "that" Mr Mace clearly meant the amount as provided by Mr Sharman, i.e. that there was not as between them an equality of security. Mr Mace maintained that as he understood it Mr Sharman had provided a property as security worth $280,000. In those circumstances he considered that if more security had to be provided to obtain increased facilities for
Ad-Glass it was necessary for him to give security over 22 Thorp Road. At
Tp.85 it was put to Mr Mace that until he offered a mortgage over 22 Thorp
Road both he and Mr Sharman had given an unlimited guarantee supported "in Mr
Sharman's case" by a property worth $280,000, and "in your case" by the term deposit of $66,000. Mr Mace was then shown the mortgage he gave on 2 October and he said when he gave it he understood he was "effectively putting up" his house as security for the debts of Ad-Glass. Mr Mace said he did not ask
Mr Robinson, in whose presence he executed the mortgage, to record that it was intended to secure a guarantee in respect of half of the debts owed to the
Bank by Ad-Glass, and that he did not write to the Bank to confirm his understanding that that was the purpose of the security. He added that he stated that to Mr Robinson during the meeting when he signed the mortgage. He continued that when he executed the mortgage he said to Mr Robinson:- "You have Phil's house as well" and Mr Robinson replied:- "Yes": Tp.86. 
His evidence continued:- "Q. So we are not at cross purposes, you are saying, if I understand you, not that you were guaranteeing fifty per cent of the debt and Mr Sharman was guaranteeing fifty per cent of the debt, but that you each, you understood, were guaranteeing the whole of the debt, but that the Bank could look to you equally when it wanted to enforce the debt? 
A. What I am saying is that by default if the Bank held such a large amount of security from each partner, they would have no trouble in forcing their requirement to guarantee the debt. 
Q. Does that mean you are agreeing with the proposition I put to you, Mr Mace? 
A. No, I am suggesting that because again the Bank had more than one hundred percent of the total amount of the debt from each partner which by default gave the ability, because the total amount was guaranteeing a $200,000 debt.

Q. So you are saying that the Bank could in your understanding enforce the securities it had against you and Mr Sharman equally, because it held security from each of you sufficient to do that? 
A. It was suggested to me, yes, it was equal.

Q. Would you agree with this, that you knew that from the documents you were signing and from the letters of approval you were receiving that referred to unlimited guarantee, you knew that each of you were liable for the whole of the debt of Ad-Glass, but that you understood the Bank would enforce securities given by you, if it had to, from each of you? 
A. Only under an act of God.

Q. I am sorry, I don't understand that answer. Are you agreeing with what I am putting to you or not? 
A. Under extreme restrictions. In other words, if Phil's property was rendered valueless, they found toxic chemicals, it was by a meteor, if Phil died tomorrow and for some reason his property was destroyed and they had nothing `it's not our fault, this property is now worth nothing, this property at 26 Thorp Road is no longer of value', under those circumstances I agree with you, and that is what was said to me.

Q. Under those circumstances you could not say, `I am only liable for half the debt'? 
A. Under those circumstances, no.

Q. And the reference you have made to what happens in the case of an act of God, that certainly does not appear on the mortgage document as far as you are aware does it? 
A. No.

Q. And it did not appear in terms of any approval letter that you are aware of? 
A. No." 
Mr Mace said he discussed the matter with Mr Robinson and, on being referred to the passage in his affidavit of 27 September 1996 about the security being rendered valueless due to an act of God, he said he discussed it "possibly earlier" and "on several occasions". He agreed he had not deposed to any other conversations, and:- "Q. And leaving aside for the moment conversation with Mr Robinson, if you had not had that conversation you would not understand the words `guarantee unlimited as to amount' to bear any restriction? 
A. I had to have the conversation. I cannot speculate what I would have thought if he said it.

Q. Could you be incorrect as to your recollection of the conversation? 
A. Not in general terms, no.

Q. It is not a conversation that you included in your first affidavit, is it? 
A. Correct": Tp.88. 
He said he could not provide any reason why he recollected the conversation subsequent to the affidavit he made on 24 May 1996. It was then put to him that he had not had that conversation and he said he knew it happened.

I am satisfied that the conversation did take place with Mr Robinson essentially in the terms to which Mr Mace deposed. I have come to that conclusion for a number of reasons. Firstly, the conversation was never denied by Mr Robinson. Secondly, on a fair reading of his evidence I am of the view that he considered such a conversation could have taken place. Thirdly, I do not consider that Mr Robinson's recollection of the conversations was as good as that of Mr Mace, nor did I regard Mr Robinson as a witness who had a sufficient recall of what had taken place such that I should accept his evidence in preference to that of Mr Mace. Fourthly, I accepted Mr Mace's evidence, in so far as it conflicted with that of Mr Robinson. The matter about which he gave evidence was one of particular significance to him and I have no doubt he had a good recall of what was said. Nor do I have any doubt that in repeating it he was telling the truth. Fifthly, Mr Robinson did not seek to deny the conversation in his affidavit of 3 December 1996. Sixthly, when the conversation set forth in the affidavit of 27 September 1996 is read together with the relevant part of the conversation set forth in the affidavit of 24 May 1996 it is inherently probable that it took place. Mr Mace said, which evidence I accept, that he was told that he would only be liable for fifty per cent of the indebtedness of Ad-Glass. The balance of the conversation, set forth in his affidavit of 27 September 1996, flows from that in the sense that it was being said to him by Mr Robinson that he would "only" be liable for the full amount in the limited circumstances therein referred to. Seventhly, the conversation is a somewhat strange one, in the sense that the circumstances in which Mr Robinson was suggesting to Mr Mace he may be liable for the full amount were highly unlikely to occur, and the nature of the conversation makes it inherently probable that a person would remember it and inherently improbable that a person would fabricate it. Eighthly, I must bear steadfastly in mind the evidence of Mr Robinson, to which I have referred, as to his understanding of the agreement. Ninthly, it does not seem to me that the arrangement is inconsistent with the amount of the guarantee being unlimited. This was not a case in which Mr Mace was asserting that he was not obliged to pay an amount restricted in terms of dollars and cents.
From time to time one has cases where a guarantor alleges that the liability was limited to a sum certain. In the present case Mr Mace was not asserting that there was any such monetary limitation on his liability. The limitation on it was a limitation as to the percentage of the obligations of Ad-Glass he was obliged to pay. Similarly, if he was obliged to pay the full amount because of an act of God, the liability as to the monetary amount was not limited. Accordingly, it was consistent with his understanding not to complain that the various documentation made reference to a liability "unlimited as to amount". Finally, for present purposes, it was agreed by Mr Robinson that Mr
Mace was concerned about giving the guarantee and mortgage and that he had sought to have it confined to loans whereby each of the partners was liable for the same amount. There was very little difference between Mr Robinson and
Mr Mace as to much of the conversation Mr Mace alleged had transpired.
Although Mr Robinson denied that he had said to Mr Mace that he would be liable for fifty per cent of the amount of the indebtedness of Ad-Glass, he did not deny the later statement, which is more readily comprehensible in the light of the former statement and, as I have said, I accept the evidence of Mr
Mace that the two conversations took place.

I shall, shortly, consider certain matters going to the probabilities which, in my view, confirm the opinion to which I have come that these statements were made to Mr Mace by Mr Robinson. I should add that Mr Mace did not say, and it was not put to him, that he read through either the guarantee or the mortgage before executing them. I accept his evidence that he relied on the representations made by Mr Robinson.

Subsequent Conduct By Mr Mace 
Mr West was transferred to the Engadine branch of the Bank on 1 May 1991 and he occupied the position of Senior Loans Officer until either 4 or 5 December
He said, in paragraph 7 of his affidavit of 2 December 1996, that he had no recollection of being involved in the settlement of the sale of 26 Thorp
Road or the release of the mortgages in March 1993 and, in paragraph 8 of that affidavit, that in July 1993 Mr Mace telephoned him and told him that Ad-Glass had ceased to trade. On 7 July 1993 he and the then manager of the Engadine branch, Mr Ross Paine, went and saw Mr Mace at his factory to discuss the affairs of Ad-Glass. He annexed to his affidavit a copy of his diary note. The diary note stated, inter alia:- "During the course of discussions we mentioned to Mr Mace that he provided the majority of the security for the Ad-Glass P/L debt and Mr Sharman would have little chance of securing a loan of $100,000 - with his home.

Mr Mace expressed his amazement at this situation and mentioned that during numerous discussions with Mr Robinson he had been assured that he and Mr Sharman were both equally liable for the total debt. He felt deceived as it appeared to him that he was supporting the debt solely with Mr Sharman's security providing little more then (sic) `comfort' for the Bank.

Mr Mace mentioned that he realised that both directors were liable for the total debt and that debt was not apportioned, however his perceived risk of loss was much higher than Mr Sharman's, and this was a matter of concern for him.

Notwithstanding the above, Mr Mace was pleased with the service etc and is happy to continue a business relationship with CBA Engadine." 
It is noteworthy that in the second paragraph Mr West recorded Mr Mace's "amazement" and his assertion of his discussions with Mr Robinson and the assurance "that he and Mr Sharman were both equally liable for the total debt". The next paragraph has to be read in the light of certain oral evidence that Mr West gave. He was cross-examined, commencing at Tp.60, about the diary note and he said that when he spoke to Mr Mace on 7 July 1993 he assumed he would have been aware that 26 Thorp Road had been sold in March 1993.
Although it seemed to have been accepted, prior to Mr West's giving his evidence, that no mortgage had been taken by the Bank over the Queensland property purchased by Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester, which indeed proved to be the case, at Tp.62 Mr West said that he had had a mortgage executed by them to support their guarantee, which he believed was sent to Queensland for stamping and "went missing in the Bank's internal mail". He said that subsequently Mr
Sharman and Ms Rochester refused to sign another mortgage. Accordingly, it appears that the Bank still considered it should have a mortgage to secure the obligations of Mr Sharman under the guarantee of the liabilities of Ad-Glass.

Mr West agreed, Tp.64, that Mr Mace said that Mr Robinson had assured him that he and Mr Sharman were both equally liable for the total debt, and Mr West said that he believed that was the first time he had heard that. His evidence continued, Tp.65:- "Q. Mr Mace did not say to you, did he, that he realised that both he and Mr Sharman were liable for the total debt? 
A. That's what I have written in this note, yes.

Q. That's not my question to you. He did not say to you words to that effect.

A. I believe he did.

Q. Do you have a clear recollection of him using words of that kind? 
A. No, not at this time.

Q. You rely for your recollection entirely upon the contents of the diary note? 
A. Yes, I do.

Q. Without the benefit of the assistance of that note, are you able to recall now anything of the words that you can think Mr Mace might have used at point in your conversation with him? 
A. No, I am not." 
Mr West made it clear, and if I may say so it is understandable, that he had no recollection other than as appeared in the diary note.

In paragraph 3 of his affidavit of 16 January 1997 Mr Mace said:- "I recall the meeting referred to in Annexure I of Mr West's affidavit. I believe that it is the meeting to which I refer in the second paragraph of Annexure J to the affidavit sworn by me on 24 May 1996. I cannot recall saying the words that Mr West attributes to me in the fifth paragraph of Annexure I, nor can I recall that Mr West or Mr Paine made the suggestion attributed to me in the seventh paragraph of Annexure I. No such meeting took place." 
Annexure "J" was a letter Mr Mace wrote to a Mr Kalikajaros of the Bank on 8
February 1994. In the second paragraph of that letter it was stated:- "I am most disturbed that seven months have elapsed since I first instructed the CBA (meeting your Mr Ross Paine & Mr Andrew West 2:30 pm Wednesday, 7th July 1993) of the position between the directors of Ad-Glass now as competitors and the fact that Ad-Glass had ceased trading. I instructed them clearly at that time of my express desire to discharge my portion of the debt. I was concerned with advice from your staff that the Bank would take no action to recover this loan until the loan agreement went into default. As Mr Sharman was now a competitor I advised Mr Paine and Mr West that all transactions regarding the CBA and Mr Sharman would obviously be, as in the past, conducted between the CBA and their client Mr Sharman. All legal documentation including the mortgage of 26 Thorp Road, Woronora is held by the CBA and I have no control over CBA policy or agreement with Mr Sharman and/or Mrs Rochester, Brett Mace has no legal agreement regarding loans by CBA to Mr Sharman for Ad-Glass, his other company or companies or his house. I have instructed the Bank on many occasions to exercise their legal rights with Mr Sharman and call in their loan by any means seen fit. (i.e. sale of 26 Thorp Road, Woronora). At all times I have vigorously offered to pay to settle my portion of the debt." 
It will be necessary to refer to some other correspondence, but, at Tp.66, Mr
West said that from his recollection Mr Mace would have said "something to the effect", "that he had been assured, as I have recorded there, that he and Mr
Sharman were both equally liable for the debt and had provided securities to secure the debt". He said he did not believe that Mr Mace said they were each liable for one half of the debt, but that he and Mr Sharman "were both equally liable for the total debt", and that he, Mr Mace, felt deceived. Mr West agreed the next paragraph seemed "a little inconsistent with those assertions", and:- "I can only assume because, from the note, that following our discussions he realised that they were both liable for the total debt. It is normal that both directors are informed that they are jointly and severally liable for a debt." 
Mr West said he thought that Mr Mace was saying that each of Mr Mace and Mr
Sharman had provided a similar level of support by way of security and that although he had thought, initially, that the paragraphs were inconsistent, he believed that having read them through again that that was not so. He continued:- "Q. What I wanted to ask you was, between those two paragraphs, in effect, did either you or Mr Paine say to Mr Mace: No, you have got it wrong, you and Mr Sharman are jointly and severally liable? 
A. Yes, I would assume that was said, yes. I can't recall exactly, I am sorry.

Q. Was it in that context that he Mr Mace said he realised that both directors were liable? 
A. I would assume that that happened.

Q. So the note, and I don't say this critically, doesn't set out that either you or Mr Paine gave the explanation after Mr Mace had expressed his amazement; is that the position? 
A. Yes, that's true, it doesn't set that out." 
In my opinion the note made by Mr West, particularly when read with the explanation that there would have been some discussion before it was stated that Mr Mace realised both directors were liable for the total debt, is consistent with the case being put forward by Mr Mace. The words "both equally liable for the total debt" is indicative of a liability for fifty per cent of it, which, in my opinion, is the better reading of the words used. This, in my opinion, was the way Mr West understood them and gave rise to the unrecorded explanation in which either he or Mr Paine told Mr Mace that he was wrong in his understanding and that Mr Mace and Mr Sharman were jointly and severally liable. It is not difficult to understand that then Mr Mace acknowledged that he understood what they were telling him. That does not mean that he had such an understanding before then. In my opinion he did not.

In paragraph 57 of his affidavit of 24 May 1996 Mr Mace was referring to a letter he received on or about 17 January 1994 from Mr Paine, which is
Annexure "H" to that affidavit. It stated:- "I refer to the undermentioned securities in favour of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia to secure the payment of all moneys owing by the abovenamed" (Ad-Glass) "to the Bank and all other moneys referred to in such securities.

I the undersigned Manager of the Engadine NSW Branch of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia situated at 1049 Old Princes Highway, Engadine NSW being duly authorised, demand payment by you to the Bank at that branch of the sum of Two hundred and four thousand two hundred and fifty four dollars and ten cents ($204,254.10) being the amount now owing to the Bank in respect of the above account under and by virtue of the undermentioned securities.

Unless the abovementioned sum together with interest accruing from the date of this notice at the rate of $69.81 per day be paid to the Bank at the abovementioned branch within fourteen days from the date of this notice the Bank will take action to recover payment of the total amount payable and any costs incurred in respect of such recovery.

Securities 
Guarantee dated 23 January 1991 by Phillip Russell John Sharman and Maureen Robyn Rochester.

Guarantee dated 31 January 1991 by Brett Ronald Mace.

Letter of acknowledgment dated 31 January 1991 over Term Deposit holding.

Mortgage dated 2 October 1991 by Brett Ronald Mace over 22 Thorp Road, Woronora NSW." 
In paragraph 56 Mr Mace said he observed that the securities did not include a mortgage given by Mr Sharman or Ms Rochester and, in paragraph 57, he continued that he immediately telephoned Mr West and had the following conversation:- "ME: `I've got a letter from the Bank dated 24 December 1993. I can't see any mention of the mortgage given by Phil and Maureen. Why is that?' 
WEST: `The Bank stuffed up the sale of their property. They sold it in March 1993. At the time nothing was done about their security. So Phil's guarantee is no longer secured.' 
ME: `How did Dave Robinson allow Phil to discharge his mortgage and go to Queensland without my consent?' 
WEST: `Dave's not functioning properly in his capacity as bank manager. He's lost the plot since he received the news of his wife's terminal illness. I'm sorry you're in such a situation.' 
ME: `What effect does that have on my liability to the Bank?' 
WEST: `If it has to the Bank will be able to take all of the money that it needs from your security.' " 
In paragraph 11 of his affidavit of 2 December 1996 Mr West denied he had the discussion with Mr Mace "as alleged on that date or at all". He continued:- "The only conversation I can recall having had with Mace on the subject of Sharman's property in Queensland occurred on one occasion during the course of the discussions referred to in paragraph 10. I recall saying to Mace words to the effect: `There's been an error in getting Sharman's securities in place in Queensland. It appears the new mortgage has been misplaced so we have to get them to execute another one.' 
By this I was referring to the fact that although mortgage documents had been prepared and sent to Queensland for execution by Sharman and Rochester to secure the debts of Ad-Glass against the Queensland property, the documents had been mislaid or lost in the Bank's internal mail system, and that Sharman had accordingly not formalised the security. However, I believe that I also said to Mace `we still have his guarantee, though'. Annexed and marked `J' is a copy of my internal memorandum dated 22 February 1994." 
In paragraph 4 of his affidavit of 16 January 1997 Mr Mace said:- "On reflection, I accept that I may have had the conversation to which I depose in paragraph 57 of the affidavit sworn by me on 24 May 1996 at some time before January 1994, but I am unable to be more precise about the date." 
Annexure "J" to Mr West's affidavit, which was written after he left the
Engadine branch and went to another part of the Bank's administration, referred to his diary note of 7 July 1993; to Mr Mace's calling him on numerous occasions and requesting that legal action be taken against Mr
Sharman, and stating that he felt it was the Bank's responsibility to resolve the matter; to his informing Mr Mace that the Bank would take action against both directors for the whole of the debt and suggesting Mr Mace seek legal advice in an attempt to resolve the dispute he had with Mr Sharman; and to Mr
Mace's on several occasions requesting the Bank to allow him to pay out half the debt and discharge his responsibility. It continued:- "However, I advised him that he and Mr Sharman were both jointly and severally liable for the total debt and in this regard we would not discharge either party until the total debt was cleared." 
The diary note continued:- "I have no recall of informing Mr Mace that `serious mistakes may have been made by the CBA', however I did inform him that the mortgage over Mr Sharman's new property appeared to have been misplaced and that we were attempting to have another executed. I also informed Mr Mace that we held a guarantee from Mr Sharman to secure the debt." 
Neither Mr West nor Mr Mace was cross-examined about the conversation referred to in paragraph 57 of Mr Mace's affidavit. However there are certain matters referred to by Mr Mace in that conversation, which are consistent with its having taken place. Firstly, the Bank wrote a letter dated 24 December 1993, which made no mention of the mortgage given by Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester.
Secondly, the Bank failed to take a mortgage over the Queensland property and there is no doubt from the Bank's internal documents that it regarded this as a mistake. Thirdly, there is no doubt that at the time Mr Robinson had been advised that his wife was suffering from a terminal illness.

Against this background it is necessary to further consider the letter Mr Mace wrote in response to that of 24 December 1993. It referred to a statement by
Mr Robinson that both directors must provide full security against all loans and that each individual could only borrow against seventy per cent of his unencumbered securities. It continued that the Bank advised that due to the
Privacy Act they could not provide details of Mr Sharman's securities "but assured me that you held security of his house etc". It set forth, correctly, that Mr Mace had requested that individual loans be provided and, after dealing with the original transaction, continued with the passage to which I have referred about the payment of one half. The letter referred to the fact that Mr Mace had been advised by Mr West and Mr Sharman "that Mr Sharmans securities were in place" "but concerns were raised that the Commonwealth Bank may have accidentally let Mr Sharman reduce his security with the Bank against
Ad-Glass loans when funds from the sale of his house were transferred".

The letter concluded:- "Finally your letter of demand is of concern because it arrived to-day, and advised me that I have fourteen days to act. Twenty four days have elapsed since you wrote this letter. Also I have been relentless in me efforts to resolve this matter since July 1993. I am also instructing the bank that I wish to resolve this matter urgently as the interest accruing is of great concern to me. Please note that I have telephoned your bank regarding this matter twenty seven times since July 1993. I believe it is totally unfair to hold me to this contract and penalise me when I am trying to co-operate and restructure this loan. I cannot do anything more than I have and inform you that if this matter is not resolved within thirty days of this facsimile I may not be in a position to meet the interest payments or conditions of the contract.

I look forward to seeing you to make arrangements as per this facsimile. Should you wish to discuss this matter further, or may I be of further assistance please contact the undersigned." 
It is important to note that all of this was written in the context of Mr
Mace's statement that he had endeavoured to pay his "50% responsibility of this debt".

This letter was followed by a further letter from Mr Mace dated 8 February
That letter, as I have noted, referred to Mr Mace's assertion that he was prepared "to discharge my portion of this debt" and to his wishing "to settle my portion of this debt". It was obvious that Mr Mace was seeking to sell 22 Thorp Road to assist in discharging what he believed was his part of the debt.

In a series of requests Mr Mace made of the Bank, many of which related to the sale of 26 Thorp Road and the distribution of the proceeds, he asked whether the Bank was targeting him for the total debt "due to their incompetence in maintaining Mr Sharman's security against this loan". He also asked why Mr
Robinson directed him "away from individual loans for myself and Mr Sharman and into a joint loan under the assurances that security against this type of loan are the same as with individual loans". In a concluding query he said:- "11. The bank have demanded $204,254.10 from myself and I am told Mr Sharman. This is a total of $408,508.20. Why demand the total from both directors?" 
The letter concluded:- "I will finalise my letter to you by expressing my concern that the CBA will not discharge my debts despite my vigorous endeavour's (sic) to do so for the past seven months. As my first child is due in July and I have been trying to sell my house to purchase a larger home and your instructions that I cannot sell my property is causing me extreme personal hardship and worry. Also the fact that the bank will not release my term deposit is starving my company of much required financial resources and this has resulted in a direct loss of trading profit and lost opportunities. I regret that this situation has occurred, should the bank wish to discharge me from this loan I would be happy to visit you at your convenience to make the necessary arrangements. I wish an amicable and urgent resolution of this matter." 
On 10 February 1994 Mr Kalikajaros replied to a letter of 8 February 1994. On February 1994 the Bank again wrote to Mr Mace, setting out the security held and confirming that in terms of the security documentation "all guarantors are jointly and severally liable for the debts of Ad-Glass". On 17
February 1994 Mr Mace responded seeking a response to the questions he had raised and, on 3 March 1994, the Bank wrote again to Mr Mace asserting that the funds were advanced on a joint and several liability basis for the full amount of the debt and advising that if there was any uncertainty as to the extent of liability independent advice should be sought. It continued:- "We are advised by the former manager of Engadine branch, Mr Robinson, that at no time did he indicate that each guarantor was required to provide or maintain a certain level security. The Bank's position is simply that at all times it requires total security to be satisfactory in relation to the amount and perceived risk of the advance. Mr Paine and Mr West also confirm that they did not indicate at any time that each director/guarantor must maintain a certain level of security." 
Somewhat strangely, particularly in the light of internal Bank documentation, which set out the assertions that Mr Robinson had said that Mr Mace was only liable for one half, and the statements which have been made by Mr Mace to that effect, this matter was not addressed in the letter.

The Bank's Internal Documentation 
In an internal memorandum of November 1993 officers of the Bank expressed concern about the failure to obtain the mortgage to secure the liability of Mr
Sharman and Ms Rochester and, in a further internal memorandum of 10 November , it was stated that the files had been perused, but that that did not establish:- ".. exactly what took place when the security held to support the guarantees from Sharman and Rochester to the two companies was released in March 1993. The files are seemingly silent on this aspect and we require full details as to why the security was released without substitution and why the usual authorities to release were not taken in terms of instructions. This clarification is of prime importance as the guarantees are now unsupported and recovery of the debts from the guarantors could prove difficult. 
We note from your diary note dated 7 July 1993 that the third party mortgagor (B.R. Mace) has been informed of the reliance on his security and that certain comments have been made concerning `numerous discussions' with Mr Robinson. Again, the files do not seemingly make any reference to this aspect and you will need to endeavour to establish exactly what form these discussions took. This will be crucial as it would seem that recovery of the debts will rest on the B.R. Mace security." 
On 29 November 1993 Mr West sought to respond to that memorandum and made particular reference to the medical condition of Mrs Robinson in late 1992 and early 1993.

On an unspecified date a further internal memorandum was written in which the
Bank stated that execution of the second mortgage was overlooked by the branch prior to settlement of the sale of 26 Thorp Road and that a further second mortgage was sent to the Brisbane office in August 1993, which Mr Sharman and
Ms Rochester refused to sign.

On 7 December 1993 a suggestion was made in an internal memorandum that it may be necessary to obtain a statement from Mr Robinson. It seems very strange that no attempt was made to obtain any such statement from him in view of the allegations as to what he had said to Mr Mace.

On 25 January 1994 Mr M.R. Brunton, the Asset Manager of the Bank, noted that
Mr Mace was "attempting to argue that he should only be responsible for" fifty per cent of the Ad-Glass debt. He suggested that argument was weak for various reasons, although he noted that Mr Mace "is trying to limit the extent of his liability".

An internal memorandum, which was prepared by Mr Brunton and is dated 9
February 1994, refers to an interview with Mr Mace on 2 February 1994. It stated:- "Mace is attempting to limit his liability to 50% of the Ad-Glass debt by arguing that his former partner, Phil Sharman, should be liable for the other 50%." 
It continued:- "He claims that this was the basis on which the loan was approved and that in all his discussions with the former manager of Engadine, D.N. Robinson, it was understood that he would only be liable for 50% of the debt. The Bank's documentation does not support this view as all consents etc for the full amount of the debt were taken in accordance with normal procedure. However, in other respects the file is deficient as formal applications were not taken for the initial advance or either of the two increases in facilities which were approved, all being done under manager's D/L/A. In addition, there are only a few diary notes recording discussions between the Bank and Mace or Sharman and it may be that a number of conversations were not documented." 
Pausing there it is clear that Mr Mace was asserting, as at early February , that his liability was limited by reason of his conversations with Mr
Robinson. The internal memorandum continued that the opportunity was taken "to re-affirm to Mace that he and Sharman are jointly and severally liable for the full amount of Ad-Glass debt". It was stated that it was felt that Mr Mace "reluctantly accepts" that that is the case and the situation concerning the settlement of the sale of 26 Thorp Road was repeated. It was confirmed that this occurred without any consent being obtained from Mr Mace. The internal memorandum stated that legal advice had been received that his consent was not required and that the securities "are otherwise enforceable". It continued:- "Nevertheless, it is felt that Sharman was treated very generously and as a consequence the amount of Mace's liability has increased. Mace is now aware of the broad details of what occurred and this will make future negotiations with him difficult. He has apparently been told by Andrew West, former loans officer at Engadine, that the Bank `stuffed up' the settlement of Sharman's Woronora property. This was conveyed to the writer by Mace in a telephone call after the interview in which he expressed his dissatisfaction that the Bank still held him liable for the full amount of the Ad-Glass debt." 
This statement is strong corroboration for the conversation to which Mr Mace deposed in paragraph 57 of his affidavit of 24 May 1996.

In a further internal memorandum of 14 February 1994 there is a note of a meeting between Mr Paine and Mr Robinson in which Mr Paine recorded that Mr
Robinson disputed the assertion by Mr Mace of an individual criteria of seventy per cent on each mortgagor to support the company borrowing.
Apparently Mr Robinson said he remembered the original limit was established against cash and that additional security was taken to provide for additional funds. He recorded that Mr Robinson was of the opinion that Mr Mace understood his full liabilities at that time and that Mr Mace was reluctant to provide additional security and requested separate loans:- ".. however, Dave Robinson recalls the loan to the company was already in place and he finally agreed to increase the borrowing on the basis that it was to the company and that by keeping the borrowing in the company name the directors would be demonstrating their confidence in the future of the company." 
It is obvious from the evidence that this recollection was defective because
Mr Mace was requesting separate loans prior to the original borrowing being put in place, which Mr Robinson acknowledged. It is also to be noted that there is no express denial by Mr Robinson of the assertion, which had already by then been clearly made by Mr Mace, that Mr Robinson had said to him that he, Mr Mace, would only be liable for fifty per cent of the debt. Apparently the Bank made no attempt, at that stage, to obtain a detailed statement from
Mr Robinson.

In a further internal memorandum prepared in March 1994 Mr Brunton reported:- "Based on the information contained in our files and the statements provided by Engadine staff it is considered that this file was very poorly handled by former manager, Dave Robinson, given that facilities to Ad-Glass were originally approved with little or no investigation of the company and it would appear purely on the basis of security that was available. In addition, the initial approval letter was poorly worded and Sharman was allowed to retain surplus funds following sale on his Woronora property. It should also be mentioned that the Trygrate debt was allowed to excess from the approval limit of $45,000 to $104,278 resulting in a surplus of only around $40,000 from the sale of the Woronora property. As well as this a business Master Card relating to Trygrate was not cancelled at settlement resulting in the existing residual debt. Finally, the proposed mortgage over the Elanora property was not taken.

Nevertheless in his statement Robinson denies that he advised Mace that he was only liable for 50% of the debt or that each director needed to put up sufficient security to maintain a 70% debt to security ratio. The current manager, Ross Paine, and former loans officer, Andrew West, also deny this." 
No statement of Mr Robinson was put in evidence. It may be reference was being made to what he said to Mr Paine which, as I have noted, contains no express denial that he said to Mr Mace that his liability was limited to fifty per cent. It is also inconsistent with Mr Robinson's recollection that the first time he was asked to recall what was said during the interview in January 1991 was in December 1995: Tp.13. However, I think it more probable that this was an example of Mr Robinson's lack of recall.

The Bank's Position As Disclosed In The Internal Memorandum of March 1994 Pages 75-79 Of Exhibit 1 
The memorandum signed by Mr Brunton in March 1994, which is comprised at pp.75 to 79 of Exhibit 1, indicates the disarray in which the Bank was in relation to this matter. Firstly, it conceded that the file "was very poorly handled" by Mr Robinson. Secondly, it conceded that the initial approval letter was poorly worded. Thirdly, it conceded that Mr Sharman was allowed to retain surplus funds following the sale of his Woronora property in the amount of approximately $40,000, and that had the Trygrate debt not been allowed to exceed the approved amount of $45,000 by approximately $59,000, that amount would have been available to the Bank to discharge Ad-Glass' debts. In those circumstances approximately $95,000 would have been available from Mr Sharman to assist in the discharge of that indebtedness. Fourthly, there was the failure to take a second mortgage over the Queensland property. The circumstances of this failure are shrouded in some mystery, but on any view it was the failure by the Bank to follow proper procedure. This point becomes the more important when the concession by the Bank that the proceeds of sale of that property were all used to discharge other indebtedness of Mr Sharman and
Ms Rochester to the Bank is remembered. Fifthly, there was the failure to cancel the Master Card, which added to the liability owing to the Bank and reduced the available amount. Sixthly, there is an acknowledgment of the assertion by Mr Mace that he was told by Mr Robinson that he was only liable for fifty per cent of the debt. Notwithstanding, the Bank determined to proceed against Mr Mace for the full amount and has sought to rely upon the strict terms of its security documents without making any allowance to Mr Mace for the undoubted surplus on the sale of 26 Thorp Road or for what would have been the surplus on the sale of that property had the Trygrate debt not been allowed to exceed its limit by more than double the amount of the approved limit. This would have left an amount, as I have said, of some $95,000 to assist to discharge the indebtedness of Ad-Glass. In addition the Bank compounded all its errors by failing to obtain the further mortgage over the property in Queensland and by failing to cancel the Master Card. Then, for good measure, it utilised all the proceeds of sale of the Queensland property to discharge other indebtedness to it of Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester. It thus chose to rely solely on the security given by Mr Mace to recover the Ad-Glass debt, after recovering other debts of Mr Sharman and Ms Rochester from security given by them. It was not in issue that all of this was done without any attempt being made to advise Mr Mace of what was happening or to obtain his consent. The failure of the Bank's officers to adhere to required procedures appears eloquently in notes written on the internal memorandum which appears at pp.33, 34 and 35 of Exhibit 1.

In all these circumstances the Bank seeks to pursue its full rights, as contained in its documentation, against Mr Mace. The only task committed to me is to determine whether, conformably with the facts I find and the law as I understand it, the Bank is entitled to recover the full amount it claims or whether, as Mr Mace contended, it is only entitled to recover one half of that amount, which amount Mr Mace contended should be limited to the amount owing at the time he offered to pay one half.

Is There An Estoppel? 
It was accepted by Mr Neil that Mr Mace bore the onus of establishing the representation and, further, that the representation must be clear. The evidence satisfies me that Mr Robinson represented to Mr Mace that in the event of the business failing each of Mr Mace and Mr Sharman would be liable for fifty per cent of the amount due which, if necessary, would come out of the security each had given and that Mr Mace would only be responsible for the whole of the debt if some unlikely act of God occurred rendering Mr Sharman's security valueless. I accept the evidence of Mr Mace in so far as it conflicts with the evidence of Mr Robinson as to what was said. I have set out my reasons for that conclusion and for considering that his version is essentially consistent with the probabilities and, more importantly, with Mr
Robinson's evidence that the statement appearing in paragraph 4 of Mr Mace's affidavit of 27 September 1996 is an accurate description of his understanding of the liability Mr Mace was about to assume under the guarantee: Tp.27. Mr
Mace was consistently putting his version of the facts forward long before the
Bank commenced proceedings.

It is convenient to consider these conclusions against the submissions on behalf of the Bank. Firstly, Ms Sofroniou submitted that the clear proof required to establish the representation and the certainty of the terms of the representation were not established because in his original version of the conversation Mr Mace made no reference to that which appears in his affidavit of 27 September 1996. It was further submitted that when read together the statements in the two affidavits are not totally consistent. As I have said, on several occasions, not only did Mr Robinson not deny the conversation, which appears in paragraph 4 of the affidavit of Mr Mace of 27 September 1996, but he agreed that it was an accurate description of the liability he understood was being undertaken by Mr Mace. In my opinion the conversation took place in the terms appearing in both affidavits and I accept the evidence of Mr Mace that upon further reflection he remembered the additional conversation. This is consistent with the failure to refer to that additional part of the conversation in his communications with the Bank concerning the limitation of his liability to one half. A consistent part of his approach to the Bank has been that his liability was not to exceed one half of whatever the liability of Ad-Glass to the Bank might be, and Mr West has recorded Mr
Mace's "amazement" when told on 7 July 1993 that the liability was greater.
There was no suggestion that it was feigned and it is strongly corroborative of Mr Mace's understanding. I should also say that I do not consider that the explanation proffered by Mr Robinson at Tpp.57-58 detracts from this conclusion. Rather, on balance, it seems to me to reinforce it.

Secondly, it was submitted on behalf of the Bank that liability was being used in a "practical" rather than a "legal" sense. The submission was that as the
Bank held security from both parties, in practical terms each would be liable for one half. It was submitted that, in truth, this was all Mr Robinson was saying and there is some support for this in his evidence in re-examination.
It was further submitted that Mr Robinson was not making a statement as to the legal effect of the documentation. It is necessary, in my opinion, for the statement to be viewed against the background of the concerns being expressed by Mr Mace and his request for joint loans. However the more cogent answer to this submission is the short submission made by Mr Neil that whether one was looking at the matter from a practical or a legal point of view was unimportant, because the statement made by Mr Robinson was unqualified by reference to a consideration of the practicalities of the matter rather than the legalities. He submitted that so far as the documentation was concerned the statement was simply wrong. The submission of the Bank continued that there was a blurring between legal liability and enforcement or, perhaps more accurately, what would, in the event of all things happening as the parties anticipated, take place on enforcement. In my view this does not carry the matter any further forward for the Bank. The simple fact is that what was said by Mr Robinson did not reflect the legal position.

However, even if the submission had any attraction it does not avail the Bank.
If the Bank was asserting that as a practical matter the security provided by
Mr Sharman would cover one half of the debt there is doubt about that statement. That doubt arises from the obligations to repay the home loan and the indebtedness of Trygrate, which problem was increased by allowing Trygrate to overdraw substantially. The Bank did not insulate the mortgage against other indebtedness, and it failed to maintain it on the sale of 26 Thorp Road.
It simply failed to have and keep in place a mortgage, which would, on enforcement, allow Mr Mace to recover one half of the indebtedness.

Thirdly, it was submitted on behalf of the Bank that the letters made it clear that the guarantees were unlimited as to amount. In my opinion, as I have said, this was not a matter of significance in the present case because it was not Mr Mace's position that he was only liable for a sum certain, but rather for a proportion of the ultimate liability of Ad-Glass. Once this is appreciated the force in that submission disappears.

Fourthly, it was submitted that Mr Robinson's letters advised Mr Mace that he should seek legal advice if he was in doubt as to his position. Mr Mace readily enough agreed that the letters stated this, but he said that he was not in any doubt and, accordingly, it was unnecessary for him to seek such advice. The reason he was not in doubt was that he accepted what Mr Robinson told him. I accept Mr Mace's evidence.

Fifthly, it was submitted that Mr Robinson gave his rationale for denying that he referred to fifty per cent. He maintained that he said the liability was joint and several, which, ultimately, was not in issue. If the matter had rested there then the Bank may not be confronted with its present difficulties. However it did not and notwithstanding the reference to joint and several, which Mr Mace asserted he did not understand until recently, Mr
Robinson put a gloss upon the transaction, which those words would not support. None-the-less he gave an explanation of the transaction, which I accept, which was totally inconsistent with the suggestion of joint and several liability.

Sixthly, it was submitted that there was an ambiguity in what Mr Robinson was saying. The submission ran that it makes sense to say that one is liable for half if someone else is obliged to pay, but that if that other person is not able to pay then one is liable for the whole. This, if I may say so with respect to the submission, depends upon ex post facto reasoning. The simple fact of the matter is, as I have found, that Mr Robinson made the statements
Mr Mace attributes to him without any qualification.

Seventhly, it was submitted that Mr Mace did not state that he failed to read the guarantee and mortgage. In terms this is probably correct although, in his affidavit of 24 May 1995, he said, paragraph 22, that in executing the guarantee and letter of acknowledgment he relied upon Mr Robinson's statements and, in particular, his statement that if Ad-Glass failed to pay he would liable to repay one half of any amounts then owing by it to the Bank. In paragraph 26 he referred to the letter of 1 February 1991 from the Bank and said that he considered that the words appearing under the heading "Security" were consistent with Mr Robinson's statement: paragraph 27.

He said, in paragraph 30, that he was asked to sign the further letter of acknowledgment, which he did on 1 August 1991, paragraph 31, and that in executing it he relied on Mr Robinson's statements and particularly those identified in paragraph 22. He referred in paragraph 37 to his further conversation with Mr Robinson about additional security and, in paragraphs 38 and 39, to his executing the mortgage in reliance upon Mr Robinson's statements. He referred to the letter from the Bank of 18 October 1991, which stated, under the heading "Security":- "Security must be to the Bank's satisfaction and will comprise a mortgage by Brett Ronald Mace over property at 22 Thorp Road, Woronora and a guarantee by Phillip Russell John Sharman supported by a mortgage over property at 26 Thorp Road, Woronora." 
He said, and this evidence was inherently probable because he was unaware of the way in which the property at 26 Thorp Road was encumbered, that he considered these words to be consistent with Mr Robinson's statements in the sense that each was giving security and, therefore, that each would be liable in the way for which he contended.

In all these circumstances it seems to me that his conduct was totally consistent with his belief that he was liable for one half only. He was cross- examined as to these matters. I have referred to his evidence and in my view it was inherently probable and totally credible.

I raised with him, Tp.98, that if he understood he was only liable for half except in the event of an act of God, which had not occurred, why it was any concern to him that the Bank might have lost the right to proceed against 26
Thorp Road. He said, Tpp.98-99:- "A. My concern was that the fundamental mortgage contracts had been changed without my consent. At that point that was my main concern and I didn't have any clear cut idea of what the Bank had done or substituting Phil's security and, obviously, I was just concerned." 
I do not regard any of his evidence as having retracted from his basic position that the representation had been made and this is supported by his evidence at Tp.99:- "SOFRONIOU: Q. So my suggestion to you is that your understanding was always that you and Mr Sharman were responsible for one hundred per cent of the debt, each of you, and that you had wanted the Bank to enforce any securities or enforce the guarantees in a different way to what it was purporting to do? 
A. No, I was looking, I expect, in relation to my property still held by the Bank that the Bank would have held Phil's until a mutual agreement between the three parties to either discharge Phil's or mine or restructure and nothing would be done without that.

Q. That's what you wanted to happen? 
A. Yes.

Q. That was your understanding of the liability for the Ad-Glass debt? 
A. To me it's a slightly different question, the degree of liability, and the property the Bank says they hold. 
Q. You understood, looking at the liabilities side, it's not that each of you had given security over one half of the Ad-Glass debt, the enforcement and keeping of property, you wanted that to remain equal? 
A. Yes." 
Although Ms Sofroniou relied heavily upon the last question and answer I have just quoted I do not see anything inconsistent with the answer, which elicited the response that Mr Mace wanted the enforcement and keeping of the property to remain equal. That was, essentially, the case he was propounding.

Did Mr Mace Rely Upon The Representation? 
No submission was made that Mr Mace did not rely upon the representation. In my view there was an abundance of evidence that he did and I have referred to much of it. He moved from a position of doubt as to whether to enter into this transaction at all to a point where he was prepared to execute firstly the guarantee and associated acknowledgment letter and subsequently the mortgage.
He asserted on his oath that he did so in reliance on the statements made by
Mr Robinson and I accept his evidence. I do so not only because I regarded it as credible, but also because it was inherently probable. When one asks what caused Mr Mace to enter into the transaction about which he had doubt the answer is obvious, namely the representation made to him by Mr Robinson.

Did Mr Mace Act To His Detriment? 
It was not submitted that Mr Mace did not act to his detriment. In my view the evidence is clear that he did by entering into the guarantee and mortgage, which did not reflect the diminished liability consistently with the representation.

What Is The Estoppel? 
The question then is what estoppel operates against the Bank. In my opinion, having regard to the facts I have found, the Bank is precluded from relying upon the terms of the guarantee and the mortgage given to it by Mr Mace to recover more than fifty per cent of the indebtedness of Ad-Glass because it would be unconscionable to allow it to do so. In other words it is not entitled to set up a legal position in conflict with the representation it made as to the effect of the transaction into which it was entering. I should note that it was not submitted to me by the Bank that if I concluded that there was a representation that this result would not follow. This was the only relief, on this aspect of the matter, sought by Mr Mace and, in the circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to consider any lesser or more limited form of relief, even if any had been suggested by the parties, to which Mr
Mace may be entitled. The relief is based on the conclusion that it would be unconscionable to allow the Bank to rely on the terms of its documentation, save to the extent to which I have referred, having regard to the representation made by Mr Robinson: Waltons Stores (Interstate) Pty Limited v Maher [(1988) 164 CLR 38l7.] 
The Position Thus Far 
In my opinion the Bank is entitled to recover from Mr Mace one half of the indebtedness of Ad-Glass to it, which has not otherwise been recovered by the
Bank through the liquidation of Ad-Glass. The question then arises as to what the amount is. As I have noted the affidavit of Mr Kupresak states the amount, inclusive of interest, as at 19 September 1997 owing by Ad-Glass is $282,101.20. One half of that is $141,050.60 from which must be deducted the several sums totalling $51,672.08. That would leave $89,723.68 on which interest is, prima facie, running from 19 September 1997. However the sum of $282,101.20 obviously comprises a large component for interest, which is running at the rate of $103.15 per day. Thus the interest component is $37,649.75 per annum. By the time Mr Brunton wrote his memorandum in March the Bank was well aware of the various problems it confronted in this litigation and, more particularly, it was aware that Mr Mace was prepared to pay it one half of the amount owing. In fact it is clear that from at least
July 1993 that had been Mr Mace's position. However, he was unable to sell 22
Thorp Road because the Bank would not grant a discharge of mortgage unless it was paid the full amount it was claiming. Therefore, according to the evidence of Mr Mace which has not been challenged, he was unable to discharge the indebtedness, with the consequence that the interest has continued to run. The question then posed is whether it is proper to order Mr Mace to pay interest on one half of the debt after the date I shall arbitrarily take as 1 April
I take that date because I am satisfied that by then, at the latest, the
Bank had ample opportunity to consider its position and to accept payment of an amount which I am satisfied, as a matter of law, was all to which it was entitled.

The grant of interest is essentially discretionary. The discretion has been exercised in different ways at different times, although usually the Court has regard to the fact that a party, who does not pay money, has the advantage of the money and the party, who has not received the money, has the disadvantage of not receiving it. However, in the present case there is no doubt on the evidence that had the Bank accepted the offer made by Mr Mace by 1 April 1994 it would have received all the money I consider it is entitled to receive from him. Admittedly thereafter Mr Mace retained 22 Thorp Road and, perhaps, it has increased in value since. I do not know and, even if it has, I do not think that would be determinative of the present matter.

On one view by allowing interest on one half of the amount owing by Ad-Glass to 1 April 1994, I am adopting a position more favourable to the Bank than that to which it is entitled. I say this because it appears from the memorandum of 7 July 1993 that the total amount owing was $195,998. If the
Bank had deducted, or been able to deduct, the sum of approximately $95,000 towards the payment of this debt from the sale of 26 Thorp Road then the amount owing would have been in the order of $100,000, slightly in excess of the one half for which Mr Mace was liable. Its failure to deduct this amount was due in part to its allowing the debt of Trygrate to exceed its limit by approximately $50,000 and by its failure to apply the other sum of approximately $40,000 to the discharge of the indebtedness. Of the amount owing by Mr Mace the Bank held the term deposit of $50,000. For some reason this amount was not credited against the indebtedness until 16 August 1994. No explanation has so far been offered to me as to why this did not happen until then.

My present inclination, however, is to allow interest to the Bank on one half of the amount owing by Ad-Glass as at 7 July 1993, i.e. $97,990, from 8 July until 1 April 1994, but after the deduction therefrom of $51,672.08, leaving a balance owing of $46,326.92. It may be that further evidence will show some proper justification for not deducting this until August 1994. I do not propose to put it higher than my present inclination, because I think it appropriate to hear evidence on the issue, if the parties wish to advance any, and, it may be, in the light of that evidence that I will come to a different view on interest.

A Further Way In Which Mr Mace Seeks To Put His Case 
Mr Mace has submitted that because of the failure by the Bank to maintain the security against 26 Thorp Road he should be discharged from all liability to the Bank. In the way in which this case has been presented I have difficulty with that submission. As I have recorded Mr Mace does not dispute that when he entered into the various arrangements with the Bank he considered he was making himself liable for one half of the indebtedness of Ad-Glass. He does not suggest that in doing so he was depending upon the fact that Mr Sharman was liable for one half and Mr Neil expressly disavowed a case that if called upon to pay one half Mr Mace would seek to recover one half of that from Mr
Sharman. Indeed as they seem to be separate debts contribution would not seem appropriate. In these circumstances it seems to me very difficult for Mr Mace to argue that his liability should be restricted to nothing when he concedes that he would be liable for one half of the indebtedness in the event of Ad-
Glass' failing and that he was prepared to undertake that liability. This, so it seems to me, is the short answer to the other claims which have been raised. Particularly I cannot think that it was unjust, within the meaning of the Contracts Review Act, at the times the guarantee and the mortgage were entered into, that Mr Mace should be liable to pay one half. He understood fully that that was his liability. But Mr Neil submitted that there is an equity which protects the right of subrogation. So much may be accepted, subject to any provision in the security documentation which destroys that equity. But, in the present case, there is no relevance in the maintaining of the right of subrogation against co-sureties because of the way in which the case has been conducted and the express disavowal by Mr Neil of any right to rely upon that equity. It may be that if I am wrong in the conclusion to which
I have come another way of reducing the liability of Mr Mace would be by claims of negligence or breach of s.52 of the Trade Practices Act, thereby providing an amount which could be set off against the full amount. I raised the question of the further relief, which Mr Neil sought, in terms to which I have just referred on several occasions, but he maintained that the obligation was not to pay any money because there had been a derogation of the right of subrogation. As I have said as there was no claim to enforce that right, and as I do not consider it is enforceable at law in any event, I do not consider the liability, which Mr Mace undoubtedly undertook with a full understanding that he was liable for one half, should be reduced. As I propose to stand the matter over for Short Minutes of Order to give effect to the principal order I have proposed, I will leave this matter for any further submissions the parties wish to make.

Proposed Orders 
I propose to declare that the Bank is estopped from enforcing against Mr Mace the guarantee given by him and dated 31 January 1991 and the mortgage executed by him and dated 2 October 1991 on the basis that it would be unconscionable for it to do so, other than to the extent of one half of the amount which was owing by Ad-Glass to the Bank on 7 July 1993, further reduced by the amount of $51,672.08, together with interest on the resulting figure from 8 July 1993 to no later than 1 April 1994 inclusive. I will hear any further evidence and submissions as to interest and costs and any further relief, which may be sought.
 * * * 
