

Francis Ivor Kelly, Comptroller-General of Customs versus Jct Wong and Rizoli
Pty Ltd Matter No 12178/89 [1998] NSWSC 712 (25 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 `FRANCIS IVOR KELLY, COMPTROLLER-GENERAL OF CUSTOMS versus JCT WONG & RIZOLI PTY
LTD` `12178/89` `25 August 1998` `Carruthers AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: As I said in the course of my judgment, which I will shortly publish, I found the assessment of penalty in this matter to be an extraordinarily difficult matter. However, as I also indicated in the judgment I must bear in mind the admonition of Kitto J in Vogel's case that offences such as these place an obligation on the Courts to impose what his Honour referred to as "drastic penalties". 
Dealing first with the imposition of penalty against Mr Wong I am persuaded by the plaintiff that there should be a conviction recorded with regard to each of the nine offences which I have found proved. Thus I record a conviction against Mr Wong in relation to each of the offences in paragraphs 3(A) to (A) inclusive of the Statement of Claim. I propose to impose the minimum penalty in relation to the smuggling offence with regard to the most recent shipment, namely the Zhukov. Accordingly, with regard to the smuggling offence under paragraph 9(A) of the Statement of Claim, I impose a penalty of $353,632.00, being twice $176,816.00. Pursuant to the provisions of sub- section (4) of <case> of the Crimes Act that penalty is to include the smuggling offences under paragraphs 6(A) and 3(A) of the Statement of Claim. I intend to impose the same sentencing pattern with regard to the evasion of duty on the Zhukov shipment. Accordingly, I impose a penalty of $353,632.00 in relation to the "evade duty" conviction under paragraph 10(A) of the
Statement of Claim. That penalty is to include the "evade duty" offences under paragraphs 7(A) and 4(A) of the Statement of Claim.

With regard to the "false entry" offence relating to the Zhukov shipment under paragraph 11(A) I impose a fine of $1,000.00. That penalty is to include the "false entry" offences under paragraphs 8(A) and 5(A) of the Statement of Claim. The total penalties imposed against Mr Wong are therefore $708,264.00. I also order Mr Wong to pay fifty percent of the plaintiff's costs. An application for time to pay, both as to penalties and costs, may be made to the Registrar of the Court.

I am also persuaded by the plaintiff that there should be a conviction recorded against Rizoli with regard to each of the nine offences which I have found proved. Thus I record a conviction against Rizoli in relation to each of the offences in paragraphs 3(A) to 11(A) inclusive of the Statement of Claim.

As I remarked in my reasons for judgment, no evidence was led in relation to the financial standing of Rizoli, nor indeed of whether it was still trading.
And indeed no concern was expressed in the sentencing proceedings by counsel on behalf of Rizoli as to any adverse effect upon Rizoli's financial viability by the imposition of penalties upon it. The distinct possibility must exist therefore that the company is devoid of assets. However, penalties must be imposed upon it and I propose to impose identical penalties upon Rizoli to those which I have imposed upon Mr Wong.

Accordingly, in relation to the smuggling offence under paragraph 9(A) of the
Statement of Claim a penalty of $353,632.00 is imposed which, pursuant to sub- section (4) of <case> is to include the offences under paragraphs 6(A) and 3(A) of the Statement of Claim. As to the "evade duty" offences, a penalty of $353,632.00 is imposed upon Rizoli in relation to the "evade duty" offence under paragraph 10(A) of the Statement of Claim and that penalty is to include the offences under paragraphs 7(A) and 4(A) of the Statement of Claim.

With regard to the offence of making a false entry under paragraph 11(A) of the Statement of Claim a penalty of $1,000.00 is imposed and that penalty is to include the offences under paragraphs 8(A) and 5(A) of the Statement of
Claim. The total penalties imposed against Rizoli are therefore $708,264.00.

The plaintiff has also sought an order against Rizoli for reparation under s
B of the Crimes Act equal to the aggregate amount of duty avoided.
Consistent with what I understand to be the practice in these matters, and in the exercise of my discretion, I shall make that order.

Accordingly, pursuant to the provisions of <case> of the Crimes Act I direct
Rizoli to make reparation to the Commonwealth of Australia in the sum of $594,507.00 by way of duty evaded in the subject shipments.

Rizoli is to pay fifty per cent of the plaintiff's costs. An application for time to pay by Rizoli, if that be relevant, in respect of the penalties, costs and reparation order may be made to the Registrar of the Court.
 * * * 
