

Qi Wang –v- Kaymet Corporation Pty Limited [2016] NSWSC 742 (30 May )
 # [![\[AustLII\]](742.1.gif)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/) Supreme Court of New
South Wales Decisions [[Index](index.html)] [[Search](/cgi-bin/sinoform.pl)] [[Download](742.rtf)] [[Help](/help/cases-help.html)] * * * 
Qi Wang –v- Kaymet Corporation Pty Limited [2016] NSWSC 742 (30 May 2016) 
Last Updated: 7 June 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
The defendant entitled to compensation equating to its loss of rental, without deduction.  
Catchwords: 
EQUITY - usual undertaking as to damages - where, but for an injunction obtained by the plaintiffs, defendant would have earned rental from leasing out strata units - where unrealised capital value of the strata units increased during the period of the injunction by more than the lost rent - whether defendant's compensation falls to be reduced by the unrealised gain -
HELD compensation not to be reduced.  
Legislation Cited: 
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2015  
Cases Cited: 
Wang versus Kaymet Corporation Pty Ltd <case> 
Churnin versus Pilot Developments Pty Ltd <case>  
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Qi Wang - First Plaintiff 
Jue Li - Second Plaintiff 
Xiaoyan Xi - Third Plaintiff 
Bin Wang - Fourth Plaintiff 
Xiaozheng Lao - Fifth Plaintiff 
Siping Xia - Sixth Plaintiff 
Meng Shi - Seventh Plaintiff 
Yijie Wang - Eighth Plaintiff 
Yu Di Xi - Ninth Plaintiff 
Qian Li Yan - Tenth Plaintiff 
Kai Jie Gu - Eleventh Plaintiff 
Li Ye - Twelfth Plaintiff 
Jia Jia Ye - Thirteenth Plaintiff 
Yanchong Wei - Fourteenth Plaintiff 
Zhen Jiang Li - Fifteenth Plaintiff 
Lisa Chan - Sixteenth Plaintiff 
Peter Ray - Seventeenth Plaintiff 
Hai Xu - Eighteenth Plaintiff 
Chao Lu Ye - Nineteenth Plaintiff 
Na Lu - Twentieth Plaintiff 
Liang Qiao - Twenty-first Plaintiff 
Jiannan Zhang - Twenty-second Plaintiff 
Jie Ma - Twenty-third Plaintiff 
Qian Lan - Twenty-fourth Plaintiff 
Ling Xu - Twenty-fifth Plaintiff 
Ahmed Nizamuddin - Twenty-sixth Plaintiff 
Alexander Lissaman - Twenty-seventh Plaintiff 
Yingqi Wang - Twenty-eighth Plaintiff 
Liu Qing Xu - Twenty-ninth Plaintiff 
Junfeng Wang - Thirtieth Plaintiff 
Wen Shi - Thirty-first Plaintiff 
Shaocong Zhou - Thirty-second Plaintiff 
Yibing Zhou - Thirty-third Plaintiff 
Boying Gu - Thirty-fourth Plaintiff 
Yonglan Shen - Thirty-fifth Plaintiff 
Lili Gu - Thirty-sixth Plaintiff 
Weidong Li - Thirty-seventh Plaintiff 
Wei Huang - Thirty-eighth Plaintiff 
Can Zhao - Thirty-ninth Plaintiff 
Helen Hoi Peng Fong - Fortieth Plaintiff 
Huey Ling Liew - Forty-first Plaintiff 
Jian Zhong Wu - Forty-second Plaintiff 
Tianjiao Liu - Forty-third Plaintiff  
Kaymet Corporation Pty Limited (ACN) 111 507 656) - First Defendant 
Toufic Bachara Kayrouz - Second Defendant 
Lichah Kayrouz - Third Defendant 
William Joseph Metlej - Fourth Defendant  
Representation: 
Counsel: 
J.S. Drummond - Plaintiffs 
F.C. Corsaro SC with M. Auld - Defendants  
Solicitor: 
Access Legal Solicitors - Plaintiffs 
Alphonse & Associates - Defendants  
File Number(s): /196153  
EX TEMPORE JUDGMENT
HIS HONOUR: The defendant developer entered into contracts with each of the plaintiffs for the sale to each of a unit in a development at Lusty Street, Wolli Creek. The defendant claimed an entitlement to rescind, which the plaintiffs disputed. On 6 December 2013, each of the plaintiffs obtained an interlocutory injunction against the defendant restraining it from dealing with the units.
The injunction was obtained against each of the plaintiffs giving to the Court the usual undertaking as to damages.
The terms of the usual undertaking are found in Pt 25 r 25.8 of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) . It is an undertaking to the Court to submit to such order (if any) as the Court may consider to be just for the payment of compensation (to be assessed by the Court or as it may direct) to any person (whether or not a party) affected by the operation of the interlocutory order or undertaking or of any interlocutory continuation (with or without variation) of the interlocutory order or undertaking.
There then ensued a trial in which the plaintiffs were unsuccessful, and the defendant was held to have been entitled to rescind: see Wang versus Kaymet Corporation Pty Ltd  <case> J). The consequence was that on 15 October 2015, the injunctions were dissolved. It is not in issue that each plaintiff's contract has been rescinded.
The defendant now moves for an order for compensation reflecting the loss that it suffered as a consequence of not being able to rent out each of the units, for the period from the date or rescission in each case to the date the injunction was dissolved. The parties are agreed that, but for the injunction, the defendant would have rented out the units and they are agreed as to the amount of rental forgone.
The plaintiffs resist the defendant's claim on one basis only, namely that the capital sale value of the units increased during the relevant period (of the injunction) by more than the lost rental. They put that this unrealised gain falls, on equitable principles, to be set off against the defendant's loss. In support of this proposition they rely on the two decisions of Young CJ in Eq in Churnin versus Pilot Developments Pty Ltd [[2007] NSWSC 1459], in which his Honour held that when the Court assesses compensation to be paid under the usual undertaking as to damages it is applying equitable principles and that it is just, in appropriate circumstances, to offset losses made by the object of the injunction, against gains made by it.
The difference between that case and this one is that there the gains were realised, whereas here they have not been. It is not suggested that the defendant has sold, or that it should have sold, any of the units. The defendant was under no obligation to sell the units. There is no basis in equity or in law for applying the principle to unrealised or potential gains. No gain has been made by the defendant as it had been made in Churnin's case.
In these circumstances, the defendant is entitled to compensation in the agreed amounts with respect to lost rental and I so order.
The plaintiffs are to pay the defendant's costs.
Postscript. Two of the plaintiffs apparently passed away in mainland China after the proceedings were dismissed by Stevenson J. Although there is a solicitor formally on the record for them, neither party suggests that final judgment should be entered against them at present.
In the circumstances, there will be judgment against each of the plaintiffs, bar the aforementioned two, in the amounts agreed. I will give the defendant liberty to apply on three days' notice with respect to the two deceased plaintiffs.
 * * * 
