

Regina versus John Hamilton Preston [2004] NSWSC 1313 (21 February 2004) 
REGINA versus John Hamilton PRESTON`` ``60164/96`` ``Wednesday, 9 April 1997`` ``IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, SMART J, DUNFORD J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - sexual assault without consent - recklessness as to whether complainant consenting - [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) s.61R(1).

CRIMINAL LAW - sexual assault without consent - submission to intercourse by reason of terror - Crimes Act 1990 s.61R(2)(c).

CRIMINAL EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURE - sexual assault without consent - evidence of complainant that she believed accused had assaulted people and shot someone - evidence tendered to explain why she did not call out for assistance - not hearsay - relevant - admissible - evidence of accused's reputation - not tendency evidence - not credibility evidence - [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [ss.55(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html), [56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s56.html)(1), [59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s59.html), [97](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html), [102](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s102.html).

CRIMINAL EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURE - sexual assault without consent - evidence of complainant that she believed accused had assaulted people and shot someone - relevant to explain why she did not call out for assistance - not unfairly prejudicial to accused - discretion or requirement to exclude - [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [ss.135](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html), [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html).

CRIMINAL EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURE - sexual assault without consent - summing up - evidence from complainant that she believed the accused had assaulted people and shot someone - adequacy of trial judge's directions as to limited use jury could make of such evidence - [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [s.136.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html) 
CRIMINAL EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURE - Comment on accused's failure to give evidence - what amounts to comment - what comment permissible by judge - [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [s.20(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) 
CRIMINAL EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURE - summing up - reference to different versions from complainant and accused - which to believe - must determine whether evidence of complainant is reliable evidence - whether proper direction.

SENTENCING - sexual assault without consent - accused gains entry to complainant's house by pretext - sexual intercourse against will of complainant - complainant upset and crying - criminality aggravated when offence committed against defenceless woman in own home.

The appellant was convicted on two counts of sexual intercourse without consent. It was alleged that he had entered the complainant's house on the pretext of wanting to speak to her and had then gone into her bathroom where she was getting dressed after having a shower, where he engaged in oral and vaginal intercourse with her without consent and that when she attempted to leave the bathroom between the acts of oral and vaginal intercourse he tripped her. The complainant said that she said "No" on a number of occasions, that she was scared, crying and shaking, that although there was another adult male in the house at the time she did not call out because she believed that the appellant had assaulted people and on an occasion had shot someone. Shortly after intercourse was completed, the complainant rushed to her bedroom where the other male was feeding the complainant's baby. She was very distressed and could hardly speak, but told the other man what had happened and then telephoned her mother who went to the home and called an ambulance which took her to the hospital for an examination. The appellant did not give evidence but in an interview at the time of his arrest (which was admitted by consent in the Crown case) he admitted having sexual intercourse with the complainant, but denied raping or threatening her. Similarly at the trial, through cross- examination of the Crown witnesses, particularly the complainant, the appellant attempted to show that although he did have sexual intercourse with her it was by consent.

Held: 
The evidence of the complainant's belief that the appellant had assaulted people and shot someone was tendered to prove the state of the complainant's mind, her belief, and not the truth of the assertion and accordingly was not hearsay within the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s.59.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s59.html) 
Evidence of her state of mind and her belief, was relevant to the issue whether there was any good reason for her not calling out for assistance [(s.51(1))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s51.html) and therefore, except as otherwise provided by the Act, was also admissible (s.56(1)).

The evidence was not tendered as evidence of the truth of the matters asserted and so was not evidence of the character or conduct of the appellant, but it was evidence of the appellant's reputation, at least in the eyes of the complainant.

S.97 (the tendency rule) only applies if such evidence is tendered to prove that a person has or had a tendency to act in a particular way and, as the evidence was not tendered for that purpose in the present case but only to prove the complainant's state of mind, it was not inadmissible by reason of that section.

Similarly the evidence was not excluded by s.102 which excludes evidence which is relevant only to a witness' credibility. Here the evidence went, not only to the complainant's credibility, but also to the existence of a fact in issue, namely whether her failure to call out was due to the fact that she was scared.

The evidence should not have been excluded pursuant to s.135 or 137.
Although it was prejudicial to the appellant, it was also of significant probative value on the issue of consent and any prejudice was accordingly not unfair to the appellant.

The judge's directions as to the limited use to which such evidence could be put were not inadequate.

Although the judge had referred to the different versions in the complainant's evidence and the appellant's interview, he emphasised that it was for the jury to determine whether the evidence of the complainant was reliable evidence and made it quite clear that they had to be satisfied of the truth of that evidence beyond reasonable doubt.

Liberato versus The Queen <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 507] at 514, 515, R versus Edwards (Unreported - Court of Criminal
Appeal - 27 September 1995) distinguished.

The judge's directions concerning sexual intercourse as a result of terror were sufficient, notwithstanding that the complainant had used words such as "scared", "crying", shaking and "terror" is the word used in s.61R (2) (c) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

The trial judge's directions on "recklessness" were adequate. In cases of sexual intercourse without consent an accused is "reckless" if he realises that the victim might not be consenting and is determined to have intercourse with her whether she is consenting or not, or if he fails to advert at all to the question of consent, treating it as an irrelevant factor. R versus Hemsley [(1968) 36 ACrimR 334] at 337-8, R versus Hemming (Unreported - Court of Criminal
Appeal - 11 May 1990), R versus Kitchener [(1993) 29 NSWLR 696], R v
Tolmie [(1995) 37 NSWLR 660] followed.

Comment on the failure of an accused to give evidence includes any statement which directly or indirectly suggests that the accused could have given evidence, and did not do so.

Bataillard versus The King [(1907) 12 CLR 1282] at 1291,
R versus Challita [(1988) 37 ACrimR 175] at 195,
R versus Greciun-King [(1981) 2 NSWLR 469] followed.

To tell the jury that merely because the appellant had exercised his right (given by law) to remain silent, they must not thereby draw any inference against him was comment, but as it was made by the judge, it was permissible. [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [s.20(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) 
Remarks by the judge that where the evidence of the Crown witnesses (particularly the complainant) was left undenied or uncontradicted by the appellant's evidence in circumstances where he must have had personal knowledge of the relevant facts, any doubts which they may otherwise have about the evidence of the Crown witnesses might be more readily discounted and the evidence of those Crown witnesses more readily accepted as truth were proper and in conformity with. Weissensteiner versus The Queen [(1993) 138 CLR .]
R versus Hallacoglu [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67] at 78, R v Towers (Unreported - Court of Criminal Appeal - 7 June 1993) referred to.

Comment made by the judge but which the judge wrongly attributed to the
Crown Prosecutor, did not constitute a breach of [s.20(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) because the
Crown had not made any impermissible comment, and the comment was permissible coming from the judge.

Concurrent sentences of six years' minimum term with additional terms of two years on each count were not excessive, bearing in mind that the offences each carried a maximum penalty of fourteen years and were very serious, being committed by an older, stronger man against a younger, smaller woman in her own home to which he had gained access under the pretext of wanting to speak to her. Sexual assault is a serious offence at any time, but its criminality is aggravated when it is committed against a defenceless woman in the sanctity of her own home.

JUDGMENT 
SMART J: I agree with Dunford J. His reasons set out the facts and the background. I will add a few observations.

The evidence in the trial lay within a small compass, being completed early on the morning of the second day. The complainant's evidence occupied about half the time taken by the evidence. The cross examination suggested that her evidence was incorrect and that she had encouraged the appellant, by her conduct, to proceed. She repelled the suggestion that she had willingly removed her clothing and consented to intercourse.

What emerged from the whole of her evidence was the appellant, a former friend, coming to her home about 9 pm or a little later, entering the bathroom which she was using, placing himself so she could not leave the bathroom and, ostensibly because of her non repayment of money, exacting oral and vaginal intercourse. She stated that she was scared, tearful and shaking. When she attempted to leave on one occasion he placed his foot or leg in such a way as to trip her. He was a large person and she was slight. The vaginal intercourse took place on the bathroom floor. Immediately after the incident she was distraught and unable to speak in a manner which could be understood. There was cogent evidence pointing to some of the appellant's subsequent statements being untrue.

The appellant did not dispute that he had oral and vaginal intercourse with the complainant. The issues were whether she had consented and whether he knew that she did not consent. The judge emphasised on several occasions that these were the issues on these charges. Given the evidence and inherent improbability of the appellant's case on these issues, he was in a tenuous position.

The judge also pointed out to the jury that the accused denied the allegation of digital penetration. This was the count on which the appellant was acquitted.

Ground 4 
Both at the start of the trial and during the Summing Up the judge told the jury that there were three important principles, namely, that the Crown had to prove the guilt of the appellant and that he did not have to prove anything, that the accused's guilt of the offence or offences had to be proved beyond reasonable doubt and that he was presumed innocent until proved guilty.

The judge told the jury that these principles must remain in the forefront of their deliberations. The judge elaborated on each of these principles. At SU of 22/2/96 he told the jury that they were called upon to determine "whether or not on the evidentiary material...you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the accused's guilt and that applies equally to each one of the three offences..." 
At SU 15 the judge relevantly continued: "But remember, that about what it is that you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt in relation to the charges laid against the accused, having regard to the way this trial has been conducted, is whether the complainant...consented to the acts of intercourse, or not, and, if she did not, whether he knew that she was not consenting." 
The judge further elaborated on this direction, pointing out that they had to be satisfied of both elements upon a consideration of the evidentiary material.

It was after the judge had explained several times and emphasised what had to be proved beyond reasonable doubt before conviction that he made the reference to deciding which version of events the jury preferred. The judge reminded the jury that the appellant contended that the complainant was dishonest and lying. The judge told the jury that they had to determine whether the evidence of the complainant was reliable.

When the Summing Up is taken as a whole, the jury must have understood that before they could convict they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the absence of consent and that the appellant knew that the complainant was not consenting.

While the judge made it reasonably clear in his Summing Up that the jury had to consider each alleged offence separately, this point was dealt with clearly and accurately in the further directions given in response to a question from the jury.

This challenge fails.

Ground 5 
In directing the jury's attention to the major issues of consent and knowledge and whether digital penetration had occurred and reminding the jury of the evidence, statements and arguments on these matters of both the Crown and the appellant, the judge adopted the course most favourable to the appellant. It was clear to the jury, and they were reminded by the judge, that the appellant was attacking the honesty and truthfulness of the complainant. The appellant had contended that on the complainant's evidence the jury could not be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on the three issues litigated.

This challenge lacks merit.

Ground 6 
Section 61R(2)(c) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides that a person who submits to sexual intercourse with another person as a result of terror is to be regarded as not consenting to the sexual intercourse.

The evidence justified, indeed required, the judge to give a direction which gave effect to the sub-section. The word which the sub-section uses is "terror" and it was prudent for the judge to use this simple and well understood word. The direction of law which the judge gave (and he so described it) was correct. He then turned to the facts said to fall within the statutory description. The judge stated that she had said that she was in fear of the accused. She used the word "scared" and said that she was "crying" and "shaking". She said that she did not cry loudly or scream loudly because she was scared. She was scared because she believed he had assaulted people and shot someone. She was in an impossible situation. She was cornered in the bathroom by a big man and her three children (aged 9, 8 and 9 months) were in the house. It would have been undesirable for the two older children to hear or see what was happening.

The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 3rd Edn gives as one of the meanings of scare "to frighten, terrify".

There was ample material from which the jury could conclude that the complainant submitted to sexual intercourse as a result of the terror instilled in her by the appellant. Any other conclusion would be surprising.

There is no substance in the complaint made by the appellant.

HANDLEY JA: I agree with Dunford J.
 
DUNFORD, J: The appellant was arraigned before his Honour Judge Nield in the District Court at Liverpool on 21 February 1996 on three counts that he on 6 August 1995, at Heckenberg in the State of New South Wales, did have sexual intercourse with Pauline Mary Brooksby, without her consent and knowing she was not consenting.

He pleaded not guilty to each count and, following his trial, the jury on 23
February 1996, returned verdicts of guilty on count one, not guilty on count two and guilty on count three.

On 29 March 1996, the appellant was sentenced on each of counts one and three to a minimum term of six years penal servitude to commence on 22 February 1996 and to expire on 21 February 2002 with an additional term of two years to commence on 22 February 2002 and to expire on 21 February 2004. At the time of sentence the appellant had been serving a sentence for periodic detention and consequent upon the conviction the order for periodic detention was cancelled and an order made that the unexpired balance of that sentence be served on a full time basis concurrently with the minimum term of these sentences.

The Crown case was that the appellant and the complainant had known each other for around eight years, the appellant being a friend of the complainant's former husband, and also godfather to the complainant's elder son. The complainant and appellant had never been in a sexual relationship, but the appellant had assisted the complainant with her three children over the years, especially since the complainant's marriage had broken down. The appellant, for example, had loaned the complainant money for her to purchase presents for
Christmas.

On the evening of Sunday 6 August 1995, the complainant was at her home in
Casula and she had finished preparing lunch for her children for the following day. Her friend David Breezely, who had helped her, was looking after the youngest child, aged nine months, whilst she went to the bathroom to have a shower. The baby was crying a great deal and David Breezely tried to comfort the child by getting a bottle.

At around 8.30 pm, whilst she was having her shower, David Breezely answered a knock at the front door. It was the appellant who said he wanted to see the complainant. David Breezely knocked on the bathroom door to tell the complainant that someone wanted to see her. Soon after that, the complainant heard another knock at the door, followed by a voice she recognised as the appellant's saying, "I want to talk to you". The complainant said that she would "be a minute". She then got out of the shower and was getting dressed in tracksuit pants and a sloppy joe, when there was another knock on the door.
The appellant then entered the bathroom uninvited, closing the door behind him.

The appellant was dressed in a tracksuit and joggers. He faced the complainant and said to her, "Don't you think its been a bit long for the money that you owe me?". The complainant replied, "I have to go to the bank". The appellant then told the complainant "Well, show us your tits" to which the complainant said, "No". The appellant repeated the request and the complainant again said "No." The complainant was at the time standing near the toilet and the appellant was between her and the door of the bathroom. The appellant told the complainant to sit on the toilet which she did. She was scared because she believed that he had assaulted people and shot someone. The appellant again told her to remove her top and she did so, exposing her breasts, he lowered his tracksuit pants and removed his penis asking the complainant to "suck on his penis" and to "play with his balls". She said "no" but he put his penis in her mouth. She did not try to stop him because she was scared. She was crying and shaking. This alleged act of fellatio constituted the first count in the indictment.

The appellant then sat on the edge of the bath and asked the complainant to pull her pants down. She said she did not want to, but took one leg out of both her tracksuit pants and her panties because she was scared. He then told her to start playing with herself; she told him she did not want to and that she had her periods, to which he replied, "I don't care about the blood".

The appellant then placed his index finger into her vagina. She did not do anything to stop him because she was scared, but told him it was hurting. This alleged incident of digital penetration was the subject of the second count in the indictment.

When he resumed sitting on the bath again, the complainant got up to walk away, but the appellant tripped her and she fell on the bathroom floor bruising her knee as she fell. She got back up and sat on the toilet. There followed an act of penile penetration by the appellant from the complainant's rear which was not the subject of any count in the indictment. The complainant was still crying and shaking.

The appellant then told the complainant to lie on the floor of the bathroom which she did. The appellant lay on top of her and opened her legs with his hands. She said "no", and did not want him to do it, but he told her she had nothing to be scared of. He then placed his penis inside her vagina and ejaculated inside her. She did nothing to stop him but was crying, scared and shaking. This alleged act of penile penetration constituted the third count in the indictment.

After this, while the appellant was washing himself in the bathroom sink, the complainant pulled up her pants, and left the bathroom, and went to her bedroom where she began to sob uncontrollably. David Breezely was lying on the bed, having given the youngest child a bottle to stop him crying. The complainant tried to communicate effectively with Breezely, but was unable to speak because she was so upset. The appellant then looked in the bedroom and said, "See youse later" before departing.

The complainant, who was very distressed, could hardly speak but she told
Breezely what happened. She then rang her mother, who went around to the complainant's home and called an ambulance which transported her to the hospital for an examination. She was found to have bruising consistent with a sexual assault.

The appellant did not give evidence but in an electronically recorded interview of the time of his arrest, which was tendered by consent in the
Crown case, he admitted having sex with the complainant, but denied raping or threatening her. He said that after he knocked on the bathroom door, he waited until she opened the door to him. She was fully dressed but he told her to lift her top up, which she did, and then at his request she played with her body "and next thing, we were on the floor, having sex". He denied the digital penetration (second count) occurred at all and "could not recall" attempting penile penetration from the complainant's rear. He denied tripping her as she attempted to leave the bathroom and denied that at any stage she said "no". In cross-examination of the complainant at the trial, she agreed that when the appellant asked her if he could ejaculate in her mouth and said "no", he thereupon withdrew his penis from her mouth.

Through cross-examination of the Crown witnesses, the appellant attempted to show that, although he did have sexual intercourse with the appellant, it was with her consent. Reliance was placed on the fact that the complainant had removed her own clothing, both top and bottom, and that the complainant had made no attempt to call out to her flatmate at any time, nor had he threatened her in any way, but he had told her she had nothing to be scared of.

A number of grounds of appeal were argued and it is convenient to deal with them in order.

Ground 1.

The evidence that the appellant had assaulted people and shot someone was inadmissible (Evidence Act ss.97, 102).

Alternatively, 
The learned trial judge erred in the exercise of discretion in admitting the said evidence (Evidence Act ss.136(sic), 137).

The relevant evidence was that of the complainant and was as follows:- 
Q. Can you tell me why you were scared? 
A. Because of his - because of his background.

Q. Did you believe something about his background that made you scared? (No verbal reply) 
Q. Do you follow what I mean? (No verbal reply).

Q. Did you have something in your mind about his background that made you scared? 
A. Yes.

Q. What was it about his background that made you scared? 
OBJECTION QUESTION ALLOWED 
A. That he has assaulted people.

Q. Sorry? 
A. That he has assaulted people once also that he had shot someone.

Q. So you believed that he had assaulted people and that he'd shot someone? 
A. Yes.

The admissibility of the evidence was first raised in the absence of the jury before the Crown's opening address, at which time counsel for the appellant submitted that the evidence was hearsay and also sought to have it excluded in the exercise of the trial judge's discretion. His Honour indicated he would admit the evidence, but gave no reasons.

The evidence was not of a previous representation made by a person to prove the existence of the fact asserted by the representation, in that it was tendered to prove the state of the complainant's mind, her belief, and not the truth of the assertion. It was therefore not hearsay within the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s.59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s59.html), as it would not have been hearsay at common law: Subramaniam versus Public
Prosecutor [[1956] 1 WLR 965] at 970.

The major issue in the trial was whether the complainant had consented to the various sexual acts which had occurred between her and the appellant, and in this regard it was relevant for the jury to take into account the fact that she had not yelled or called out for assistance when she knew there was another adult male in the house and therefore also relevant for the jury to consider any reason or explanation which she gave for not doing so. She gave as her reason for not doing so that she was scared, and so any evidence which if accepted could rationally affect the assessment of the probability of the existence of that fact (ie. that she was scared) was relevant [(s.55(1))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) and so, except as otherwise provided by the Act, was also admissible (s.56(1)).

If she believed that the accused had previously assaulted or shot someone, such belief could rationally affect the probability that she was scared, and so evidence of her belief was admissible, subject to the other provisions of the Act.

The evidence that was relevant to her being scared was that she had this belief about the appellant - how she had acquired such belief, or from whom, or whether the belief had any justification or basis in fact was not relevant - unless the fact that she had the belief was challenged and, in the events which happened, her belief was not challenged. I am satisfied that the evidence was accordingly relevant and admissible unless excluded by some other provision of the Act.

It was submitted that the evidence was not admissible because of s.97 (tendency rule) or s.102 (credibility rule).

S.97(1) provides that evidence of the character, reputation or conduct of a person or a tendency that a person has or had is not admissible to prove that a person has or had a tendency to act in a particular way or have a particular state of mind unless two conditions are fulfilled.

As already pointed out in relation to the hearsay objection, this was not evidence of the truth of the matters asserted, and so was not evidence of the character, conduct or tendency of the appellant, it was not evidence that he had previously been violent or that he had a tendency towards violence. It was however evidence of the appellant's reputation, at least of his reputation in the eyes of the complainant. But s.97 only applies to such evidence if it is tendered "to prove that a person has or had a tendency ... to act in a particular way ...". This evidence of the complainant's belief was not tendered to prove that the appellant had a tendency to act in a particular way or to commit sexual offences, but to prove the complainant's state of mind, particularly why she was scared, and why she therefore did not physically resist or call out for help to the other adult male in the house at the time. It was not part of the Crown case that her belief was justified or that the accused had done the things alleged, but merely that she had this belief, correct or incorrect, justified or unjustified. Accordingly the evidence did not come within the terms of s.97(1) and was not excluded by it.
See also R versus Mordy (Unreported - Dowd J - 14 August 1996) where evidence of whether in the view of the witness the accused was in the habit of carrying a knife was held not to relate to a tendency to carry a knife and was therefore outside s.97.

S.102 provides that evidence which is relevant only to a witness' credibility is not admissible. The important word is "only", and if the evidence also goes to the probability of the existence of a fact in issue it is relevant (s.55(1)) and therefore admissible (s.56). As I have already shown a fact in issue was whether she was consenting and relevant to this was whether she had reason for not resisting or whether she was scared, and her belief about the appellant went to the existence of that fact. It was not therefore relevant only to her credibility and was not excluded by s.102.

Alternatively, it was submitted that the trial judge erred in failing to exercise his discretion under ss.135 and 137 to exclude the evidence. Those sections are as follows:-
The court may refuse to admit evidence if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger that the evidence might: be unfairly prejudicial to a party; or be misleading or confusing; or cause or result in undue waste of time ...
In a criminal proceeding the court must refuse to admit evidence adduced by the prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant.

It may be conceded that evidence from the complainant that she believed the appellant had assaulted people and shot someone was prejudicial to the latter, but prejudice simpliciter is not sufficient, there must be unfair prejudice which outweighs the "probative value" of the evidence i.e. the extent to which the evidence could rationally affect the assessment of the probability of a fact in issue (Dictionary). This evidence of the complainant's belief, explaining (if accepted) her failure to resist or call for assistance, could rationally affect the assessment of whether she was consenting, which was a fact in issue; and it accordingly had a high probative value. Indeed, in the circumstances of this case, where according to her evidence, the complainant had been confronted in the bathroom of her own home by a much larger man who had admitted himself into her bathroom, uninvited, and was standing between where she was and the only exit from the bathroom, while there was another adult male elsewhere in the house, evidence of her state of mind was crucial; the probative value of the evidence was high and was not outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the appellant.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the prejudice was unfair because, although the evidence may have been useful or important to the Crown case, it was not crucial because it was open to the Crown to lead evidence from the complaint that she was "very" scared (instead of merely "scared") or "had a fear" bordering "on terror" without leading the basis for her fear unless it became "necessary" as a result of cross-examination; and it was pointed out that the complainant gave evidence that she was "crying, scared, shaking" and the appellant told her she had nothing to be scared about, but it was put to her in cross-examination (and she agreed) that he did not, and had never threatened her, nor hit her, and in the appellant's recorded interview he said he never threatened her (A52), but he could not recall whether she started to shake and he told her she had nothing to be scared of (A58), and he said the sexual intercourse was consensual. There was no concession in the recorded interview that she was scared or shaking or crying (e.g. AA68, 76).

Even if her evidence that she was scared, crying and shaking had not been challenged in cross-examination and the jury had been told that it was not in issue, it would not have had the same impact on the jury as an explanation of why she was scared, crying and shaking, and the jury would have been given a distorted picture of a woman claiming to be scared but offering no explanation of why and may have been less likely to accept it in the absence of her explanation or reason for so being scared. The exclusion of the evidence would not have done justice to the Crown case and so the prejudice to the appellant cannot be regarded as unfair.
 
Ground 2: 
The learned trial judge was in error in failing to direct the jury when the said evidence was admitted of the limited use it could make of such evidence (Evidence Act ss.95, 136).

At the time the evidence complained of was given no direction or instruction was given to the jury as to how such evidence might or might not be used. In his summing up the trial judge directed the jury that a person who submits to sexual intercourse with another person as a result of terror is to be regarded as not consenting to the sexual intercourse, that consent induced by terror is not consent at all, and that if they were satisfied that the complainant did or permitted the acts alleged and did so as a result of her fear then she had not consented. His Honour went on (SU 27): "Now members of the jury, she has said that she feared for herself, that she was in fear of the accused. She said the basis of her fear was that she knew the accused had assaulted people and had shot someone. As the learned Crown
Prosecutor said, that goes not to prove anything other than her state of mind.
Her evidence goes only to prove the basis for her belief. It does not go, and it would be quite improper for you to use it to go, to prove whether or not the accused knew that she was not consenting." 
At the conclusion of the Summing-Up, following a request from defence counsel, His Honour further directed the jury as follows (SU37): "The fact that the complainant believed that the accused had assaulted people and shot a person is not evidence that he had done any of those things, it is the basis of her fear, and it would be quite improper for you to take into account adversely to the accused, the allegations, and that is all they are, that he had assaulted people and shot a person. The evidence was admitted only, and I repeat only, in relation to her belief going to her terror of what was occurring in the bathroom, because as I have said, if it should be that a person submits to sexual intercourse with another person as a result of terror, the person (is) not to be regarded as consenting to that sexual intercourse. That's the issue to which that went." 
In my view these were adequate directions as to the use the jury could make of the evidence. It may have been desirable for such a direction to have been given immediately the evidence was given, but there was no requirement for such a direction at that time and neither counsel asked for it at the time.
Reference was made in the written submissions to ss.95 and 136, but s.95 only applies to evidence to which Part 3.6 applies and for reasons given earlier that does not include this evidence, and the directions quoted above effectively limited the use that might be made of the evidence as required by s.136. That section does not require that the direction be given at any particular time..
 
Ground 3: 
The learned trial judge was in error in disallowing the complainant to depose what David Breezely said when she complained to him (Subramanian versus The Public Prosecutor (of Malaysia), s.65 [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)).

Counsel for the accused asked the complainant what David Breezely (the other male in the house) said when she told him she had been raped. The Crown
Prosecutor objected and the question was rejected.

It is not clear on what basis it is alleged the evidence of his response was admissible.
[S.65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) is an exception to the hearsay rule and deals with the admission of previous representations where the person who made the previous representations is not available to give evidence about an asserted fact, and Subramaniam's case likewise dealt with a statement made by a person who was not called as a witness. Here Mr Breezely not only had not made a previous representation or statement, but he was called as a witness. Whilst he could, and did, give evidence of what he saw and heard, I fail to see any basis on which evidence of what he said to the complainant at that time could be admissible, unless it was part of a conversation between them to put what she said to him in context; and his evidence was that he was unable to have a conversation with her because she was so upset and hysterical. Any answer which he gave to the complainant's complaint of being raped was an irrelevant comment, not made by an eye witness of the events in the bathroom, and incapable of establishing any material fact in the case.

Ground 4: 
His Honour erred in directing the jury "sometimes it is easy to make the decision ... in the witness box answering questions" (Summing-Up pp.17-18).

The full passage referred to was as follows: "Sometimes it is easy to make the decision about something. Sometimes you are given different versions by different people of the one thing and you have got to decide between the two different versions, which one you prefer so you can act upon the one you prefer. That is what you have got to do here. You have got to decide the version that you are going to act upon. As I said to you yesterday in order to do that you have got to decide whether a witness is a reliable witness and reliability, as I said, depends upon honesty of the witness as a person, and the only one who is challenged as being dishonest, and really you do not need me to tell you that the accused, through his counsel, has suggested that (the complainant) is dishonest, that she is flatly lying about what she says, and the accuracy of the witness's memory. Those two are interlocking. Now, members of the jury, when you make a decision between different people who have told you different stories or different versions of the one thing, you take into account a number of factors. Demeanour is one of them, the body language, as psychologists call it. You are entitled to take into account in assessing (the complainant's) honesty as a witness, honesty as a person, the way she acted and re-acted in the witness box. Really, in relation to the others, honesty does not enter into the equation because the accused, through his counsel, has not suggested that they are dishonest people...... So, it is for you, members of the jury to determine whether the evidence of the complainant is reliable evidence. In assessing the reliability you take into account honesty of (the complainant) as a person and accuracy of (the complainant's) memory. In assessing or determining honesty of (the complainant) as a person you are entitle to take into account, if you want to, you do not have to if you do not want to, her actions or reactions, her demeanour, her body language, in the witness box answering questions".

It has been submitted that these directions could have been understood by the jury as inviting them to choose between the complainant's evidence and the appellant's denials in his recorded interview and that it was sufficient if they "preferred" the complainant's version; and in particular, they were not directed that even though they did not positively accept the appellant's version as set out in his recorded interview and preferred the complainant's version, the appellant's version may nevertheless cause them to have a reasonable doubt.

It was also submitted that the passage was capable of encouraging the jury not to consider the evidence related to each case separately - because it was all predicated upon the truthfulness of the whole of the complainant's evidence.

In relation to the first complaint, reference was made to Liberato versus The
Queen <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 507] at 514-5 where Brennan J said: "When a case turns on a conflict between the evidence of a prosecution witness and the evidence of a defence witness, it is commonplace for a judge to invite a jury to consider the question: who is to be believed? But it is essential to ensure, by suitable direction, that the answer to that question (which the jury would doubtless ask themselves in any event) if adverse to the defence, is not taken as concluding the issue whether the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt the issues which it bears the onus of proving.
The jury must be told that, even if they prefer the evidence for the prosecution, they should not convict unless they are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the truth of that evidence. The jury must be told that, even if they do not positively believe the evidence for the defence, they cannot find an issue against the accused contrary to that evidence if that evidence gives rise to a reasonable doubt as to that issue." 
It is first necessary to look at the passage complained of in its context.
His Honour had previously directed the jury that it was open to them to accept part of a witness' evidence and reject other parts (SU 11), that the only
Crown witness whose evidence was seriously challenged was the complainant (p.11), that the Crown carried the onus of proving the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt (pp.12-13), that each charge had to be considered separately (pp.13-4) and the separate elements of lack of consent and the accused's knowledge that the complainant was not consenting (p.16).

His Honour then came to a review of the evidentiary material and prefaced it with the remarks complained of. He pointed out to the jury that in their everyday lives they are often given different versions of something by different people and they have to decide which one they prefer, and went on to say, in effect, that was what they had to do here, decide which version they were going to act upon (that is, the sworn evidence of the complainant or the unsworn version contained in the appellant's interview with police); and if the direction had finished there I would have been very concerned. But it did not finish there, as His Honour went on to point out that the complainant was the only witness whose evidence was challenged and who was accused of being dishonest and he explained how in determining her honesty and reliability they might have regard to her demeanour in the witness box and then said: "So, it is for you, members of the jury, to determine whether the evidence of the complainant is reliable evidence". This made it quite clear in my view that the jury had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that her evidence was true, and there was no suggestion, as in Liberato's case, that it was merely a case of a preference of one version over the other; nor were the jury told, as in R versus Edwards (Unreported - Court of Criminal Appeal - 27
September 1995), that they had to decide whether they believed the complainant or not or whether they believed the accused or not, or (on one occasion) that they had to decide beyond reasonable doubt whether they accepted or rejected the evidence of the accused! In both those cases the accused had given sworn evidence and it was clearly important for the jury to take into account such sworn evidence in assessing the evidence of the complainant's. When the
Summing-Up is taken as a whole, the jury could have been left in no doubt that they had to be satisfied that the evidence of the complainant was reliable and true, and satisfied of that beyond reasonable doubt.

The further complaint, that the passage was capable of encouraging the jury not to consider the evidence in relation to each count separately because it was all predicated upon the truthfulness of the whole of the complainant's evidence is completely without foundation. Not only did His Honour tell the jury they could accept part and reject part of the witness' evidence (SU 11) but on a number of occasions he specifically directed them that the evidence in relation to the separate counts had to be considered separately (see pp.13-14, 38), and following a question from the jury the following morning, again summarised the issues in relation to each of the counts separately and went on (p.5): "In law it is necessary to consider each of the three offences separately and distinctly one from the other and, in law, it is not required that there be the same verdict for (1) as there is for (2) and (3) ..." etc.
That the jury understood this is clear from their "not guilty" verdict on the second count, where the issue was whether the incident occurred, rather than lack of consent and knowledge thereof.

Ground 5: 
His Honour failed to put the defence case and the Summing-Up thereby became unbalanced adversely to the appellant.

Alternatively, 
By putting the Crown case and failing to put defence case the learned trial judge unduly influenced the jury.

This was a case in which the appellant did not give evidence and called no witnesses, so the only evidentiary material on which the defence could rely were some of the appellant's answers to police when interviewed to the effect that digital penetration of the complainant's genitalia (count 2) did not occur and that the acts of fellatio (count 1) and penile intercourse (count 3) were consensual, that at no stage did she say "no", there was no forcing, begging or insistence, that she had removed her own clothing and had not called out. But a lot of his answers in the recorded interview were non- committal or ambiguous, and there was no evidence from the appellant to the jury that his exculpatory answers were true.

The trial judge said that he would not make a case for the Crown or for the defence and pointed out that the facts were entirely a matter for them and that they should disregard any perceived opinion of his unless they independently came to the same conclusion (SU 19). He then highlighted the issues (consent, knowledge or otherwise of absence of consent, and digital penetration of the complainant's genitalia) (SU 20) and proceeded to summarise the evidence pointing out as he came to them, the different versions as to who opened and closed the bathroom door when the appellant entered (SU 20-21), whether digital penetration occurred, whether she consented or the appellant knew she was not consenting (SU 21), and the different versions of what occurred after the intercourse (SU 22). He again pointed out that when interviewed the appellant said she consented (SU 23), and the jury had with them in the jury room transcripts of the recorded interview.

True it is the judge drew attention to some of the Crown's arguments as he reviewed the evidence, but he was entitled to do that. He did not in one place summarise the defence case (or the Crown case) but there was so little to the defence case apart from the unsworn claims of consent that it would hardly have been helpful to the defence to summarise the two contrasting cases. In any event the point was not taken at the trial and [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s4.html) would require leave to be given to argue the point. I do not consider the point has any substance and would refuse leave.

Ground 6: 
The learned trial judge erred in directing the jury "A person who submits to sexual intercourse ... knew that she was not consenting (Summing-Up pp.27-28) 
The full passage was as follows:- "Now this also has been mentioned to you, members of the jury, and is important in this case because the complainant said to you that she was in fear of the accused. The law is this: the person who submits to sexual intercourse with another person as a result of terror is to be regarded as not consenting to the sexual intercourse. That simply means and you do not need anyone to tell you, if consent is induced by terror then it is not consent at all and that is a logical and sensible application of common sense... Now members of the jury, she has said that she feared for herself, that she was in fear of the accused. She said the basis of her fear was that she knew the accused had assaulted people and had shot someone. As the learned
Crown Prosecutor said, that goes not to prove anything other than her state of mind. Her evidence goes to prove only the basis for her belief. It does not go, and it would be quiet improper for you to use it to go, to prove whether or not the accused knew that she was not consenting". [emphasis supplied] 
Two complaints are made: the use of the word "terror" when the complainant did not use that word but "scared", which was said to be an "embellishment" of her evidence; and the concluding sentence of the passage which it is claimed denied the appellant the opportunity of raising a doubt in the jury's mind on the question whether he knew she was not consenting.

It is true that the complainant did not use the word "terror" in her evidence, she said she was "scared and crying" "had tears" and was "shaking". Although
His Honour gave the direction in terms of "terror", he did not use that word in relation to her evidence, but the word "fear". Whether there is any difference in shades of meaning between "terror", "fear" and "scared" may be a matter of some debate, but no objection was taken at the trial to the use of the word "terror" and this is the very type of technical appeal that [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s4.html) is designed to prevent. I have no doubt that if objection had been taken and it had been pointed out to His Honour that the complainant had not used the words "terror" or "fear" but had merely said she was "scared, crying and shaking,"
His Honour would have corrected himself. In any event "terror" is the word used in s.61R(2)(c), [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which provides that a person who submits to sexual intercourse as a result of threats or terror is to be regarded as not consenting. The point is without substance, and I would refuse leave under [Rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) 
In relation to the concluding words of the passage, His Honour was endeavouring to deter the jury from accepting (unfavourably to the accused) the complainant's belief that he had assaulted people and shot someone as established facts, and was quite correct in pointing out that her belief about his antecedents was not relevant to the issue of whether or not he knew she was not consenting. That issue was dealt with separately later in the Summing-
Up (at pp.29-30).

At the conclusion of the Summing-Up (p.37) defence counsel did ask that the jury be told that the evidence of her belief about the accused did not suggest or prove or substantiate that the appellant did do those things. The trial judge said that he had already said that, but would repeat it, and did so. No other objection was taken to the passage. As I have already said I consider the passage unobjectionable.
 
Ground 7: 
The learned trial judge misdirected, or alternatively, failed adequately to direct the jury on recklessness (Summing-Up pp.29-30).

What His Honour said was as follows: "How you decide whether he knew that she was not consenting depends upon your decision as to what occurred within the bathroom. There is a principle, and the Crown Prosecutor has referred to it already, and it is this, `a person who has sexual intercourse with another person without the consent of that other person and who is reckless as to whether the other person consents to the sexual intercourse, is to be taken to know that the other person does not consent to the sexual intercourse. `In other words, if, in the circumstances in which person is, that person is reckless as to whether or not the other person is consenting to sexual intercourse, by turning a blind eye, by disregarding the comments that were being made, then the person is taken to know that the other person is not consenting.'" 
Once again, no objection to the direction was taken at the trial. For the purpose of this offence an accused is "reckless" if he realises that the victim might not be consenting and is determined to have intercourse with her whether she is consenting or not: R versus Hemsley [(1988) 36 A Crim R ] at 337-8: or if an accused fails to advert at all to the question of consent treating it as an irrelevant factor: R versus Hemming (Unreported - Court of Criminal Appeal - 11 May 1990), R versus Kitchener [(1993) 29 NSWLR 696.] R versus Tolmie [(1995) 37 NSWLR 660.] 
Although the complainant removed her own clothes when asked (or told) to do so and conceded in cross-examination that she did not do or say anything to indicate to him that she did not want to do it (T25), her evidence was that the accused was between her and the door of the bathroom, she said "no" on a number of occasions, she was scared and crying and shaking, she told him she had her periods and did not want to do anything, and when she attempted to leave the bathroom he put his leg out and tripped her.

In the circumstances of this case, I am satisfied that the directions on recklessness were adequate and, as no objection was taken at the trial, they were apparently regarded by those present at the time, including defence counsel, as being sufficient.

Grounds 8, 9 and 10 may be considered together. They were:
The learned trial judge made impermissible comment on the failure of the accused to give evidence (Summing-Up pp.30-34, [s.20(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s20.html), [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)).
The learned prosecutor made impermissible comment on the accused's failure to give evidence (prosecutor's address p.4).
Alternatively, the learned trial judge erred in attributing such an impermissible comment as available to the Crown (Summing-Up p.33 - [s.20(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)).

A further ground described as ground 10 on p.23 of the appellant's written submissions is repeated as ground 11 (p.29) and will be dealt with as such.
 [S.20(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) is as follows: 
The judge or any party (other than the prosecutor) may comment on a failure of a defendant to give evidence. However, unless the comment is made by another defendant in the proceeding, the comment must not suggest that the defendant failed to give evidence because the defendant was, or believed that he or she was, guilty of the offence concerned.
 "Comment" includes any statement which directly or indirectly suggests the accused could have given evidence and did not do so: Bataillard versus the
King <case>; [(1907) 4 CLR 1282] per Isaacs J at 1291, R versus Challita [(1988) 37 A Crim R ] at 195, R versus Greciun-King [[1981] 2 NSWLR 469..] 
After reminding the jury that the accused did not give evidence, His Honour pointed out that the only sworn evidence of what occurred in the bathroom was that of the complainant, but the Crown in accordance with its duty to present all the available evidence had placed before the jury the evidence of the appellant's interview with Constable Abdy, but he also pointed out that his answers were not on oath and the only evidence on oath of what occurred in the bathroom was that of the complainant. This was not comment and was permissible.

His Honour then told the jury that the appellant was not under any obligation to give evidence and that was because it was for the Crown to prove his guilt beyond reasonable doubt and the accused did not have to prove anything at all, and went on to say that merely because he exercised his right (given by law) to remain silent they must not thereby draw any inference against him. This was comment, but as it was made by the judge it was permissible [(s.20(2)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) 
It was faintly suggested that the following passage "There may be many reasons, as a lawyer I can think of many, and I am sure each of you could think of some, as to why a person might not wish to give evidence before a jury."...
 impliedly suggested that the appellant's failure to give evidence was because he was or believed himself to be guilty of the offences charged, and so constituted impermissible comment within [s.20(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html), but His Honour went on to tell the jury not to speculate on the appellant's reasons for not giving evidence, again reminding them that the right to remain silent at trial is a right given by law. In my opinion the passage referred to contained no suggestion that the appellant's failure to give evidence was because he was or believed himself to be guilty, and there was no infringement of [s.20(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) in that regard.

His Honour then went on: "In this case I should add this, the Crown, however, asks you, when judging the value or the weight or the quality of the evidence of the complainant, because, as the Crown has said to you, you've got to be satisfied by her evidence beyond reasonable doubt that the accused engaged in acts of sexual intercourse with her, without her consent and knowing that she was not consenting, if you're not satisfied by her evidence of those things then you cannot find the accused to be guilty, the Crown says when you judge the value or the weight or the quality of the complainant's evidence, you are entitled to take into account the accused's decision, admittedly given to him by law, not to deny or contradict matters about which he could have given by (sic) direct evidence from his personal knowledge. That is a circumstances that you may consider in this case. You may think that it's only common sense that, in a situation where a Crown witness and the accused are directly involved in a particular incident, and the only two involved in this particular incident were the complainant and the accused, so that they are the two persons best able to give evidence of what happened in that incident, and where the evidence of the Crown witnesses is left undenied or uncontradicted by the accused's evidence, any doubts which may otherwise have been case (sic) upon the evidence of the Crown witnesses, may be readily discounted and the evidence of those Crown witnesses may be more readily accepted as the truth." 
What the Crown had in fact said was: "One thing that's important in this case, and it's - I suggest to you, at least, there is only one sworn version before you in this trial as to what happened in that bathroom and that's from (the complainant). That's the only evidence you have on oath about what happened in that bathroom. And you might think there's some real significance in that. (Emphasis supplied) 
And later: "In my submission to you, the fact that the only sworn evidence you have in this case about what happened in that bathroom comes from the complainant, in view of her obvious distress and emotional condition, in view of what the accused told the police - or more particularly, what he didn't tell the police when he kept saying `I can't recall' during that interview, overwhelmingly in my submission points to the fact that you would be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about his guilt in relation to the three charges". 
Remarks by the Judge that in judging the value, weight or quality of the complainant's evidence they were entitled to take into account the appellant's decision, admittedly given to him by law, not to deny or contradict matters about which he could have given evidence from his personal knowledge, and the further comment that, where the evidence of the Crown witnesses is left undenied or uncontradicted by the accused's evidence in circumstances when the accused must have personal knowledge of the relevant facts, any doubts about the evidence of the Crown witnesses may be more readily discounted and the evidence of those Crown witnesses more readily accepted as the truth were proper and in conformity with Weissensteiner versus the Queen <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 217.] See also R versus Hallacoglu [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67] at 78,
R versus Towers (Unreported - Court of Criminal Appeal - 7 June 1993) at 13.

The jury admittedly had before it the appellant's answers given in the recorded interview, but that was not evidence by him to the jury, the denials were general and as pointed out by the Crown Prosecutor a lot of his answers were not denials, but rather "I can't recall". In addition, when a number of the complainant's allegations were put to him and he was asked did he wish to say anything he declined to do so. He was entitled to decline to say anything but his failure to say anything did not constitute a denial of the allegations so that, at least on those matters, the complainant's evidence was undisputed in any way.

The two passages from the Crown Prosecutors address set out above contain no suggestion that the appellant could have given sworn evidence, and consequently there was no comment by the prosecutor on the failure of the appellant to give evidence, and [s.20(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) is not offended. It was conceded that it was permissible for the Crown to point out to the jury that the only sworn evidence of what occurred in the bathroom was that of the complainant, and similarly there could be no objection to the Crown in the second of the passages quoted pointing to the non-committal answers of the appellant during the interview.

There was some suggestion that the passage "And you might think there's some real significance in that" was an indirect comment that the appellant's failure to give evidence was because he was guilty, but I do not read that inference into the passage; the "real significance" was in the fact that the only sworn evidence of what happened in the bathroom was that of the complainant.

But then it was (as the tenth ground of appeal) submitted that the judge in the passage quoted attributed to the Crown comment which it was not permissible for the Crown to make, but which it would have been permissible for the judge to make on his own authority: [s.20(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html), namely that although the appellant could have given evidence he had not done so, and had not denied or contradicted matters of which he could have given direct evidence of his own personal knowledge.

The short answer to this submission is that the Crown did not make any impermissible comment, and cannot be blamed for the judge erroneously attributing such remarks to it; and the comment coming from the judge was permissible comment from him.

Ground 11.

The learned trial judge erred in directing the jury on the inferences open to them as a result of an "apparent" change of instructions by the accused to his counsel (summing-up pp. 34-35).

In his recorded interview with police, the appellant said that after leaving the bathroom, the complainant walked to the bedroom and got into bed with Mr Breezely, both of them under the blankets, and they were in bed together when he left moments later, and from that he assumed him to be her boyfriend (QQ&AA 28, 120-1, 162-5, 168). At the trial, it was put to the complainant in cross-examination by the appellant's counsel that she was sitting on the bed with Mr Breezely and was not crying, which she denied. Mr
Breezely said that when the complainant came into the bedroom she was sitting on the bed or standing there. He was cross-examined that he had not previously said she may have been standing, but it was never suggested that the two of them were in bed together.

The Crown Prosecutor addressed the jury as follows: "One aspect you might think is incredible and unbelievable, so far as the accused says, quite clearly, in that record of interview he said on a number of occasions that when he put his head in the door (the complainant) and David
Breezely were in bed together. They were under the blankets in bed together.
You might think remarkably when (the complainant) and David Briezley, each in turn gave evidence there in the witness box, it was not suggested to either of them by Mr Watson, barrister for the accused, that in fact they were in bed together when the accused put his head around the door, it wasn't suggested to them. So somewhere along the line, you might think, the accused has had a change of heart about that, but that's what he told the police - they were in bed together within a matter of what must have been only seconds, perhaps a minute or so, on the evidence, that he comes out of the bathroom, puts his head in the door, and he tells the police they were in bed together. And that might help you to assess, firstly, whether you accept the things the accused said. And if you reject what he said to the police, then that would obviously assist you in coming to the view that you can accept the version placed before you on oath by (the complainant). and how often did the accused say, during the course of that interview, `I don't recall'?" 
In his Summing-Up, the trial judge took up this aspect of the matter and developed it saying, "Let me digress for one minute. The accused counsel put questions to the complainant and she answered them. The basis upon which a barrister is entitled to put questions to a witness depends upon the instructions given by the barrister's client to the barrister. So, the questions that a barrister asks a witness are based upon what information the barrister has been given by the client. In this case, you will remember that it was put to the complainant that at the time the accused came into the bedroom and said "see youse later", the complainant was sitting on the bed with her flatmate. That means that the accused has given Mr Watson an instruction that, at the time that he came into the bedroom and said "see you later" he saw the complainant and her flatmate sitting on the bed together. But remember members of the jury, when the accused was interviewed, 9 days after the incident, by police, 3 times he said that when he went into the bedroom and said "see you later" or words to that effect, the complainant and her boyfriend were together in bed and under the blanket. You might think that, between being interviewed by the police and giving instructions to Mr Watson, the accused has changed his mind about what he saw and you might ask yourselves, "Why might that be". (Punctuation supplied). That might be one of the questions you can ponder long and hard and not answer, but it might be because what he told police about what he saw was not right. Then you might ask yourselves, "Why did he say to the police that he saw the complainant and her flatmate in bed together" to suggest that, and it's for you to decide, that having had sexual intercourse with him, she's the sort of women that would go next door into the bedroom and get into bed with her boyfriend. Members of the jury, it is for you to consider the facts and decide the facts of which you are satisfied".

It was submitted that His Honour's remarks went further than the Crown's submission and were unfairly prejudicial to the accused because, in particular, His Honour suggested that the fresh instructions might be due to the fact that the appellant was not being truthful in the recorded interview.

But the point was not without its significance. The version given by the appellant to police suggested that the complainant, far from being distressed about what had happened in the bathroom, was prepared to get into bed with her "boyfriend", thereby suggesting she was promiscuous and would readily have consented to the sexual activity in the bathroom, a very different picture from her sitting on the side of the bed distressed, crying and hysterical.

I consider it was not improper for the judge to comment in the way he did whilst reminding them that it was for them to consider and decide the facts.
It was also proper to explain to the jury that defence counsel's cross- examination of the complainant would have been based on instructions from the appellant; a fact which lawyers take for granted but which some jurors may not have appreciated. It appears defence counsel did not address this issue in his submissions to the jury (presumably because he could not think of anything to say which would not have highlighted the issue and made it worse for the appellant), and no objection was taken to His Honour's remarks at the conclusion of the Summing-Up.

For these reasons the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

Sentence.

There is also an application for leave to appeal against the sentence. In respect of each count the appellant was sentenced to concurrent minimum terms of six years imprisonment with additional terms of two years making total sentences of eight years. The offences which each carry a maximum penalty of fourteen years were very serious, being committed by an older, stronger man against a younger, smaller woman in her own home to which he had gained access under the pretext of wanting to speak to her, the intercourse being against her will when she was clearly not consenting, being upset and crying, and was solely for his own sexual gratification. Sexual assault is a serous offence at any time, but its criminality is aggravated when it is committed against a defenceless woman in the sanctity of her own home.

The appellant was born on 12 September 1949 and accordingly was nearly 46 at the date of the offences and is currently 47. He has a substantial criminal record extending back to February 1969 when he was 19 years old; a lot of the matters are driving offences, but they also include a sexual matter when he was a juvenile (which His Honour quite correctly disregarded), convictions for unlawful assault, robbery whilst armed, robbery whilst armed and wound (which convictions suggest the complainant had grounds for her belief that he had assaulted people and shot someone), receiving, and goods in custody. In respect of the robbery matters he was sentenced to 18 years penal servitude in , and for goods in custody and drive whilst disqualified to fixed terms of months in 1989. At the time of the commission of these offences he was on bail for supplying a prohibited drug for which by the time of his trial he had received a sentence of twelve months periodic detention, which His Honour cancelled and converted to a full time concurrent term when sentencing the appellant for these offences.

It was submitted that the sentences are manifestly excessive, that His Honour was in error in attributing violence to the appellant in the commission of these offences when a fair reading of the evidence disclosed minimal or no violence; and that he has been penalised for pleading not guilty and refusing to accept the jury's verdict.

I have already described the objective seriousness of the offences and the appellant was not entitled to any leniency on account of a plea of guilty or prior good record. Consequently I see no basis on which the sentences could be described as manifestly excessive; in my view they were well within the range of a proper sentencing discretion.

The reference to violence by the appellant was apparently a reference to the appellant putting his leg out and tripping the appellant when she tried to leave the bathroom causing her to hit her right knee on the bath; and it was in the context of His Honour observing that violence was consistent with his previous record, indicating that he had not learnt from his previous convictions and sentences, and accordingly personal deterrence was a significant factor in the sentencing discretion. These considerations were all justified on the material before His Honour and were not dealt with inappropriately.

Finally the reference to the appellant refusing to accept the jury's verdict was merely cited as another example of his lack of contrition, not as a factor leading to an increased sentence, but as a matter which disentitled the appellant to any reduction on that account.

For these reasons I would grant leave to appeal against the sentence but dismiss the appeal.

ORDERS: 
I therefore propose the following orders:
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Grant leave to appeal against sentence but dismiss the appeal.
 * * * 
