

Rosser versus Maritime Services Board [1996] NSWSC 434 (17 September 1996) 
ROSSER versus MARITIME SERVICES BOARD /93 
Tuesday 17 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced by the plaintiff seeking specific performance of an agreement to dredge Yamba Harbour.

After a six day hearing, I delivered reasons for judgment on 30 August, 1993.
In that judgment, I found that there was a contract binding the parties for the dredging of parts of the lower Clarence River. That contract was made or varied in accordance with the defendant's letter of 12 July, 1991, which is annexed H to the plaintiff's affidavit of 19 February, 1993. The work was to be done in accordance with the draft development application approval of the
Maclean Shire Council of 25 February and 1 July, 1991. I held that the initial period of two years with options had been varied to 6.5 years. This, however, was the outer limits of the contract. It could be terminated by reasonable notice on either side. I held that three months' notice was not reasonable.

I held, on discretionary grounds, that there should be no order for specific performance. I found that the plaintiff had suffered some damage through the defendant's repudiation of the contract and that he was entitled to damages in lieu of and in addition to specific performance. These damages would be under
Lord Cairns' Act (Supreme Court Act, <case>). At the time I considered that the assessment of these damages should be remitted to a Master. As things have worked out, including the state of the Masters' Lists, I found it appropriate to assess the damages myself.

The plaintiff was also found to be in breach of contract. I gave liberty to the defendant to refer the assessment to a Master. The defendant has elected not to pursue its enquiry, so I need say no more about it.

Although Short Minutes of Order were handed up on 16 September, 1993 and, after discussion, I indicated that I would make declarations and orders 1 and -10 therein, no order was taken out.

The enquiry and assessment was commenced before me at Maclean Courthouse on
Monday 5 August, 1996. Thirty-one affidavits were read. In addition, the court spent the afternoon of Monday 5 August on a view at Yamba and by boat on the
Clarence River between Yamba/Iluka and the right hand bend in the river adjacent to Goodwood and Palmers Islands.

It soon became apparent that the present hearing was more than a traditional assessment of damages and that some preliminary questions arose which must be dealt with before any others. I believe that the logical way of approaching this case is to consider it under the following questions:-
What is the present status of the contract?
How should one assess damages under <case> in a case such as the present? 
Generally 
How far under "Reserve Further Consideration" may a judge review earlier evidence? 
How should one deal with facts that have occurred since the hearing? 
How relevant are acts of third parties which may have made attainment of the contractual aims materially more difficult? 
At what date should damages be assessed?
Must the plaintiff prove that he has lost something of value? 
Should there now be a verdict for the plaintiff for nominal or substantial damages? 
If substantial damages should be awarded, on what principles should they be assessed? 
If the plaintiff is to receive substantial damages, further questions arise.
In his opening on the damages aspect of the case, Mr Brereton, who appeared with Mr Meek for the plaintiff, outlined four major questions that arose in this case. Mr Donohoe, QC, who appeared with Mr Kunc for the defendant, did not disagree with this analysis. I will thus adopt it. In my structure these questions with appropriate sub-questions are considered under the headings 5 and 7-9 below. It will be readily apparent from the discussion of these questions that it is necessary to deal with assessment of the accuracy of the evidence given by some of the expert and other witnesses. I will deal with this under heading 6. I should note that, for brevity, when I attribute a statement to a party or to counsel for a party, I have merely referred to the leading counsel, without, I hope, conveying any disrespect to the other members of the party's team of lawyers.
What would have been the period of reasonable notice to be given by the defendant to the plaintiff to terminate the contract as at December, 1992; and, if different; September, 1993.
How much sand would the plaintiff have dredged if specific performance of the contract had been ordered? 
How much sand remained in the designated areas of the river bed to be dredged? 
Was it permissible for the plaintiff to use more than one dredge or the services of sub-contractors? 
How long would it take to abstract the sand? 
During what period and at what rate would the plaintiff have extracted the sand? 
How, if at all, would problems of storage of sand removed from the river affect production? 
What vicissitudes should be taken into account? 
Accordingly, how much sand would have been dredged?
Which witnesses should be accepted and to what extent?
For what sum would the plaintiff have sold the sand? 
What was the market price for dredged sand in the Yamba area? 
What is the appropriate method of measuring the sand? 
What was the demand for such sand in the Yamba area? 
Accordingly, what market price should be allowed?
What would it have cost the plaintiff to dredge the sand and sell it? 
What are the actual costs of the dredging operation? 
What additional costs should be taken into account? 
Accordingly, what is the proper cost that should be allowed?
How should one quantify cash flows? 
How should one deal with interest?
Has the plaintiff failed to mitigate his damage? 
Has the plaintiff any such duty? 
If he has, has he breached it? 
After dealing with each of these questions in turn, I must deal with the ultimate question namely,
What is the result of the litigation? 
I have also been requested by Mr Donohoe, QC to address the following question:
On the assumption that three months' notice terminating the contract given by the defendant to the plaintiff on 19 March, 1993 was valid, what would have been the result of the litigation?
Mr Brereton initially submitted that the contract was still on foot and he reiterated an offer to perform it. However, he soon departed from this proposition and submitted that damages under Lord Cairns' Act are assessed, in a case such as the present upon the basis that the contract is brought to an end by the decree of the court which substitutes damages for specific performance. Such a decree has the effect of substituting for the defendant's obligation to perform the contract, an obligation to pay damages. There is strong authority for the proposition that once the court has declined to grant specific performance, "the contract is lost": Madden versus Kevereski [[1983] 1
NSWLR 305], 306. See also Bosaid versus Andry <case>; [[1963] VR 465], 484 and McDermott, Equitable Damages (Butterworths,
Sydney, 1994) p 116.

In Corpers (No 664) Pty Ltd versus NZI Securities Australia Ltd [[1989] NSW
Conv R 55-475] at p 58,463,(a more complete report is [1989] ASC -714), I declined specific performance, but said that the contract was still on foot. Counsel rightly submitted that this statement was correctly made in reasons for judgment, but that as soon as Short Minutes of Order were proffered to and accepted by the court substituting a right to damages for the right to perform the contract, the contract ceased to exist.

Thus I accept that on and after the time when the court indicates its final decision that the plaintiff is not entitled to specific performance, but should have damages in lieu of or in addition to specific performance, the contract "is lost." Indeed, I did not understand Mr Donohoe, QC and Mr Kunc to submit to the contrary. In the instant case this cut off point is 16
September, 1993.

I should note that the defendant purported to terminate the contract if it were still on foot by notice dated 14 October 1993 giving six months' notice expiring 14 April 1994. The plaintiff says that six months is not reasonable.
The plaintiff says that reasonable notice would be two years. I will take up this matter later in section 4 of these reasons.
Lord Cairns' Act is, strictly speaking, the Imperial Act entitled "The
Chancery Amendment Act, 1858". Section 2 of that Act is as follows:- "In all Cases in which the Court of Chancery has Jurisdiction to entertain an
Application for an Injunction against a Breach of any Covenant, Contract or
Agreement, or against the Commission or Continuance of any wrongful Act, or for the specific Performance of any Covenant, Contract, or Agreement, it shall be lawful for the same Court, if it shall think fit, to award Damages to the
Party injured, either in addition to or in substitution for such Injunction or specific Performance, and such Damages may be assessed in such Manner as the
Court shall direct." 
The current NSW provision is [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s68.html) of the [Supreme Court Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), which provides, "Where the Court has power: to grant an injunction against the breach of any covenant, contract or agreement, or against the commission or continuance of any wrongful act; or to order the specific performance of any covenant, contract or agreement, the Court may award damages to the party injured either in addition to or in substitution for the injunction or specific performance." 
The difference in language between the original statute and the current NSW provision is not material; see ASA Constructions Pty Ltd versus Iwanov [[1975] NSWLR 512], 518.

Mr Brereton submits that when damages are given in substitution for specific performance what the court is really doing is saying that the plaintiff is entitled to have the contract performed, and is to be awarded the net benefits that he would have received had specific performance been decreed, so as to put the plaintiff as nearly as possible in the position in which he would have been put had specific performance been granted.

Mr Donohoe, QC says that equitable damages are discretionary: they are not common law damages, but are sui generis, with the power to award them being to enable the court to do complete justice so far as equity considers it ought to be done.

Mr Brereton's submission is supported by a number of authorities. He took me through a long list in chronological order commencing with Eastwood versus Lever (1863) 4 De G J & [S ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s114.html), ;
[46](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s46.html) ER , 865. There is no necessity to mention all of the cases on Mr Brereton's list. I will, however, briefly mention the main authorities.

Leeds Industrial Co-operative Society Ltd versus Slack [[1924] AC 851] was a case where the House of Lords held that damages under Lord Cairns' Act should be awarded where a court refused a quia timet injunction on discretionary grounds. At 857, Viscount Finlay said of Lord Cairns' Act, "In terms it gave power to substitute damages for an injunction. Such a substitution in the very nature of things involves that the damages are to deal with what would have been prevented by the injunction if granted." 
Mr Brereton's principal authority was Wroth versus Tyler [[1974] Ch 30.] At p 58, Megarry,
J said, that the power under Lord Cairns' Act to award damages in substitution for specific performance, "at least envisages that the damages awarded will in fact constitute a true substitute for specific performance." His Lordship repeats that thought at 59 in different words, viz, "...damages 'in substitution' for specific performance must be a substitute, giving as nearly as may be what specific performance would have given." Then he says at 60, "No doubt in exercising the jurisdiction conferred by the Act a court with equitable jurisdiction will remember that equity follows the law, and will in general apply the common law rules for the assessment of damages; but this is subject to the overriding statutory requirement that damages shall be 'in substitution for' the injunction or specific performance." As RP Meagher, QC as his Honour then was, put it in "Whither Equity" (College of Law, Sydney, ) "what the plaintiff is entitled to is something very different from what he is entitled to at law. He is entitled to compensation in money for the missing decree. In other words, what would the decree have been worth to him had it been made?" In his article on Lord Cairns' Act in [(1975) 34 CLJ ], , Jolowicz says that this was "an obviously correct award of damages in equity." See also, Meagher op cit at 27.

The general rule is that, if the defendant has committed a common law breach of contract or tort, the damages given by a court of equity should generally be the same as they would be at common law, Iwanov's case at 516-7 and see
Smith versus Day (1882) 21 Ch D 421, 428. This also appears to be the position taken by the leading text, Fry on Specific Performance 6th ed (Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1921) para 1302 p 602.

In Hickey versus Bruhns <case>; [[1977] 2
NZLR 71](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1977%5d%202%20NZLR%2071 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 79, a case decided under Lord Cairns' Act, Quilliam, J followed the view taken by the Exchequer in the purely common law case of Robinson versus Harman <case>; [(1848) 1 Exch 850], 855; <case>; [154
ER 363], 365 (a passage that is clearly the law in Australia at common law, see Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64] at 80) that the damages should be to give the plaintiff "so far as money can do it, to be placed in the same situation ... as if the contract had been performed." See also New Zealand Land Development Co Ltd v
Potter [[1992] 2 NZLR 462], 468 where it appears that the New Zealand courts will now refuse to recognise any difference between damages at law and those in equity. Neither set of counsel supported this extreme position.

In the House of Lords in Johnson versus Agnew [[1980] AC 367], 400, Lord
Wilberforce said of damages under Lord Cairns' Act, "The general principle of the assessment of damages is compensatory, ie, that the innocent party is placed, so far as money can do so, in the same position as if the contract had been performed." 
However, Jones and Goodhart, Specific Performance (Butterworths, London ) say at p 228 that the court has a discretion as to the manner in which it will assess damages. They refer to early cases on Lord Cairns' Act such as
Rock Portland Cement Co Ltd versus Wilson [(1882) 52 LJ Ch 214] where it was recognised that damages may well be assessed differently in equity.
They also say, at p 230, that there are very real logical paradoxes in the reasoning in Johnson versus Agnew. That case is stridently criticised by
Meagher op cit at 26-7 who says that it "represents a state of confusion which could scarcely be equalled." I will disregard any of the criticism of Wroth v Tyler contained in Johnson versus Agnew, however, the passage I have quoted is in sympathy with the leading judgments on the Act.

Spry, Equitable Remedies (LBC 1990) at 631-4 says, in summary, that whilst normally the measure of damages at law and equity will be the same, there are exceptions. At p 634, he says that where there is no analogous common law cause of action, equity will assess damages looking "primarily to the real loss or detriment suffered by the plaintiff, and...special circumstances, such as laches, may arise that affect the balance of justice in granting particular relief, so that it is appropriate to quantify the amount of damages accordingly." 
I briefly dealt with these matters in Longtom Pty Ltd versus Oberon Shire 29
August, 1996, unreported. After a discussion of the authorities which I will not repeat, I considered that whilst, generally, equity would apply the same principles of assessment of damages as applied at common law, it would not invariably do so. In appropriate cases, the court may apply what is sometimes described as "the user principle" to equitable damages. Thus, where damages are given in substitution for an injunction to protect a restrictive covenant, the damages may well be the sum which the plaintiff might reasonably have demanded for relaxation of the covenant, not the detriment he has actually suffered, Stoke-on Trent Council versus W & J Wass Ltd [[1988] 1 WLR ],
See also Wrotham Park Estate Co Ltd versus Parkside Homes Ltd [[1974] 1
WLR 798](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1974%5d%201%20WLR%20798 "View LawCiteRecord" ) and the discussion by Ferris, J in Surrey County Council versus Bredero Homes
Ltd [[1992] 3 All ER 302], though the authority of this latter case is weakened by the words of the English
Court of Appeal when it affirmed it reported <case>; [[1993] WLR 1361]; [[1993] 3 All ER 705.] See also Jaggard versus Sawyer [1995] 1 WLR 269.

The case that is probably the closest to the present on the facts is McNeill v Richards [1899] 1 Ir Rep 79. In that case, there was a contract for the sale of timber growing on the defendant's land. The court refused specific performance, mainly because neither party really desired it. Porter, MR held that common law principles of assessment of damages should apply. His Lordship noted that the case was a peculiar one because there was only a limited local market for the timber produced (p 84). He held that the defendant knew that the plaintiff was cutting the timber for resale. At 86 he said, "I am satisfied that the proper way of assessing the damages here is to take the contract price of the timber, the expenses which would be necessarily incurred in cutting and removing it, and making it marketable, add them together, and on the other side to take the sums which the timber would have sold for, and to give the plaintiff the difference. ... If I give to the plaintiff less than the sum he claims in his affidavit it will be because I consider his figures to be too large, and besides he has not risked any capital in the event which has happened; and even if his figures are correct it does not follow that he ought to get the whole of the sum he claims. Every contract of the sort is liable to contingencies. I shall look into the figures, and inform the Chief Clerk of the amount which I arrive at." 
The report discloses that the plaintiff claimed [sterling]304 9s 6d, but that the Master of the Rolls in fact assessed the damages at [sterling]120: a discount of 60%. Of course, the rate of discount a particular judge takes in a particular case is of little assistance, especially where, as in McNeill v
Richards no reasons were given as to how the actual assessment was made.

This approach also accords with that adopted by Hodgson, J in a fairly analogous case, Australian Aggregates Pty Ltd versus Maxmin Pty Ltd 16
May, 1988, unreported. That case concerned a sand quarry at Newnes Junction in the Upper Blue Mountains on land owned by the defendant and operated by the plaintiff. The plaintiff sought an injunction to restrain further trespass by a third party, Monier. The plaintiff failed against Maxmin, but succeeded against Monier. The damages it obtained against Monier were common law damages. Hodgson, J assessed damages on the basis of the amount of sand the plaintiff would have sold at so much per tonne, less expenses and royalties and then discounting by 30% against the chance of rescission.

There seems to be no doubt that, under Lord Cairns' Act, damages include compensation for acts both before and after the commencement of the proceedings: Fritz versus Hobson [(1880) 14 Ch D 542], 557.

The foregoing discussion probably is as far as I need go. I should, however, refer to Wentworth versus Woollahra MC <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 672] where the High Court discussed some aspects of <case>: see also the thorough discussion in Meagher, Gummow & Lehane, Equity Doctrines & Remedies, 3rd ed (Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) [2306]-[2321] and in
McDermott, Equitable Damages.

I thus basically accept Mr Brereton's submissions, but issue the caveat that they are not necessarily applicable to all cases where damages need to be assessed under Lord Cairns' Act.
Reservation of further consideration does not permit the judge to review and reconsider what has been decided by him at an earlier hearing. I so held in NSW Egg Corp versus Peek (No 3), 13 June, 1986, unreported which was based on what Lord Gifford, MR said in Le Grand versus Whitehead  <case>; [(1826) 1 Russ 309], 311; <case>; [38
ER 120], 121 supported by Pritchard versus Draper [(1830) 1 Russ & M 191], 77;
Lyne versus Lyne <case>; [(1856) 8 De G M & G 553], 559; <case>; [44
ER 503], 506 and
Haviland versus McLeary <case>; [(1894) 15 LR (Eq) 22.] 
Daniell's Chancery Practice, 7th ed 1901 p 946 says with reference to authority, "No further evidence, as to matters directly in issue in the action, than the findings, verdict or judgment at the trial, the findings at any trial of any questions of fact which may have been directed by the judgment, and the certificate will be received at the hearing on further consideration." The authorities provided for this proposition are Curling versus Austin (1862) 2 Dr & Sm 129, 135; [62 ER 570] The first of these really does not assist. 
Mr Donohoe, QC also referred to the note in the 5th edition of Seton's Forms of Judgments and Orders (Stevens, London, 1891) Vol l p 316 where the learned editors say, "The Court will not, on the further consideration of the action, entertain questions raised on the pleadings, but with respect to which no direction or reservation is contained in the original judgment..." They cite for that proposition, Le Grand versus Whitehead (supra); Morgan v
Morgan <case>; [(1850) 13 Beav 441], 446; <case>; [51
ER 170], 172 and
Hughes versus Jones (1861) 3 De F & J 307; <case>; [45
ER 897.] This last case is no real authority as the point did not actually arise on the facts.

However when one actually reads the authorities, one can see that the practice set out above is really a discretionary rather than an absolute rule.
Especially is this so after the time when equity could itself try questions of fact instead of referring such issues to be tried by a jury at law; see eg
May versus Newton [(1887) 34 Ch D 347], 351. It is significant that the passage in the 5th ed of Daniell (1871) at p 1230 cited by counsel for the defendant differs markedly from the corresponding text of the 7th, post Judicature Act, edition from which I have quoted.

Another aspect of the matter appears from McKenna versus Ritchie <case>; [[1950] VLR 360] where a decree of specific performance was made, but subsequent circumstances showed that damages should be given instead.

In almost every one of the old cases I have examined, it would seem that the real principle is that there must be a fair trial. If a matter has been determined at one stage of the proceedings, it is determined forever and cannot be reopened. If a point has been abandoned at an early stage of litigation, it has been abandoned forever. However, on due notice, where the significance of a matter was not appreciated at an early stage, or facts were not found which bear on the question of damages, there is no procedural problem which prevents the court from so doing. Even in 1863, the court took the view that it would not allow any technical rule to defeat substantial justice; see Howard versus Chaffers [(1863) 11 WR 585], 586. Of course, this is assuming that the court is not functus and due notice is given. The court will not be functus where the order has not been taken out or where further consideration has been reserved either generally or in such a way as to cover the point in question. On the present case, no-one took out any formal order, so the court is not inhibited from revisiting any matter if it considers it appropriate to do so.

I will apply what I have just said in this subsection later in these reasons, in particular, in section 11. I will there consider refining the declaration as to the existence of the contract and clarify what I intended to be covered by the order for costs I made in September 1993.
It seems to follow, that the court is able to use the evidence taken at the original hearing plus the evidence taken on the subsequent hearing when making its determination on the present questions.

Even when assessing damages at common law the court can and should take into account events that have occurred since the hearing because they represent vicissitudes and contingencies that have become actualities or certainties; 
Faulkner versus Keffalinos [(1971) 45 ALJR 80] at 85 per
Windeyer J. The practice in the old court of Chancery was similar as may be seen from the passage from Daniell's Chancery Practice, 7th ed (190l) p quoted in section 2(b).
As appears from my earlier judgment, there are a number of other persons who assisted in frustrating the plaintiff. Included amongst these are the Maclean Shire Council and the then Department of Conservation and Land
Management now the Department of Land and Water Conservation. I will use the inaccurate description "Lands Department" for simplicity. How far do the acts of these persons, neither of whom is a party to these proceedings, affect the result? 
In general the answer must be "not at all." This answer should be given not only for events after 16 September, 1993, but also for acts before that date.
However, events which apparently were brought about by a third party, but were actually orchestrated by the defendant are a different matter.

At pp 44-7 of my previous judgment, I indicated that I was satisfied that the defendant had acted in a way which materially frustrated the plaintiff's activities under the contract. The worst act was to cause the Lands Department to revoke the plaintiff's licence to dump material on Hickey Island.

Mr Brereton submits that the stop work notice issued by the Maclean Shire
Council (see section 3(a)) is in the same plight. He submits that the stop work order depended upon non- compliance with the condition that required the access channel to be dredged under the direct supervision of the Yamba pilot.
The Yamba pilot, Captain Gray, either of his own motion or because he had no instructions from his superiors to do otherwise, declined to provide that supervision.

Mr Donohoe, QC however put there has never been a finding that the Council's issue of this notice was anything other than the act of an independent third party. Moreover, it was this notice which prevented Mr Rosser from continuing work on the Palmers Island dump site/Goodwood Island Reach. Mr Donohoe, QC submits that this has two consequences: 
Mr Rosser's losses in relation to the Goodwood Island Reach are not attributable to the defendant and no liability can attach to it in respect of those losses; 
Alternatively, even if (a) is not accepted, some time would have to be allowed within the reasonable notice period for the Council's concerns to be satisfied and the notice rescinded. The time available to Mr Rosser to dredge in the Goodwood Island Reach would have to be reduced accordingly.

The evidence of Mr Rosser is that he told Captain Gray that he was going to start dredging in the next few days. It is conceded that Captain Gray did not give him supervision. Mr Rosser says that Captain Gray merely said, "I don't care what you do." Mr Donohoe, QC put that the evidence did not actually disclose that Mr Rosser had ever asked Captain Gray to provide supervision.
However, in my view, the attitude taken by Captain Gray made such a request futile and an explicit request was unnecessary. I am sure that everyone appreciated what Mr Rosser wanted. Mr Rosser then dredged to a depth of 4.5m below chart datum. The stop work notice cited condition 31 of Development
Consent 90/2442 which referred to three matters namely, (a) the weed beds; (b) the direct supervision of the pilot; and (c) the dredging being confined to the minimum depth necessary to allow safe passage of the dredge.

It is clear that the sole cause of the issuance of the notice was not the failure to supervise. Thus I agree with Mr Donohoe, QC's submission that the evidence does not support the conclusion that the defendant was responsible for Mr Rosser's breach of condition 31 or that it procured the stop work notice.
This question has been dealt with in various decisions of this court including Iwanov's Case. The better view is that, ordinarily damages under <case> are assessed at the time of trial, but it is really a matter for the exercise of the court's discretion as to what is appropriate in all the circumstances of the case.

Mr Donohoe, QC accepts the above proposition but submits that it is the plaintiff who bears the onus of showing what would be just in all the circumstances. He submits that, in the present case no different result flows depending on whether damages are assessed at 7 December 1992 or 16 September
However, he notes that those cases where damages have been assessed at hearing have concerned contracts for the sale of land in a rising market where as a matter of justice the plaintiff has been held entitled to the benefit of the increase in value of the land between breach and hearing. This is not such a case and, in the circumstances, he submits that equity should follow the law and apply the usual rule of assessing damages at breach, ie what Mr Rosser lost as at 7
December 1992 which he would have received had specific performance been ordered.

Mr Brereton submits that in a case such as the present where the contract was for a continuing term under which benefits would continue to accrue to the plaintiff even after the date of assessment, it is appropriate to assess the loss as at the date of assessment, because it enables the best judgment to be made of what the plaintiff would have derived from the contract had it been performed.

With respect, I do not consider that what Mr Brereton says outweighs taking the date when the contract was lost as the proper date for the assessment.
Within limits, the court can take into account subsequent events, but the exercise is really to determine what was lost by the refusal to decree specific performance at the date of the decree.

Whilst recognising the distinction made in Mr Donohoe, QC's submissions, I still consider that the appropriate date is 16 September, 1993.
Mr Donohoe, QC submits that the plaintiff must prove that he has lost something of value and that he has failed to do this. He submits that Mr
Rosser is not entitled to any damages because he has failed to prove, on the balance of probabilities, that his expectation of making profits, as a result of the performance of the contract, had a likelihood of attainment rather than being mere expectation. Alternatively, even if he has proven the fact of a loss, he has not given the court sufficient evidence with which it can determine the amount of that loss with sufficient certainty to justify anything more than an award of nominal damages. The court will not engage in guesswork and it is not a case where the evidence is such as to justify the court "doing the best it can".

Mr Donohoe, QC submits the following fundamental principles apply: 
The onus of proving damages sustained lies on a plaintiff and the amount of damages awarded will be commensurate with the plaintiff's expectation, objectively determined, rather than subjectively ascertained. That is to say, a plaintiff must prove, on the balance of probabilities, that his or her expectation of a certain outcome, as a result of performance of the contract, had a likelihood of attainment rather than being mere expectation. He rightly relies on Commonwealth versus Amann Aviation Pty Limited supra at p 80 to support the submission.

The submission then proceeds:- 
If the plaintiff proves the fact of the loss, but does not call the necessary evidence as to its amount, the plaintiff cannot be awarded substantial damages.

Again this proposition has support in the authorities. In JLW (Vic) Pty Ltd v Tsiloglou <case>; [[1994] 1 VR 237] at 241, Brooking, J in the Appeal Division of the 
Victorian Supreme Court said, "A plaintiff cannot recover substantial as opposed to nominal damages unless he proves both the fact and the amount of damage:" (his 
Honour refers to the Amann case and continues) "If he proves the fact of the loss but does not call the necessary evidence as to its amount he cannot be awarded substantial damages". He then refers to a number of authorities including Luna Park Limited versus Tramways Advertising Pty Limited <case>; [(1938) 61 CLR 286]; Toronto Transit Commission versus Aqua Taxi Ltd [(1956) 6 DLR (2d) 721] at 742 - 746 and Ted Brown Quarries Pty Ltd versus General Quarries (Gilston) Pty
Ltd [(1977) 16 ALR 23.] 
In the Toronto Transit Case, an aqua taxi operator proved a cause of action against the transport regulation authority. It was entitled to damages for loss of fares that it might otherwise have collected. However as there was no evidence of the quantum of this loss, only nominal damages were awarded. At p 745, Gale, J said, "The general rule is that the plaintiff must prove sufficient facts to enable the Court to calculate the loss with reasonable certainty ... the plaintiff's damages was clearly the loss of the fares which it would have received from passengers. ... Accordingly, the plaintiff was required to prove the facts from which the Court could make a reasonable calculation as to the damages suffered, and that was not done." 
In the Ted Brown Case, the High Court had to consider a Queensland decision where the judge rejected the only evidence of value of loss and then did the best he could to estimate the loss. Gibbs, J with whom Aitken, J agreed (Barwick, CJ dissented) held that as the claimant could have provided figures for the judge to assess the damages, if the claimant failed to do so, it could not be awarded substantial damages.

Another case in this line of authority is Ashcroft versus Curtin [[1971] 1
WLR 1731] where a company director's claim for financial loss as a result of a decline in profitability failed for lack of reliable accounts to quantify the loss; see also Tate & Lyle Food and Distribution Ltd v
Greater London Council [[1982] 1 WLR 149.] 
These cases are to be distinguished from situations where the material as to the loss is in the opposing party's camp or where there is no such material.
Thus in 
Fink versus Fink <case>; [(1946) 74 CLR 127], which was a case where a wife sued on a separation deed for damages for her husband's breach for not permitting her to remain in the matrimonial home, Dixon and McTiernan, JJ said at 143, "The intangible chance of success ... cannot be compared with any of the contingencies which in the decided cases have been regarded as capable of monetary expression or as a proper subject for pecuniary assessment however speculative. Where there has been an actual loss of some sort, the common law does not permit difficulties of estimating the loss in money to defeat the only remedy it provided for breach of contract, an award of damages." 
Furthermore, the present case must be distinguished from cases such as
Chaplin versus Hicks [[1911] 2 KB 786.] That was a situation where the plaintiff lost an opportunity of being part of a competition in which she might have received a substantial prize. In that sort of case, the court could start with the assumption that there was a benefit which the plaintiff had lost, ie, the certain existence of the prize, whatever vicissitudes may have stood between her and that prize. Mr Donohoe, QC puts that in the instant case, Mr Rosser must prove that there was a prize at all, ie, that the contract would have yielded him a profit.

Mr Donohoe, QC submits that on these principles, I should hold that the plaintiff has failed to discharge his onus of proof of the fact of loss or, alternatively, if he has proven the fact of loss, proof of the quantum of his damages to the requisite standard.

Mr Donohoe, QC puts that the plaintiff's case on damages has at its heart his affidavit of 23 June 1994 (PA01) which, Mr Donohoe, QC says, is a perfect example of the vice identified by Lord Goddard CJ in Bonham-Carter versus Hyde
Park Hotel [(1948) 64 TLR 177] at 179: "Plaintiffs must understand that if they bring actions for damages it is for them to prove their damage; it is not enough to write down the particulars, and, so to speak, throw them at the head of the Court, saying: 'This is what I have lost; I ask you to give me these damages.' They have to prove it." 
I now need to consider Mr Donohoe, QC's analysis of the evidence or lack of it. However, it is necessary first to outline the factual matrix. The following is an oversimplified outline as to the operation of the dredging and associated equipment with which these reasons are concerned.

The typical dredge involved in the present case consists of several basic parts. First there is the dredge unit containing the control cabin and the pump. This is mounted on two pontoons, one to the port side and one to the starboard. At the front of the main unit is an extended metal framework known as a ladder. At the front of the ladder, there may be installed a cutter. This may have a rosebud cutter which rotates and so disturbs the material to be dredged or it may be a rotary digger. There may be no cutter used at all, the material to be removed may be disturbed by high pressure water delivered through the ladder. A suction dredge may well perform with no cutter.

The dredge sucks the sand off the river bed into pipes. Mostly these are polyurethane, but may be steel. These are in standard lengths which are bolted together into a continuous length at metal flanges. When it is necessary to surmount an obstruction, a flexible section of pipe is bolted into the line.
Sometimes the pipes are submerged: sometimes floated on pontoons.

The dredge pivots by means of a scud, a metal tube which extends either at the rear of the port or starboard pontoon. The dredge may also be stabilised by wires.

The dredge can propel sand considerable distances. However, the distances can be increased and efficiency increased with the use of a booster unit placed somewhere down the pipeline. The use of a booster, of course, increases the cost of the operation.

The density of the sand and the distance it can be propelled depends on a number of factors. The average diameter of a grain of sand is 0.3mm, with fine grained material nearer a river mouth and coarser grained material found as one travels upstream. The sand won can either be stockpiled or else piped straight to the site on which it is required.

I now turn to the particular facts of this case. The plaintiff trades on his own account, and also uses the vehicle CMT Machinery Pty Limited. He has also been associated with others in the industry. The plaintiff purchased a suction dredge which he named the Wooloweyah at Beenleigh on 6 September, 1991 . He had it reconditioned in Brisbane and then brought it down to the
Clarence River. He put it to work on dredging the Wooloweyah Lagoon which runs off the Clarence River at the west of Yamba township. Mr Rosser indicated that the Wooloweyah was purchased for the contract with the Maritime Services
Board. He probably had that contract in mind when he purchased the dredge, but it was not the sole reason for its purchase.

The plaintiff employed the Wooloweyah on the subject contract from 6 January,
Prior to that, between about 13 February and the end of May, 1992, the contract had been performed by Davidsons Dredging under subcontract. A sudden flood occurred on the Clarence River on 18 February. The Yamba Pilot, Captain
Gray, towed Davidsons' dredge to safety, but a quantity of pipes and pontoons were washed out to sea.

On 25 January, 1992, the plaintiff entered into a licence agreement with a Ms
Delaney which permitted him to utilise her land Port 65 Palmers Island for stockpiling sand and then removing it by truck at a minimum royalty of 25 cents per cubic metre.

It will be remembered from my earlier judgment, that the start of the present problems was when on 7 December, 1992, the Lands Department, at the request of the defendant revoked the licence for the plaintiff to use Hickey Island as a dump site. On 18 January, 1993 the Maclean Shire Council wrote to the plaintiff directing him to cease dredging the access channel until the defendant was satisfied on certain matters and then only to perform under the direction of the Yamba Pilot. This is the "stop work notice" to which I have already referred.

As to the present case, Mr Donohoe, QC points to the following:- 
It should be noted that Mr Rosser's own evidence cannot be relied upon because he has virtually no dredging experience and is really an earthworks contractor and a buyer and seller of machinery who had always intended to use subcontractors on the present job. Until the present job, he had never entered into a dredging contract in his own name to perform it himself. Thus, it is difficult to rely on Mr Rosser's figures if they purport to be based on experience.

Mr Donohoe, QC puts that in relation to operating costs, Mr Rosser has done no more than assert his figure of $1.80 per cubic metre without exposing any basis for that figure, such as details of wages, fuel costs, period of expected dredging etc. He has refrained from proving actual operating costs when he might have at least examined the Wooloweyah Lagoon job and compared it with the present job. He could have examined and proved his costs of dredging the Palmers Island access channel (it being noted that cutters are less economical to operate so some assumption favourable to Mr Rosser could have been made). Furthermore, it is clear that Mr Rosser operates both in his own name and through CMT Machinery Pty Limited with elements of expense and income (and therefore profit or loss) in both. He has expressly declined to advance evidence of a proper dissection between himself and the company so that the court could determine what profit he might have earned rather than the corporate entity. Mr Rosser declined to call the accountants who prepared his income tax returns, so that the usual Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] presumption applies. Mr Sanford, the accounting expert called by the plaintiff, at T610 acknowledged that there was nothing difficult in principle about such a dissection had he been given appropriate instructions.
The "scintilla doctrine" applies to questions of operating costs and availability; see Hampton Court Limited versus Crooks <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 367] at 371 and Apollo Shower Screens Pty Ltd versus Building and
Construction Industry Long Service Payments Corporation [(1985) 1 NSWLR .] 
Again, Mr Donohoe, QC puts that Mr Rosser has failed to prove the capacity of the engine he says he would have used. He has simply asserted the engine provided 400 hp to the pump. While the engine has at all material times apparently been in Mr Rosser's possession, driving his booster pump, it has never been fitted to the Wooloweyah. It would have been simple for Mr
Rosser to prove as a fact what the engine could deliver.

Mr Donohoe, QC strongly submitted that it was clear that the plaintiff had records of the actual dredging income from both the sales of sand from his stockpile on Hickey Island and the operation of the Wooloweyah on the
Wooloweyah Lagoon by National Sand Dredging in late 1992 and the costs of deriving that income. He says that the court was entitled to expect that this factual information would be put before it. The plaintiff did not lead that evidence and conducted his case so as to prevent the defendant presenting any critical assessment of it to the court.

Further, despite requests for particulars, none were supplied. The plaintiff's usual accountants were not called, yet the plaintiff in cross-examination continually referred to those accountants. In re-examination nothing was asked on this subject.

Mr Sanford, the plaintiff's expert accountant gave evidence. He was aware of the analysis by the defendant's expert accountant, Mr Wills, of the plaintiff's accounts and that it had thrown up dredging costs more than twice the figure of $1.80 asserted by the plaintiff. Mr Sanford agreed that there was nothing difficult in principle in making any necessary adjustments if he received necessary instructions from the plaintiff. He explained that he did not do so because "it was not going to be cost effective" and instead he accepted one invoice from Davidson Dredging without investigating the terms of that subcontract (T606). In re-examination (T612) he was not asked to explain what he meant by the words quoted. It is submitted that he meant that he made an assessment of the likely outcome and assessed that the cost of the exercise would not be justified by the benefit to the plaintiff. He confirmed that Mr
Wills' approach was valid and only required adjustment.

Notwithstanding that concession by Mr Sanford, Mr Wills was cross-examined to the effect that his analysis was invalid and no figures were put to him that would have permitted him to make the adjustments that might have enabled the court to know the true performance of the Wooloweyah.

It must also be remembered, Mr Donohoe, QC says that the Wooloweyah had never been intended for the present job and that the closest the Wooloweyah got to the job was to dredge the Palmers Island access channel using a configuration (cutter suction) and engine (not the 400hp Cummins) which on Mr
Rosser's case he would not have used to perform the contract.

Mr Donohoe, QC acknowledges that the plaintiff's case does not only depend on Mr Rosser's evidence. However, he says that insofar as Mr Rosser relies on 
Mr McQuade, who is conceded to have some dredging experience, the evidence is merely a series of assertions said to be based on Mr McQuade's own experience, but which are acknowledged to be "guesstimates". Mr Donohoe, QC puts that there is no suggestion Mr McQuade had ever seen the Wooloweyah in operation nor indeed seen any other dredging operation involving Mr Rosser.

Thus, he submits that there is no basis in proven facts for the opinions
Mr McQuade expresses.

Mr Brereton pours scorn on those submissions. He does not quarrel with the points of law that were made, but says that it is almost absurd to say after a ten day hearing on damages that there is no evidence on which a court could hold that the plaintiff had suffered loss or on which a court could quantify the damages. He also remarked, with some justification, that the suggestion that Mr Rosser deliberately withheld evidence was not put to him in cross- examination.

In reply, Mr Brereton took me through the various elements in the plaintiff's case, the capacity of the dredge, the actual dredging income, the actual costs of dredging and the demand for sand.

I consider that there is considerable merit in what Mr Donohoe, QC has put. Mr
Rosser's case contained a large amount of suspect and rubbery figures and often showed a disinclination to descend to the real world. I agree with Mr
Donohoe, QC's comment that especially in view of the plethora of material which emanated from Mr Rosser, one would expect that the court would be supplied with the material noted above.

However, I do consider that despite these imperfections the plaintiff has provided sufficient material for me to find that the plaintiff suffered loss and to quantify that loss. The factual matters that Mr Donohoe, QC has raised under the present heading, however, are relevant on weight and have influenced my final assessment of damages.
Should there now be a verdict for the plaintiff for nominal or substantial damages? 
Mr Donohoe, QC submits that, if his submission in 3(a) fails to find favour, there should be a verdict for nominal damages only. Mr Brereton submits that the plaintiff has established a case, not only for substantial damages, but very substantial damages indeed.

Mr Brereton insists that the measure of damages is the value to the plaintiff of an order for specific performance. He says that had specific performance been ordered, the plaintiff would have received the benefit of the dredging rights under the contract until about December 1997, with the consequent ability to sell the dredged sand. He acknowledges that this right was subject to various vicissitudes, including the risk that the defendant would in the meantime terminate the contract by giving reasonable notice.
However he puts that there is no certainty that the defendant would have given notice in the face of an order for specific performance, requiring an application to the court for leave to give such notice. Even if such leave had been sought and given, and notice given pursuant to it, such notice would have had to have been for a reasonable period, during which period the plaintiff would have been able to dredge at maximum speed and accumulate a stockpile from which sales would produce profits.

Mr Brereton also reminds me that the plaintiff is also entitled to damages in addition to specific performance, in respect of the period from January 1993 until the decree on 16 September 1993, during which he was prevented from performing the contract.

Mr Donohoe, QC accepts that, if there were sufficient evidentiary material, the measure of the plaintiff's loss would be the market value of the contract of which he was deprived. However, he puts that the only evidence of its value is the fact that in February 1993 the defendant retendered Mr Rosser's contract and no tenders were received. Thus he submits that the court should infer that in the absence of any interest in the tender, there was no market for Mr Rosser's contract and it was therefore of only nominal value.

I do not consider that this necessarily follows. There was only one tender in the first round when Mr Rosser was awarded the tender. It must have been notorious in the retendering process that there would be difficulties for the person who won the tender and this in itself might have deterred anyone from lodging a tender. In any event, it ignores the fact that what I have to do is to award the damages that are a true substitution for specific performance of what I have found to be an enforceable contract.
Thus, I turn to consider the principles on which substantial damages should be assessed.

In Sellars versus Adelaide Petroleum NL <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 332], 362, Brennan, J said that it is necessary in cases such as the present for the plaintiff to show that he could and would have taken advantage of the opportunity lost by the action of the defendant and that benefit would then have been yielded.

Mr Brereton puts that had specific performance been ordered, subject to a discount for vicissitudes, the plaintiff would have been able to dredge the sand and sell it, retaining the proceeds but paying those costs necessary to conduct the dredging operation and to effect the sales. In short, he puts that the measure of the plaintiff's damages is:- gross income from sales of dredged sand; less costs of dredging and selling sand which would have been incurred had specific performance been ordered, but have not in the circumstances been incurred; discounted for vicissitudes, being the risks that the plaintiff would not be able to dredge or sell all of the sand; discounted for the circumstance that the plaintiff will receive a present award of damages in lieu of income which, had specific performance been ordered, he would have received over a period partly past and partly future.

On the basis that I did not accept his earlier submissions, Mr Donohoe, QC put that Mr Rosser is entitled to that sum of money which he can prove represents the value of his contract to dredge the North Channel, being the contract of which he was deprived by the defendant procuring the withdrawal of the Hickey
Island licence, and being a contract terminable on reasonable notice and of which he would have regained the benefit had an order for specific performance been made. That value is to be determined by reference to what he could have dredged from the North Channel during such a reasonable notice period in accordance with the terms of his contract.

Mr Donohoe, QC says that the above follows from the following propositions: 
Mr Rosser has lost what he would have got if the court had ordered specific performance insofar as his entitlement to that order flowed from conduct which the court has found to be attributable to the defendant.

The court has found the defendant had procured the suspension of the
Hickey Island licence. If an order for specific performance had been made, the defendant would have had to procure the reinstatement of that licence.

The defendant was not responsible for the consequences of the stop work notice issued by the Maclean Shire Council.

As the contract was terminable on reasonable notice, any assessment of the value of the contract must take that into account. That is reflected by determining how much Mr Rosser could have dredged from the North Channel (from what remained to be dredged there) within the notice period. If, contrary to its primary submission, the defendant is also liable to compensate Mr Rosser for the loss of that part of the contract relating to the Goodwood Island
Reach, it is submitted that the same principle applies, namely what could he have dredged within the notice period and otherwise in accordance with the contract from both the North Channel and the Goodwood Island Reach.

The value of that contract (and hence Mr Rosser's damages) is then the difference between the price for which Mr Rosser would have sold that sand and the expenses he would have incurred in dredging and supplying the sand, with that difference itself being discounted to reflect the vicissitudes of business. This approach precisely follows that adopted in McNeill versus Richards .

The defendant denies that it was possible for Mr Rosser to have used more than one dredge or to have done some work himself and some by subcontract. I will not discuss this point further at this stage as it is considered and discarded in section 5(b).

Thus it can be seen that the method assumed in the defendant's "ultimate fall- back" position and the position taken by the plaintiff as to the method of assessing damages, do not differ markedly.

The issue really is that on the facts as we now know them, the plaintiff did not raise the 253,000 cubic metres of sand that he expected to raise. It must be asked whether he could have done so and what would have been the gross profit and expenses. I will now deal with these matters under the appropriate questions.
Mr Jenkins, a consulting chartered engineer, gave evidence that in normal construction estimating practice, one distributes the overheads during the term of the project. The plaintiff would have to set up his equipment: Mr
Jenkins accepted $50,000 for those costs. There would be a further $50,000 for demobilisation costs. The only income to meet these costs would be from sales of sand. Thus, he would have me believe, because it would take a considerable length of time to recover the establishment and demobilisation costs, I should take two years as a reasonable time.

In cross-examination, it was obvious that Mr Jenkins' figures were pure guesses or, as he put it at T344, an "experienced guess".

I do not consider Mr Jenkins' approach is valid. When working out what is a reasonable time, one must look at the situation of both parties. There is no evidence that the defendant knew of the practices of dredgers as to their costing methods.

I agree with the submission of Mr Donohoe, QC that the plaintiff's submission that the period of notice should permit him to dredge all the sand is a circular argument and defeats the purpose of reasonable notice, which implies at least a power to achieve termination before the contract expired of its own force. It is not correct to say the capacity to give notice was to ensure Mr
Rosser would speed up his dredging if necessary. This ignores that the notice could be given by either party and without reasons. For example, the government may have changed its policy about Mr Rosser not paying royalties and wished to bring the old arrangement to an end, irrespective of the speed of Mr Rosser's dredging. On the other hand, Mr Rosser may have wanted to be relieved of his dredging obligation if it had turned out that the demand and price for sand were below what he had expected.

Mr Donohoe, QC approached the question by putting that damages should be assessed on the basis that if specific performance had been granted, Mr Rosser would have had the benefit of the contract for the period that would have constituted reasonable notice. Mr Brereton did not disagree with this statement.

Indeed, this approach accords with how damages are assessed at common law for breach of contract where a contract is terminable on reasonable notice. Should one party give insufficient notice and the other party accepts that notice as a repudiation of the contract and sues for damages, the latter party is entitled to damages equivalent to the benefit of the contract for the whole of the notice period; see The Wine Company Pty Ltd versus The Wine Company Pty Ltd
Supreme Court of Victoria, Hansen, J, 16 May, 1996 unreported; Futuris
Industrial Products Pty Limited versus Arrow Industries Pty Limited Full Federal
Court, 18 April, 1994 unreported and the subsequent assessment of damages by
Davies, J, 13 December, 1994 unreported.

Mr Brereton submitted that the question of what is reasonable notice may be academic as even if there would have been insufficient time for the Wooloweyah to complete the dredging on her own, the time to complete the contract would have been reduced by the subcontracting of part of the work to a second dredge, halving the time required. In particular, upon service of notice of termination, a subcontractor could have been engaged to maximise production while the notice was pending.

Mr Brereton then makes the point that had specific performance been ordered, the defendant could not have given notice of termination without the leave of the court: JAG Investments Pty Limited versus Strati [[1981] 2 NSWLR .]
Mr Brereton puts that it is far from certain that the defendant would have sought, let alone been given, such leave. The requirement to obtain leave would have operated as a deterrent to termination. He also put that the fact that the defendant gave notice when specific performance had been declined is no evidence that it would have done so had specific performance been ordered; although it is evidence that if it had given notice, it would have been for a period of not less than 6 months.

This last proposition is not completely logical, but, in the factual matrix, may be correct.

Accordingly, Mr Brereton submits that it should not be assumed that notice would have been given at all, although allowance ought be made for the circumstance that it might have been. If notice had not been given, then plainly there was no risk that the plaintiff could not dredge all the sand within the remaining term until about late 1997. Even if notice were given, it is likely that it would not have been given very promptly after an order for specific performance.

As to this, Mr Donohoe, QC says that the rule is, as the judgment of Mason CJ in Sunbird Plaza Pty Ltd versus Moloney <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 245], 260 makes clear, that "once a plaintiff has obtained an order for specific performance of a contract, he cannot be permitted to act inconsistently by rescinding it so long as the defendant is required by order of the court to complete the contract". The principle, if it is otherwise correct, is thus confined to preventing termination where, at the request of the person who now seeks to terminate, the court has ordered the defendant to perform the contract. Thus the rule would not apply to a person who is subject to performance of a contract under which it can terminate by reasonable notice from exercising its contractual rights. I consider that this submission is correct.

There was some discussion in argument as to whether the rule exists at all.
This is a fairly dry exercise in the light of the fact that Strati is a considered decision of the Court of Appeal. However, Meagher, JA in Aarons v
Advance Commercial Finance Limited (1995) 6 BPR 13911, 13,915 threw scorn on the rule describing the proposition that leave was necessary to discharge a contract as "farouche". The defendant urges me to follow the attitude expressed in the judgment of Meagher, JA in Aarons' Case. I do not see how
I can comply with that request. However, for the other reasons set out above, the whole matter is a red herring.

In any event, I accept the defendant's submission that it was most likely that the defendant would have given some notice to terminate during the contract had specific performance been ordered. It had already given a notice in early and it gave another in October, 1993.

Mr Brereton then submits that assuming notice was given, the plaintiff would still have had an opportunity to dredge the 253,000 cubic metres of sand. He again reminds me that the plaintiff is entitled to damages in addition to specific performance for the period from the defendant's breach in early 1993 until the enquiry was ordered on 16 September, 1993, as well as in substitution for specific performance. Thus, he says, the period available for performance by the plaintiff should be taken as one which runs from January until a date which represents the expiration of a period of "reasonable notice". I consider that this is correct.

I agree with the submission that what would have been reasonable notice is a matter for the judge and not for direct evidence, Stenhouse Limited v
Phillips <case>; [[1974] AC 391] at 402.

Both sets of counsel agreed that the leading judgment on how a period of reasonable notice is to be determined is that of McHugh JA (as his Honour then was) in Crawford Fitting Co versus Sydney Valve & Fittings Pty Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR 438], 444 where his Honour said after referring to the decision of the Privy Council in Australian Blue Metal Ltd versus Hughes [[1963] AC :] "However, the reasonableness of the period of notice depends upon the circumstances existing when the notice is given ... When a contract is terminable on reasonable notice, the period of notice must be sufficiently long to enable the recipient to deploy his labour and equipment in alternative employment, to carry out his commitments, to bring current negotiations to fruition and to wind up the association in a businesslike manner." His Honour returned to the subject at p 448 where he said, "The chief purpose of a notice for a reasonable period, therefore, is to enable the parties to bring to an end in an orderly way a relationship which, ex hypothesis has existed for a reasonable period so that they will have a reasonable opportunity to enter into alternative arrangements and to wind up matters which arise out of their relationship. Matters to be wound up will include carrying out existing commitments, bringing current negotiations to fruition, and, where appropriate, obtaining the fruits of any extraordinary expenditure or effort carried out within the scope of the agreement. The line between ordinary recurrent expenditure and effort and extraordinary expenditure and effort will not always be easy to draw. But in general it will be determined by what the parties would reasonably have contemplated was extraordinary effort or expenditure." His Honour cited copious authorities, though I have omitted them.

In the present case, I observed in my reasons for judgment of 30 August 1993 at 36 on the question of reasonable notice: "One would have to consider the time required to remove the dredges from the site and to rehabilitate Hickey
Island and other dump sites. It may be that if there was a release from the obligation to rehabilitate the dump sites, the period of notice may be shorter." I adhere to those words. I then went on to say that, on the evidence, three months' notice was too short to constitute reasonable notice.

Mr Donohoe, QC submits that the court should find that the contract was terminable on not less than six months' notice. He points to the following factors:- 
The contract gave Mr Rosser the right to dredge from the river and to keep and sell the sand for his own benefit. There is no suggestion that the period during which Mr Rosser could dredge would be co-extensive with the period he would be selling the sand which he had dredged.

As the contract was terminable upon reasonable notice by either party to the other, the period must be determined by the interests and obligations of both parties rather than solely from the point of view of Mr Rosser. The defendant acknowledges that, in practical terms, it had few ongoing obligations under the contract, however, the whole reason for the contract from the defendant's point of view was to get the river dredged to the requisite navigable depth as quickly as possible. This suggests a shorter period of notice rather than longer so that, if it wished, it could for example replace Mr Rosser with a contractor who might do the work faster or more efficiently than Mr Rosser.

Mr Rosser's principal obligations were to dredge a continuous shipping channel to the requisite depth at a reasonable rate. It is clear that the contract was not one where he could dredge when economic conditions, in particular his prospects for the sale of the sand suited him. Insofar as termination is concerned, the key features from Mr Rosser's point of view were to ensure he had sufficient time to dredge sufficient sand that, when sold, he would cover his demobilisation and other termination costs such as reinstating the storage sites once they had been depleted. The defendant acknowledges that he would also need sufficient time to get his dredge and pipeline out of the river.

Turning to the facts, the defendant submits that up to six days should be allowed for getting his dredge and pipeline out of the river and that he would have costs of approximately $22,000 to meet. This could be rounded up to $25,000 to include a 10% contingency.

Then, it needs to be recognised that as at December 1992 the contract had been on foot since July 1991 (1.5 years out of a life of 6.5 years) and Mr Rosser had dredged 45,000 cubic metres from the 298,OOO cubic metres available, that is a mere 15%. The fact that there had been no dredging since May 1992 because
Mr Rosser had parted company with his subcontractor (Davidsons) is not a matter which should affect the calculation of reasonable notice, being peculiar to Mr Rosser's internal arrangements. This 45,OOO cubic metres shows that, even on Mr Sanford's lower income figure, Mr Rosser had made sales of $228,693 and thus had already recovered his mobilisation or start up costs.
Hence the need to recover such costs need not be taken into account in determining a reasonable notice period.

Then it must be remembered that both the Hickey Island licence and the licence permitting the designated areas of the river bed to be dredged both granted by the Lands Department were terminable at any time on three months' notice in the absolute discretion of the Minister.

The defendant puts that the question of giving Mr Rosser sufficient time to deploy his labour elsewhere does not arise because, on his evidence, he really only used himself and casual employees or subcontractors.

Again, the defendant puts that there is no issue of the time taken for Mr
Rosser to deploy his equipment elsewhere, because Mr Rosser always intended using sub-contractors.

Furthermore, there is no evidence of any ongoing sand supply contract to which
Mr Rosser was committed or for which he was negotiating at the relevant date for which he had not already dredged sufficient sand.

As there were no payments to be made by Mr Rosser to the defendant or any other formal administrative arrangement on foot between them, no time needed to be allowed to wind up the association in a business like fashion. Even if the defendant had wished to take soundings of the dredged area, the experience of the Wooloweyah Lagoon job would indicate that such soundings could be taken within a couple of weeks of completion.

Then the defendant submits that the costs of acquiring and fitting the
Wooloweyah are not an extraordinary expenditure which should be taken into account in determining the period of reasonable notice. Mr Rosser was a buyer and seller of equipment and had his dredge fitted out for the Wooloweyah
Lagoon job.

Other reasons were also given of less appeal. It does seem to me that the factors presented by the defendant are very persuasive. The only real counter was the scenario presented by Mr Jenkins which I considered was too rough and ready and was, in part based on a faulty appreciation of the problem.

I believe that six months would have been reasonable notice to terminate as at September, 1993. I agree with Mr Brereton's submission that a little time should be allowed for the defendant to take advice as to whether it would serve a notice. As a notice was served on 14 October, 1993, I will take the period in which the plaintiff could have dredged as expiring on 14 April, .
The next question is, how much sand would the plaintiff have dredged if specific performance had been ordered? This will be answered in section 5(g) after I have dealt with the various relevant factors in 5(a)-5(f).
The contract entitled the plaintiff to excavate sand from two designated areas which have been described as the Goodwood Island Reach and the North Channel Reach.

The plaintiff dredged some sand from the North Channel near Moradate's wharf.
It is common ground that, after that extraction, there remained 253,000 cubic metres of sand to be extracted from the combined areas of the North Channel and Goodwood Island. It follows that the maximum further amount of sand that the plaintiff could have extracted would have been 253,000 cubic metres.
As I have mentioned, Mr Brereton submits that Mr Rosser would have had more than one dredge on the job if the defendant had given notice of termination. The defendant takes issue with this on the ground that the
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) made provision to limit dredging to "alleviate conflicts with the peak recreational boat usage on the waterway".
Furthermore, the EIS refers throughout to "the dredge".

I do not consider that so much can be read into those provisions. It was Mr
Rosser's original proposal to carry out the work through subcontract. There was no contractual obligation tied to any one particular dredge or subcontractor. So long as the requirements were met that the dredging should not unduly interfere with recreational or commercial use of the Clarence
River, I cannot see any limitation on the mode of dredging.

Although much of the evidence focussed upon the dredge Wooloweyah, use of the
Wooloweyah was only one of the means by which the plaintiff might have performed the contract. That evidence, of course provides a useful guide, but no more than that, as to how the dredging operation might have proceeded, and what its speed and costs might have been. But it is not the only way in which the plaintiff could have performed the contract. I agree with Mr Brereton's submission that if, for example, it became apparent that only a relatively short time was available to the plaintiff to extract as much sand as he could, then he could have engaged subcontractors, just as he did with Davidsons in the North Channel.

I also agree with Mr Brereton's submission that I should assume, at least within limits, that so far as possible the plaintiff would perform the contract in the manner which maximised its value to him.
How long would it take to abstract the sand? This depends on a number of matters. Mr Brereton's primary submission was that notwithstanding my earlier finding, I should assume that the plaintiff had 6.5 years to extract it. I have really already rejected this proposition. In my view the plaintiff had only until 14 April, 1994.

Mr Brereton says that I should use the figure of 6.5 years on the basis that the Court of Appeal might overturn the reasonable notice part of my earlier judgment. I must confess that I was extremely surprised that after almost three years there should be any suggestion that the judgment on liability could now be attacked. However, Mr Brereton assures me that there is now a respectable argument that one can challenge the finding on liability or any part of the judgment on liability after the final damages are found, no matter what length of time has passed.

Despite these submissions, I will proceed on the basis of my earlier judgment and my finding that the contract could have been determined by 14 April, 1994.

The question then is, could or would the 253,000 cubic metres of sand be extracted in this period? As to "could", the answer is "Yes." I can well see that with only a limited time and the availability of other dredges and the services of subcontractors, it was possible to extract all the sand in the time available. Because I take this view, it is unnecessary to delve into the detailed evidence as to the capacity of the Wooloweyah or its rate of dredging.

However, the question as to whether Mr Rosser would have dredged all that sand is more difficult.

The first apparent problem is the position with the dump sites. I deal with this in 5(e). Unless sand could be dredged direct to a building site, it had to be stockpiled on one or other of the authorised stockpile sites at Hickey
Island or Palmers Island. These were of limited capacity. Furthermore, I accept the evidence of Miss Watkins, a former town planner for Maclean Shire
Council who gave evidence for the defendant, that it may well take five months for Council approval for additional stockpile facilities.

Another factor is Mr Rosser's record for dredging. As I have said, in one and a half years Mr Rosser had dredged only 45,000 cubic metres. One of the reasons for this is that he felt that there was no requirement to dredge any more quickly, because that rate of progress was sufficient to more than maintain sales. However, this was not the only reason.

If one allows 16 months (December, 1992 to April, 1994) and assumes that Mr
Rosser would proceed at the same rate, only another 45,000 cubic metres would have been produced rather than 253,000. Indeed, this figure may be generous as it ignores time needed to remove the dredge and pipes from the river and clean up and includes two long school vacations when dredging was not permitted.

The onus is on the plaintiff to satisfy me that he would have removed sand from the river. In all the circumstances, I do not consider that it was likely that by 14 April, 1994 that Mr Rosser would have produced more than four times his previous output. This amounts to 180,000 cubic metres solid. This is roughly a one-third discount on the amount of sand that might be removed.

The defendant submits that this sub-question cannot be answered on the evidence. However, that submission was based on the assumption that the only machine that could be put to work was the Wooloweyah. I do not accede to it.

Thus I will use the figure of 180,000 cubic metres (solid) of sand in my calculations. I will explain the significance of the term "solid " in section (b).
In view of the conclusion that the plaintiff could use more than one dredge, at least if the dredge was of the type that complied with the EIS, this question really does not arise. However, in case I am wrong on that question, I will briefly deal with it.

Mr Jenkins says that the plaintiff's dredge is capable of extracting 100 cubic metres of sand per hour. Even allowing for 20% downtime, at this rate, the plaintiff's dredge was capable of removing all the remaining 253,000 cubic metres of sand prior to the expiry of the defendant's notice of termination.

Mr Hollis, a dredging contractor who gave evidence for the defendant, says that he dredged sand from the Clarence River from 1987. He obtained 100 cubic metres per hour when his dredge operated 10 hours per day, but suffered a lot of downtime for repairs.

The defendant also called Mr Hutchinson, who describes himself as a consultant dredging and reclamation engineer. Mr Hutchinson says that 100 cubic metres per hour is not achievable, but that 85 cubic metres per hour is appropriate.
He also says significantly more downtime should be allowed: his opinion is %.

Mr Davidson, a dredging and sand processing consultant who also gave evidence for the defendant says that 50% is the appropriate allowance for downtime. Mr
Davidson says that the plaintiff's dredge could achieve an extraction rate of cubic metres per hour for short periods, but, at other times will be much less than 63 cubic metres per hour. Mr Davidson uses calculations in his report (p 86) that with a pump distance of 2,000 metres, the plaintiff's dredge would achieve only 50 cubic metres per hour.

Mr Davidson also had a role in this case at an earlier stage as a subcontractor for the plaintiff. Mr Brereton comments adversely on Mr
Davidson's evidence because he says the figures that Mr Davidson is now putting forward are inconsistent with the figures used when working under that subcontract.

Mr Brereton points out in support of the plaintiff's higher figures that Mr
Hollis achieved an extraction rate of 233,696 cubic metres over 14 months.

If it be necessary to reach a conclusion on this point, whilst I was generally impressed with Mr Davidson as a relatively independent expert, I would think that, on this issue, his assessment is too far out of kilter to be accepted. I believe that Mr Brereton is fairly close to the mark in his submission that the Wooloweyah was capable of producing, without a booster, an average of 120 cubic metres an hour from the North Channel and 100 cubic metres an hour from the Goodwood Island Reach.
A related issue is the storage capacity of the dump sites on Palmers
Island and Hickey Island. Once those sites were filled, the plaintiff could not extract more sand from the river. The plaintiff says the capacity of the
Palmers Island dump site was 206,000 cubic metres. Thus the 201,000 cubic metres from Goodwood Island Reach would be brought to Palmers Island which would have accommodated it all. A further 52,000 cubic metres dredged from the
North Channel would be brought to Hickey Island. Mr Jenkins has calculated that the capacity of the Hickey Island dump site was 48,400 cubic metres and that on Palmers Island the capacity was 210,000 cubic metres. I think Mr
Jenkins as a qualified person is more likely to be correct and I will adopt his figures.

Miss Watkins says that there would be a breach of the amended development consent if 201,000 cubic metres was dumped on Palmers Island. She says that this is because some of that area had to be treated as "settling ponds" under the amended development consent. There is a real question as to whether the amended development consent was part of the contract. Mr Brereton says that even if that were the case, the plaintiff would not have needed to stockpile the whole 201,000 cubic metres at any one time because of continuing sales.

As at January, 1993, Mr Rosser had a stockpile of 5,038 cubic metres of sand on Palmers Island. (PA12, para 7.19). All but 250 cubic metres was sold between that date and 2 December, 1994 when the relevant affidavit was sworn.
There was thus plenty of capacity.

Although there was, in theory sufficient capacity, I do believe that the limited capacity of the dump sites would have affected Mr Rosser's output. For one thing, the sand would be deposited as slurry and would have different bulk from when it was hydraulically compacted. Sales also were not necessarily going to occur in an even pattern. I have taken this factor into account when discounting production.
So far as vicissitudes are concerned, the relevant factors were identified in the evidence as being:- 
Mooring conditions; 
Weather conditions; and 
Passing traffic 
Really these factors overlap. Mooring conditions will be different for dredging in the North Channel where the current is stronger than it is for dredging in the Goodwood Island Reach 
Mr Donohoe, QC dealt with the first under the notion of "availability". He said that this is a percentage of the total available dredging time when the dredge is in fact producing. A starting figure, according to Mr Davidson, in the case of a suction dredge is 70% (that is it would be available for work % of the time) reduced to 55% on the basis of his experience of the North
Channel. Mr Davidson allowed 57% for maintenance in holidays. This reflects the fact that as a matter of routine dredging must be interrupted for various reasons such as moving the dredge. This is a discrete notion from contingencies such as rough weather, for which other allowance is made.
Availability was dealt with by Mr McQuade who used a figure of 90%. Mr
Davidson explained that one first calculates the maximum production capacity.
This is then reduced by 30% and the availability factor is then applied to that figure. In other words, the theoretical maximum dredging capacity is discounted by 30% to convert the maximum potential to a realistic potential when operating. The availability factor is then introduced to account for routine interruptions so that the reasonable production potential is further reduced to reflect routine interruptions.

Mr Donohoe, QC said that Mr Jenkins referred to the notion of "downtime" of % which translates to an availability of 80%. He allowed 30% of the balance for unworkable weather. This amounts to a cumulative discount of 56%. In the light of the 55% arrived at by Mr Davidson, the figures are closely comparable.

Mr Brereton has conceded, he says for the sake of minimising argument, Mr
Davidson's figure that the dredge would be operating only 38 six day weeks per year or 230 working days. However, he disputes Mr Davidson's figure of only .5 hours work per day and says that 12 hours per day was well able to be achieved. He says that at the rate that the Wooloweyah could dredge, at least with a 400 hp motor fitted, Mr Rosser could have dredged the whole of the ,000 cubic metres in 15 months.

Mr Brereton also puts that the court has to take counterbalancing positive contingencies into account. Amongst these are the possibility that there might be a greater quantity of sand available than estimated and that the price would have increased.

I agree, in principle, with most of what Mr Brereton has put. However, the plaintiff must establish his claim and his evidence is not sufficiently persuasive to induce me to hold that he would have extracted the whole of the ,000 cubic metres by 14 April, 1994. I have taken the positive and negative contingencies into account when assessing the probable gain of ,000 cubic metres solid, referred to above.
The answer to this part of the case is thus 180,000 cubic metres.
This part of the case commenced at Maclean where the witnesses in Northern
NSW and Southern Queensland were cross-examined on a convenience rather than a logical basis. I will comment on the witnesses in the order in which they were called. It was only rarely that I disbelieved a witness. The significant fact finding exercise is to determine the weight or discount to be given to the figures produced by the various witnesses.

The first witness was Mr McQuade, a retired dredger who gave evidence for the plaintiff. Mr McQuade worked as a dredger, mainly on the Gold Coast of
Queensland, but also elsewhere, mainly in Queensland and Indonesian New
Guinea, between 1970-1993. He had done little work in NSW. I have detailed the evidence in chief Mr McQuade gave on the various issues under the appropriate headings elsewhere in these reasons.

The cross-examination of Mr McQuade was courteous, gentle, but devastating.
The witness showed himself a man who prided himself that his long experience in the industry outweighed any theoretical factors that might be thrown up. He had not read much on the subject. He declined to enter into discussion with respect to density of sand. His view was simply that it was all sand to him . His motto appeared to be, as he put it at T264, "That is how you make a buck." He answered cross-examination at one point (T279) "I disagree with you entirely. I have a bank book to show you I am right." He said that one just got confused reading Environmental Impact Statements (T275)and he was acerbic about the interference of "environmentalists" with the dredging practices of "the old days" (T283 and 288).

I got the firm impression that Mr McQuade was one of those "salt of the earth" tradesmen who did so much to develop Australia in former times, but whose methods are not compatible with present day conditions. It is necessary these days to be more precise than guesstimates and to take into account environmental and other considerations which might impede a contractor from "making a buck". Furthermore, Mr McQuade's calculations tended to disregard or minimise risk and contingency factors.

For all these reasons, I consider that Mr McQuade's figures are far too favourable to the plaintiff than fair objective figures.

The next witness was a town planner, Mr Rackham, who also gave evidence for the plaintiff. A considerable amount of the material upon which Mr Rackham relied were quotes obtained from suppliers. Mr Rackham obviously disagreed with the defendant's town planning expert, Miss Watkins as to the potential for the Maclean-Yamba district. Mr Rackham was far more optimistic. Despite strong cross-examination, he remained unscathed and his evidence of itself was credible.

Mr Fish, the current District Manager of the Lands Department in Grafton was next called by the defendant. He gave evidence as to the Crown's royalty payments. Although Mr Brereton attacked the Lands Department as being anti
Rosser, Mr Fish denied this. I would accept him as a witness of truth.

Mr Col Jenkins a civil engineer practising in the Clarence River area was then called by the plaintiff. Mr Jenkins' figures tended to be his practical estimates or sometimes guesstimates rather than being scientifically based. He often acknowledged that his figures were empirical rather than logical (see eg
T341).

Mr Jenkins acknowledged that many of his figures were "nice big round figures". I feel that I have to discount his figures if there are acceptable more scientifically based figures available.

The defendant then called Captain Gray, the Yamba Pilot. Surprisingly, he was one of the few witnesses who had to acknowledge that part of his affidavit was untrue. Furthermore that evidence must have been deliberately untrue. I can only surmise that dislike for the plaintiff caused Captain Gray to overstate his position.

Mr Rosser himself was the last witness in Maclean. He came through as a man who had been interested in dredging since a schoolboy, a man who had had a lot of practical experience in the industry, but a man who had no academic qualifications and who had not ever been at the top of his field. As Mr
Donohoe, QC established during cross-examination, the plaintiff had only limited experience as a dredge master.

I have already set out at some length, Mr Donohoe, QC's criticisms of the way
Mr Rosser presented his case and the allegation that he withheld information if it did not suit him to disclose it and that he has manipulated the figures.
I believe that there is some force in this criticism, but not to the extent that Mr Donohoe, QC would have me find. Indeed when one finds that two accounting experts both put forward a common figure as to discount, but Mr
Rosser disagrees and puts his own figure, suspicion is immediately raised about the validity of the figures.

The plaintiff was recalled to give further evidence in Sydney. This time the cross-examination was devastating and some of the figures which Mr Rosser had been advancing were shown to be very rubbery indeed.

The first witness back in Sydney was Mr Franz Schlack. He was a most impressive witness who has been working in the dredging industry in NSW for a considerable period of time. He has worked with the plaintiff and also has worked for Mr Davidson. I would generally accept his evidence, but he did not give that much evidence on the key questions in the proceedings.

Mr Hutchinson appeared to be more academically than practically orientated. He is a qualified engineer, though a considerable part of his evidence was given on the basis of what he had read in books, charts and reports rather than personal experience. Although he had some experience of NSW conditions, most of his work had been done elsewhere, particularly in the Northern Territory.
My attention was drawn to a possible problem with his evidence as an expert when in supplemental evidence in chief, he expressed the view that one of the plaintiff's experts' propositions was "ludicrous". This is often the first sign of a not completely impartial expert witness. Mr Hutchinson was most uncomfortable under cross-examination. He also showed himself very reluctant even to make proper concessions to Mr Brereton, a factor which again affected his partiality in my eyes. Many of Mr Hutchinson's statements were exaggerated or outside his sphere of expertise. An illustration is paragraph 30 of his affidavit in which he purported to list the number of jobs that he put forward as being available to the plaintiff in the period 1993-4.

I would not accept Mr Hutchinson as an impartial expert witness and would discount his evidence to some extent because of exaggeration and partiality.

The next witness was Mr Sanford, the plaintiff's accountant. I have no doubt as to Mr Sanford's competence. However, a lot of the data which he used was provided by Mr Rosser or Mr Jenkins which, as I have noted, is of questionable worth. The view I have constantly taken with respect to this type of evidence is set out in Sapir versus Sapir (No 2) [(1989) 13 Fam LR 362], 364.
I have thus confined the use I made of this evidence to the methods in which I might process the figures that I find to be reliable.

Mr Hollis then gave evidence for the defendant. At first blush his evidence appeared sound and reliable and he presented well in the box. However, in cross-examination, Mr Brereton clearly demonstrated that his evidence was just wrong in several places, he had made assumptions as to the basic facts on hearsay and that his expertise was more apparent than real. As the cross- examination continued on, Mr Hollis appeared less and less credible. However, when assessing a number of witnesses in the dredging field, all of whom succumbed to some cross-examination, Mr Hollis was not as bad a witness as many of the others.

Mr Davidson was the next witness. He was well qualified holding a Diploma of
Civil Engineering and having extensive practical experience on his own account and as an employee in responsible positions. I was quite impressed with him generally. Furthermore, despite Mr Brereton's incisive and lengthy cross- examination, Mr Davidson's evidence emerged mainly intact. The only real doubt about his evidence was that his figures were so far out of kilter with the other witnesses and did differ from what had actually occurred when Mr
Davidson worked on the present job as Mr Rosser's subcontractor.

Mr Burgess, called by the defendant, again was a highly qualified person. He holds a Master of Science degree from Sydney University as well as a European degree. He is in a senior position with a specialist company of mining engineers. His evidence was principally in the area of bulking factors which will be considered in section 7(b). Mr Burgess appeared to be a thoroughly professional and reliable witness.

The only other witness apart from the accountants was Miss Watkins, the former town planner of the Maclean Shire. She had been away from the area since
February, 1995. She mainly gave evidence as to the sites in the Yamba area that would require fill in the near future. Her material may have been accurate as at November, 1994 when she swore her affidavit, but, it was clear that any evidence she gave of the August, 1996 scenario was based to a considerable extent on hearsay. However, when one adjusts the figures between solid metres of sand and loose truck metres, her evidence is well within the ballpark.

There is no doubt as to the expertise of the three accounting experts, Messrs
Sanford, Wills and Lonergan. I have already referred to the first two and the limitation that I put on this type of evidence. Mr Brereton did attack Mr
Wills quite acerbically. Mr Wills came out slightly ahead. However, as Mr
Donohoe, QC pointed out, Mr Wills could only act on the data he was given and the plaintiff was playing his cards close to his chest. Accordingly, criticisms of Mr Wills' evidence that were based on lack of reliable data did not detract from the acceptability of his evidence overall.

Mr Lonergan is a well known authority on the price of money. His expertise was obvious. If any criticism of his evidence could be made it was that he was not well enough briefed with the particular exercise with which the court was involved.
There are two factors in ascertaining the price for sand in the Yamba area. The first is to see what prices were actually achieved. The second is to consider what would have been the market price in the future.

As to the first factor, the accounting experts have considered the sales figures of Mr Rosser and his company over the period 1991-1994. Mr Wills' corrected average is $6.48 per loose truck metre which on his assumption that the bulking factor is 1:1.24 means $8.03 per cubic metre solid.

In an endeavour to simplify the calculations the accountants met and agreed in a document, MI349, that from their examination of the plaintiff's records, his sales averaged $7.72 per loose truck metre up to the end of 1994 and $9.78 per loose truck metre thereafter. I will explain the term "loose truck metre" in section 7(b). These figures are an analysis of the plaintiff's invoices. They do not necessarily give a complete picture. They also have the vice that the sales are made to comparatively few purchasers, the general evidence in the case tending to show that some special factor usually entered into the price quoted.

The plaintiff initially sought to rely on the evidence of Mr Rackham, a town planner, who posits $9-$15 per cubic metre. However, Mr Rackham is not a person who is at all familiar with the dredging industry. He obtained his figures by finding the contract price for certain jobs in the Yamba area and by seeking quotes from a series of sand suppliers in the Maclean-Yamba area.
Most sand in the area has been supplied by truck in the last few years as pressure from environmental groups has meant that the cheaper dredged product is not available. I would reject the figures which Mr Rackham obtained at the high end of his range.

The plaintiff also sought to rely on material to confirm that his usual selling price from late 1995 was $11 per "loose truck metre".

Mr Donohoe, QC submitted that the best material as to the relevant market price in 1995 was Mr Rosser's $8 "solid" (presumably including a booster) to the Catholic School site and the quotes to Mr Rackham by Mr Hollis and Mr
Schlack of $5.50 and $6.00 including a booster. He averages this out to $6.50 per cubic metre "solid" boosted to a fill site. I do not consider that one can apply an average to these three figures. If one could and if one used a bulking factor of 1:1.25 (see section 7(b)), this would be the equivalent of $5.20 per loose truck metre.

The market price for sand will depend to some extent on whether it is piped straight from the dredge to the building site or whether it is delivered by truck. The figures in Mr Donohoe, QC's schedules are for sand dredged straight to a building site. The evidence shows that 85% is delivered by truck. The cost of sand delivered by truck is $2.70 per loose truck metre. Neither set of counsel factored this figure into their final calculations, I assume because delivery is merely added to the price.

Mr Brereton submits the figure should reflect the price after December, 1994, because sales prior to that date had all been made from sand already stockpiled. This seems to me the correct way of proceeding. He thus says the applicable market price was $11 per loose truck metre. This would equate to $13.75 per solid cubic metre using the bulking factor I have found, which is out of kilter. Tables 2 and 3 to Schedule 1 of Mr Donohoe, QC's submissions set out the evidence as to sales of sand. For some reason that I cannot work out, the prices for sand sold by loose truck metre grossly exceed the prices for solid cubic metres. Why would anyone pay more for a loose truck metre which was only 80% of a solid cubic metre? The answer may well be salesmanship. However it is more likely that one should deduct the delivery cost of $2.70 per loose truck metre. This would mean an adjustment to $8.30 per loose truck metre or $11.31 per solid cubic metre. This, I believe, is still too high a price on the evidence as a whole.

It is very difficult to assess from the wide variety of figures that have been provided the "real" sale price for the sand. The onus is on the plaintiff to establish the price. I have been provided with a considerable amount of detail, but the figures are not always consistent. After full consideration, I am of the view that Mr Rosser's sale price to the Catholic School site in 1995 is as good a guide as any. This was $8 per cubic metre solid. This is a 1995 price in an arm's length transaction apparently without specifical features.
For the reasons set out in 7(b), this would be the equivalent of $6.40 per loose truck metre.

As to the second factor, I basically agree with Mr Brereton's proposition that, because sand dredged earlier had been stockpiled, one should take a sale price for the sand that would have been dredged after 1993 at a 1995 or later market price. There is some evidence of sales in excess of $10 per loose truck metre, but some of these involved compacting the sand when it arrived on the site. A lesser sale price per loose truck metre including delivery seems more consistent with the evidence generally.
I now turn to the matter of bulking factors. The problem here is that, in documents, a cubic metre of sand means a solid cubic metre, that is, sand that is at least naturally compacted. However, when sand is loaded on to trucks, it becomes loose. There is evidence in this case to show that one solid cubic metre of sand can constitute the equivalent of up to 1.5 "loose truck metres", that is, sand loaded loose on a truck. The plaintiff contends that as his sales by volume are for sand which typically is delivered in a truck of 10 cubic metre capacity, loose truck metres is the appropriate measure. Thus selling prices achieved in the past in cubic metres as sold mean the price for one loose truck metre. Accordingly, although 253,000 cubic metres of sand remains in the river, if and when that was loaded into the back of a truck for sale it would occupy more than 253,000 cubic metres.

The plaintiff initially said that one solid cubic metre of sand, ie, sand in the river bed is the equivalent of 1.5 loose truck metres. Mr Burgess, a consulting engineer who gave evidence for the defendant, says that the bulking ratio is between 1:1 and 1:1.24 depending on the density of the sand. However,
Mr Burgess conceded that it may be necessary to make an adjustment for moisture content and that it might be appropriate to allow 1:1.25 to 1:1.3. Mr
Jenkins says 1:1.472. In re-examination, Mr Jenkins said that his rule in practice was 10 loose metres to 7 solid. This is a ratio of 1:1.428. Mr
Burgess says Mr Jenkins' methods just do not give a true indication. In any event, Mr Burgess says that sand is usually sold by weight and thus no bulking factor should be taken into account.

Indeed, Mr Burgess' evidence gave me the strong impression that the bulking factor was just another red herring. As Mr Donohoe, QC submitted, the appropriate measure is sand dredged to site and hydraulically compacted.
Therefore a bulking factor does not come into the equation. The evidence established that developers pay for sand and not air and that the real market was for sale of sand to be used as fill which was ultimately paid for after compaction to a relative density approved by an engineer and to levels checked by survey. Indeed even hydraulic compaction usually falls short of the engineering requirements for a building site. It is erroneous to use the notion of loose truck metres because the evidence does not establish any quantitative demand for sale of sand calculated in that way. Even where the development site required sand to be trucked to it, the same principle of the developer not paying for air applies as the sand would have to be compacted to the requisite density and paid for accordingly.

However, whether the bulking factor is really a red herring or not, it is necessary to make sure when pricing quantities of sand sold to know whether one is dealing in solid cubic metres or loose truck metres.

I prefer Mr Burgess' evidence. I consider that the lower end of Mr Burgess' adjusted range is the most appropriate figure. Thus I will take a bulking factor of 1:1.25.
Mr Brereton says that there was no significant risk that the plaintiff would be unable to sell all the sand. He says that the demand for sand may be divided into three categories: first, development projects undertaken between and the present for the supply of sand fill for which the plaintiff could have competed; secondly, developable land presently available which is likely to be developed over the next few years; and thirdly, land not yet zoned for development which is likely to be rezoned in the near future.

Mr Brereton points out that both in the invitation for expressions of interest and in the EIS, the defendant predicted that the sand would be readily saleable.

Evidence was given by Mr Rackham in the plaintiff's case and Miss Watkins in the defendant's case of the development projects which had been undertaken in the first half of the 1990s. Miss Watkins gave evidence of projects which required a total of 167,322 cubic metres (solid) up to 1994. Mr Brereton points out that this did not include many projects for which Mr Rosser could have tendered. She explained this on the basis that the Development Approvals were "site specific", but it is clear that this meant no more in some cases than that by the time of the Development Approval, the developer had already identified his source of sand. It does not mean that Mr Rosser could not have tendered for it if he had an available source of sand. One such case was the
Caroona development to which Mr Hollis supplied fill. Accordingly, Mr Brereton puts that there has already been demand for well in excess of 250,000 cubic metres (solid).

As to present demand, Mr Rackham said that the following sites were available for development: 
Tory - 43,000 m3; 
O'Keefe - 25,000 m3; 
Sunny Acres (Lots 12, 84) - 15,500 m3; 
Parkes/Menai - 126,000 m3; 
Scott/Brown - 49,000 m3; 
Wattle Park (Lot 82) - 74,000 m3; 
Sullivan - 72,000 m3; 
Bate - 29,000 m3; 
Cannon - 126, 000 m3; 
This is a total of 559,500 loose truck metres. Even excluding the Cannon site, there are 433,500 loose truck metres.

Miss Watkins gave her figures in solid metres. She provided different figures for O'Keefe, Sunny Acres, Parkes/Menai and Scott/Brown taken from the
Development Approvals rather than from any assessment. She did not enquire about Wattle Park, Lot 82, and was obviously uncertain as to the situation there. She included Tory, Sullivan and Bate in the overall calculations of areas, without separately calculating those areas now zoned for development.

The same witnesses identified land likely to be rezoned for development in the near future. Their figures were fairly comparable.

It seems to me that virtually whichever way one looks at the figures, Mr
Rosser, had he produced the sand, would have had a market for all of it.
However, the evidence generally tells me that it is more likely than not that he would not have disposed of the whole 180,000 or 253,000 cubic metres until
The indications are that development in Yamba will not proceed at a fast rate in the next year or so, but in the period 2000-2003, Yamba may have to build more houses to overcome a shortfall in accommodation. I will take a median point of 2001 for the exhausting of the plaintiff's notional stockpile of sand.
For the reasons I have given in 7(a), I have accepted the figure as $8 per solid metre or $6.40 per loose truck metre. The bulking factor is eliminated when one deals in solid metres. For the reasons set out in 7(c), Mr
Rosser would have sold all the sand by 2001.
A major issue is the costs of the actual dredging operation. The plaintiff says that the basic cost of dredging is $1.80 per cubic metre solid or $1.20 per loose truck metre. He bases this on the subcontract let to Mr
Davidson whose subcontract price was $1.80 for dredging in the North Channel.
He was not really challenged on this in cross-examination. Mr Jenkins says the cost is $1 per cubic metre plus mobilisation costs of a further 40c per cubic metre.

On the defendant's side, Mr Hollis gave evidence of several contracts performed by him in the period 1992-1994. Each of them involved a distance in excess of lkm, and the use of a booster. Each of them was at a price of $4.00/m3. One job involving dredging from the North Channel was originally quoted on the basis that it would be dredged from Boat Harbour without a booster, but an additional $2/m3 was allowed on account of indurated sand in
Boat Harbour. On another job in the North Channel, there was no such indurated sand, but a booster was required. In his affidavit, he said he would have quoted $7/m3 for the North Channel and $6/m3 for the Goodwood Island Reach.
Having regard to his practice of allowing a profit margin of 50%, this implies costs of $4.66 for the North Channel and $4 for the Goodwood Island Reach. In cross-examination, he agreed that the basic cost of dredging was $2/m3, with an additional $2/m3 for a booster pump. In the course of cross-examination he gave evidence that he would charge $6 for the North Channel, but later in evidence said that he would charge $5, at least for part of it without a booster. There would also be mobilisation costs in the Boat Harbour though not in the River.

Mr Brereton puts that, based on the price for other jobs for which Mr Hollis quoted during the period, the price which was in fact quoted by Davidsons, the price which Mr Hollis charged in 1987, the circumstance that the booster added $2 and effectively substituted for the allowance for the indurated sands, and the variations in his evidence as to what he would quote, it should be found that Mr Hollis would have charged $4/m3 to contract dredge the North Channel and the Goodwood Island Reach. These figures are for solid cubic metres.

Mr Brereton points out that Davidsons quoted $1.80/m3 for dredging the North Channel to Hickey Island up to 900 metres, if the plaintiff supplied the loader and operator, and otherwise $2, and $3.65/m3 for a distance of 900 to 2,000 metres (which would have covered all the North
Channel and all the Goodwood Island Reach). Again the figures refer to solid cubic metres. The higher price included a booster presumably provided by
Davidsons.

Mr Davidson said that he made a loss on the Rosser subcontract even apart from the pipes and other material lost in the flood. However, Mr Brereton says that even after their experience in the North Channel, Davidsons quoted $3.75/m3, plus mobilisation and demobilisation costs of $29,500, in September 1992, to dredge from Mr Rosser's lease near Dart Island through a floating and submerged pipeline to a reclamation area, including one booster pump supplied and installed by Davidsons, with a second to be supplied and installed by Mr
Rosser. Again these would have been solid cubic metres.

Mr Davidson said that his actual costs of dredging in the North Channel were $2.66/m3. However, his weekly operating costs included rent and depreciation totalling $3,680, and insurance premiums totalling $820, which would not have been saved. These total $4,500 per week, and reduce the weekly operating costs from $20,234 to $15,734. When that is substituted in Mr Davidson's calculation, the adjusted costs are $2.07/m3 (solid). Mr Davidson adjusted his figures a number of times. His final figures estimated the costs of dredging from the North Channel at $2.78/m3, and from the Goodwood Island Reach at $7.28/m3. The weekly operational costs upon which these are based are to be found in his affidavit adjusted in the "Wednesday night document" (DX357, p9) being a weekly operating cost of either $14,000 or $14,593, and weekly layup costs of $3,763. The calculations from which those figures are derived appear in his affidavit (DA21, pp ll5, 116).

As to the weekly cost of operational plant, Mr Brereton says it includes rent and depreciation totalling $2,349, and insurance premiums totalling $331, a total of $2,680, which would not be saved. This, he puts, reduces Mr
Davidson's assessed total weekly operational costs from $14,593 to $11,913.
Similar adjustments to the layup costs result in a deduction of $1,208 rent and depreciation and $281 insurance, which Mr Rosser would incur in any event, and office running costs of $250, being a total of $1,739, reducing the total weekly layup costs from $3,763 to $2,024. Mr Brereton says that this cannot usefully be converted to a cost per cubic metre figure until the time which the contract will take to perform is known. Based on 62 weeks, this would produce 45 weeks operating costs totalling $536,085, and 17 weeks layup costs totalling $34,408, a total of $570,493. Even after allowing for costs of mobilisation this produces a significantly lower figure than any other analysis.

Mr Wills undertook an evaluation of the costs and expenses incurred by Mr
Hollis. This analysis showed that of the expenses incurred by Mr Hollis at least $3,647 of the $4,137 expenses shown as "insurance" for Caroona, would have been incurred in any event and would not represent a cost saved by not having to perform the contract. Adjustments also need be made because Mr
Rosser would not have incurred rent and living expenses as Mr Hollis did for rented premises at Yamba, nor would Mr Rosser in dredging to the dump sites have in the subcontract the expense of contract bulldozing. Again, Mr Hollis had paid the licence fee in November 1993, long before he deployed to the
North Channel in January 1994. It would not have been saved had the contract not proceeded, but was incurred in any event.

Mr Brereton makes various other adjustments to Mr Wills' exercise based on Mr
Hollis' figures and concludes that the costs actually incurred by Messrs
Hollis and Davidson in the North Channel are reasonable indicators of what the costs would have been to the plaintiff had he performed the contract himself.
However, in using them for the purpose of assessing his damages, there must be removed those elements which the plaintiff incurred in any event. Accordingly the results of $1.59 (Davidson) and $1.80 (Hollis) per loose truck metre respectively indicate what the costs would have been to the plaintiff. An alternative for the plaintiff was to subcontract, in which case a dredging contractor such as Davidsons or Mr Hollis would have performed all the work of dredging to the deposit site for the quoted price. So far as Davidsons is concerned, the best indication of what they would have quoted is what they actually quoted: $2 per cubic metre up to 900 metres, and thereafter $3.75 per cubic metre to 2000 metres. Despite Mr Hollis' protestations, Mr Brereton says that I should find that Mr Hollis would have quoted $4 for jobs up to 2000 metres. These are all solid metres and the bulking factor must be applied to convert them to loose truck metres, (producing about $3.20 per loose truck metre at a bulking factor of 1:1.25). Use of subcontractors for at least some of the dredging would have maximised the plaintiff's prospects of dredging all the sand within the available time, if notice were given.

Mr Brereton puts that the assumption that Mr Rosser would have done half the work himself and half by sub-contractors is a fair way of making the assessment. He says that using properly adjusted figures from Messrs Davidson and Hollis, one would arrive at a figure of $2.40 per loose truck metre.

Mr Donohoe, QC produced a series of tables, Schedule 1 to his submissions, which tended to show, when the prices were expressed in solid metres, a cost of about $6.50 per solid metre (equivalent to $5.20 per loose truck metre) and surprisingly a cost of about $11 when expressed in loose truck metres. In each case, the prices are based on the dredge operator employing a booster.

My preference is for Mr Davidson's final adjusted figures. Mr Brereton poured scorn on some of Mr Davidson's evidence and pointed out that he had frequently adjusted his figures. However, an expert who does adjust his or her figures shows some independence of mind. He or she has not, as so many experts have, nailed their colours to a mast, and cannot unfix them.

Although Mr Brereton furnished many pages of detailed calculations pointing to a much smaller cost for winning the sand, I cannot help feeling that, basically, the calculations and some of the adjustments are based on rather rubbery figures.

The final adjusted figures as per Mr Donohoe, QC's submissions were $2.30 per solid cubic metre from the North Channel ($1.84 per loose truck metre) and $6.01 per solid cubic metre ($4.80 per loose truck metre) from the Goodwood
Island Reach. I will adopt these figures as being as near as I can set the cost figure.

I also consider that Mr Brereton is correct when he puts that some of the dredging should be allowed for at subcontracting rates. However, as no reasonable sub-contractor would charge less than the cost of dredging, and one would have to include a figure for the sub-contractor's profit margin, I do not see why the figures I have accepted should be varied because of this consideration.
As to methodology, the accountants have agreed that the maximum amount of sand that could be dredged is 253,000 cubic metres. Of the amount sold, 85% needs delivery. The accountants have reached the same conclusion as to the costs of the operation. I believe I should accept their conclusion. Thus I find that the costs of loading are $2.30 per cubic metre and delivery to site is 40c per cubic metre. However, as previously mentioned, this figure does not have much place in the ultimate calculation. The cost of restoring the two dump sites and of complying with clauses 10 and 11 of the development consent is $11,860. I further find that in respect of sand won from the Goodwood
Island Reach stored on Palmers Island a royalty of 25c per cubic metre would be payable.

I will assume that, of the 180,000 cubic metres won, the first 52,000 cubic metres would be won from the North Channel and the next 128,000 cubic metres won from the more expensive site in the Goodwood Island Reach.
It follows from 8(a) that applying $2.30 per cubic metre solid to ,000 cubic metres solid produces $119,600 and $6.01 to 128,000 cubic metres produces $769,280. The costs referred to in 8(a) are thus $888,880.

To these one adds 25c royalty for each of 128,000 solid metres that in my view would have been stockpiled on Palmers Island, a total of $32,000, plus $11,860 restoration costs. There is thus $43,860 to be added to the dredging costs of $888,880 to produce a grand total cost of $932,740.
Mr Donohoe, QC puts that the task before the court is to assess the value to Mr Rosser as at September 1993 of a future income stream from such sand as he could have dredged over a six month period. As Mr Rosser still had sand left in December 1994, he would not have had the benefit of that stream until at least 1995. Thus, he says the income must be classed as future income and subject to the vicissitudes of commercial life. As Mr Lonergan is a specialist in this type of analysis and gave evidence that a discount rate of % would be appropriate, Mr Donohoe, QC urges me to adopt that figure.

Mr Brereton agrees that the income from the additional dredging would not have come on stream until 1995. He says that thereafter, it would have flowed to Mr
Rosser up until 1999. Thus the mid-point would be 1997. As the income will be received one year in advance, one discounts by 3% under the doctrine approved in Pennant Hills Restaurant Pty Ltd versus Barrell Insurances Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 145 CLR 625], 643. At the most, one applies a discount rate for the "real interest rate" which, on the evidence is 4.8%.

Mr Brereton puts that Mr Lonergan's 23% includes two factors, (a) present value; and (b) vicissitudes. Mr Lonergan's figure for (a) was (4.8 say) 5% and for (b) 18%. Mr Brereton says that this is inconsistent with the way courts approach these problems. Courts look at the full value of what would be received if the contingency occurred and then look at the chance it might occur. This is not what Mr Lonergan did, though the difference is small in the instant case. Moreover, Mr Brereton says, one must be careful to distinguish this case from cases such as Inchbald versus The Western Neilgherry Coffee Tea & Cinchona Plantation Co Ltd <case>; [(1864) 17 CB (NS) 733] or
Plessey Components Pty Ltd versus Cant - Young, J, 31 May, 1996 unreported, where the discount was for loss of the chance of making a contract. Here Mr
Rosser has a contract. The loss he has suffered is the chance to make a profit from that contract.

Mr Lonergan's expertise on these sorts of matter is not in doubt. However, I must be careful not to double count vicissitudes. I have already discounted the amount of sand that might be won for multitudinous events which may well have prevented Mr Rosser from reaching his goal of extracting 253,000 cubic metres from the bed of the Clarence River. It would be wrong to deduct that factor again. Accordingly, I should only adopt a figure to deal with the fact that Mr Rosser is receiving money in 1996 instead of later.

As I have said, Mr Brereton suggests that the mid-point for receipt of income would be 1997. I believe that on the evidence, it would have taken to 2001 to sell all the sand. The mid-point is thus 1998, so that two years' discount should be taken. On the 3% tables $1 payable in two years' time is worth 94.7 cents now.
On Mr Brereton's analysis, the question as to how one deals with the question of interest just does not arise. However, as I have approached the case on the basis that damages are to be assessed as at 16 September, 1993, the matter must be considered.

I agree with Mr Donohoe, QC's submission that a court of equity has inherent jurisdiction to award interest at an appropriate rate to compensate a plaintiff for loss, and is not constrained by interest rates prescribed by statute, see McDermott, Equitable Damages p 125.

In Madden versus Kevereski (1983) 2 BPR 9650, Master Cohen (as his Honour then was) awarded interest under <case> of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) from the date specific performance was refused, being the date the plaintiff was declared to be entitled to damages. In his reasoning he accepted that such an award compensated the plaintiff for being kept out of his money from when the court said he was entitled to it. In the present case, and recognising the flexibility of equity, the plaintiff's damages represent the value of an income stream as at 16 September 1993 that he would not have received until sometime later. On the evidence, Mr Rosser still had 250 cubic metres of unsold sand at Palmers Island as at 2 December 1994. Thus the court can draw the inference that Mr Rosser would not have had the benefit of any subsequent income stream until after that date.

The defendant submits that justice will be done by awarding Mr Rosser <case> interest on the amount of his damages from January 1995 to the date of assessment. The fact that he would not have received the whole of that income stream in January 1995 is already dealt with in the discounting exercise referred to above.

In my view, this is the correct approach. Indeed, if anything, it may be even slightly over-generous to the plaintiff.
Mr Donohoe, QC submitted that it follows from the approach of
Needham, J in ASA Constructions Pty Ltd versus Iwanov (supra) that mitigation is a relevant factor in cases under Lord Cairns' Act. This is because the object of the court is to do "complete justice" (Ferguson versus Wilson [(1866) 2 Ch App 77], 92). Equity thus will make some adjustment as a matter of justice where circumstances occur which, at common law, would have been adjusted under the doctrine that a plaintiff has a duty to mitigate. I did not understand Mr Brereton to submit to the contrary.
The onus of proving this matter is on the defendant. Mr Brereton submits that this evidentiary onus has not been discharged. Mr Donohoe, QC submits otherwise and says that the damages otherwise payable should be discounted by 10% for failure to mitigate.

The defendant relies on two matters to justify this discount. First it says that Mr Hutchinson's affidavit disclosed 16 possible jobs and Mr Rosser did not appear to have put in a tender for any of them.

Mr Hutchinson gave evidence of a number of dredging contracts that were available between December, 1993 and November, 1994 from Lake Illawarra North to Maroochy. However, the cross-examination made it clear that many of those jobs were not suitable for the Wooloweyah. Mr Donohoe, QC pointed out that Mr
Brereton had only cross-examined as to the first nine of the jobs Mr
Hutchinson had listed. I do not really consider that Mr Brereton needed to cross-examine on every job in Mr Hutchinson's list. Indeed, with some of the ones that were the subject of cross-examination, Mr Hutchinson showed he knew little of the details.

Mr Rosser says he retained Keith Dawson to help find him work. Mr Dawson is somewhat elusive: he has a mobile phone. Although there is no evidence as to the extent to which he publicises his phone number, I can assume that he is not at present likely to be publicising it. Mr Donohoe, QC suggests that I should discount this evidence. Even if I did so, it would not assist the defendant in proving failure to mitigate.

Mr Donohoe, QC then puts that while Mr Rosser attempts to explain why the contracts mentioned by Mr Hutchinson were unsuitable, the point is that Mr
Rosser was clearly making no effort to obtain other work. Finally, as a buyer and seller of dredges, the court should infer that he made no serious attempt to sell his equipment, notwithstanding his assertion through his solicitors that he was setting about that task. The defendant submits that, as a matter of justice, Mr Rosser's damages should be reduced by 10% to reflect his failure to mitigate.

I am not satisfied that Mr Rosser's claim should be diminished by any factor for failure to mitigate. Whilst it was to some extent surprising that with the demand for sand the way it is, the Wooloweyah has been parked workless on
Palmers Island for three years, there is little evidence as to what work was available to it.

The onus is on the defendant to establish this matter and it has not done so to my reasonable satisfaction.
I now turn to the ultimate question, What is the result of the litigation? 
From the above discussion, the following relevant conclusions emerge:- (From section 5(g)) 180,000 solid cubic metres would have been dredged; (From section 7(c)) The plaintiff would have sold all 180,000 cubic metres of sand; (From section 7(d)) The market price would have been $8 per cubic metre solid; (Deduced) The gross receipts would have been $1,440,000; (From section 8(c)) The gross costs were $932,740; (Deduced) The profit not adjusted for vicissitudes and before interest was $507,260; (From section 9(a)) There should be a deduction for present value by taking 94.7% of the figure in (f) which reduces the verdict to $480,375.

This 94.7% is based on the 3% tables; (From section 9(b)) Interest at the court rate should be payable from
January, 1995 to September, 1996. Taking the mid-point of both the first and the last months this is 20 months at 12% which is $96,075; (From section 10) There should be no discount for any alleged failure to mitigate; 
There thus should be a verdict for the plaintiff for $576,450.

I have been asked not to deal with the question of costs until after these reasons have been handed down and time has been allowed for digesting them.
However, I should note that as the order was not taken out in 1993, I should adjust the order for costs then pronounced that 90% of the costs be paid by the defendant so that it reads 90% of the costs up to and including 16
September, 1993.

Theoretically, the declaration as to the existence of the contract is probably unnecessary. However, it is still to my mind of utility. Perhaps it should be a little more refined than the version in the Short Minutes of September,
If the parties cannot agree on this, the form of declaration may be settled by a Registrar. The exhibits should be returned after 28 days or, if an appeal is lodged, when that appeal is concluded. However, the model dredge,
DX317 should, for safety, be handed out to the defendant's solicitors now on the basis that, should there be an appeal, it will be brought to the hearing before that court.
This question assumes that I was in error in holding that condition which allowed either party to give three months' notice of termination did not apply to the varied contract (vide pp 35-6 of my earlier judgment). On this assumption, Mr Rosser's contract could have been terminated by three months' notice at any time.

Three months' notice was in fact given on 19 March, 1993 (Ex DX115). If my previous determination was erroneous, Mr Rosser would have had to cease work and remove his equipment by 19 June, 1993.

The determination of the question depends in part on how long it would take Mr
Rosser to demobilise his equipment and to restore the dump sites. It also depends on whether one should treat the plaintiff as being absolved from the obligation of restoring Hickey Island. In view of my earlier findings, I will make this assumption.

Excluding school holidays, there would have been 18 weeks of productive dredging available to Mr Rosser less the time taken for demobilisation. It would have been much more difficult for Mr Rosser to marshal sub-contractors and additional dredges to assist him, thus, on the balance of probabilities, he would only have used one dredge. Doing the best I can, I consider that, had there only been limited time, Mr Rosser would have removed the 52,000 cubic metres from the North Channel and only that sand.

At a selling price of $8 per cubic metre and at a basic cost of $2.30 per cubic metre plus on-cost of $11,860, the loss would be $284,540.
($416,000-[$119,600+$11,860]). One then discounts this at .971 for present value for one year. This is for a one year advance payment as only a smaller amount of sand needs to be sold. This produces $276,288.

Interest should, for the reasons already set out, only run from mid-January,
Thus one adds interest at 12% for 20 months, namely $55,257 to get a gross verdict on the stated premiss of $331,545.
 * * * 
