

Boral Formwork versus Action Makers [2003] NSWSC 713 (5 August 2003) 
Last Updated: 15 August 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Boral Formwork versus Action Makers <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity  
FILE NUMBER(S): 3350/03  
HEARING DATE{S): 8 July 2003  
JUDGMENT DATE: 05/08/2003  
PARTIES: 
Boral Formwork & Scaffolding Pty Ltd (P) 
Action Makers Ltd (In Administrative Receivership) (D1) 
National Australia Bank Ltd (D2)  
JUDGMENT OF: Austin J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
R J Weber SC with K M Richardson (P) 
P R Graham QC with A J Bulley (D1)  
SOLICITORS: 
Carter Newell, Lawyers (by their Sydney agents: Hunt & Hunt) (P) 
Toomey Pegg Drevikovsky (D1) 
Bernadette Baynie, Solicitor for National Australia Bank (D2)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACT - implied negative stipulation - whether supply agreement contained implied negative stipulation qualifying seller's right to call on standby letter of credit - COMMERCIAL LAW - irrevocable standby letter of credit - principle of autonomy and exceptions - exceptions for negative contractual stipulations and unconscionable conduct contrary to Trade Practices Act - scope and application of exceptions - TRADE AND COMMERCE - unconscionable conduct under ss 51AA and 51AC of the Trade Practices Act - whether seller under supply agreement engaged in unconscionable conduct by demanding full payment on letter of credit without allowance for repair costs of defective goods  
ACTS CITED:  [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) ss
AA, 51AC  
DECISION: 
Declarations made and injunctions granted  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
AUSTIN J  
TUESDAY 5 AUGUST 2003  /03 BORAL FORMWORK & SCAFFOLDING PTY LTD V ACTION MAKERS LTD (IN ADMINISTRATIVE RECEIVERSHIP) & ANOR  
JUDGMENT (revised 6 August 2003)  HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff ("Boral") seeks to prevent the second defendant ("the Bank") from paying the first defendant ("Action Makers") any amount in excess of $634,821.53 ("the Undisputed Amount") on a letter of credit issued by the Bank for the benefit of Action Makers. The proceeding began on 18 June 2003, and on that day Campbell J granted the plaintiff interim ex parte relief. The case returned to me on 8 July 2003 in the
Equity Duty List. At the request of the parties, I agreed to deal with it on a final basis. The contest is between Boral and Action Makers. The Bank has lodged a submitting appearance.  Boral and Action Makers entered into an agreement under which Action Makers, an English company, was to manufacture and deliver to Boral approximately 48 containers of scaffolding equipment referred to as "SuperCuplok scaffold components". Boral's first purchase order was issued on 2 May 2002, and it procured the letter of credit which is now the subject of contention on 16
July 2002. Boral and Action Makers entered into a written supply agreement on October 2002, only after at least two purchase orders had been placed.
Nevertheless the parties accepted, at the final hearing, that the supply agreement governed their contractual relationship.  Action Makers delivered only 18 containers of scaffolding components to
Boral. After inspecting goods delivered, Boral determined that the product was defective because it did not meet the specifications set out in the supply agreement. On 21 February 2003 it wrote a letter setting out details of defects. Later, Boral carried out rectification work on the goods, incurring expenditure for that purpose.  In their letter to Boral's solicitors dated 30 June 2003, the solicitors for
Action Makers made the following concession, upon the basis of which the final hearing was conducted:  "Your client may proceed on the understanding that, without admissions and solely to enable the convenient disposal of the injunction proceedings on a final basis ..., our client will not argue that your client does not have a valid claim against our client in the nature of the claim described in your client's letter of 21 February 2003."  On 3 February 2003, Derek Oakley and Simon Thomas were appointed joint administrative receivers of Action Makers in the United Kingdom. On 5 June they made a demand on the Bank, purporting to act as agents for Action
Makers, for payment of $808,886.92, the full amount of the invoices rendered by Action Makers for scaffolding components supplied to Boral ("the Invoice
Amount"). The Bank has paid the part of that amount Boral admits to be owing, namely the Undisputed Amount. The balance of the amount claimed, $174,065.39 ("the Disputed Amount"), is alleged by Boral to be the cost of the rectification work, which Boral claims to be entitled to deduct from the
Invoice Amount. The question for determination is whether Boral is entitled to prevent the Bank from responding to the Receivers' demand on the letter of credit for the Disputed Amount.  
The supply agreement  The supply agreement, which is governed by the law of New South Wales, is for a term of four years, and relates to the manufacture by Action Makers, and its supply to Boral, of products specified in an annexure to the agreement, and to the technical specifications set out in another annexure. The agreement provides for Boral to place purchase orders from time to time for deliveries at times agreed in writing between the parties. The product is sold CIF for delivery to ports in Australia, risk passing on delivery to the stipulated port (clauses 3 and 14).  Clause 7 of the agreement is relevantly in the following terms:  "Boral shall throughout the term of this agreement provide to Action Makers an irrevocable standby letter of credit in the form acceptable to Action Makers to the value of each order. Payment shall be made by Boral to Action Makers, in Australian Dollars, within 90 days of the date of invoice .... Boral will make all payments to Action Makers electronically and directly into Action
Makers [sic] nominated bank account."  Action Makers may render invoices on an interim basis to cover any instalment of products delivered (clause 24.3), and may charge interest on any payment that is overdue by more than 30 days (clause 24.5). It may assign any debt owing to it by Boral to a third party (clause 24.11).  By clause 9.1, Action Makers warrants that all products will conform to the drawings and specifications, and that they have been manufactured in accordance with the manufacturing procedures set out in the annexure to the agreement or provided by Boral at the time of manufacture. By clause 9.3
Action Makers warrants that it will comply with the technical specifications set out in the annexure.  Clause 24.9 provides that, within four weeks of the arrival of each delivery to the designated port, Boral must (if appropriate) deliver to Action
Makers a rejection report setting out details of any material defects by reason of which the products delivered are not in accordance with the specification. This provision does not restrict Boral from bringing claims at a later point in time. Clause 24.10 says that if there is any difference of opinion between the parties as to whether any products supplied are in accordance with the specification, either may request that the matter be determined by a person appointed by agreement, or by a representative of the
Australian Institute of Engineers.  It is not clear whether the written complaints made by Boral about the products delivered amounted to a "rejection report" for the purposes of clause .9, but nothing seems to turn upon whether a rejection report was delivered.
Clause 24.10 applies whether or not a rejection report has been delivered under clause 24.9. Boral purported to invoke clause 24.10 in the circumstances that I shall describe, but the administrative receivers did not agree and no one was appointed to act under that clause.  Clause 24.13 applies where a valid warranty claim arises, which is properly notified to Action Makers in accordance with the agreement. It states that  "Action Makers will at its option and expense either:-  replace the non-complying or defective Products as soon as reasonably practicable; or  require Boral (subject to acceptance by Boral) to retain the Products and grant to Boral an appropriate allowance against the Contract price; or  take back the non-complying or defective Products and refund the appropriate part of the Contract price; or  take such steps as Action Makers considers necessary to make the Products comply".  
The clause also states that Action Makers is to be liable to Boral for all losses suffered or incurred by Boral in connection with the warranty claim to a maximum of $2,236,713.  
The letter of credit  The letter of credit is described as an irrevocable standby documentary credit, issued on 16 July 2002 on the application of Boral as drawer, in favour of Action Makers as beneficiary, for $2,300,000, freely negotiable at any Bank. The drawee is the Bank.  The following text is included:  "WE HEREBY ESTABLISH IN YOUR FAVOUR THIS STANDBY LETTER OF CREDIT AVAILABLE
WITH ANY BANK AGAINST PRESENTATION OF YOUR DRAFTS DRAWN ON NATIONAL AUSTRALIA
BANK .... 
THIS STANDBY LETTER OF CREDIT IS OPENED TO FACILITATE THE SALE OF SCAFFOLDING
COMPONENTS BY THE BENEFICIARY TO THE APPLICANT.  "PAYMENT UNDER THIS CREDIT WILL BE MADE UPON RECEIPT BY US OF THE ABOVE DRAFTS
AND THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENT IN DUPLICATE 
BENEFICIARYS CERTIFICATE STATING THE AMOUNT CLAIMED AND CERTIFYING THAT  \+ SUCH AMOUNT REPRESENTS FUNDS DUE TO BE PAID TO THE BENEFICIARY BY BORAL
FORMWORK AND SCAFFOLDING PTY LTD  \+ SUCH AMOUNT WAS NOT PAID TO THE BENEFICIARY WHEN DUE BY BORAL FORMWORK AND
SCAFFOLDING PTY LTD IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE UNPAID INVOICE NO .......... DATED .............. DEMAND FOR PAYMENT OF SUCH AMOUNT HAS BEEN MADE BY THE
BENEFICIARY ON BORAL FORMWORK AND SCAFFOLDING PTY LTD AND SUCH DEMAND HAS
REMAINED UNSATISFIED".  On 25 June 2003, five days before the letter of credit was due to expire, it was amended to extend the date of expiry from 30 June to 29 August 2003, and to decrease the amount covered from $2,300,000 to the Disputed Amount.  
The correspondence  As I have said, Boral wrote on 21 February 2003 to complain about defective products. The letter, written on behalf of Boral by Mr Montocchio, was addressed to Mr Oakley and Mr Thomas, the administrative receivers, and was written at a time when Boral had received seven containers of product. He set out particulars of defects in the product, and referred to the options contained in clause 24.13. He said that Boral would prefer to effect the necessary rectification work and deduct the cost of doing so from the price.
Boral's proposal was to deduct $24,057.93 for the cost of inspection, transport and repair, excluding storage charges. Mr Montocchio invited the administrative receivers to indicate whether they were agreeable to Boral's proposal by 26 February, on the basis that if they were, Boral would waive any claim it had for costs and losses suffered as a result of the product being defective.  On 11 March 2003 Mr Montocchio sent an e-mail to the office of the administrative receivers, reporting that the rectification work on the seven container loads of scaffolding had nearly been completed, and listing additional costs that had been incurred for storage, supply of components and travel. The total repair costs were stated as $98,825.92. Mr Montocchio said that, as regards the remaining 11 containers Boral was receiving, he anticipated that there would be some rectification work of which he would notify the administrative receivers in due course.  On 5 June 2003, without having replied to Mr Montocchio's letter of 21
February and his e-mail of 11 March, Mr Oakley, purportedly on behalf of
Action Makers, made a demand for payment of the Invoice Amount. This was the full price on 18 invoices, rendered over the period from 5 November 2002 to 30
January 2003, and listed in his letter. Mr Oakley's letter said that if full payment of the Invoice Amount was not received by return, "we" (presumably, the administrative receivers) would exercise a right to claim for the total amount under the letter of credit. The letter of demand made no reference to
Mr Montocchio's correspondence.  On the same day Mr Oakley made a demand upon the Bank for payment under the letter of credit to the order of Action Makers, for the Invoice Amount. The demand was expressed to be made by Mr Oakley as administrative receiver of
Action Makers, "acting as agent and without personal liability". He provided a beneficiary's certificate for the purposes of the letter of credit, as administrative receiver on the same basis, certifying that the amount claimed represented funds due to be paid by Boral in respect of 18 invoices, particulars of which were listed. The certificate said that a demand for payment had been made on Boral and the demand remained unsatisfied. This is presumably a reference to the demand made bearing the same date as the certificate. Neither the certificate nor the demand on the Bank referred to the dispute about defective product.  On 6 June 2003 solicitors acting for Boral responded to the letter of 5
June, asserting that the goods provided to Boral contained numerous defects, failing to meet the specifications set out in the supply agreement, and that
Boral had incurred costs adding up to the Disputed Amount in rectifying the defects. They sought an undertaking that the administrative receivers would not exercise their rights under the letter of credit for seven days, to give the solicitors time to take full instructions from Boral. They said that if the administrative receivers were to exercise their rights pursuant to the letter of credit, Boral would hold them personally liable for any loss or damage it may thereby incur. I infer that Boral's solicitors were not aware that Mr Oakley had already made a demand on the Bank.  When they received no reply to their letter of 6 June, the solicitors for
Boral wrote again on 10 June 2003, reiterating their request for an undertaking that the administrative receivers would not exercise rights under the standby letter of credit for seven days. They gave further particulars of
Boral's claim with respect to defective product, and referred to the letter of February and the e-mail of 11 March. They asserted that the containers of scaffolding components received after 21 February contained components with a higher number of defects than in the previous containers. They said that Boral would pay the Undisputed Amount, being the Invoice Amount less the cost of rectifying defects, in full and final settlement of the matter.  On 10 June 2003 a Manchester firm of solicitors, apparently acting for the administrative receivers and the company in administrative receivership, replied to the letters of 6 and 10 June. They said that it is an essential characteristic of a letter of credit that it is an autonomous contract, and that its performance is independent of the underlying transaction to which it relates (propositions described by Campbell J on the ex parte application as "uncontroversial": <case> (18 June 2003), paragraph [7]). They asserted, controversially, that the existence of a "potential" claim by Boral against Action Makers did not prevent the latter from exercising its rights under the letter of credit. They rejected the assertion that Boral could hold the administrative receivers personally liable for the action they might take, as agents of the company, in respect of the letter of credit.  Boral's solicitors replied on 11 June. They demanded to know whether Action
Makers had made a call on the letter of credit. They drew attention to the terms of the supply agreement and Boral's right to make a claim in respect of defective product under the agreement. They asserted that it is a condition of the letter of credit that the beneficiary certifies that the amount claimed represents funds due to be paid to the beneficiary by Boral, and that in light of the dispute with respect to defective product, Action Makers could not certify that the Invoice Amount was due. They asserted that the administrative receivers were not acting in good faith, because they had failed to respond to
Boral's correspondence, and because they were proposing to take unnecessary action on the letter of credit, having regard to Boral's offer to pay the
Undisputed Amount.  By another letter also dated 11 June 2003, Boral's solicitors offered to pay the Undisputed Amount immediately, and to pay the Disputed Amount into a trust account of an independent third party pending resolution of the dispute.
They also said that Boral would agree to an independent third party being appointed to consider the dispute, without expressly referring to clause .10.  The Manchester solicitors replied on 11 June 2003. They rejected the payment proposal and said that their "client" (presumably, the company in administrative receivership) had exercised its rights under the letter of credit. They repeated the claim that, as their "client" (presumably, the administrative receivers) was acting as agent of the company, Boral would not be able to hold the client personally liable for action in respect of the letter of credit. They concluded:  "Should your client wish to bring proceedings against the Company, it would be an unsecured creditor in any future liquidation. We understand that there will be nil dividend to unsecured creditors."  On 18 June 2003, after obtaining ex parte orders from this Court, Boral's solicitors wrote again to the solicitors for the administrative receivers, reiterating the offer to pay the Disputed Amount into a trust account of an independent third party and to agree to appoint an independent third party to consider the dispute. This time specific reference was made to clause 24.10.  On 18 June 2003 the solicitors for the administrative receivers replied, raising various questions about the ex parte relief ordered by this Court, and rejecting Boral's offer.  The parties arranged that the Bank would pay the Undisputed Amount to the administrative receivers, but the Disputed Amount has not been paid.  
Relief sought  By its amended summons, Boral seeks the following relief:  * declaratory orders that, in calling for payment under the letter of credit in a sum greater than the Undisputed Amount, Action Makers is engaging in conduct that is in all the circumstances unconscionable, or unconscionable within the meaning of the unwritten law of New South Wales;  * injunctions restraining the Bank from paying to Action Makers any amount in excess of the Undisputed Amount, and requiring Action Makers to countermand the demand it has made for payment upon the letter of credit, and restraining Action Makers from making any further demand under the letter of credit.  Boral claims to be entitled to this relief on three grounds:  on the basis of an implied negative stipulation in the supply agreement;  pursuant to <case> of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth); or  pursuant to <case> of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).  In these ways Boral seeks to overcome what is often referred to as the principle of autonomous operation of instruments such as letters of credit, performance bonds and bank guarantees. I shall begin by revisiting briefly the principle of autonomy and its exceptions. I shall then consider the proper construction of the letter of credit in light of that principle. Boral's first ground depends on the proper construction and application of the supply agreement, matters which I shall then consider in detail. I shall then address
Boral's second and third grounds.  
The principle of autonomy and its exceptions  Broadly speaking, the principle of autonomy provides that the financier's unconditional payment obligation in commercial instruments is independent of the underlying contract between the applicant for the instrument ("the account party") and the beneficiary of the instrument; therefore, with limited exceptions, courts do not interfere with performance of the payment obligation. The principle was developed in respect of documentary letters of credit, and was applied to standby letters of credit and various kinds of demand guarantee (including performance bonds) as these instruments were developed: A Ward and G McCormack, "Subrogation and Bankers' Autonomous
Undertakings", [(2000) 116 LQR 121], 122ff; R Edwards, "On-demand Guarantees or Performance
Bonds: Rotten at the Root", [(2002) 18 Australian Banking and Finance Law
Bulletin 13.]  In its simplest form, a documentary letter of credit is an arrangement between an importer, a bank and an exporter, under which the bank irrevocably undertakes to pay the exporter upon production of stipulated documents (including, typically, a bill of lading) before the credit's expiry date, and is reimbursed by the importer. The arrangement permits the exporter to ship the exported goods with assurance of payment.  Whereas a documentary letter of credit requires documents which evidence the shipment of goods under a contract of sale, a standby letter of credit requires documents which evidence money owing but unpaid by the account party to the beneficiary, frequently suggesting a breach of the underlying contract.
That being so, a standby letter of credit is in some ways akin to a guarantee, but it is a primary obligation of the financier, and the payment obligation is typically expressed to arise upon the receipt of documents rather than upon the account party's default under the underlying contract. The required documentation depends upon the terms of the instrument - it may be an externally produced document such as a certified judgment or arbitral award, or a certificate of some kind given by the beneficiary itself.  Bank guarantees and performance bonds are similar to standby letters of credit, in that the financier undertakes an obligation to pay the beneficiary on receipt of documentation, but frequently the documentation is nothing more than a demand for payment up to the stipulated amount. Typically the financier's obligation is expressed to be "unconditional" as well as irrevocable. Again, these instruments have some similarities with a guarantee, but they are primary obligations expressed to be unconditional once a demand is made in accordance with the instrument.  Standby letters of credit, bank guarantees and performance bonds are often considered together in the cases and by commentators, because they have the same commercial purpose. In part, the commercial purpose is simply to provide security against default by the account party in the underlying contract.
Frequently, however, the payment obligation arises without proof of default, upon the making of a demand on or the provision of documents to the financier.
Where that is the case, the commercial function of the arrangement is to protect the beneficiary from carrying credit risk during the course of a dispute with the account party as to money due under the underlying contract.  The leading statement of the principle of autonomy in Australian law is found in Wood Hall Ltd versus Pipeline Authority <case>; [(1979) 141 CLR 443.] There the beneficiary of an unconditional bank guarantee had called upon the financier to make payment. The High Court declined to interfere to restrain the financier from acting on the call, or to require the beneficiary to countermand it. Gibbs J said (at 451):  "By each of the bank guarantees, the Bank 'unconditionally' undertakes 'to pay on demand' the sum demanded up to the limit specified in the bank guarantee.
To hold that the bank guarantees are conditional upon the making of a demand that conforms to the requirements of the contract between the Authority and the contractor would of course be quite inconsistent with the express statement in the bank guarantee that the undertaking of the Bank is unconditional. To hold that the Bank should not pay on receiving a demand, but should be bound to inquire into the rights of the Authority and the contractor under a contract to which the Bank was not party would be to depart from the ordinary meaning of the undertaking that the Bank is to pay on demand. It would be contrary to the settled rules governing the implication of terms in contracts to imply provisions that would contradict the ordinary meaning of the words of the bank guarantees in this way."  Stephen J said (at 457):  "Their Honours were, with respect, entirely correct in their conclusion that none of the four guarantees is, by any process of implication or construction, to be deprived of the unqualified operation which its express words dictate the. Not only does the clear, indeed empathic [sic], language of these guarantees preclude the introduction of any such qualification: to introduce such a qualification would be to deprive them of the quality which gives them commercial currency. Once a document of this character ceases to be the equivalent of a cash payment, being instantly and unconditionally convertible to cash, it necessarily loses acceptability. Only so long as it is 'as good as cash' can it fulfil its useful purpose of affording to those to whom it is issued the advantages of cash while involving for those who procure its issue neither the loss of use of an equivalent money sum nor the interest charges which would be incurred if such a sum were to be borrowed for the purpose.
Being 'as good as cash' in the eyes of those to whom it is issued is essential to its function."  The history of the principle of autonomy was outlined by Young J in
Hortico (Australia) Pty Ltd versus Energy Equipment Co (Australia) Pty Ltd [(1985) 1 NSWLR 545.] As his Honour pointed out (at 551), prior to the 1960s the principle developed out of commercial practice regarding documentary letters of credit, and appears to have been treated as absolute. However, an exception to the principle was suggested in cases of fraud (Young J gave as an example a case where the exporter ships rubbish or empty cartons), in a line of English cases beginning with Hamzeh Malas & Sons versus British Imex Industries Ltd [[1958] 2 QB 127]; see also, for example, Discount Records Ltd versus Barclays Bank
Ltd [[1975] 1 WLR 315]; Edward Owen Engineering Ltd versus Barclays Bank International
Ltd [[1978] QB 159]; Themehelp Ltd versus West [[1995] 3 WLR 751]; Solo
Industries (UK) Ltd versus Canara Bank [[2001] 1 WLR 1800]; the "fraud exception" was explored by the Batt J in Olex Focas Pty Ltd versus Skodaexport Co
Ltd [1998] 3 VR 380, 397, where reference is made to the Australian authorities; see also P Zohrab, "Standby Letters of Credit: Fortex", [[1996]
NZLJ 392.] It has not been contended that the facts of the present case fall into the fraud exception.  Another exception to the principle of autonomy, invoked by Boral in the present case, was suggested in English cases such as Elias & Rabbath v
Matsas & Matsas [[1966] 2 Lloyd's Rep 495]; see also Potton Homes versus Coleman Contractors [(1984) 28 BLR 19.] This is the notion that the Court may, at the suit of the account party, grant an injunction to restrain breach, by the beneficiary of the instrument, of an express or implied negative stipulation in the underlying contract, namely a stipulation to the effect that the beneficiary will not call upon the financier to meet its unconditional payment obligation if there is a bona fide dispute between the beneficiary and account party. By this means, the Court does not interfere directly with the autonomy of the financier, but it prevents the beneficiary from invoking the financier's autonomous obligation.  More recently English courts have expressed strong reluctance to exercise the injunction jurisdiction in such cases, on the ground that, although an injunction to restrain the beneficiary from breaching the underlying contract does not directly interfere with the autonomy of the payment obligation, the effect of intervening in this way is to break down the separation between the underlying contract and the independent financing contract: Bolivinter Oil SA v Chase Manhattan Bank [[1984] 1 Lloyd's Rep 251], at -7 per Donaldson MR; Group Josi Re versus Walbrook Insurance Co Ltd [[1996] 1
WLR 1152], at 1161-2 per Staughton LJ.  However, there is now a solid line of authority in Australia for the view that an injunction is available to restrain breach of an express or implied negative in the underlying contract, where the beneficiary has not yet made a call on the instrument, or a call has been made but not acted on. In Wood
Hall, Stephen J expressly left open the possibility that such an injunction might have been granted had there been an appropriate qualification on the beneficiary's power in the underlying contract: 141 CLR at 459. In Hortico,
Young J made a statement the same effect at 550-551. Yeldham J granted such an injunction in Pearson Bridge Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority of New
South Wales (1982) 1 Australian Construction LR 81, and this case has been followed in other first instance decisions in New South Wales: for example,
Barclay Mowlem Construction Ltd versus Simon Engineering (Australia) Pty Ltd [(1991) 23 NSWLR 451]; other cases are collected in my judgment in Reed
Construction Services Pty Ltd versus Kheng Seng (Australia) Pty Ltd (1998) 15 BCL
Of course, as those cases make clear, there is no basis for intervention by injunction unless, as a matter of construction of the contract between the account party and the beneficiary, there is a relevant express or implied stipulation that is truly negative: cf R Perrignon, "Performance Bonds and
Standby Letters of Credit: the Australian Experience", [(1991) 2 Journal of
Banking and Finance Law and Practice 157.]  The issue was addressed by the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
Victoria in Fletcher Construction Australia Ltd versus Varnsdorf Pty Ltd [[1998] VR 812.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1998%5d%203%20VR%20812 "View LawCiteRecord" ) Charles JA reviewed the Pearson Bridge line of authority without demur, but he distinguished those cases on the ground that the building contract before him did not contain any qualifications upon the owner's right to call on the security. Callaway JA referred to the observation of Staughton LJ in the Group Josi case, that the effect on the lifeblood of commerce is precisely the same whether the guarantor (typically a bank) is restrained from paying or the beneficiary is restrained from asking for payment. He continued :  "There is nevertheless an important difference between restraining a bank from honouring a guarantee and restraining the beneficiary from calling upon it. In the former case the moving party seeks to prevent the bank from performing its contract; in the latter case the moving party seeks to prevent the beneficiary from breaching a provision of the underlying contract. A moment's reflection will show that the beneficiary, unlike the Bank, maybe restrained if there is an express provision in the underlying contract against calling upon the guarantee. In theory an implicit or implied prohibition is just as good."  His Honour noted, however, that the implication of a term cannot be made if it would stultify, or be inconsistent with, the purpose for which the guarantee was taken. Batt JA agreed with the reasons given by Charles and
Callaway JJA.  A third exception to the principle of autonomy, also relied upon by Boral, arises out of the Australian statutory provisions dealing with unconscionable conduct, ss 51AC and 51AA of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). I shall consider this exception later, as its application depends upon some matters of construction and fact dealt with below.  
Construction of the letter of credit  The letter of credit is expressed to be "irrevocable" but not "unconditional". It provides that payment will be made upon receipt of a draft and the beneficiary's certificate. It prescribes the contents of the certificate, saying inter alia that the certificate is to state that the amount claimed "represents funds due to be paid to the beneficiary by Boral", and that the amount "was not paid to the beneficiary when due by Boral" in accordance with a specified unpaid invoice. The certificate must also say that a demand for payment of that amount has been made by the beneficiary on Boral and the demand has remained unsatisfied.  Where the instrument in question is a bank guarantee, under which the bank "unconditionally" undertakes "to pay on demand" the sum demanded up to the limit specified, the Court will adopt a construction of the instrument that reflects the unconditional nature of the payment obligation, and will not make the bank's payment obligation depend upon the claimant establishing an entitlement to be paid under its contract with the person who procured the bank guarantee. The observations of Gibbs and Stephen JJ in Wood Hall are applicable. The instrument is treated as "unconditionally convertible to cash", in the words of Stephen J.  A standby letter of credit provides for payment by the financier on receipt of documents, rather than simply on demand. Whether a standby letter of credit should be construed in the same fashion as a bank guarantee or performance bond depends upon the commercial purpose of the instrument. It is theoretically possible, though highly unlikely, that in a case where the purpose of a letter of credit is nothing more than to provide security for payment of valid claims, the financier's obligation to pay might depend on its being satisfied that the beneficiary has a valid claim against the account party for the amount called upon. Where, more typically, the commercial purpose of the arrangement is to shift the credit risk from the beneficiary pending resolution of a dispute between the beneficiary and the account party, the financier's payment obligation arises as soon as it receives documents complying, ex facie, with the description in the instrument. In such cases (as Gibbs J observed in Wood Hall, in the passage quoted above), the financier is not bound to inquire into the rights of the beneficiary and the account party under the underlying contract to which the financier is not party.  In the Fletcher Construction case, the Victorian Court of Appeal held that the commercial purpose of the arrangement under which a standby letter of credit had been issued was the shifting of credit risk pending resolution of disputes rather than the simple provision of security for payment of valid claims (at 821 per Charles JA). The letter of credit required the beneficiary to supply the financier with a statutory declaration to the effect that the amount claimed represented the amount remaining unpaid to the beneficiary under the building contract. It was argued that the statutory declaration must record facts establishing the existence of a real obligation to pay the amount claimed, and it was not sufficient that the declarant have a bona fide belief that the beneficiary was owed that sum of money. The argument was rejected.
Charles JA observed (at 823) that the parties had precisely agreed that it would be sufficient for the declarant to make a statement that the amount remained unpaid.  Similarly, in the present case there is nothing in the supply agreement (considered under the next heading) to suggest that the commercial purpose of the arrangement for supply of the letter of credit was anything other than the shifting of credit risk from Action Makers to Boral pending resolution of disputes. The letter of credit provides, in clear and express terms, that payment will be made upon receipt of documents including a beneficiary's certificate stating that the amount claimed represents funds due to be paid by
Boral. As between the Bank and the other parties, the payment obligation arises as soon as the Bank receives a draft and a beneficiary's certificate which appears on its face to be in compliance with the terms of the letter of credit.  
Implied negative stipulation  Boral submits that, properly construed, the supply agreement contains an implied negative stipulation, to the effect that Action Makers promises not to call upon the letter of credit in respect of any amount that is the subject of a bona fide dispute as to indebtedness, and promises not to certify under the letter of credit in respect of such an amount. Boral makes the further submission that, even if there is no implied negative stipulation with respect to an amount the subject of a bona fide dispute, there must be such a stipulation where it is clear that the amount in question is not owing at all.  This submission makes some assumptions which deserve consideration. There are, broadly speaking, three questions to consider:  * whether, on the facts, Action Makers should be taken to have selected option (b) under clause 24.13 of the supply agreement;  * if so, whether the supply agreement permits Action Makers to demand full payment of the Invoice Amount after the option (b) procedure has been implemented;  * if not, whether there is any implied provision in the supply agreement which prevents Action Makers from claiming the full Invoice Amount after the contract price has been reduced under clause 24.13(b).  As to the first question, this is a case where (having regard to the concession made on behalf of Action Makers, set out above) a valid warranty claim has arisen, properly notified to Action Makers in accordance with the supply agreement. The obligation of Action Makers under clause 24.13 was, when the claim was made, to elect one of the four alternatives set out in that clause. Boral proposed option (b) in its letter dated 21 February 2003, and followed up that proposal on 11 March 2003, making it plain that repair work was being undertaken on the assumption that option (b) would apply. Action
Makers never demurred to Boral's proposals, although it was aware on 11 March, if not earlier, that repair work was being undertaken pursuant to option (b).
It did not take any of the steps that it would take under options (a), (c) or , if it were to select one of those options.  There is no direct evidence that a decision was made by Action Makers to select option (b). Counsel for Boral submitted that Action Makers either waived its right to elect for another remedy than option (b), or it was estopped from so doing.  The ambiguities in the concept of waiver, in its application to circumstances such as the present, were pointed out in some of the judgments in Commonwealth of Australia versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394: see Lewis v
Cook <case>; [(2000) 18 ACLC 490.] For example, Toohey J (at 467) recalled Roscoe Pound's observation that waiver is "a slippery word worn smooth with overuse". If the traditional formulation is used, describing waiver as an intentional act with knowledge (Craine versus Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Co Ltd <case>; [(1920) 28 CLR 305]; Grundt versus Great Boulder Pty Gold Mines Ltd <case>; [(1937) 59 CLR 641)], there has been no waiver, on the facts, because there has been no conduct by the administrative receivers that might satisfy that description, but at most acquiescence in the state of affairs assumed by
Boral. If the submission is intended to invoke the doctrine of election, it is doubtful whether the evidence establishes that a binding election was made.  In my view, however, the facts provide evidence of an estoppel of the kind referred to in Verwayen's case, at 500 per McHugh J (dissenting, as to the application of the principle); see also Austotel Pty Ltd versus Franklins Self
Serve Pty Ltd [(1989) 16 NSWLR 582], at 610 per Priestley JA; Wykes versus Samilk [[1998] Aust Contract R 90-097] at 14-15 per Sheller JA. In the passage cited, McHugh J explained (by reference to Grundt's case) that the common law does not permit "an unjust departure by a party from an assumption of fact which he has caused another party to adopt or accept for the purpose of their legal relations". He added that equity, like the common law, will not permit an unjust departure from an assumption of fact which one person has caused another to adopt or accept for the purpose of their legal relations, but whereas the common law doctrine is concerned with rules of evidence, the equitable doctrine creates rights.  By failing to assert any contrary view in response to Boral's letter of 21
February and its e-mail of 11 March, the administrative receivers created on
Boral's part an assumption of fact for the purpose of their legal relationship, the assumption of fact being that the administrative receivers had caused Action Makers to select option (b). The assumption of fact was created, at the latest, shortly after 11 March 2003, by virtue of the administrative receivers not replying to the e-mail of that date. Boral relied on the assumption and acted to its detriment by completing the repairs and incurring expenses in the sum of the Disputed Amount. Action Makers, and the administrative receivers as its agents, are estopped from denying that option was selected. Equity, like the common law, will not permit unjust departure from such an assumption. It does not matter whether one relies on the common law or the equitable doctrine, for it is enough that the estoppel prevents Action Makers from denying, in the present proceeding, the selection of option (b).  Since I have concluded that Action Makers should be taken to have selected option (b), it is relevant for me to consider the second question. Once the waiver or estoppel took effect, clause 24.13 obliged Action Makers to "grant to Boral an appropriate allowance against the Contract price". It is critically important to determine whether this obligation has the effect of reducing the liquidated amount that Action Makers is entitled to claim under the supply agreement.  The obligation of Action Makers under clause 24.13(b) is to grant an appropriate allowance against the Contract Price. As a matter of construction this amounts to contractual agreement that the allowance is to be set off against the contract price, thereby reducing the contract price once the allowance has been granted.  It is unnecessary for me to decide whether the wording of the clause means that, before the allowance has been granted, the obligation to grant an appropriate allowance reduces the contract price or suspends the obligation to pay any disputed amount. It is also necessary to decide whether failure to grant an appropriate allowance in breach of the obligation would give rise to a claim for a liquidated amount or unliquidated damages (compare Spain v
Union Steamship Co of NZ Ltd <case>; <case>; [[1956] VLR 436).]  This is because, once option (b) has been selected without an allowance being stipulated in advance, the obligation to grant an appropriate allowance means that Action Makers must make allowance for all repair costs reasonably incurred. The word "appropriate" is to be construed, in its context, as imposing on Action Makers an obligation to allow what is objectively appropriate, rather than as giving Action Makers a subjective discretion available to be exercised after the repair costs have been incurred. There is evidence before me that the Disputed Amount was the cost of repairs actually incurred by Boral, and no evidence to suggest that those costs were not reasonably incurred.  In the circumstances, it seems to me that, at some time before 5 June 2003 when the administrative receivers sought to draw upon on the letter of credit, they had come under a contractual obligation to set off against the contract price, that is the Invoice Amount, an allowance for the Disputed Amount. This reasoning has the consequence that, prior to 5 June 2003, the amount owing (that is, the liquidated sum payable by Boral to Action Makers for the goods) ceased to be the full invoice price and became the invoice price less the appropriate allowance.  I turn to the third question, which relates to the contractual position between Boral and Action Makers as drawer and beneficiary of the letter of credit. Clause 7 of the supply agreement obliges Boral to provide an irrevocable standby letter of credit "to the value of each order". There are provisions about payment, principally in clause 7, but they make no further reference to the letter of credit.  The supply agreement does not contain the kind of provision found in the contract between the account party and the beneficiary of the irrevocable instrument in the Barclay Mowlem and Reed Construction Services case - that is, a provision stipulating when the instrument is available to be called upon by the beneficiary. In Reed Construction Services, for example, a building contract between a builder who provided a maintenance bond, and the building proprietor who was the beneficiary of that bond, stated that any security provided by the builder was to be available to the proprietor whenever the proprietor came to be entitled to the payment of money by the builder under the building contract. I held that this provision implied a contractual promise by the proprietor that the security would not be called upon unless it was entitled to the payment of money under the building contract. Although the maintenance bond was an autonomous contract, and there would be no basis for interfering with the performance of that contract by the insurance company that wrote the bond, it was appropriate for the Court to issue an injunction restraining the proprietor from calling for payment on the bond in circumstances where its conduct in doing so would breach that implied negative stipulation in the building contract.  In the absence of such a provision in the supply agreement, it is not plausible to contend for the kind of implied negative term asserted by Boral.
If the contract between the account party and the beneficiary of an irrevocable instrument were to say, "the beneficiary shall be entitled, as against the account party, to call on the financier's irrevocable promise to pay, in X, Y and Z circumstances", it would be naturally implied, in the absence of some other provision, that these were the only circumstances in which it would be contractually permissible for the beneficiary to call upon the financier's promise to pay. Here, however, there is a requirement for the provision of a letter of credit to the value of each order but nothing is said in the supply agreement as to the circumstances in which the beneficiary of the letter of credit may demand payment under it, and the natural implication is that there is no contractual limit on such demands. The reference to the value of the order sets the maximum amount of the letter of credit, but those words do not imply any limitation as to the circumstances in which that value may be recovered from the financier.  Nothing in any other part of the supply agreement changes this analysis.
Clause 24.13(b) requires Action Makers to grant Boral an appropriate allowance against the Contract price, once that option has been selected and implemented, and under this provision (as I have said) the grant of an appropriate allowance reduces the amount thereafter due and payable on invoices rendered. But the supply agreement does not expressly deal with the effect of such a reduction in the invoice price upon Action Makers' ability to make demands on the letter of credit.  Since the letter of credit is required by clause 7 to be in place throughout the term of the agreement, to the value of each order, it must cover the value of the order when it is made, necessarily at a time prior to any warranty claim that may arise after delivery of product. It would have been a simple matter for the parties to provide, in the supply agreement, that if an allowance is made, after a warranty claim under clause 24.13(b), then
Action Makers shall not thereafter be entitled to claim on the letter of credit for an amount that disregards that allowance. They did not do so. It is perfectly sensible, as a commercial matter, for the parties to a supply agreement to agree that the seller is to be entitled to unrestricted access to a letter of credit notwithstanding a valid warranty claim, so as to shift the credit risk from the seller by giving it a security that it could use to put itself in funds pending settlement of the claim, subject to an obligation to account to the buyer for any net overpayment. It follows that any implied term to the contrary is not necessary to give business efficacy to the supply agreement, and is not so obvious that it "goes without saying": see BP
Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 at -3.  This is, in effect, the analysis adopted by the Victorian Court of Appeal in the Fletcher Construction case. Charles JA held ([1998] 3 VR at 821) that the relevant clause in the building contract made provision for allocation of risk between the owner and project manager by exhibiting a contractual intention that, pending resolution of any dispute between them, the project manager and not the owner was to be out of pocket. There was no implied term in the building contract limiting the owner's calls on the security to cases where it had established the validity of its claim for damages.  Boral submits that, as the letter of credit must, according to clause 7, be in a form acceptable to Action Makers, the supply agreement is to be construed harmoniously with the letter of credit, which requires the beneficiary to certify the amount due. But it is not out of harmony with the letter of credit to construe the supply agreement as I have. Bearing in mind the strict judicial approach to the implication of terms in commercial contracts, explained in many cases including the BP Refinery case, there would be no justification for implying into the supply agreement a provision limiting claims on the letter of credit to moneys actually due, on the ground that the letter of credit requires a beneficiary's certificate stating the amount due.
To do so would eliminate the significance that the parties have presumably intended to place on having that provision in the letter of credit rather than in the supply agreement. Again, my conclusion is consistent with the Fletcher
Construction decision, because in that case the building contract required that security be given in a form, and by a financial institution, approved by the owner.  My conclusion is that in the present case, Boral has failed to establish that there is an implied negative stipulation in the supply agreement grounding an entitlement to an injunction to restrain Action Makers and its administrative receivers from claiming the Disputed Amount from the Bank under the letter of credit.  
The Trade Practices case  My conclusions so far mean that, when Mr Oakley provided a beneficiary's certificate to the Bank on 5 June 2003, his certification that the Invoice
Amount represented funds due to be paid to Action Makers by Boral was false, and in fact the only amount due to be paid by Boral was the Undisputed Amount.
He also certified that demand for payment had been made and had remained unsatisfied. It seems to me that this statement was misleading, because it suggested the expiry of some interval of time between the demand and the certificate, whereas the demand for payment was in fact made only on the same day as the certificate. The question is whether, by calling for payment of the
Invoice Amount and supplying the certificate in these terms, Action Makers by the administrative receivers is engaging in unconscionable conduct for the purposes of ss 51AC or 51AA of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).  Section 51AA is in the following terms:  "(1) A corporation must not, in trade or commerce, engage in conduct that is unconscionable within the meaning of the unwritten law, from time to time, of the States and Territories. 
This section does not apply to conduct that is prohibited by <case> or
AC."  The section has the effect of bringing into the statutory regime of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) the general equitable concepts of unconscionability. It is clear that in the present case, in a transaction governed by the law of New South Wales, Action Makers by the administrative receivers engaged in conduct in trade or commerce. Section 51AB has no application, because the goods and services in this case are not of a kind ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic or household use or consumption. The question is whether the conduct in question was unconscionable within the meaning of the unwritten law of New South Wales.  The principle of autonomy, applicable to a standby letter of credit, cannot override the statute. As Batt J observed in the Olex Focas case, at 404, the effect of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) "is to work a substantial inroad into the well-established common law autonomy of letters of credit and performance bonds and other bank guarantees"; see also Ferro
Corporation (Aust) Pty Ltd versus International Pools Australia Pty Ltd [(1993) NSWLR 539] (as regards bills of exchange and injunctions restraining the exercise of the powers of sale of a mortgagee).  In Australian Competition and Consumer Commission versus Samton Holdings FCR 301, at 317, the Full Federal Court rejected submissions, based on the Explanatory Memorandum to the Amending Bill which brought the section into the Act, to the effect that its operation was limited to one species of unconscionable conduct; that is, the unconscionable taking advantage of a special disadvantage of another, a doctrine applied in Blomley v Ryan <case>; <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447.] The present case is clearly not one where the "special disadvantage" principle would be attracted.  I agree with counsel for Boral that the recent High Court decision in
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission versus Berbatis (2003) 77 ALJR 926 does not cast doubt on the correctness of the Full Court's decision in
Samton. Berbatis was in terms limited to its facts, and by the way in which the hearings had been conducted in the courts below and in the High
Court - the case was run as a "special disadvantage" case (at paragraph [5] per Gleeson CJ; paragraphs [45]-[46] per Gummow and Hayne JJ; paragraph [77] per Kirby J; and paragraphs [160]-[161] per Callinan J).  Boral submits that the aspect of unconscionability in equity that is most relevant to the present case unconscientious reliance on strict legal rights.
Counsel for Boral relies upon the following passages:  "Like most of the traditional doctrines of equity, it operates upon legal entitlement to prevent a person from asserting or exercising a legal right in circumstances where the particular assertion or exercise of it would constitute unconscionable conduct": Muschinski versus Dodds <case>; [(1985) 160 CLR 583], at 619 per Deane J;  "Underlying the approach taken in the Dagenham (Thames) Dock case and
Kilmer's case is an expansive view of the equitable doctrines of jurisdiction to relieve against forfeiture. This in turn conforms to the fundamental principle according to which equity acts, namely that a person having a legal right shall not be permitted to exercise it in such a way that the exercise amounts to unconscientious conduct ...": Legione versus Hateley <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 406], at 444 per Mason & Deane JJ.  
See also Stern versus McArthur [(1988) 168 CLR 489]; and Olex
Focas at 402.  Counsel also relied on the analysis taken by Rolfe J in Wilkinson v
Feldworth Financial Services Pty Ltd [(1998) 29 ACSR 642], at 745-6.
In that case of firm of solicitors, faced with an allegation of negligence, had sought to rely on an exclusion clause. The solicitors were entitled, at law, to do so. But it was submitted that it was unconscionable for them to rely on the exemption provisions where the necessity to do so arose from their own breach, and where they were aware of their breach and had not communicated it to parties who would not have been aware. Rolfe J accepted that submission, and said that there could not be "a plainer case of unconscionability in obtaining exculpation, by reliance on the exemption clauses, from knowing and continuing breaches".  It is plausible to contend that in the present case, by making a call on the letter of credit for amounts greater than was in fact due, by reason of facts known to the administrative receivers, and certifying incorrectly for that purpose, the administrative receivers caused Action Makers to act unconscionably for the purposes of <case>. However, the principle of autonomy, though it does not prevent the application of the statutory provision, is relevant to be taken into account in determining whether any specific relief should be ordered in respect of such conduct.  In the Olex Focas case the head-contractor called up the full amount of some performance bonds provided by the sub-contractor plaintiffs while there was a continuing dispute between them. Batt J declined to grant interlocutory injunctions to require the head-contractor to countermand the calls made on the bonds. Part of his reasoning on that point ([1998] 3 VR at 403) was directed to the balance of convenience in interlocutory circumstances, and is therefore not relevant here, as the question before me relates to final relief. Nevertheless, the Court has a discretion with respect to final relief, and it is relevant to note that Batt J took into account in the exercise of his discretion the undesirable effect that the grant of an injunction would have. His Honour also took into account the historical purpose and use of performance bonds, as discussed in the cases. I take that to be a reference to what I have called the principle of autonomy. He said that in Wood Hall, the
High Court noted "with apparent equanimity" that in making demands on the bank guarantees in that case, the beneficiary was pursuing a strategy of putting pressure on the account party so as to achieve an advantageous settlement of their dispute.  This would normally be so, in my view, even if the beneficiary is insolvent when the call is made on the irrevocable instrument. If the parties have agreed to protect the beneficiary from credit risk, there is unlikely to be anything unconscionable in the consequence that the beneficiary may (for the benefit of its creditors) call on the irrevocable instrument at the account party's expense, leaving the account party to claim in the beneficiary's insolvency if the dispute is resolved in its favour.  While those considerations are relevant in the present case, Boral's claim to unconscionable conduct goes beyond the matters considered by his Honour.
Boral says that Action Makers called on the letter of credit at a time when it was clear that the Disputed Amount was not a sum due, and was therefore not capable of being the subject of a beneficiary's certificate. This is not just a matter of calling upon the irrevocable instrument in order to apply pressure to settle a dispute. It is a case where, effectively, the dispute had been settled by virtue of the administrative receivers' acquiescence in Boral undertaking repairs after its letter of 21 February and its e-mail of 11
March, and then later, notwithstanding that acquiescence, Action Makers made a call on the letter of credit as if all those circumstances had not occurred.
In my opinion, considering the case on a final basis, it would be appropriate to make declarations and orders under <case>.  Section 51AC(1), which commenced after Batt J's decision in Olex Focas, is in the following terms:  "A corporation must not, in trade or commerce, in connection with:  the supply or possible supply of goods or services to a corporation (other than a listed public company); or  the acquisition or possible acquisition of goods or services from a corporation (other than a listed public company);  engage in conduct that is, in all the circumstances, unconscionable."  Boral, a proprietary company, is not a "listed public company", having regard to the definition in <case>(14), which in turn refers to <case> of the
Income Text Assessment Act 1997 (Cth) (under which "listed public company" means a company shares in which (except shares that carry a right to a fixed rate of dividend) are listed for quotation in the official list of an approved stock exchange). Under <case>(10), there is a monetary limit of $3 million on transactions to which the section can apply, but the present transaction is within that limit. The conduct in question is, as I have said, in trade or commerce. Therefore <case> potentially applies.  Counsel for Action Makers submits that <case> does not apply to the present circumstances because it is concerned with securing supply, rather than taking advantage of supply thereafter. I disagree with this submission. The section speaks of conduct "in connection with" the supply or possible supply of goods or services. The conduct challenged in the present case, making a call on a letter of credit issued under a supply agreement, is in my opinion clearly "in connection with" the supply of goods. In the words of Heerey J (Black CJ and
Tamberlin J concurring) in Monroe Topple & Associates Pty Ltd versus Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia <case> (19 June 2002), at [74]-[75] the conduct impugned accompanies, goes with or is involved with the supply of goods.  Counsel for Action Makers also submits that the section, being circumstantial in nature, is directed at protecting the weak and inexperienced, and has no application to conduct affecting a commercial entities such as Boral. It offers protection to people who cannot help themselves and to people who are at a disadvantage. But there is nothing in the section that, in terms, imposes a limitation of that kind. As I have said, this transaction is within the monetary limit.  In my opinion, just as the specified conduct of the administrative receivers is unconscionable within the unwritten law of New South Wales, so it is unconscionable within the words of <case>. For the same reasons as outlined in my findings under <case>, the presumption of autonomy does not provide an adequate discretionary reason for declining declaratory and injunctive relief on the basis of contravention of <case>. The position might have been different if this was simply a case of making a call on the irrevocable instrument to apply pressure to resolve the dispute. But here, the dispute was effectively over and the Disputed Amount was no longer owing, and it was unconscionable for Action Makers to use its rights under the letter of credit by certifying for payment of the whole Invoice Amount in those circumstances.  It is unnecessary for me to embark on any extensive analysis of the meaning of <case> in the present case. I am content to rely on the analysis of the
Full Federal Court in Hurley versus McDonald's Australia Ltd <case>; [[2000] ATPR 41,741] at 4,585, where their Honours said:  "For conduct to be regarded as unconscionable, serious misconduct or something clearly unfair or unreasonable, must be demonstrated ... . Whatever 'unconscionable' means in sections 51AB and 51AC, the term carries the meaning given by the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, namely, actions showing no regard for conscience, or that are irreconcilable with what is right or reasonable ... . The various synonyms used in relation to the term 'unconscionable' import a pejorative moral judgment ..."  That analysis has been cited with approval in the following cases:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission versus Simply No Knead
Pty Ltd <case>; [(2000) 104 FCR 253] per Sundberg J at [30]; Durkin versus Pioneer Permanent Building
Society Ltd  <case> at <case>; Old
Papa's Franchise Systems Pty Ltd versus Camisa Nominees Pty Ltd & Ors  <case> at <case>;
Francis versus South Sydney District Rugby League Football Club Ltd <case> per Lindgren J at [300]; Apple Computer Australia Pty Ltd versus George Mekrizis and Ors  <case> per Bergin J at [251]; and Overlook versus Foxtel  <case> per Barrett J at <case>, Lindgren J in Francis versus South Sydney District Rugby League Football Club
Ltd  <case>, and Sundberg J in Australian Competition and Consumer Commission versus Simply No
Knead (Franchising) Pty Ltd <case>; [(2000) 104 FCR 253.] But in my opinion they do not add materially to the analysis, except to make it clear that the word "unconscionable" in <case> is not limited to conduct that would be unconscionable according to equitable principles. Here, in my view, both the equitable principles and <case> are applicable. Having regard to <case>, relief in such circumstances is to be granted under <case> to the exclusion of <case>.  
Conclusion  Boral is entitled to declaratory orders under <case> that, in calling on payment under the letter of credit in a sum greater than the Undisputed
Amount, Action Makers by the administrative receivers is engaging in conduct that is in all the circumstances unconscionable. It has also established its entitlement to final orders requiring Action Makers by the administrative receivers to countermand the demand for payment of the Disputed Amount under the letter of credit, and restraining it from making any further demands under the instrument.  It is unnecessary to consider whether an order should be made against the
Bank, as Boral concedes that such an order is unnecessary if (as will occur) the injunctions against Action Makers sought in the Amended Summons are granted.  I shall direct Boral to bring in draft short minutes of orders, and hear the submissions of the parties on the question of costs.  I hope it is clear that, in deciding to grant the relief sought by Boral, I have given anxious consideration to the principle of autonomy and the dangers associated with any judicial intervention with the performance of unconditional commercial obligations. The terms of the irrevocable instrument and the underlying contract, properly construed, are highly relevant to the decision whether conduct in connection with those arrangements is unconscionable for statutory or equitable purposes. It is not normally unfair or unreasonable or otherwise unconscionable to exercise commercial rights under an autonomous commercial contract, even if (for example) for the purpose of applying pressure to resolve a dispute. Even if the conduct is unconscionable, the principle of autonomy is relevant to the exercise of the
Court's discretion to grant injunctive relief or leave the plaintiff to other remedies. Here the circumstances, involving as they do a call on the letter of credit on a false basis, are sufficiently special to overcome the hesitation which the principle of autonomy generates.  
LAST UPDATED: 12/08/2003 * * * 
