

Vella versus Wah Lai Investments Pty Limited Matter Nos Ca 41019/98; Ca /98; Ca 41022/98 [1998] NSWSC 776 (13 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 February 1999 
PAUL VELLA versus WAH LAI INVESTMENTS PTY LIMITED 
CA 41019/98 
CA 41021/98 
CA 41022/98 December 1998 
Mason P 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This application relates to some premises which were occupied as a hotel until May 1998, and now appear destined for redevelopment, at least so far as concerns the wishes of the owner. 
The owner is the first opponent, Wah Lai Investments Pty Limited. The second opponent is the Registrar General, who has not been joined in this application, but nothing I think turns upon this, because the Registrar
General was joined in the Court below and indicated in effect submission to the order of the Court.

In September 1995 the owner, whom I will refer to as Wah Lai, commenced proceedings in the Common Law Division for possession of the premises against the tenant, a company called Buddies Liquor Pty Limited, and the tenant's guarantor. The tenant held under a registered ten year lease. Repossession was sought, based upon allegations of breaches of covenant.

On 17 April 1996 the tenant and the guarantor consented to judgment. The judgment included a consent to an order to judgment for possession.

Some time after those orders were made Mr Vella, who is the claimant in the proceedings before me, sought to be joined in those now completed Common Law proceedings. He sought to be joined in order to be able to challenge the consent judgment. The interest which he propounded was that of a transferee holding under a transfer executed by Buddies Liquor in 1994 of the term of the lease. The transfer was not submitted for registration until some date in
The claimant also contended that the judgment for possession was flawed because he, Mr Vella, was in occupation of the premises and had not been served with the requisite notice.

Sully J heard a contested application, and on 29 January 1998 dismissed the application by the claimant to be added as a party to those Common Law proceedings. His Honour's orders are technically interlocutory, but they flow in consequence of a contested hearing on the merits.

His Honour, as I read the judgment, accepted that there had been a transfer of the lease executed. However, having regard to subsequent events associated with the difficulties the claimant had in becoming an acceptable licensee to the Liquor Registration Board, and rearrangements that were then made involving a company and the de facto wife of the claimant, Sully J was satisfied that at the relevant time the claimant, though present at the premises, was not there as an occupier.

His Honour's reasons disposed of the variously formulated arguments advanced on the claimant's behalf to the effect that he had some interest in the premises at the relevant time that would have given him an entitlement to be let into the proceedings, or alternatively to impugn the judgment for possession. That judgment was given on 29 January 1998, and was not the subject of any challenge in this Court until very recently.

The proceedings in the Common Law Division to which I have adverted were really antedated by some proceedings commenced in the Equity Division by the claimant. They sought to enforce against various parties the rights flowing from the 1994 transfer of lease, and in the alternative to claim damages or compensation.

Those proceedings stood in abeyance while the application before Sully J was fought and determined. After the determination of that application the judgment for possession was executed, and on 14 May 1998 all persons then present at, I use the words advisedly, the hotel premises were evicted pursuant to a writ of possession. These included the claimant.

Subsequently, on 17 June 1998, Bryson J gave judgment in which, following a contested hearing before him, he ordered that an earlier interlocutory injunction, which restrained the Registrar General from registering certain dealings and an earlier undertaking given by Wah Lai, should be dissolved and released respectively. His Honour held that there was power to do this, and that the matter that had been litigated and effectively determined, albeit on an interlocutory basis by Sully J, followed by the subsequent events, was such that it was appropriate to dissolve that interlocutory injunction and that undertaking.

The clear intent and effect of his Honour's orders to enable the registration by Wah Lai of an instrument which, when registered, would remove from its freehold title any endorsement relevant to the lease. If the lease went, then any instrument claiming under the lease would obviously be incapable of subsequent registration. It will be apparent from what I have said that the claimant was party to the proceedings before Bryson J.

For various reasons which I will not repeat, his Honour considered the position as it then appeared, and expressed the view that there was no real prospect that the claim to become registered proprietor of the lease would succeed, in the light of events which have happened since August and September .

A further application was made quite recently to Windeyer J for an interlocutory injunction to restrain the Registrar General from removing the lease from the register, and for a Mareva injunction to restrain Wah Lai from disposing of various assets. The Mareva injunction was refused on the ground that his Honour was not satisfied there was any evidence of a threat to dispose of assets, and I am not persuaded that any material has been put before me that would indicate any error on that behalf.

Windeyer J was presented with some evidence, said to be fresh evidence which entitled him to revisit the matters litigated before Sully J and Bryson J.
Technically it was open to do that, those earlier proceedings having been interlocutory only. The material advanced was said to ground allegations of unconscionable conduct, or worse, which were made or adverted to indirectly, just as they were made and adverted to indirectly before me, to the effect that some form of wicked conduct in the eye of the law or of equity occurred when the consent judgment was entered into between Wah Lai and Buddies Liquor back in April 1996.

I am far from satisfied from that material that it gets anywhere near supporting any form of challenge, even of some form of unconscionable conduct.
After all the tenant at all times was Buddies Liquor, and the material indicates that, though there had been an assignment initially at least to the claimant, the assignee fell into arrears with payment of rent and rates and the like.

But more importantly, Windeyer J held that the new material sought to be relied upon was material that would have been available, indeed was available.
It was in court at the time of the hearing of Sully J, produced on subpoena from the Liquor Administration Board, or perhaps other parties. The simple fact is it was not tendered.

I have to remind myself that this application is made in aid of the appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Before me are three sets of appellate proceedings, an application for leave to appeal out of time from Sully J's judgment, an application for leave to appeal out of time from Bryson J's judgment, and an application for leave to appeal from Windeyer J's judgment.

Like Windeyer J, I am of the view that the real time to have fought the issues was at the earlier proceedings, not in a technical sense of issue estoppel, but in the sense that when the Court is asked to grant an interlocutory injunction, it is relevant to take into account the issues fought at those earlier times, the outcome of the applications before Sully J and Bryson J and the failure to have challenged the judgments that were then made, particularly at the time when possession was given on 14 May 1998.

I regard the prospects of leave to appeal being granted in relation to Sully J and Bryson J's interlocutory judgments as very remote, especially given the lapse of time that has occurred and the events that have occurred since Sully
J's judgment. I consider that the prospect that the so called fresh evidence might persuade a court to be indulgent as to time are not good, for the reasons expressed by Windeyer J. I cannot therefore see any basis for granting an injunction in aid of those applications that would persuade me to do so.

The proceedings before Windeyer J, as I have already said, were very much an attempt by a fresh interlocutory proceeding to re-agitate matters that had been determined after a hearing on the merits - interlocutory, not final - in the earlier proceedings. I do not see any error in the way Windeyer J addressed the issues before him. No new material has been presented before me to indicate some basis upon which it would be likely that an appellate court would overturn the refusal of the interlocutory injunction that Windeyer J refused to issue to the Registrar General.

For those reasons I refuse the applications for interlocutory relief, whether by way of stay or injunction, that are made I believe in each of the three summonses for leave to appeal that have been filed in this Court. Those summonses at the moment are in the form of holding summonses. I have been shown in draft form ordinary summonses for leave to appeal, which contain (in part) material no longer required by the Rules. What is now required is a white book containing the material prescribed in the Rules. Be that as it may, it is obviously open to the claimant to pursue, if so advised, the three summonses for leave which have been filed, at least in a holding form, at this stage. But I am not disposed to order any injunction in aid of those various proceedings, which I consider to be pretty hopeless in prospect.

Accordingly, I refuse the applications with costs.
 * * * 
