

Regina versus E H Heuston [1996] NSWSC 652 (23 December 1996) 
REGINA versus Eric Harold HEUSTON REGINA versus Neil HEUSTON REGINA versus Shane Neville
HEUSTON /96, 60656/96, 60789/95 
Monday 23 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, JAMES J, SIMPSON J 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PRACTICE - ALIBI - CROWN EVIDENCE IN REPLY 
The three appellants were charged with a number of offences involving alleged assaults with weapons. The issue in the case was whether the appellants were present on the occasion in question. Each appellant gave a notice of alibi, the notices of the first and second appellants being given well out of time and shortly before the trial. The Crown's investigation of the alibis was continuing up until the close of the Crown's case. The trial judge gave leave to the Crown, pursuant to s405A of the Crimes Act, to call this evidence in rebuttal of the alibis of the first and second appellants in reply. It was argued that this caused a miscarriage of justice - HELD - The discretion of the trial judge did not miscarry and there was no miscarriage of justice.

CRIMINAL LAW AND PRACTICE - UNSWORN STATEMENTS - DIRECTIONS 
The trial judge instructed the jury that they could compare the unsworn statements of each appellant for evidence of collusion - HELD - This produced a miscarriage of justice in the case of the third appellant who still had a viable alibi after the Crown evidence in reply.

O R D E R S Appeal of first appellant against conviction dismissed.
 (By majority) Appeal of second appellant dismissed.
 Each of first and second appellants to have leave to appeal against sentence, but appeals dismissed.
 Appeal of third appellant allowed. Convictions and sentences quashed. New trial ordered.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In August and September 1995, the appellants were tried before his Honour Judge Twigg QC and a jury in the District Court at Port Macquarie. They were each charged with three offences of assault, one offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, and one offence of using offensive weapons (pistols) with intent to commit an indictable offence, namely, assault. The first two appellants were convicted of all five offences. The third appellant was convicted of four offences and acquitted of one. They appeal against their convictions and seek leave to appeal against their sentences.

The principal issue in the appeals concerns the manner in which the trial was conducted in relation to certain alibis raised by the appellants, and the
Crown's response to those alibis. In that respect, the position of the third appellant, Shane Neville Heuston, is somewhat different from that of the other two appellants, and he relies upon considerations and arguments additional to those relied upon by the other appellants.
 
Background facts 
The charges arose out of events alleged to have occurred on 29 November 1991, at Kinchela Creek in northern New South Wales.

It was common ground at the trial, and emerged in evidence at an early stage, that the first two appellants, Eric Heuston and Neil Heuston, and the principal Crown witness and complainant, Craig Goodwin, had all been engaged in criminal activities, including activities relating to the supply of cannabis. The first two appellants both have long criminal histories. (The sentences imposed upon the second appellant, following his conviction in the present case, are not due to commence until the year 2003, because of other sentences he is serving).

The third appellant is the son of the first appellant, and the nephew of the second appellant.

All three appellants were known to Craig Goodwin prior to 1991. It is not presently relevant to examine the background of that association.

According to the evidence of Craig Goodwin, the incident giving rise to the charges against the appellants arose out of their belief that he, Goodwin, had given information to the police against them. Goodwin did not report the incident to the police until March 1993, his reason being fear.

Goodwin said that at about 1.30 pm on Friday, 29 November 1991, whilst he was home alone, he was visited by the three appellants. According to Goodwin, the first appellant produced a pistol and pointed it at Goodwin, accusing him of being a "dog". Goodwin attempted to wrestle the gun away from the first appellant and, in the course of the struggle, tore the palm of his right hand, which bled profusely. A scar on his hand was shown to the jury at the trial.
The second and third appellants joined in the struggle and kicked and punched
Goodwin. The third appellant produced a pistol of his own and placed it against the back of Goodwin's head. Goodwin stopped struggling.

According to Goodwin, the first appellant then put a pistol at Goodwin's throat and said that they were going to hang Goodwin and make it look like suicide. The second appellant went into a bedroom and returned with a wire coathanger which he used to tie Goodwin's hands. His hands were tied so tight that the circulation in his hands stopped. A pillowcase was placed over
Goodwin's head.

At that stage a car arrived at the premises, and Goodwin's de facto wife,
Rachel Crisp, and his brother, James, entered. They also were allegedly assaulted. The first appellant said that the appellants had a grudge against
Craig Goodwin for "giving information to the coppers". A written statement which Goodwin had made to the police was located and produced to the appellants. Its contents appeared to reassure the appellants about some matters. The appellants then left, warning Goodwin not to speak to the police.

James Goodwin and Rachel Crisp supported Goodwin's version of what happened.
Their evidence was in certain respects corroborated by an insurance salesman named Clark.

The alibis 
Prior to the commencement of the trial, although, at least in the cases of the first and second appellants, well out of time, the appellants gave the Crown notices of alibi defences.

The trial commenced on 28 August 1995.

The first appellant, Eric Heuston, gave a notice of alibi on 24 January 1995.
It was expressed fairly briefly. The particulars of the alibi were that the appellant was in Sydney on 29 November 1991, having his motor vehicle's windscreen repaired by his brother, Lee Heuston, at Novus Windscreens at
Bankstown. (Novus Windscreens had an outlet at Bankstown, where Lee Heuston worked. It also had an outlet at Blacktown. The difference between the two outlets was of some evidentiary significance, but need not be pursued here.)
It could be inferred from the notice that Lee Heuston would be a witness in the defence case. Nothing was said in the notice about the detail of any evidence Lee Heuston would give.

The notice of alibi of the second appellant, Neil Heuston, was given, shortly before the trial, in three instalments, on 27 and 28 July, and 16 August 1995.
It was to the effect that, on the day of the alleged offences, Neil Heuston was at 21 Cooper Street, South West Rocks, painting a house belonging to Ann
Horne. It was said that the accused would call Ann Horne, and her neighbour,
Mr Arthur, to support that alibi. It was also said that the appellant's son would be called to give evidence that, on the day in question, he drove to
South West Rocks to collect his father from work, 29 November 1991 having been the last day on which the appellant had been engaged in painting the house.

The substantial delay in the giving of the second appellant's alibi notices is of significance in considering criticisms that have been directed to the Crown in relation to the time and manner of its investigation of those alibis. The evidence showed that Mrs Horne, who was a friend of the Heuston family, had discussed her evidence with the appellant's solicitor at least as early as
August 1994, and probably earlier. There was no satisfactory explanation as to why it was left until the end of July 1995, shortly before the trial, to give the alibi notices. Under the relevant statutory provisions they should have been given more than a year before they were given.

The third appellant, Shane Heuston, had given a notice in July 1994, to the effect that he would call his mother-in-law, Mrs Dodds, as an alibi witness.
During the trial that notice was amplified to say that at all material times on 29 November 1991, the appellant was at his residence in South Kempsey.

A feature of all three alibis was that the evidence to be called to support them came substantially from relatives of the accused or family friends.

In due course, each of the three appellants made an unsworn statement, in which he repeated the alibi foreshadowed in the relevant notice. The witnesses referred to in the alibi notices were called in the defence case.

It is common ground on this appeal that evidence called by the Crown, in its case in reply, exploded the alibis of the first two appellants. The witness who supported the alibi of the third appellant was challenged in cross- examination, but, in the case of the third appellant, the Crown did not profess to be able to establish, as it unquestionably did in the case of the first two appellants, that his alibi was untrue.

The course of the trial 
It is necessary to go into some detail concerning the course of the trial.

The Crown case in chief ended on 13 September 1995.

A number of exchanges between counsel, which occurred between 28 August and 13
September 1995, and which are recorded in the transcript, show that, over that period, the Crown was continuing its investigation of the alibis, although, statements of some of the witnesses upon whom the Crown ultimately relied had been obtained in August 1995, prior to the commencement of the trial. For example, on 1 September 1995 the Crown prosecutor sought further particulars of the third appellant's alibi, and sought access to a diary of Mrs Dodds. He was given access on 4 September. Later evidence showed that on 10 September a person (Mr Wearne) made a statement to the police about the first appellant's alibi, and on 11 September 1995 an important piece of evidence about the first appellant's alibi (Mrs Pincevic's invoice, which will be referred to below) was located. Mrs Pincevic made a statement to the police on September.

In the case of the alibi of the first appellant, the investigative work remained incomplete at the time of commencement of the trial. Further investigation was conducted by police, at the urging of the Crown prosecutor, and this investigative work continued right up to the time when the Crown case in chief was closed.

In the case of the alibi of the second defendant, one vital piece of evidence favourable to the Crown only came to light when the Crown prosecutor interviewed a material witness on 19 September, some days after the Crown case in chief was closed.

At no stage before the Crown closed its case in chief was there any disclosure by the Crown to the legal representatives of the appellants of such information as the Crown by then had been able to obtain concerning the alibi defences. Nor was there any request by the legal representatives of the appellants to see any such information, although, as was mentioned, it was known that the matter was the subject of ongoing and uncompleted investigation.

On 13 September 1995, the Crown prosecutor closed his case without calling any evidence touching upon the alibis. However, before anything relevant further happened, he sought leave to re-open the Crown case to tender the notices of alibi. This was opposed, but leave was granted. The transcript records argument on the matter, but, so far as appears from the appeal book, including the judgment of the trial judge giving leave to re-open, the precise basis upon which the notices of alibi were said to be relevant to the Crown case was not made clear. It does not seem to have been suggested that the Crown was setting out to prove that the raising of false alibis demonstrated a consciousness of guilt, and in that respect, constituted a positive part of the Crown case against each appellant. The Crown did not, in its case in chief, call any evidence specifically aimed at proving the falsity of the alibis. It may be that at least part of the purpose of tendering the notices of alibi in chief was to meet the possibility that the appellants, in their respective cases, would give alibis different from those that had been foreshadowed. In that respect, Twigg DCJ referred to the obligation of the
Crown to anticipate matters and not to keep its material until reply. His
Honour noted that trial counsel for the appellants had not been able to point to any prejudice which their clients would suffer as a result of the tendering of the notices, they having indicated in the course of argument that they would conduct their respective cases in accordance with the notices that had been given.

The action of the Crown prosecutor in tendering the notices of alibi as part of the Crown case in chief was neither unusual nor irregular (Reg v
Rossborough [(1985) 81 Cr App R 139];
R versus Fields and Adams [[1991] Crim.L.R. 38).] As was observed in argument on this appeal, if the Crown were to tender a notice of alibi only in reply, that could prevent an accused person who did not seek to rely upon the alibi, or who gave a different alibi, from giving an explanation of what had occurred. It will often be the case that the Crown will not know what course an accused proposes to take in relation to an alibi, and there is usually no way of binding the accused to any particular course before the
Crown case is closed. The trial judge was right to conclude that, in the circumstances of this case, the tender of the notices was not unfair to the accused.

The case for the first appellant was then opened. It began with his unsworn statement. He spoke about his relationship with Craig Goodwin, and gave information which, if accepted, would have suggested a motive on the part of
Craig Goodwin to seek to injure him. He then explained how difficult it is for a person to account for his movements on a particular day when there has been a delay in making an allegation against him. Fortunately, however, he said, in the course of his examination of his records a most important matter had come to light. Whilst driving his car on one occasion, a stone had caused a chip on the windscreen. He took it to be repaired to Novus Windscreens. He did not suggest that his brother actually fixed the windscreen. Some other employee fixed it. That was what he was doing on the day of the alleged offence. He was in Sydney, hundreds of miles from where the alleged offence was committed, having his car windscreen repaired.

Following the unsworn statement of the first appellant, his brother, Lee
Heuston, a windscreen repairer by occupation, was called to give evidence. The witness said that in 1991 he was employed by Novus Windscreens. He corroborated his brother's evidence. However, he went further. He said that he had made a check of the records of Novus Windscreens and had obtained a copy of the invoice for the work in question. The invoice was No. A12164, and it had noted on it the words "Lee's brother", which were relevant to the obtaining of a staff discount. He produced the relevant copy invoice, and other records of Novus Windscreens which he said tended to demonstrate the genuineness of the invoice. No previous reference to the invoice, or the business records of Novus Windscreens, had been made in the evidence, although it appears that the police, to the knowledge of the accused, had been investigating the records of Novus Windscreens.

In the course of his cross-examination of Lee Heuston, the Crown prosecutor made it clear that he intended to challenge the authenticity of the invoice upon which the witness was relying. It is unnecessary to go into the details of that challenge. It suffices to say that it is common ground on this appeal that the challenge was successful, and that the invoice produced by Lee
Heuston and tendered in the defence case was shown, by the cross-examination of Lee Heuston, and later by the evidence of a witness called by the Crown in reply, to have been a forgery. It may be noted, however, that the cross- examination of Lee Heuston had to be interrupted because the Crown prosecutor had not yet been able to obtain from Novus Windscreens all the documentary material relevant to the cross-examination.

Next, the case of the second appellant, Neil Heuston, commenced. He also made an unsworn statement, and gave as his alibi that he was painting Mrs Horne's house on the day in question. He gave some supporting details about the work he did and the amount of money he was paid. A medical practitioner, whose evidence is presently immaterial, was then called. Then the defence called Mrs
Horne, Mr Arthur, and the appellant's son who all gave evidence along the lines foreshadowed in the notice of alibi.

On 15 September 1989, at the end of the cross-examination of Mrs Horne, counsel for the second appellant told the judge that it had come to his knowledge that Mrs Horne's former husband had made a statement to the police and was likely to be called to contradict her evidence. The transcript then records the following: "Mr Little called for a statement and asked if the Crown would be calling him. The Crown indicated that he expected to call him and undertook to make the statement available to the defence.
 
Mr Barber (counsel for the first appellant) stated that usually, in alibi matters, police get statements and they are supplied to counsel - this has not happened in this matter - Mr Barber called for all statements in the possession of the Crown relating to alibi witnesses. The Crown Prosecutor stated he was unable to comply with the call at this stage but he undertook to do so at some time this evening. The Crown Prosecutor advised the names of those persons who had given statements were Charles Bidwell, Paul Horne, Anna
Pincevic, and Patrick Ian Wearne".
 
It later appeared that the statement of Paul Horne was dated 9 August 1995, the statement of Charles Bidwell was dated 9 August 1995, the statement of
Anna Pincevic was dated 12 September 1995, and the statement of Patrick Wearne was dated 10 September 1995. Those statements were made available to the defence on the afternoon of 15 September, after the court had adjourned for the day. By that time the second appellant had made his unsworn statement and
Mrs Horne had given her evidence.

The case for the second appellant was followed by the case for the third appellant. He made an unsworn statement, and then called his mother-in-law to support his alibi. She was cross-examined to suggest that she was not telling the truth. There was no material which disproved her evidence, although aspects of her evidence might well have been regarded as unconvincing.

After the cases for the appellants closed, the Crown indicated an intention to call a case in reply, consisting of the evidence of Paul Horne, Charles
Bidwell, Anna Pincevic and Patrick Wearne. The opposition to that course, the applications for a discharge of the jury, and the rulings and directions of the trial judge will be considered below.

In due course, the evidence of the four witnesses was called in reply by the
Crown. The evidence of Mr Bidwell, which was supported by contemporaneous records, destroyed the alibi of the second appellant. That evidence proved that the painting work at the home of Mrs Horne had been done in September, not November, 1991. The evidence of Mrs Pincevic destroyed the alibi of the first appellant. It proved that she was the person to whom receipt A12164 had been issued, and that the genuine receipt related to her motor vehicle. Her evidence, together with other documentary material, showed that the receipt produced by Lee Heuston, and relied upon in the case for the first appellant, was a forgery. She was not cross-examined.

The key Crown witnesses in relation to the alibis were Mrs Pincevic and Mr
Bidwell. There is one potentially significant practical difference between them. The evidence of Mr Bidwell, and its significance, would have been comprehensible to the jury, when considered in connection with the second appellant's notice of alibi, if it had been available and had been called during the Crown's case in chief. The same, however, is not true of the evidence of Mrs Pincevic. A reader of the first appellant's notice of alibi, who knew nothing else about the case for the first appellant, would have no understanding of the possible significance of Mrs Pincevic's evidence. Her evidence proved that a certain document, then in the possession of the appellant's solicitors, was a forgery, but there was no mention of such a document in the first appellant's alibi notice. Indeed, it was not mentioned by him in his unsworn statement. Mrs Pincevic was called to contradict Lee
Heuston's evidence about the invoice; but that evidence had not been foreshadowed in the notice of alibi.

The second appellant's principal alibi witness, Mrs Horne (who used her unmarried name, McDonald) said in her evidence in chief, in the defence case, that she and Mr Horne had purchased a house at South West Rocks in August , that it had been painted by the second appellant, and that the painting finished on Friday, 29 November 1991. That was the date of the alleged offence. The witness said she was able to check the date by reference to her bank statements.

In the Crown case in reply, the former husband of the witness, Mr Horne, said that the second appellant had indeed painted the house in 1991. The work, he said, took about a week. At the same time, building work was being done by Mr
Bidwell, a builder. Mr Horne did not say exactly when the building and painting work was done.

Mr Bidwell, when called in the Crown case in reply, said that the renovations to the Horne house, including the painting, were done in September, not
November 1991. His diary was produced, and that showed conclusively that his evidence was true, and that Mrs Horne was in error about the dates.

The evidence showed that, before the trial, Mrs Horne, at the request of the second appellant's solicitor, had telephoned Mr Bidwell to check on the dates.
The clear inference is that she passed on to the solicitor what Mr Bidwell told her. Mr Bidwell told Mrs Horne that she was wrong in thinking that the relevant work had been done in November. It had been done in September. Mrs
Horne was cross-examined above the conversation with Mr Bidwell. She sought to resolve the problem by the suggestion that Mr Bidwell might have worked at her house in November as well as September, and that it was in November that he saw the second appellant doing some painting. It was Mr Bidwell's response to that suggestion which gave the alibi its quietus. He proved by reference to his diary that he could not have been at Mrs Horne's house on 29 November, and that he was never there in November. That piece of evidence, which was not referred to in the statement which the police took from Mr Bidwell on 9
August, first came to the knowledge of the Crown on 19 September, when the
Crown prosecutor interviewed Mr Bidwell on the morning on which he was called in the Crown case in reply.

The case provides a good illustration of the differing circumstances that can arise in relation to alibi defences, and in relation to the Crown's response to such defences.

The rulings and directions of the trial judge 
Reference has already been made to the leave granted to the Crown, on 13
September 1995, immediately following the close of the Crown case, to re-open the Crown case to tender the notices of alibi.

Reference has also been made to the application by counsel for the appellants, on 15 September 1995, to see the statements of any witnesses upon whom the
Crown intended to rely in answer to the alibis and the Crown's response to that application. The statements were then made available to the legal representatives of the appellants.

On 18 September 1995, at the conclusion of the case for the second appellant, and before the case for the third appellant commenced, trial counsel for the appellants complained to the judge about the fact that the Crown appeared to be intending to lead a case in reply, in answer to the alibis. The Crown prosecutor foreshadowed an application to present a case in reply. At that stage nothing conclusive was decided.

The third appellant then presented his case.

At the conclusion of the case for the third appellant, on 18 September 1995, the Crown made an application for leave to present evidence in reply to rebut some of the matters raised in the alibi defence for the first and second appellants. The Crown indicated that it wished to call the evidence of Mrs
Pincevic, Mr Wearne, Mr Horne, and Mr Bidwell. The application was opposed by counsel for each of the appellants. On 19 September 1995, Twigg DCJ gave a judgment in the Crown's favour. He referred to <case> of the Crimes Act, and the decisions of the High Court in Killick versus The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1988) 62 ALJR 503.] 
It was not suggested at the trial, and has not been suggested on this appeal, that a consequence of allowing the Crown to lead the evidence in reply was that any of the appellants would be, or were, prevented from calling any evidence upon which they might seek to rely on the issues raised by the alibis. This is not a case of the kind referred to by the Court of Criminal
Appeal in R versus Browne [(1987) 30 A Crim R 278] at - 297 (the case which went to the High Court under the name of Blewitt).
It is not a case where the appellants were unfairly prejudiced by being prevented, as a result of the Crown's being given leave to call evidence to reply, from putting before the court evidence which they could have had available if the evidence called in reply had been called in chief.

It being apparent that the evidence to be called in reply related only to the first and second appellants, counsel for the first and second appellants then sought a discharge of the jury on substantially the same basis as that on which they had opposed leave to call evidence on reply. That application was refused.

The four witnesses mentioned above were then called by the Crown in reply with the consequences earlier discussed.

After that happened, trial counsel for the third appellant made an application for the discharge of the jury which, he acknowledged, was virtually an application by his client for a separate trial.

In his judgment refusing that application, Twigg DCJ said: "Mr Barnett puts once again ..... that Mr Shane Heuston has nothing to do with the evidence in reply. The Crown concedes that this related to the alibi defences of Eric and Neil Heuston. The point Mr Barnett makes is that there may be a "rubbing off" effect if there is any prejudice in the jury's mind created by the admission of this evidence.
 
I cannot see necessarily that there is no more than the necessary prejudice to which I referred by evidence that is brought in relation to Eric and Neil
Heuston (sic). As Mr Barnett says, the highest he can put it is that there may be some prejudice in the jury's mind because of that. If there is any possible prejudice I am quite certain the jury will understand, when I deal with alibis and give the proper directions I give in relation to the Crown's duty to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt and the jury will be properly instructed and there will be no basis for this application".

The concern being expressed by counsel for the third appellant was that the alibis of each of his two co-accused had been destroyed, in circumstances which indicated dishonesty, and this might mean that the jury would not give proper, separate, consideration to the case of the third appellant, unaffected by what had happened to the alibis of the first and second appellants. In dismissing what was in effect an application for a separate trial, the trial judge indicated an intention, in the course of his directions, to protect the third appellant from that possibility.

When Twigg DCJ summed up to the jury, he told them that their obligation was to return a separate verdict, in respect of each charge, and in respect of each accused. He stressed that the jury needed to consider each charge separately. Later he said that, although this was a joint trial, the appellants were individually charged and must be so treated. He said they were entitled to have the material presented in respect of each appellant considered separately. The jury were warned to put aside any inclination to consider the appellants as "the Heustons".

The trial judge, in the context of directing the jury about the onus of proof, subsequently warned the jury that when the accused person puts forward an alibi, he does not thereby assume any burden of proving that claim. The burden of proving the guilt of the accused continues to rest upon the Crown.

His Honour reviewed in sequence the evidence of the various witnesses in the case, including the evidence of Mrs Pincevic, Mr Wearne, Mr Horne and Mr
Bidwell. He then said: "The Crown suggests from all this evidence, that you firstly cannot accept the alibis of the two accused, Eric Heuston and Neil Heuston. They say to you that those alibis must be rejected as false if you accept the evidence of the latter witnesses that I referred to, and remember that the Crown must negate the alibi defences. None of the accused have to prove anything to you, the onus is always on the Crown to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
As Shane Heuston says, in this regard, that you should not be prejudiced in considering his alibi by any of this evidence that of course is related to
Eric Heuston and Neil Heuston. And Mr Barnett on behalf of Mr Shane Heuston says to you, do not be tainted in any event on this question of alibi by that evidence from Crown of those four witnesses, when considering the alibi defence of Shane Heuston.
 
What the Crown says to you of course is, looking at all that evidence, that you will accept it as reliable, reliable to the degree that you can say that you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the allegations of the offences are made out".

The last paragraph quoted above was a reference to the whole of the evidence which his Honour had just finished reviewing, and not specifically a reference to the four witnesses earlier mentioned.

There was no complaint by trial counsel about the above directions, and there was no application for any relevant re-direction.

There is one further aspect of the summing-up which, although not the subject of any complaint by trial counsel, is now relied upon by the appellants.

When, in his summing-up, Twigg DCJ came to remind the jury of the unsworn statements of the appellants, he introduced his reading of the statements by saying: "You may consider each of the statements in your general deliberations.
Whilst each such statement is individual to the accused, you may compare each of the statements and draw inferences of collusion from them." 
His Honour did not attempt to relate that last observation to the facts of the case, or to any particular aspect of the statements, and it is not at all clear what he had in mind. He was not asked either to clarify it or to withdraw it.
 [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) s405A 
Section 405A of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides as follows: "405A (1) On a trial on indictment the defendant shall not without the leave of the Court adduce evidence in support of an alibi unless, before the end of the prescribed period, he gives notice of particulars of the alibi.
 
Without prejudice to subsection (1), on a trial on indictment the defendant shall not without the leave of the Court call any other person to give evidence in support of an alibi unless: the notice under that subsection includes the name and address of the person, or, if the name or address is not known to the defendant at the time he gives the notice, any information in his possession which might be of material assistance in finding the person; if the name or the address is not included in the notice, the Court is satisfied that the defendant before giving the notice took, and thereafter continued to take, all reasonable steps to secure that the name or the address would be ascertained; if the name or the address is not included in the notice, but the defendant subsequently discovers the name or address or receives other information which might be of material assistance in finding the person, he forthwith gives notice of the name, address or other information, as the case may be; and if the defendant is notified by or on behalf of the Crown that the person has not been traced by the name or at the address given by the defendant, he forthwith gives notice of any information which might be of material assistance in finding the person and which is then in his possession or, on subsequently receiving any such information, forthwith gives notice of it.
 
The Court shall not refuse leave under this section if it appears to the
Court that on the committal for trial of the defendant he was not informed by the committing justice of the requirements of subsections (1), (2) and (5), and the statement in writing of the committing justice that the defendant was so informed shall be evidence that the defendant was so informed.
 
Any evidence tendered to disprove an alibi may, subject to any direction by the Court, be given before or after evidence is given in support of the alibi.
 
Any notice purporting to be given under this section on behalf of the defendant by his solicitor shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to be given with the authority of the defendant.
 
A notice under this section shall be given in writing to the Director of
Public Prosecutions. and may be given by delivering it to the Director or by leaving it at his office, or by sending it in a registered letter or by certified mail addressed to him to his office.
 
In this section: `evidence in support of an alibi' means evidence tending to show that by reason of the presence of the defendant at a particular place or in a particular area at a particular time he was not, or was unlikely to have been, at the place where the offence is alleged to have been committed at the time of its alleged commission; `the prescribed period' means the period of ten days commencing at the time of the committal of the defendant for trial." 
This section was introduced in 1974. [Subsection ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) was plainly intended to alter the common law.

In Killick versus The Queen, above, the High Court held that a judge may not permit the Crown to adduce evidence in rebuttal of an alibi after the closing of the defence case where the Crown ought reasonably to have foreseen the alibi evidence relied upon by the defence. That was treated as a particular instance of the more general rule that all available evidence on which the prosecution intends to rely in proof of the guilt of an accused should be presented before the close of the case for the Crown (see 147 CLR at 569).

In Blewitt versus The Queen, above, the High Court said <case>; [(62 ALJR 503] at ): "Plainly enough (s405A (4)) alters the old common law rule that a judge should not permit the Crown to adduce evidence after the accused has closed his case for the purpose of rebutting an alibi which the Crown should reasonably have foreseen would be raised at the trial: Killick versus The Queen.
But it may well be that, notwithstanding s405A(4), there are some situations in which the giving of evidence of a rebuttal of an alibi in reply would so unfairly prejudice an accused as to amount to a miscarriage of justice".
 
As the Court of Criminal Appeal had pointed out in that case, an example of the kind to which their Honours were referring at the conclusion of that passage would be a case in which the circumstance that the rebuttal evidence was called in reply precluded the accused from properly litigating the alibi issue.

Similar legislation was introduced in England in the Criminal Justice Act , s11. Section 11(4) provided: "Any evidence tendered to disprove an alibi may, subject to any directions by the court as to the time it is to be given, be given before or after evidence is given in support of the alibi".
 
The New South Wales provision is in slightly different terms, which appear to expand the discretion of the trial judge in relation to the matter of giving directions.

The present case provides a good example of the need for the flexibility given by a provision such as s405A(4), and of the undesirability of determining these matters by reference to technical and inflexible rules of evidence, including rules about splitting of cases. It illustrates the desirability of determining the matter by reference to considerations of fairness, and by judicial discretion.

One relevant consideration of fairness will often be that referred to by the
High Court in Killick (147 CLR at 569). Evidence tendered by the Crown after the defence has closed its case may assume an inflated importance in the eyes of the jury. Other considerations relevant to fairness may include the position in which an accused will be left if evidence is called in reply, and the matter of the Crown's duty of disclosure, to which further reference will be made below.

There is no time specified as to when the directions contemplated by s405A(4) must, or may, be given. There is nothing to prevent an application for directions being made before the close of the Crown case, or, for that matter, before the commencement of the Crown case. In the present case the Crown, by delaying its application for leave to call evidence in reply until the end of the defence cases, ran the risk that an exercise of discretion adverse to the
Crown would leave the alibis before the jury, perhaps somewhat damaged by cross-examination, but uncontradicted by critical Crown evidence.

Because the trial judge exercised his discretion in favour of permitting evidence to be called in reply (and refusing to discharge the jury) this court is concerned with a challenge to the manner in which he exercised his discretion, and with the question whether there has been shown to have been a miscarriage of justice resulting from what occurred. The central question is whether there was unfairness to the appellants.
 
Was there unfairness to the first and second appellants? 
It is convenient to put to one side, for the moment, the position of the third appellant.

As to the first appellant, the position is clear. The critical evidence was that which proved that the copy invoice produced and relied upon by Lee
Heuston, to support his evidence in the defence case, was a forgery. I am unable to see how the Crown could have called that evidence in chief, even if it had wished to do so. The copy invoice was not mentioned in the notice of alibi. It was simply a document in the possession of Lee Heuston or, by then, the first appellant's solicitor. What would the jury have made of evidence tending to show that such a document was a forgery? How could the Crown have set about proving that a document, which had not been put in evidence, and was not in the possession of the Crown, was not genuine? It is not difficult to imagine the protests that would have issued from the defence side if the Crown had embarked upon such an exercise.

Furthermore, it is difficult to charge the Crown with breach of any duty of disclosure in relation to the matter. The question of the genuineness of the copy invoice was still being investigated up to the time the Crown case was closed, and a good deal would obviously depend upon how the defence was going to explain and use the document. The genuine invoice that was sent to Mrs
Pincevic was not seen by the Crown prosecutor until after the close of the
Crown case, and, where questions of forgery are involved, examination of original documents can be important.

The Crown clearly had suspicions about the copy invoice, and about the way it might be used by the defence, and the Crown prosecutor, until a very late stage in his case, was urging the police to make further inquiries about the business records of Novus Windscreens. I do not consider that he had any duty to inform the defence of the progress of his investigations concerning a document he suspected the defence might seek to rely upon.

There was no unfairness to the first appellant in allowing the Crown, in its case in reply, to prove that the copy invoice relied upon in support of Lee
Heuston's evidence was a forgery.

The position in relation to the second appellant is less clear. Once again, however, much turns upon the detail of the evidence, and the way the issue concerning the second appellant's alibi unfolded.

The second appellant's alibi, as notified to the Crown, was that he was painting Mrs Horne's house on 29 November 1991.

Before the trial commenced, both Mr Horne and Mr Bidwell told the Crown that the appellant's painting work had been done while Mr Bidwell was also working at the house. Mr Bidwell told the Crown his records showed that was in
September. Mrs Horne, at the suggestion of the appellant's solicitor had checked the dates with Mr Bidwell before the trial. (That she did so demonstrates that she also associated the timing of the appellant's work with that of Mr Bidwell). He told her that she was wrong in thinking that the work was done in November; it was done in September. What exactly Mrs Horne reported back to the solicitor we do not know.

Mrs Horne, in her evidence, sought to deal with the matter by saying that Mr
Bidwell might have worked at her house twice; in September and again in
November. She also said that the appellant was there while Mr Bidwell was there and, significantly, that the appellant was only there once. Then, in the
Crown case in reply, Mr Bidwell gave the evidence he had foreshadowed in his pre-trial statement and, in addition, proved from his records that he was not at Mrs Horne's house in November.

Two things emerge. First, although the Crown prosecutor did not, until 15
September 1995, show Mr Bidwell's statement to the defence, what was in that statement had been told by Mr Bidwell to Mrs Horne when she spoke to him, at the solicitor's request, before the trial. Second, it was not until after Mrs
Horne gave her evidence, and Mr Bidwell subsequently produced his records for
November, that it became apparent that Mr Bidwell's records could destroy the second appellant's alibi.

There has been a good deal of argument on this appeal as to whether the Crown prosecutor should have shown defence counsel the August statements of Messrs
Horne and Bidwell before the Crown case was closed. In my view he should have done so.

It has been submitted for the Crown that one effect of s405A(4) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) is that, if evidence in rebuttal of an alibi can be given in reply, then the corollary is that the Crown is under no duty to disclose that evidence to the accused at any time before its case in reply. I would reject that submission.
Questions of disclosure and the timing of giving of evidence may often be closely related but they are different questions.

In Whitehorn versus The Queen <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 657] at 663-4 Deane J said: "Prosecuting counsel in a criminal trial represents the State. The accused, the court and the community are entitled to expect that, in performing his function of presenting the case against an accused, he will act with fairness and detachment and always with the objectives of establishing the whole truth in accordance with the procedures and standards which the law requires to be observed and of seeking to ensure that the accused's trial is a fair one. The consequence of a failure to observe the standards of fairness to be expected of the Crown may be insignificant in the context of an overall trial. Where that is so, departure from these standards, however regrettable, will not warrant the interference of an appellate court with a conviction. On occasion, however, the consequences of such a failure may so affect or permeate a trial as to warrant the conclusion that the accused has actually been denied his fundamental right to a fair trial." 
In the present case the failure to disclose the statements of Messrs Horne and Bidwell did not produce consequences warranting the conclusion that the second appellant was denied a fair trial. Mrs Horne and, I would infer, the appellant's solicitor, already knew the substance of what was in those statements. There was, on the other hand, no relevant failure to disclose the critical piece of evidence which Mr Bidwell gave. That only came to the attention of the Crown prosecutor on 19 September 1995.

As has been accepted on this appeal, the alibis of both the first and second appellants were convincingly demonstrated to be false. That this demonstration occurred in reply and was, as the saying goes, left ringing in the ears of the jury, did not, in the circumstances of the case, invoke unfairness to them.
However, the position of the third appellant raises different considerations.

Was there unfairness to the third appellant? 
Counsel for the third appellant was alive to the peril for his client resulting from the demolition of his co-accused's alibis. He applied for a discharge of the jury, seeking a separate trial.

Twigg DCJ was correct in refusing that application, recognising, at the same time, the need to give the jury adequate warnings and instructions to protect the third appellant's position.

The primary submission for the third appellant is that his Honour failed to give the necessary warnings and instructions to ensure that the jury did not hold against the third appellant the collapse of the alibis of his co-accused.

The relevant directions have been set out above. It is apparent that the paragraph commencing with the words "As Shane Heuston says ...." was intended by his Honour to give the protection he said the third appellant would be given when he refused to discharge the jury.

What had to be made clear was that the third appellant was entitled to separate consideration of the case against him, including the case in relation to his alibi. There was an obvious risk that the jury would reason along the following lines: "The alibis of Eric and Neil Heuston have been proved to be false. There is no such conclusive proof about the alibi of Shane Heuston.
However, we will infer from the falsity of their alibis that his also is false".

The directions given by the trial judge, in favour of the third appellant, may well have been adequate to this purpose were it not for the addition, later, of the remark that the jury could compare each of the unsworn statements of each accused "and draw inferences of collusion from them".

No objection to that remark was taken by any of the trial counsel and I would refuse leave to either of the first two appellants to complain about it on appeal. However, its effect in depriving the third appellant of the protection to which he was entitled, in relation to separate consideration of his alibi, could have been very serious. Once again, if that remark had stood alone, I would not have given the third appellant leave to complain about it now.
However, it is the combination of the third appellant's particular need to have his alibi, which was still viable, separately considered, and the making of the remark, which means that, in his case, leave should be given to raise the point.

The likely source of what the trial judge said was the decision of the Privy
Council in Mawaz Khan versus The Queen [[1966] 3 WLR 1275. (See] also [(1967) 40 ALJ 352).] That was a case in which two co-accused had, separately, made false statements, out of court, setting up a joint alibi. The question was whether the statement of one co-accused could be used against the other, or whether it was inadmissible hearsay. The Crown sought to prove the fact of the making of the statements, not their truth, to show that the accused had jointly fabricated a false story.

That has nothing to do with the present case. The three alibis were entirely separate. It is unnecessary to decide what the proper direction to the jury would have been if, for example, Shane and Neil Heuston had said, in their unsworn statements, that they were both painting Mrs Horne's house on 29
November, or if all three had said they spent the day at Novus Windscreens.

To invite the jury to consider the possibility of collusion in relation to the alibis, which formed an important part of each joint statement, was to deprive
Shane Heuston of the opportunity of having his alibi, which remained viable, considered separately on its own merits.

For this reason I would allow the appeal of the third appellant, and order, in his case, a new trial.

Other Grounds of Appeal 
It is argued that the trial judge failed properly to instruct the jury on the dangers inherent in the identification of firearms.

No such complaint was made at the trial and leave to argue the point should be refused. In any event there is no merit in the argument.

The issue concerned some photographs of firearms that were tendered. There was no question of seeking to identify any particular weapon. The point was related to the scar on the complainant's hand, and the wound he said he suffered during the incident he described. The evidence was called to show the type of weapon that was used, and to show that the wound on the complainant's hand was consistent with his evidence. The trial judge's directions were adequate to the circumstances.

It is further argued that the trial judge failed to give an appropriate warning in relation to the evidence of the complainant, Craig Goodwin, an indemnified witness.

Twigg DCJ, in his summing-up, reminded the jury of counsel's argument that the complainant might have a strong motive to falsify his evidence and that the jury should look carefully at the reliability of his evidence, and said that proposition was true.

Subsequently, in the absence of the jury, there was an exchange between his
Honour and counsel as to those directions, and thereafter, at the request of counsel, his Honour read the indemnity to the jury and gave them a detailed explanation of its meaning and practical effect.

Leave is required for this ground of appeal to be pursued. Leave should be refused. Furthermore, the directions given to the jury were sufficient.

Another ground of appeal, for which leave is also required, is that his Honour failed adequately to identify for the jury the elements of the various offences and the precise conduct on which the Crown relied to establish the offences. No complaint about this was made at the trial; leave should be refused. The point sought to be raised is that, for example, the allegation that the various accused "used" offensive weapons, did not sufficiently specify the activity said to constitute the offence.

It was clearly open to the jury to conclude that, if the complainant's account of the relevant events were to be believed, the manner in which each accused had handled the weapons amounted to assault.

The alleged ambiguities in the directions relate to matters that were not in issue at the trial and were not material. Having regard to the issues fought at the trial, the directions were not misleading or inadequate.

A number of other grounds of appeal were not pursued in argument.

A Procedural Matter 
There was one ground of appeal which, although only faintly argued, raises a matter which calls for comment.

On a number of occasions during the trial the trial judge adopted the course of calling counsel from the Bar table to approach the Bench so that legal issues could be discussed, and ruled upon, in the presence, but not in the hearing, of the jury and of the accused.

Although there appears to have been some unwillingness on the part of trial counsel to participate in this procedure, there was no application for a discharge of the jury on this ground. There is nothing to suggest that the procedure caused any miscarriage of justice, or had any possible effect upon the jury's verdict. Nevertheless, it should be said that the procedure is inappropriate.

It may well be that his Honour was anxious to spare the jury the inconvenience and discomfort involved in having to retire from the courtroom from time to time when matters needed to be discussed out of their hearing. In almost all criminal trials it is sometimes necessary for legal argument to take place in the absence of the jury. Ruling on the admissibility of evidence, for example, often involves the judge having to hear the nature of evidence which is ultimately determined to be inadmissible. It would defeat the purpose of the exercise if the jury listened to the argument.

At the same time, however, proceedings in a criminal trial are to be conducted in public, even if partly in the absence of the jury. Moreover, they are to be conducted in the presence and hearing of the accused.

There are good reasons why, from time to time, the jury should be prevented from hearing part of a criminal trial. It is only rarely that the public should be prevented from knowing what is going on; and the accused always has a right to know.

The procedure adopted in the present case should not have been followed.

Sentences 
As was noted earlier, both the first and second appellants have lengthy criminal records.

The first appellant was sentenced in respect of the first charge (using a pistol with intent to commit an indictable offence) to penal servitude involving a minimum term of six years and an additional term of three years.
On each of the remaining charges he was sentenced to concurrent fixed terms of two years.

The second appellant is currently serving another sentence, with the minimum term expiring in March 2003. Twigg DCJ sentenced him, on the first charge, to penal servitude involving a minimum term of five years, to commence on 3 March , and an additional term of three years. On each of the remaining charges he was sentenced to concurrent fixed terms of two years.

There was some evidence of assistance to the authorities, and it is complained that the appellants were given insufficient credit for that. (cf R v
Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220).] I am not persuaded that this complaint has been made out.

In the case of the second appellant it is argued that, although Twigg DCJ made allowance for the length of time before the sentence commences, and the total period the appellant will spend in custody, he made insufficient allowance.
His Honour applied the correct principle, and it has not been shown that he erred in the exercise of his discretionary judgment.

Both the first and second appellants argue that a reference made by his Honour to Veen versus The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 465] at 477 indicates error. I am unable to understand this argument. The passage to which his Honour referred was the passage in which the High Court explained the significance that could, and could not, be attached by a sentencing judge to an antecedent criminal history. It is precisely in point. All his Honour did was refer to the relevant principles, by citing the passage in the judgment of the High Court in which they were enunciated.

The sentences have not been shown to be excessive.

Orders The appeal of the third appellant against his convictions should be allowed. The convictions and sentences should be quashed and there should be a new trial on all of the counts in respect of which the appellant was convicted.
 As to each of the first and second appellants: 
The appeals against conviction should be dismissed.

Leave to appeal against the sentences should be granted but the appeals should be dismissed.
 
JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice.
 
SIMPSON J: I have read in draft the judgment of the Chief Justice, and I agree with the orders proposed in the appeals of the first and third appellants, Eric and Shane Heuston, and with his Honours reasons for those orders. I regret, however, that I am unable to agree with the order proposed in the appeal of the second appellant, Neil Heuston.

I agree with the Chief Justice that the statements held by the Crown ought to have been disclosed to the legal representatives of the appellant. I am further of the view that evidence from those statements ought to have been led in the Crown case in chief.

The intention of the legislature in introducing <case> into the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) is clear. It was to ensure that the Crown is in a position to investigate and meet any alibi defence raised by an accused. It was not intended, in my view, otherwise to put an accused in a worse position than prior to its enactment. Certainly it was not intended, in my view, to put the Crown in a position to retain relevant information in its possession for the purpose, or having the result, of securing a tactical advantage. I do not suggest that that was the purpose of the Crown in the present case, but it almost certainly was the result.

An alibi notice may be, and commonly is, tendered in the Crown case in chief.
What use may then be made of it will be dependent upon the course taken in the defence case. Should the accused adduce no evidence, or in an unsworn statement refer to no other material in support of the alibi, a comment is available to the Crown not different in kind to that available where an accused is alleged to have told lies about some material matter, or has fled.
The Crown will be entitled to directions from the trial judge, but those directions will be tempered by the cautions necessary in cases of lies or flight. Should the accused adduce evidence, or provide other material which departs from the particulars given, similar comment will be available, and similar direction required. The Crown case in chief in my view, is also the appropriate time for the Crown to adduce any evidence in its possession demonstrating the falsity of the alibi. Such a course permits an accused who has an answer to the Crown's rebuttal, or an explanation for raising a false alibi, to raise those matters in his or her own case.

Sub <case> contemplates that the Crown may, in a case in reply, respond to alibi evidence given in the defence case, but reserves to the trial judge a discretion to give "directions" about when the Crown may adduce such evidence.
It is that discretion which, I consider in the case of Neil Heuston, miscarried. The Crown had in its possession, well before the close of its case, much of its material to rebut the alibi, and the opportunity of access to the balance, particularly the records of Mr Bidwell that showed that he did not work at the Horne house in November. As a matter of principle, I am of the view that the time for the production of all of that material was prior to the close of the Crown case.

A number of features of this case have given me pause before reaching the conclusion I have. The first is the lateness of the alibi notice and particulars provided by the second appellant. The earliest of these were given only one month before the commencement of the trial, and the third only twelve days before. The third notice, which nominated the appellant's son Cane as an alibi witness, did not change the nature or substance of the alibi. The Crown therefore had one month to investigate. This is well short of the time envisaged by <case> A. The second matter is that the trial took place in a country circuit town and it may be supposed that police resources to investigate the alibi were scarce. The third and most significant factor that has caused me concern is the complete absence, in this Court, of any suggestion that, had the appellant been given the opportunity (either by disclosure of the Crown's material to his legal representative, or by its tender in the Crown case in chief) to respond, he would have been able to dislodge what appears to have been an unanswerable rebuttal, or give an explanation that may have taken some of the sting out of that rebuttal. Even this, however, does not persuade me that the rebuttal was not given, by its timing, a significance that, in the context of the whole case, was disproportionate. When this is added to the flow-on effect of the devastating rebuttal of the first appellant's alibi, and the direction concerning collusion, the result is, in my view, that a miscarriage of justice has occurred.

For these reasons, in the case of the second appellant, I would quash the conviction and order a new trial.
 * * * 
