

Juhlin versus Foley Matter No 1398/97 [1997] NSWSC 531 (31 October 1997) 
Juhlin versus Foley /97 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - MIKAEL PER-AKE JUHLIN versus NOREEN FOLEY 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by motion for a declaration that these proceedings have been settled.

The court has not got all the facts, but it would appear that the parties were in a de facto relationship up to about 1992. The defendant, at some stage after 1992, went to England leaving her furniture at premises owned by a relation of the plaintiff at Gymea. The parties were the proprietors of real property at Bowral. The plaintiff had given the defendant a Power of Attorney which she had utilised to put the whole of the title of the property in her own name.

The plaintiff commenced these proceedings in February of this year for the purpose of obtaining ownership rights in respect of the property and for the property to be sold and the proceeds distributed to the co-owners.

The plaintiff's solicitor sent to the defendant's then solicitor on 26
September 1997 draft terms of settlement. The terms of settlement involved the appointment of trustees for sale under [s
G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66g.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), for the trustee to sell the property to pay out of the proceeds of sale certain monies to the plaintiff's side and thereafter for the balance of proceeds to be divided equally.

The defendant's then solicitor wrote to the plaintiff's solicitor on 2 October
I will quote the relevant passage precisely as it appears in the letter: "We confirm our client's instruction this morning that she agrees to the terms of settlement drafted by your counsel. She requires however, that she inspect her furnitures at Mr Leif Juhlin's premises before handing the executed document". The inspection took place on either or both 8 and 14 October 1997, and on 14 October 1997 the defendant removed her furniture, though she has since complained that some of it was missing or damaged. The defendant then changed her solicitor. The defendant resists the declaration sought by the plaintiff.

The material which the court has got is not completely satisfactory in that there are some items of the evidence which do not quite tally. Indeed, the affidavit of Mr Icao, the former solicitor for the defendant, does not really match what he said in his letter of 2 October 1997.

One matter to take into account, in this sort of case, is that it frequently occurs that people appear to have settled family proceedings and then change their position. It is, accordingly, not unusual to find a situation where there appears on the documents to be a settlement and one person changes his or her mind and his or her solicitor and then seeks to escape from the settlement. What was said or done by the parties after the date of the alleged settlement either is of nil or, alternatively, slight, evidentiary value in assessing whether there was a firm agreement made on the date of the alleged settlement.

In the instant case, the matter was allegedly settled on 2 October 1997. It was in the Registrar's list on 3 October and that is why 2 October 1997 was a significant date. It was then stood over to 17 October 1997. Mr Cook, for the defendant, places stress on a letter of the plaintiff's solicitor of 16
October 1997 that: "... if a settlement has not been achieved by 5 p.m. on 16
October 1997 we will proceed with the matter to get a hearing date on 17
October ..." as indicating that Mr Drexler, the plaintiff's solicitor, thought that there had been no actual settlement as at that date. Waiver is not alleged and I cannot see how a statement by a solicitor otherwise after the alleged contract was made can really assist me in determining whether a contract was made two weeks earlier.

Further, there is no defence that the contract of settlement was subject to any Masters versus Cameron type pre-conditions. It is said by Mr Cook, that either there was no contract or alternatively that the contract was subject to a condition precedent to performance, namely that all her furniture was in a good and sound condition at the Gymea premises and, in fact, it was not.

The court does not usually imply terms into a contract unless they come within the very narrow band of implications allowed by the Privy Council's decision in BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Hastings Shire Council (1977) CLR 266, 283. In the instant case there is a detailed set of terms of settlement which actually refers to the defendant's right to collect her furniture and belongings and for mutual releases. Were there a concluded contract, it would be inconsistent with any such implied term.

Was there then a contract? It would seem to me on the balance of probabilities that there was. It is just inexplicable, on the defendant's part, that a solicitor of the court would write a formal letter to another solicitor agreeing to terms of settlement if those were not his instructions. The defendant says, in the witness box, that she was dissatisfied with her solicitor and she did not have enough time to consider the matter. She further says she would not have agreed to the settlement as in the short minutes, of which she had a copy. I found it difficult to believe everything the defendant said in the witness box. I think the comment is right in the question Mr
Evans, for the plaintiff, put to her in cross-examination, that she obtained in fact a considerable advantage in getting her furniture. She has got everything she immediately wanted under the settlement and can now renege on the settlement. I consider that the offer on 26 September 1997 in Mr Drexler's letter and Mr Icao's reply of 2 October 1997 constitute a contract to settle the matter.

I should add that Mr Cook today says that really the whole suit is a mess because the parties were in a de facto relationship and the property of the parties should be adjusted in accordance with <case> of the De Facto
Relationships Act 1984. However, it might be said in answer to that that the proceedings were commenced in February of this year because the conduct of the defendant under the Power of Attorney had meant that the property was solely in her name and at her mercy. The question of de facto relationship relief has not been raised before today. As more than two years have elapsed since the de facto relationship ended, a claim under the Act cannot now be raised without the leave of the court. Mr Cook says that was a fault of the previous solicitor but it is easy for new solicitors to say that without knowing the full extent of the previous solicitor's involvement.

Accordingly, I make declaration 1 in the notice of motion. I cannot, I think, make any further orders in the suit, at the moment, without the consent of the persons nominated as trustees for sale. The matter should be stood over for a few days, so that that evidence can be produced.

I thus stand over the proceedings to my list at 9.50 am on Friday, 7 November for formal orders to be made. The defendant must pay the costs of the motion.

I should add, for clarity, that whilst in fact there are two defendants, the second being a bank, the words "parties" or "defendant" when used in these reasons do not include the bank, which was not a party to this motion.
 * * * 
