

T M Lynch versus R Holland [1996] NSWSC 536 (8 November 1996) 
THERESA MONICA LYNCH versus ROSS HOLLAND /93 
Friday, 8 November 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER JA, SIMOS AJA, ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: DEFAMATION - FINDINGS OF FACT 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal by Miss Theresa Lynch from a judgment of his Honour, Bell DCJ, in a defamation case. Miss Lynch has conducted her own case and done so with very considerable skill. 
The circumstances arise out of some remarks Miss Lynch made many years ago when she was a nurse at the intensive care unit at St Vincents Private
Hospital. Certain practices in that hospital came to her attention of which she disapproved. She made her disapproval clear to the authorities but instead of being praised for her diligence, she found that she was dismissed. That led to certain industrial agitation and that is not the subject of the present litigation.

Eventually she wrote to the complaints unit and they checked on her complaints, not without some prodding, against the records of the hospital.
This was done by a lady called Miss O'Kane and the results which Miss O'Kane came to can be summarised thus.

There were 19 complaints made of which 7 were concluded to be substantiated and 12 unsubstantiated. Those words in Miss O'Kane's dictionary do not quite mean what they say in someone else's dictionary. By substantiated, Miss O'Kane meant made out or proved; by unsubstantiated she meant not proved. She did not mean false or without foundation, she simply indicated that with regard to the ones she classified as unsubstantiated that she was unable to find evidence one way or the other.

It is a great pity that she chose that terminology because it succeeded in misleading a number of people but pity or not, that is the fact of the matter.

Another aspect of her investigations was that some of the complaints were of considerable seriousness, particularly two of them which dealt with substituted medicines. Other complaints were of less seriousness and the final aspect of her investigations which bears comment, is that she found no trace of three of the patients mentioned by Miss Lynch in the hospital records. That does not mean that she found that those three patients did not exist. It does not mean that they never were in the hospital records. It might mean, for example, that she misread the hospital records.

The Department sent a letter to the respondent, Professor Holland, to comment on the results of Miss O'Kane's work. That letter asked the Professor to comment on the following questions:
Over the period involved, which is approximately from May 1983 to October , what is your view of the rate of irregular incidents in an intensive care unit with a maximum of six patients.
What is your view of the seriousness of irregularities which have been substantiated by investigation.
Do you have any other comment in respect of the matters detailed in the attached material.

There then followed some pages giving details of the charges made and of the facts as observed by Miss O'Kane. It should be noted that the letter sent by the complaints unit to Professor Holland did not mention Miss Lynch's name and did not even mention the name of the hospital involved. That letter was, if I may use the term currently in vogue, sanitised in this respect.

In due course, the Professor having considered the materials replied on 2
February 1987. In respect of the first question, his ultimate conclusion seemed to be, (with regard to the errors of substitution), that in cases in which one medicine has been substituted for another he had no experience of such errors and found it difficult to appreciate how they could have occurred.

In regard to other matters, he said that there was some administrative sloppiness which needed tightening up. As to the seriousness of the incident, he gave a somewhat guarded reply, which certainly did not suggest that any great emergency had arisen.

As to the third question, I shall quote extensively what he did say and it is this- "It is impossible not to speculate on the motivation of the informant, especially in view of the volume of unsubstantiated allegations. Amongst the unconfirmed reports are three "patients" whose names do not appear in the hospital register. This strongly suggests manufacture of "evidence" and one would have to take a most serious view of such actions. My opinion is that the informant's credibility is much undermined by dubious tactics." 
The weight and meaning to be given to the answer to question three must be conditioned on three other facts. One is that somehow or other Professor
Holland took the view that the analysis of the complaints had been prepared by the chief pharmacist, whereas we now know they had not. They had been prepared by Miss O'Kane who was a nurse in the complaints unit. The second factor is that Professor Holland misunderstood the use of the word unsubstantiated and took them to mean disproved. As I have been at pains to say, that is not what the word meant. The third factor is that Professor Holland seemed to assume that the patients whose names could not be discovered on the register were invented names. Again I made it clear there is no warrant for that assumption but they were the assumptions which the Professor made when he looked at the material.

Miss Lynch, into whose hands this letter eventually fell, found that the
Professor's comments in paragraph 3 were prima facie defamatory. I do not blame her. I agree entirely with Bell DCJ that prima facie those remarks are defamatory. If they could be linked with Miss Lynch's name, they would tend to bring her into disrepute in the eyes of most people to whom they might have fallen.

Miss Lynch sued for defamation and she lost. There are many reasons which explain her loss. In the first place, it ought to be noted that the publication of the letter was extremely limited. The letter itself, like the letter to which it responded, does not name anyone. It does not name Miss
Lynch and one would have to have extra knowledge in order to connect it with her.

The letter fell into the hands of Mrs Hurwitz to whom it was addressed and certainly into the hands of Miss Walton. Both of those people gave evidence and each of them said that the receipt of that letter did not make them think any the worse of Miss Lynch. His Honour accepted their evidence in that regard and that seems to me an end of the issue. Nobody who saw the letter thought the worse of Miss Lynch because of it's contents.

There is no evidence that any other damage occurred. There is no evidence that a prospective employer rejected an application by Miss Lynch because of that.
There is no evidence that a bank denied credit, there is no evidence that friends left her because of that or anything of the sort.

I might add that his Honour found, and again with manifest correctness, that
Miss Lynch is a woman of admirable character and any suggestion that she is dishonest would be quite unwarranted. She was a completely honest witness. I might also add that his Honour made a similar finding about the respondent,
Professor Holland. He also was completely honest and was not in any way activated by any malice. They are all findings of fact which his Honour made, there is lots of evidence for them and they must be taken by us as givens.

In those circumstances, his Honour turned to the defences which Professor
Holland raised, all of which his Honour found were proved. There was no need technically I suppose for his Honour to go through each defence one by one and consider whether it was proved or not but his Honour did so.

His Honour found that Professor Holland had made out a common law defence of qualified privilege and had also made out a statutory defence of qualified privilege. His Honour also found that a defence of fair comment had been made out. Again I see no reason why any attack can be made on his Honour's findings. If one takes the question of qualified privilege, the matter with which the correspondents dealt was the conduct of a private hospital in an intensive care unit and that is clearly a matter of great interest.

The letter of Professor Holland was published pursuant to at least a social duty if not a legal duty. He believed it's contents and both he and Mrs
Hurwitz had reason to be concerned with the contents of his communication.

Likewise the statutory defence. Both parties, Professor Holland and Mrs
Hurwitz, had an interest in the information with which the letter was concerned, namely the conduct of the intensive care unit at St Vincents
Private Hospital. The publication of the letter, that is addressing it to Mrs
Hurwitz, was done in the course of providing the information requested and the conduct was reasonable.

Despite the skill with which Miss Lynch addressed her case, there was really very little which countered his Honour's findings on the question of qualified privilege. Her main attack was with his Honour's upholding of the defence of fair comment. In this regard, the principal attack which Miss Lynch made on his Honour's finding, was that his Honour's finding could not be said to have been reasonable as found by his Honour. There is something, but not, I think, much, to be said for Miss Lynch's argument. However, I can certainly be sympathetic with the reasons which she advances.

Basically, although Miss Lynch formulated the argument in a number of different ways, it amounts to this: how can Professor Holland's remarks be considered reasonable when they were based on a number of obvious falsehoods?
I have already considered what those falsehoods were.

The short answer to that is that Professor Holland did not realise that those falsehoods were in fact falsehoods. He was given a hypothetical question to answer and he answered it in accordance with what he thought was the meaning of that hypothetical question. Looked at from this point of view, it is difficult if not impossible in my view to say that his response was not reasonable.

For those reasons, I am of the view that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SIMOS AJA: I am of the same opinion, I would only refer, without quoting them, to the findings of his Honour at pp 104 and the top of p 105 of the appeal book in relation to the defence of fair comment, including his conclusion in relation to all the defences at the top of p 105, and say that I am in complete agreement with what his Honour said, as well as what has fallen from my learned brother, Meagher JA.

ABADEE AJA: I generally agree with the observations made by the presiding judge. Bell J had to determine disputed issues of fact and law, he did so with considerable care. 
I see no error of fact or law reflected in his Honour's reasons for judgment.
With these additional reasons I am of the view that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

MEAGHER JA: The order of the Court therefore is the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
