

Regina versus Ruth Joy Leff [1996] NSWSC 145 (21 May 1996) 
REGINA versus Ruth Joy LEFF / 94 
Tuesday 21 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, ALLEN J, JAMES J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Importation of prohibited imports -duration of importation 
RESULT: Appeal against sentence dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the judgment of James J. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders. I would add only a brief observation in relation to the grounds of appeal concerning the alternative basis on which the second count was left to the jury.

At the trial the Crown case, supported by the evidence of Mr and Mrs Di Cristo and Mr Raz, was that the appellant and her son Louis Leff organised, in the
United States, the transportation to Australia of cocaine by Mr and Mrs Di
Cristo on 18 July 1991 and by Raz on 21 July 1991. In both cases the couriers were instructed to deliver the cocaine to the principal at the Australian end, a man named Kissner. Kissner was to meet the couriers at Sydney airport. He met Mr and Mrs Di Cristo as arranged. He failed to make contact with Raz at the airport, for the reason that Raz had been intercepted by the authorities.
However, he made contact with him later on 21 July.

The appellant, when the defence came to put its case, denied any involvement with the Di Cristos. In the light of tape recorded telephone conversations of July to which she was a party, she could hardly deny having contact with
Raz. However, she claimed that her involvement in the conduct of Raz only commenced on 21 July after he arrived in Sydney, when she first became aware of, and concerned about, (as distinct from concerned in), the cocaine importation.

The Crown responded that this was no defence to the second charge. Her answer to the charge was inculpatory, not exculpatory. On her own account she was knowingly concerned in the second importation. That is how there came to be an alternative basis on which the second count was put to the jury. Nash DCJ made it clear to the jury that they would only come to consider it if they rejected the Crown's primary case.

Since the jury convicted the appellant on the first count, it is extremely unlikely that they ever came to consider the alternative basis on which the second count was put to them. They were told to ignore it unless they considered that the Crown failed on its primary basis. However, if the Crown succeeded on the first count, then it is impossible to see any logical process by which the jury might have rejected the primary basis on which the second count was put. If they believed the evidence of the Di Cristos they must have accepted that the appellant's involvement in the Raz importation pre-dated 21
July. Even if they dealt with the second count first, to convict on the first count necessarily involved findings that would make the alternative basis of the second count irrelevant. The issue now under consideration appears to me to be purely hypothetical. However, the court has considered it on its merits.

Raz was merely a courier. The venture of importation to which he lent himself involved the consignment of cocaine from principals in the United States to
Kissner in Sydney. Raz, with the cocaine strapped to his body, was to be met by Kissner at Sydney airport and taken to a place where he would hand the cocaine over to Kissner. From the point of view of the importer, Kissner, the importation would end when he received the cocaine from Raz.

Because of the interception by the authorities, before Raz cleared customs, he did not make contact with Kissner at the airport.

Later on 21 July, when, on her story, the appellant became involved, Raz telephoned her to say he had not been met at the airport. (Why Raz would have telephoned her, and spoken to her in the manner recorded by the surveillance, if she had not previously been involved is hard to imagine).

At that stage the venture of importation was incomplete. It had been interrupted by the authorities. Raz had not been able to make contact with
Kissner, and the authorities had taken the cocaine, which he was to deliver to
Kissner, from him.

The principal argument for the appellant comes down to the proposition that at that stage it was impossible for her to become knowingly concerned in the importation; the importation was over. I am unable to accept that argument.
The concepts of importation, and of being concerned in an importation, are both sufficiently flexible to cover a case such as the present. As the authorities referred to by James J show, importation is a process, or a venture, not a physical act which occurs or ceases at the moment of import.
Furthermore, concern in an importation can commence at a time when it has apparently broken down, and where efforts are being made to bring it to fruition.

ALLEN J: I agree with Gleeson CJ and with James J.

JAMES J: The appellant, Ruth Joy Leff, was tried before his Honour Judge Nash and a jury on two counts of being knowingly concerned in the importation into Australia of prohibited imports to which s233B of the Customs Act applied, being a quantity of cocaine not less than the trafficable quantity applicable to cocaine. It was alleged by the Crown that the quantity of cocaine the subject of the first count had been brought into Australia on 18 July 1991 by a married couple, Michael Di Cristo and his wife, Eileen Di Cristo, and that the quantity of cocaine the subject of the second count had been brought into Australia on 21 July 1991 by a man named Gil Raz. On each occasion the total quantity of impure cocaine alleged to have been imported was approximately 2 kilograms, of which approximately 11/4 kilograms was pure cocaine. All of the appellant, Michael Di Cristo, Eileen Di Cristo and Gil Raz were persons ordinarily resident in Miami in the United States of America. Eileen Di Cristo was a step-daughter of the appellant, being a child of the appellant's husband, Norman Cherlin. Gil Raz was a person known to the appellant and to her son, Louis Leff. At the trial the jury found the appellant guilty on both counts. The appellant has appealed against her conviction on both counts but all the grounds of appeal, with only one exception, relate only to the second count. 
On each of the two counts his Honour Judge Nash sentenced the appellant to a head sentence of thirteen years four months with a non-parole period of eight years six months commencing from 23 June 1992, the date on which the appellant was taken into custody in the United States of America before being extradited to Australia. His Honour ordered that the two sentences be served concurrently. By virtue of ss233B and 235 of the Customs Act the maximum penalty which could have been imposed for each offence was a fine of $100,000 or imprisonment for twenty-five years or both. In the event of her appeal against conviction being dismissed, the appellant seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed by Judge Nash.

The evidence against the appellant on the first count consisted largely of the evidence given by Michael Di Cristo and Eileen Di Cristo in the committal proceedings against the appellant, which was read to the jury as evidence for the prosecution pursuant to s409 of the Crimes Act, on the basis that at the time of the trial Mr and Mrs Di Cristo were absent from Australia.

Mr and Mrs Di Cristo had entered Australia on 18 July 1991, without the cocaine being carried by Mr Di Cristo being detected. However, both Mr Di
Cristo and Mrs Di Cristo had been arrested in Sydney on 25 July 1991. After being arrested each of them admitted his or her guilt and provided assistance to the authorities by giving information about the other persons involved in the importation of 18 July 1991. On 6 March 1992 Mr Di Cristo was sentenced to imprisonment for four years with a non-parole period of two and a half years and Mrs Di Cristo was sentenced to imprisonment for four years with a non- parole period of two years. Each of them received a substantial discount in sentencing because of the assistance provided to the authorities.
Subsequently, each of Mr Di Cristo and Mrs Di Cristo gave evidence in the committal proceedings against the appellant. However, before the appellant's trial was held each of the Di Cristos had been released from custody in
Australia and had been deported to the United States of America. Mrs Di
Cristo, notwithstanding a previous undertaking by her to give evidence at the appellant's trial, refused to come to Australia to give evidence at the appellant's trial and there was no means of compelling her to attend. By the time of the trial Mr Di Cristo, who had given a similar undertaking to give evidence, had separated from Mrs Di Cristo and his whereabouts were unknown.
In these circumstances the evidence given by Mr and Mrs Di Cristo in the committal proceedings against the appellant was read as evidence for the prosecution.

Because all of the grounds of appeal in the appellant's appeal against conviction, with only one exception, are limited to her conviction on the second count, it is sufficient to give a brief summary of the evidence of the
Di Cristos. The following summary is taken, to a large degree, from Judge
Nash's remarks on sentence of 6 December 1994.

The appellant and her husband had visited Australia in May and June 1991. Soon after they returned to Miami, the Di Cristos had dinner with the appellant at her apartment in Miami. On this occasion the appellant had a conversation with her step-daughter, Mrs Di Cristo, in which she offered to provide her and her husband with an all expenses paid trip to Australia, on which they could earn some money by carrying cocaine. Mrs Di Cristo spoke to her husband and the two of them agreed to accept the appellant's offer. The appellant arranged and paid for the Di Cristos' passports, visas, travel and accommodation and told them that they would be met in Sydney by her Australian connection, a man named Peter Kissner. On the day the Di Cristos were to depart, they went to the appellant's apartment where the appellant and her son, Louis Leff, strapped packages containing the cocaine to Michael Di Cristo's body. The Di
Cristos flew from Miami to Los Angeles and then from Los Angeles to Sydney. As
I have previously recounted, they succeeded in passing through Sydney airport, without the cocaine being carried by Michael Di Cristo being detected. They were met at Sydney airport by Kissner, who subsequently took them to his home in Sydney where the packages containing the cocaine were removed from Michael
Di Cristo's body and passed into the control of Kissner.

It is convenient to continue this summary of the Di Cristos' evidence up to the time of their arrest on 25 July 1991. On 21 July 1991 Michael Di Cristo and Kissner went to Sydney airport to met Raz. Michael Di Cristo had had some slight previous acquaintance with Raz, whereas Kissner had never met Raz.
Because Raz was detected by customs officers at the airport and arrested, Raz did not enter the public area at the airport within a short time of his plane having arrived at the airport and both Kissner and Michael Di Cristo suspected that Raz might have been arrested. Kissner arranged for the Di Cristos to move from the hotel where they had been staying. However, on 25 July the Di Cristos were arrested at the hotel to which they had moved and Kissner was arrested at his home.

The evidence against the appellant on the second count consisted largely of the oral evidence of Gil Raz. As I have already indicated, Raz was arrested on July 1991. He promptly admitted his guilt and provided assistance to the authorities by providing information about the other persons involved in the importation by him and about the earlier importation on 18 July by the Di
Cristos. On 7 February 1992 Raz was sentenced to imprisonment for seven years with a non-parole period of five years four months. However, on appeal this sentence was reduced to imprisonment for four years nine months, with a non- parole period of three years six months. Like the Di Cristos, Raz received a substantial discount off the sentence he would otherwise have received, by reason of the assistance he had provided. Raz was still serving the non-parole period of the reduced sentence at the time of the appellant's trial and hence was available to give evidence.

Raz gave evidence that he had been friendly with the appellant's son, Louis
Leff. Raz and Louis Leff had made two trips together within the United States, carrying cocaine. It was Louis Leff who recruited Raz to take cocaine to
Australia.

Raz said that he had a conversation with the appellant in which, according to
Raz's evidence:- "I told Ruth (the appellant) that Louis told me that she wasn't too happy about me making this trip and I wanted to know why and she said because I look too Latin and that it would look suspicious".

Raz asked the appellant if there was anything she wanted to tell Raz and "she said that I should just stay calm and cool when I get off the plane I should, after I go through immigration I should get a baggage trolley lay and put it in front of me and go through customs in that manner". The appellant told Raz that she was taking care of all the travel arrangements, that Raz would be travelling by Qantas and that he would be staying at the Sheraton Hotel in
Sydney.

On another occasion the appellant who was at her shop told Raz over the telephone that he should go to the appellant's apartment and pick up an application form for a visa to Australia. Raz went to the apartment and picked up the application form.

Raz said that he assisted Louis Leff and two other men to pack into plastic bags the cocaine to be taken to Australia by the Di Cristos and by Raz.

One day before Raz left for Australia he was told by Louis Leff that he would be "going tomorrow". On the following day he went to the appellant's apartment. The appellant, Louis Leff and another man were present. The appellant gave Raz his plane ticket and passport, some American and Australian money and a sheet of paper with the insignia of the Sheraton Wentworth Hotel in Sydney. Raz stripped down to his underwear and the appellant taped plastic bags containing the cocaine on Raz's thighs, torso and back. At some stage
Louis Leff took over from the appellant and completed the taping of the bags to Raz's body. The appellant provided Raz with special clothing, consisting of a pair of baggy black pants, a black shirt and a black jacket, all of which
Raz put on. Raz then left the apartment and flew to Sydney via Los Angeles.

At Sydney airport a customs officer touched Raz's leg and apparently detected one of the packages. Raz was taken to a cubicle and searched and all of the cocaine was discovered. Pursuant to an arrangement with the Federal Police Raz went out into the public area at the airport and walked around for about half an hour but no one met him. As I have indicated earlier in this judgment,
Kissner and Michael Di Cristo, who had gone to the airport to meet Raz, suspected that Raz may have been arrested when he did not enter the public area soon after his plane had arrived at the airport.

Raz was then taken to the premises of the Federal Police in Sydney and then he was taken to the Sheraton Hotel. At the Sheraton Hotel he waited for some hours for a telephone call from someone concerned in the importation. After he had waited several hours without receiving a telephone call, he telephoned the appellant's apartment in Miami.

On 21, 22 and 23 July Raz made or received a large number of telephone calls, the other parties to these telephone calls being the appellant, Louis Leff or
Peter Kissner. All of these telephone conversations were lawfully intercepted and recorded by the Federal Police and tape recordings and transcriptions of the conversations were admitted into evidence at the appellant's trial.
Unfortunately, there are a number of blanks in the transcriptions. It is necessary to refer to only some of the telephone calls.

The first telephone call at 4.07 pm Sydney time on 21 July was by Raz to the appellant. Part of this conversation was as follows:- ("M" indicates a male voice, Raz, and "F" indicate a female voice, the appellant):- "M: What's goin on 
F: I don't know you tell me 
M: I've been here for 5 hours 
F: Yeah 
M: And ah no body showed 
F: Yeah where are you 
M: I'm at the Sheraton 
F: Yeah, what time is it there 
M: Its ah, let me see, 5 o'clock 
F: Yeah, what time did you get to the hotel? 
M: I got here abut 4 hours ago 
F: Yeah were you in the... you landed at 6 o'clock 
M: Yeah I know, they had a problem with my visa and then I had to wait for my baggage because by the time I got out with my visa, my baggage wasn't already there.

F: Whats wrong with your visa 
M: I don't know they were checking it, but it was OK ... I got through 
F: Yeah ...

M: But ah, I'm still here 
F: Yeah, well ... alright let me get in touch with some people ah you know ...
I don't know what to tell you.

M: Well what should I do 
F: Well, ah go eat or somethin, and I'll make some phone calls alright 
M: Alright .. um ...

F: I called earlier your ... your phone was off the hook 
M: No I was talking to another girl 
F: What do you mean 
M: I met this girl on the plane 
F: Yeah 
M: I called her back, when I got to the ... after I got settled in here 
F: Yeah, I oh ... where are you now, where are you calling from 
M: I'm calling from my room 
F: Thought you were going to call from a pay phone 
M: Ah I've been waiting here for about 5 hours and I don't know what the hells going on 
F: Uh ha ... alright ...I'll be in touch alright".

The next telephone call was about half an hour later. This was an incoming telephone call made by the appellant to Raz. It was clear from the recording that someone else was in the room with the appellant and it does not seem to have been disputed that that other person was Louis Leff. In the conversation the appellant asked "Is the green light going or is it red?", a question which
Raz appeared not to understand or at least not to understand immediately, although the jury at the appellant's trial could well have understood that it was a coded enquiry as to whether everything was all right or something had gone wrong.

Part of the transcription of the conversation (there are many blanks in this part of the transcription) reads as follows:- "F:.. OK what time did your flight come in this morning 
M: ... Ah ...six something 
F: Ah huh ... Ah you have to understand you never come through ... Where were you 
M: What do you mean. I never came through 
F: .. You never came straight through ...

M: I told you I just told you 5 minutes ago why 
F: I understand that but how many hours did they hold you 
M: About an hour ...... I had to wait another hour for my baggage ...

F: Thats 2 hours 
M: Something like that, I don't know maybe a little bit more (overtalk) 
F: Now where to 8.30. Gil what happened from 8.30 to 1 o'clock".

In the rest of this conversation the appellant made repeated demands that Raz explain what had happened during the number of hours which had elapsed between
Raz's arrival at the airport and Raz's arrival at the hotel and repeatedly expressed her lack of satisfaction with the explanations Raz was offering, which were to the effect that there had been some problem with Raz's visa and that when that problem had been straightened out he had had another problem in collecting his baggage. The appellant asked whether Raz had had to go through customs, told Raz not to leave his room at the Sheraton Hotel and said "you know everybody has been concerned on this end".

At 4.53 pm on 21 July Kissner telephoned Raz. The transcription of this brief conversation contains a number of blanks. It would appear from other evidence that in this telephone conversation Kissner asked Raz to go for a walk outside the hotel towards the waterfront (harbour) and that Raz did so, without however meeting Kissner. Federal Police who were undertaking surveillance observed Kissner watching Raz from a distance.

At 8.21 pm on 21 July Raz telephoned the appellant. Part of this conversation was as follows:- "GR: Listen he called me a little while after you called me 
RL: A huh 
GR: And he told me to take a walk downstairs, take a walk towards the water and I did and I ah, nobody met me so I came back that was quite a while ago he hasn't called me or anything since 
RL: He's checking you out Gil 
GR: What 
RL: Checking you out 
GR: Well I figured that much but that was a little while ago 
RL: A huh he'll be in touch just hang in there now OK 
GR: Oh OK Lets get on with it I don't mean like a little while I mean like in ahh almost two hours 
RL: OK I haven't heard from him but I should be hearing from him shortly".

On 22 July 1991 at 8.19 am and 1.37 pm Raz had further conversations with the appellant.

At 2.40 pm on 22 July 1991 Kissner telephoned Raz. The interception of this conversation was imperfect. Raz gave an account of the conversation in an interview with a Federal Police officer later the same day. Part of the transcript of the interview is as follows:- 
Police Officer: Q. To the best of your recollection from the beginning of the call, through to the end, can you tell me, what the conversation was in a I said, he said manner? * * * "I said: hello. He said: Hello Gil. I said: Yes and he, I believe he said it's
Peter, I'm not sure, ah, he said: What's up. I said: Moth, ah, said I'm waiting on your call and he said: Um, listen things aren't going down as they as ah, I wanted them to, there things are pretty fishy ah. I said: Why what do you mean. He says: Well you had ah, you had people following you when I told you to go to the waterfront, yesterday. I saw people with radios in their hands and people with wires in their ears and I said: Yeah I was pretty nervous all day yesterday too, 'cause ah, it was um, I had a bad feeling from the time I got off the plane. I was pretty nervous myself and you didn't call,
I was waitin' on you and I was a little anxious and at that time he told me, he gave me the directions to go purchase a bag and I told him 
Police Officer: Can you rememberer specifically what he said? 
GR: Yeah he told me to forget the prior arrangements, go purchase a bag and take it to the concierge, make, book a flight back to Miami as soon as possible and leave immediately, and I told him, I'm running very low on money,
I'm going to need money and he said, I will send a taxi over there with a thousand dollars which will be left for you at the front desk and I said that'll be fine. Ah, he then said, and then I told him I would wait for the taxi to bring me the money and then I would go purchase the bag. He said no you have enough money now to go purchase the bag, to take care of that and go to Qantas, book your flight back home. And I said okay fine I'll do that and I will be back in approximately three hours which would be six pm here and he said he would call me back around six o'clock and then ah, we said goodbye".

In another part of the interview Raz told the police officer that Kissner had told him to put the cocaine in the suitcase.

After this telephone conversation Raz bought a suitcase.

Kissner made a further telephone call to Raz at 5.45 pm on 22 July. After Raz had told Kissner that he had bought a suitcase, the conversation continued:- "Peter: Wonderful, er, suitcase's security.

Raz: Uh, the suitcase has a lock on it, yeah, it's not a very big lock 
Peter: Er, fine that's fine. Tell them you are going up to Queensland for a few days.

Raz: Yeah okay 
Peter: Alright and leave a few things in there, go home, ah take the claim, ask for a claim bag, ah, ticket.

Raz: Take the claim check with me 
Peter: Yes.

Raz: Okay, ah.

Peter: Okay and we'll take it from there, um, I'll send ah, send somebody with ah, some dollars for you, now I said one before, is 5 enough to get you home.

Raz: Yeah, yeah that'll, I guess so".

Raz left the suitcase he had bought at the Sheraton Hotel.

Further telephone conversations occurred between Raz and the appellant, Louis
Leff or Kissner but it is unnecessary to refer to the details of these conversations.

At the trial the appellant gave evidence in her own case. She said that during her visit to Australia in May/June 1991 she had won about $40,000 gambling at a casino. She had left some of her winnings with Kissner, with whom she had formed an innocent association, because if she took more than a certain amount of her winnings back to America she would have to pay tax on the excess. She had paid for the Di Cristos' trip to Australia as a sort of delayed wedding present for them. While the Di Cristos were in Australia they were to collect the part of her gambling winnings which she had left with Kissner. At the request of her son Louis she had assisted in arranging Raz's trip to
Australia. She denied that she was involved in trafficking in cocaine or that she had known that her son Louis was involved in trafficking in cocaine. She denied doing or saying any of the things which on the Crown case showed that she had been concerned in the importation by the Di Cristos or the importation by Raz. She said that the first time she became aware of the importation of cocaine was at about 1 o'clock in the morning Miami time on 21 July 1991, that is at about 3 o'clock in the afternoon Sydney time. At that time her son Louis told her that he had "a problem", that he had received a telephone call from
Kissner in which Kissner had told him that he though Raz had been arrested.
When the appellant asked how Raz could have been arrested, Louis said that he had sent Raz and the Di Cristos to Australia with drugs and that Kissner was "the Australian connection". According to the appellant, she was "really angry" at this news. However, at her son's request, she agreed, unwillingly, to telephone Raz in Sydney. She did do, but the number was engaged.

A little later she received the first call from Raz, the call made at 4.07 pm
Sydney time. After receiving this call she herself telephoned Louis and he came to her apartment. Louis asked her to telephone Raz and the appellant made the telephone call which was made at 4.37 pm Sydney time. In his remarks on sentence Judge Nash said:- "It is obvious from the second call, that is the one she made, that someone was in the room with her giving some instructions. She said that this was
Louis".

The appellant claimed that in the telephone conversations to which she was a party she had no concern for the cocaine but was only concerned for her son and Raz.

On the first count in the indictment, the charge of being knowingly concerned in the importation on 18 July 1991 by the Di Cristos, the Crown case against the appellant was based on the evidence of what the appellant had done and said before the Di Cristos left Miami and this remained the only way in which the Crown case was put on the first count.

The Crown case on the second count was initially put solely on a similar basis, that is that by what the appellant had done and said in Miami before
Raz left Miami she had been "knowingly concerned in" the importation of cocaine by Raz. However, after the appellant gave her evidence, denying that she had known about any importation of cocaine prior to 21 July and asserting that she had become aware of the importation by Raz only when her son spoke to her at about 3 o'clock Sydney time on 21 July 1991, the Crown was permitted in its closing address to put its case on the second count on an alternative basis, that, even if the appellant's evidence was accepted, she had become concerned, knowingly, in the importation by Raz in the telephone conversations she had with Raz.

On this appeal it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the trial judge had erred in permitting the Crown to put its case on the second count on the alternative basis, because, it was submitted, the alternative basis was not legally available. It was contended that the alternative basis was not legally available, because a person can be convicted of being knowingly concerned in an importation of prohibited drugs, only if the person becomes knowingly concerned before, or during, the importation, and not after the importation has been completed, and because in the present case the importation had been completed before any of the telephone conversations occurred. As the Crown had been permitted to put its case on the second count on two bases, on one of which the appellant could not lawfully have been convicted, the conviction on the second count should be set aside.

An argument that the Crown was not entitled to rely on the alternative basis had been put at the appellant's trial by counsel then appearing for the appellant.

Some parts of the argument on behalf of the appellant can readily be conceded.
A person commits the offence of being knowingly concerned in the importation of prohibited imports into Australia, only if the person becomes knowingly concerned in the importation before the importation takes place or during the importation, that is while the importation is still in progress, (R versus Tannous [(1987) 10 NSWLR 303] especially at 307), even though the conduct by which the concern is made manifest need not occur while the importation is still in progress (R versus Courtney-Smith [(1990) 48 A Crim R 49] at ). If in a criminal trial the Crown case on a charge is put to the jury on two alternative bases, and the accused cannot lawfully be convicted on one of those bases, then any conviction on that charge is liable to be set aside, even though the accused could lawfully have been convicted on the other basis.
However, the key issue which remains in the present case is whether the jury could have lawfully found that at the time of the telephone calls to which the appellant was a party the importation of the cocaine which had been carried by
Raz was still in progress or whether it had been completed.

It is now convenient to turn to the specific grounds of appeal against the appellant's conviction.
His Honour the learned trial judge erred and erred in law in allowing, in relation to the charge that the Appellant was knowingly concerned in the importation of narcotics by Gil Raz on 21 July 1991 (the Second Count) that there was sufficient evidence for the jury to consider whether or not the importation venture was still in progress at the relevant time.

This ground of appeal raises the question whether there was evidence on which the jury could find that the importation venture involved in the second count was still in progress at the time of the telephone conversations to which the appellant was a party, or whether there was no evidence on which the jury could make such a finding, with the consequence that the trial judge should not have permitted the jury to consider the alternative way in which the Crown sought to put its case on the second count.

The word "importation" is not defined in the Customs Act. The meaning of the word was considered by the High Court in Forbes versus Traders' Finance Corporation
Limited <case>; [(1972) 126 CLR 429.] An issue in that case was whether a motor vehicle had been forfeited as being a carriage used in the importation of goods, within s229(j) of the Customs Act as it then stood. Two of the three judges forming the majority, Barwick CJ and Windeyer J, held that the motor vehicle in question had been used in the "importation" of goods.

Barwick CJ in a short judgment said that he agreed with the judgment of
Windeyer J. However, the Chief Justice added:- " 'importation' extends on both sides of the actual act of importing goods into the country. The importation does not cease at the moment of an import.
But the relevant use of a vehicle must be proximate to the act of importing.
Whether it is so or not is a question of degree for decision in the particular case".

At p445 Windeyer J said:- "To give them a meaning, the words 'a carriage used in the unlawful importation or exportation of goods' must therefore, I consider, refer to some use of it that is incidental and proximate to, or involved in the course of the illegal process. I here respectfully accept the reasoning of Jordan CJ in
Owens versus Collector of Customs [(1940) SR NSW 605.] A motor vehicle taken to the airport by a person who had procured prohibited goods to be secretly brought in, so that he might there obtain them on landing from an accomplice in the crime and then carry them away in that vehicle, is in my view properly said to have been a carriage used in their unlawful importation.
An unlawful importation is, as I see it as a process, not at an end immediately illicit goods are put on land. It can begin before they are put aboard the craft by which they are landed, and can continue after it has made a landfall".

In R versus Lam [(1990) 46 ACrimR 402] Gleeson
CJ, with whose judgment the other members of the Court agreed, said at p404, in referring to Forbes versus Traders' Finance Corporation Limited that "the term 'importation' is one that must involve at least some measure of flexibility".
The Chief Justice approved of certain directions given by the trial judge, including a direction that "the venture (of importation) does not finish the moment that goods are landed but extends to all matters and events which are directly related or proximate or incidental to the importation".

In R versus Courtney-Smith this Court pointed out that the concern which a person charged with an offence under s233B(1)(d) must exhibit is concern in the venture centred on the importation. In that case it was held that at a point of time when the goods which had been brought into Australia by sea were still, two weeks after they had been landed, in a container which was being held in a factory in a Sydney suburb, before distribution to the market in
Australia for which the goods were intended, the venture or process of importation contemplated by the Customs Act had not ceased.

In the present case, I consider that there was sufficient evidence to enable a finding by the jury that the process or venture of importation had not been completed at the time of the telephone calls to which the appellant was a party.

It was clearly open to the jury to find that the parties to the venture of importation contemplated that after Raz arrived at Sydney airport he would be met by Kissner and that, as had happened in the case of the importation by
Michael Di Cristo, Kissner would take Raz to some place where the packets containing the cocaine which were taped to Raz's body would be removed from his body and would pass into Kissner's control for distribution by Kissner within Australia, and to find that the venture centred on the importation would not cease at least until the cocaine had passed into Kissner's control.
There is some analogy between the facts of the present case and the facts in
Lam, where the role of the appellant was to supply an enema to the couriers who were carrying the heroin in capsules which they had swallowed, so that the heroin could be liberated from the couriers' bodies.

It is true that in the present case Raz was arrested at the airport and the cocaine being carried by him was seized by the Federal Police. However, I do not consider that the intervention by the authorities prevented the process or venture of importation from continuing so that a person might subsequently become concerned in the importation. In R versus Chow [(1987) 11 NSWLR 561] this
Court held that the appellant had been rightly convicted of being in possession of prohibited imports being heroin, in a case where before the appellant had a meeting with the courier who had brought the heroin into
Australia in a suitcase, police had entered the motel room where the courier was staying, taken possession of most of the heroin and substituted plaster of
Paris blocks in the suitcase.

In the present case, there was evidence that after some of the telephone conversations with the appellant had taken place, Kissner was still taking steps with a view to obtaining delivery of the cocaine. There was evidence that after the appellant had had the first two conversations with Raz Kissner communicated with Raz and asked Raz to leave the Sheraton Hotel and walk towards the harbour, that Kissner observed Raz from a distance while Raz was walking towards the harbour and that he was thereby "checking out" Raz and that after the appellant had had further telephone conversations with Raz
Kissner communicated with Raz and, with a view to obtaining delivery of the cocaine which had been imported, made arrangements with Raz that Raz should buy a suitcase, put the cocaine in the suitcase, leave the suitcase at the reception at the Sheraton Hotel and post the baggage claim check for the suitcase to Miami.

In my opinion the first ground of appeal should be rejected.

I have dealt with the first ground of appeal on the basis that there is a possibility that in reaching the verdict of guilty on the second count the jury relied on the alternative way in which the Crown case was put. However, I observe that it is improbable that the jury relied on the alternative way in which the Crown case was put, in convicting the appellant on the second count.
If the jury was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty on the first count, on the only basis on which the Crown case was put on the first count, that is that the appellant had concerned herself in the importation by Michael Di Cristo by what she had done and said in Miami before
Di Cristo's departure, it is improbable the jury would not have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty on the second count on a corresponding basis, which was the primary way in which the Crown put its case on the second count.
His Honour erred in law in his directions to the jury on the issues for the jury to decide in relation to the question of whether or not the importation venture referred to in the Second Count was still in progress at the relevant time.

The trial judge gave the jury extensive directions on the meaning of the expression "importation". These directions were in accordance with the authorities to which I have already referred in this judgment, including the passages in the summing-up by the trial judge in Courtney-Smith which were expressly approved by this Court on the appeal.

The only complaint made under this ground of appeal was that the trial judge erred in not directing the jury that the importation was at an end by the time of the telephone calls. For the reasons which I have already given in rejecting the first ground of appeal, I also reject this ground.
His Honour erred in his directions to the jury on the issues to decide in relation to the question of whether or not the importation venture referred to in the Second Count was still in progress at the relevant time in that directly or by implication those directions suggested that the Crown had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the Appellant was "knowingly concerned" when that was an issue for the jury to decide.

This ground was not supported by any argument in the appellant's written submissions and was not developed in oral argument on the hearing of the appeal. A reading of the summing-up as a whole clearly shows that his Honour left to the jury as an issue to be decided by them whether, even if they were satisfied that the importation venture was still in progress at the time of the telephone calls, what the appellant had said in the telephone calls manifested a knowing concern by her in the importation venture.
The learned trial judge erred, and erred in law in directing the jury in relation to certain examples of persons who could be said to be "knowingly concerned" in the importation of narcotics and these directions were confusing and may have had the tendency to distract the jury from proper consideration of the relevant issues and these directions rendered the convictions unsafe and unsatisfactory.

His Honour correctly directed the jury that it was necessary for the Crown to show as an element of the offence charged that the appellant was "concerned in", not just concerned about, the importation. This was a live issue at the trial, because part of the appellant's evidence was to the effect that in the telephone conversations with Raz she had no concern for the cocaine of the existence of which she had so recently become aware but only a personal concern for her son and Raz. In this connection his Honour gave the example of a mother who, having discovered that her son is involved in an importation of illicit drugs, is concerned or anxious about the importation but is nevertheless not guilty of the offence of being knowingly concerned in the importation, because she does not do anything to connect herself with, or involve herself in, the importation.

In my opinion, the example given by his Honour was apposite to an issue which had been raised by the appellant's evidence. I do not consider that the giving of this example could have had the effect of distracting the jury from a consideration of the different question of whether at the time of the telephone calls the importation had ceased, a question which was separately and extensively dealt with in the summing-up. I would reject this ground of appeal.
The directions referred to in 4 when combined with the directions referred to in 2 and 3 hereof rendered conviction on the Second Count unsafe and unsatisfactory.

As I have found that there is no substance in any of grounds 1 to 4 I would also reject this ground.
There was, in all the circumstances a miscarriage of justice in that the
Crown was allowed to put its case on the Second Count in the alternative and the jury were not directed or were not directed in sufficiently strong terms that they should not apply evidence which they accepted in relation to the
First Count as evidence tending to establish guilt on the Second Count.
Accordingly the Crown should have been required to elect how it chose to proceed in relation to the Second Count, in default whereof the trial judge should have ordered a separate trial on the Second Count.

This was the only ground of appeal which in any way involved the first count in the indictment.

In written submissions in support of this ground it was pointed out that there was a difference between the nature of the evidence on the two counts, in that
Mr and Mrs Di Cristo had not given oral evidence, whereas Raz had given oral evidence, and there was a separate question affecting the credibility of Raz only, in that there was evidence that Raz had made a previous statement to police officers inconsistent with his evidence, in which he had nominated a man named Rodriguez and not the appellant, as the person who had attached the bags containing the cocaine to his body.

In my opinion, the two counts in the indictment were appropriately tried together. Much of the evidence was relevant and admissible on both counts. I am quite unable to conclude that a joint trial of the two counts led to any miscarriage of justice. Counsel for the appellant on the appeal was unable to refer the Court to any record of any application for separate trials of the two counts, whether made at the trial or before the trial. No relevant complaint was made about any of the trial judge's directions by the experienced counsel who appeared for the appellant at her trial.

The principal submission put in oral argument in support of this somewhat diffusely worded ground was that the alternative way of putting the Crown case on the second count had been improperly put to the jury, that the jury might have found the appellant guilty on the second count on the impermissible alternative basis and that the jury might then have been influenced by the verdict of guilty they had wrongly found on the second count in finding the appellant guilty of the first count.

This argument falls to the ground if, as I have held, the alternative way of putting the second count was properly put to the jury. I observe that it seems to me highly improbable that the jury would have arrived at their verdicts by taking the route postulated by the submission.

In my opinion this final ground of appeal should also be rejected and accordingly the appellant's appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

I turn to the appellant's application for leave to appeal against the sentences imposed on her by Judge Nash, consisting of a head sentence of thirteen years four months with a non-parole period of eight years six months.

In his remarks on sentence Judge Nash said that he accepted the evidence of the Di Cristos and Raz and rejected the evidence of the appellant and accordingly was satisfied that the appellant was knowingly concerned in each of the importations before the cocaine was brought into Australia, in the ways described by the Di Cristos and Raz in their evidence. On the application for leave to appeal against sentence no challenge was made to these findings by his Honour.

In his remarks on sentence Judge Nash addressed the question of what had been the appellant's position or role in the importations. His Honour found that the appellant was a principal, having played a major role in the importation by the Di Cristos and a lesser, but still vital, role in the importation by
Raz. Later in the remarks on sentence his Honour said that the appellant's role was "at a level somewhere close to that of a full principal, but considerably more than that of a courier".

In his remarks on sentence Judge Nash noted that the subjective circumstances of the appellant included that she was fifty six years old at the time she was sentenced, that she had no prior criminal record, that her husband was elderly and seriously ill and that she would not have any support from members of her family during a prison term to be served in Australia.

In his remarks on sentence his Honour referred appropriately to the
Commonwealth Crimes Act and indicated that before the discount required by s16G of the Crimes Act an appropriate head sentence would have been imprisonment for twenty years. When the discount required by s16G was made, the head sentences would be reduced to thirteen years four months.

On the hearing of the application for leave to appeal against sentence it was not submitted that the sentences imposed by the sentencing judge, standing by themselves, manifested any error. However, it was submitted that the appellant would be justified in feeling a legitimate sense of grievance when comparing the sentences imposed on her with the sentences imposed on the co-offender
Kissner. Kissner pleaded guilty to two charges of being knowingly concerned in the importation of prohibited imports into Australia. On each charge he was originally sentenced to a sentence of ten years imprisonment with a non-parole period of seven years. However, on a Crown appeal to this Court each sentence was increased to a sentence of twelve years imprisonment with a non-parole period of nine years. It had been conceded in the original proceedings on sentence that Kissner was "a principal in Australia" and the Court of Criminal
Appeal remarked that the original sentences passed on Kissner were the sort of sentences which would have been appropriate for an offender who was merely a courier. In re-sentencing Kissner the Court of Criminal Appeal had regard to the principle that after a successful Crown appeal against sentence the sentence imposed by the Court of Criminal Appeal will usually be less than the sentence which would have been properly imposed by the original sentencing judge.

In his remarks on sentence Judge Nash took into consideration the sentences passed on Kissner by the Court of Criminal Appeal. His Honour correctly regarded the sentences passed on the Di Cristos and Raz as affording him little assistance in sentencing the appellant. Each of the Di Cristos and Raz was not a principal, had promptly admitted his or her guilt and had provided substantial assistance to the authorities. As regards Kissner his Honour found the appellant's criminality not to be as great as Kissner's. On the other hand his Honour pointed out that Kissner had pleaded guilty, although the Court of
Criminal Appeal had held that in the circumstances he was not entitled to a large discount for his plea of guilty. His Honour observed that the appellant had not pleaded guilty and had put the community to great expense in that she had had a long committal proceeding and a long trial. His Honour was careful not to suggest that the appellant's conduct in not admitting her guilt was a circumstance of aggravation but observed that "she would have fared better on sentence if she had pleaded guilty". His Honour eventually imposed head sentences on the appellant which were somewhat longer than the head sentences imposed on Kissner which the Court of Criminal Appeal had said were less than should have been imposed on Kissner at first instance, and non-parole periods which were six months less than the non-parole periods in Kissner's sentences.

I consider that the sentencing judge should be regarded as having reached this result by a process of reasoning, that while the appellant's criminality as a principal was not as great as Kissner's it was not far short of Kissner's and her somewhat lesser degree of criminality was offset by the discount Kissner had received through pleading guilty. I do not consider that his Honour erred in so reasoning and I do not consider that the appellant is entitled to feel any legitimate sense of grievance because of the relationship between her sentences and those passed on Kissner. In my opinion, while leave should be granted to the appellant to appeal against the sentences passed on her, her appeal against those sentences should be dismissed.
 * * * 
