

Pira P/L versus Tucker [1996] NSWSC 569 (26 November 1996) 
PIRA PTY LIMITED versus TUCKER /96, CC 20487/94 
TUESDAY 26 November 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
COLE JA, BEAZLEY JA, ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Workers Compensation - Assessment and amount of compensation - Weekly payments during incapacity - Ability to earn in suitable employment or business after injury - worker's actual earnings - Workers Compensation Act <case> 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: I will ask Justice Abadee to give the first reason.

ABADEE AJA: The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Nielson of the Compensation Court. The appeal is limited to points of law. There are two grounds of appeal, the first ground being that his Honour erred in law in concluding that the worker was entitled to an award under <case> of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). The second ground is that his Honour erred in his interpretation of [s 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s40.html) of the Act, in construing in his award that the applicant is earning rather than is able to earn. [Section 40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s40.html) is the provision concerning the weekly payment of compensation to be paid to an injured worker during a period of partial incapacity.

Both grounds were argued together.

The respondent had been employed as an apprentice spare parts interpreter. The appellant sustained injury on a journey on 19 October 1990, to her right leg.
It appears that following her accident there was a period of incapacity. She then returned to her normal work. Later a problem developed, and a further operative procedure was performed. She was paid compensation. Again the respondent returned to work and performed her normal duties until 14 February
On that day she completed her apprenticeship and was retrenched. His
Honour found that retrenchment was due to lack of work. At the same time he noted that she had some difficulty in carrying out her normal work prior to retrenchment. The difficulty was performing lifting because of the condition of her left knee. She found that she had to call for assistance to do heavy lifting, a matter that caused her co-workers to become upset. His Honour accepted that the respondent had the difficulties of which she complained.

Subsequently the respondent became pregnant. A child was born. The respondent did not wish to join the workforce until the middle of 1994. That was her evidence. She performed a three month training course as an assistant nurse.
On 15 October 1994 she found part time work as an assistant nurse at the Dubbo
Nursing Home in whose employ she remained at the time of trial. She was working only ten hours a week at the Home with some limited overtime.

His Honour found that the respondent was unfit to do all aspects of her pre- injury work and was therefore unfit or incapacitated for that work. His Honour found that between 15 February 1992 and 15 October 1994 when she was not working, she was suited for "receptionist work which the applicant did prior to taking up her spare parts interpreter apprenticeship, or clerical work which was an aspect of her pre-injury work". However, his Honour concluded that she was able to earn in such period between $310 and $320 per week. His
Honour stated that since 15 October 1994 he did not have to make an assessment of the respondent's ability to earn because her actual earnings were known.

In this appeal the appellant employer submitted that his Honour should have ignored the actual earnings and assessed the respondent's entitlement again as he had done up to 15 October 1994 by reference to her ability to earn upon the basis that there was, to use the employer's submissions, no evidence of any change. The fact is, of course, that there was such a change. She had entered upon actual employment.

His Honour addressed the issue whether ability to earn should be taken as the "benchmark" within [s (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s40.html) as the appellant submitted, or whether it should be actual earnings. His
Honour cited Aitkin versus Goodyear Tyre & Rubber Co (Australia) Limited <case>; [(1945) 46 SR 20] as clear authority for the proposition for taking into account her actual earnings as the respondent's ability to earn "unless she is malingering, shirking or deliberately taking lower paid work".

The employer submitted that his Honour's proposition was perhaps a misstatement of what the Chief Justice had said in Aitkin's case, or if not a misstatement, not a full and accurate statement of what the Chief
Justice had said.

It is not necessary to further debate this submission because I do not believe it makes any difference to the result.

His Honour found that none of the matters to which he had regard in quoting
Aitkin's case had been made out or established. He made an important finding of fact. He said that the fact that the respondent had chosen the
Dubbo Nursing Home work "which was really not suitable for her is a comment on her desire to work and also indicates that she would do other work if she could". His Honour also specifically accepted that but for the injury the respondent would be working full time if she was able to find full time work and would have done so since 1 July 1994. He concluded that the respondent's ability to earn since 1 July 1994 and her actual earnings since 15 October should be measured against the full hours of a spare parts interpreter. A finding was made that during the period when the applicant has been earning, her actual earnings were much less than her probable weekly earnings and the difference would need to be reduced to the statutory maximum.

The appellant has submitted, as I have said, that the trial judge in referring to the decision in Aitkin incorrectly summarised what Sir Frederick
Jordan said at 22-23. He submits that the trial judge failed to properly consider the two alternatives in the subsection, being "is earning" (the prima facie basis) or the second alternative "able to earn". I would observe that his Honour's findings reflect, in fact, a consideration of the alternatives.

The manner in which the alternatives found in [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s40.html) of actual earnings or ability to earn, are to be applied have not only been considered in Aitkin but also in this court in J C Ludowici & Son
Limited versus Cutri [(1992) 26 NSWLR 580.] In that case Kirby P (with whom Sheller JA agreed) said at 592: "It will be rare that a judge, faced by the undisputed fact that a worker 'is earning' an amount, concludes nonetheless that the amount earned is more than the worker is `able to earn'. By the worker's own activity, he or she will ordinarily demonstrate, by the amount earned, what, at the least, he or she is `able to earn'." 
And at 593: "It is that where the worker is earning, the average weekly amount produced thereby is normally to be taken as the paragraph (b) component of the equation. It is only otherwise where the decision-maker concludes that the worker is able to earn more than that sum in some suitable employment. Then, but then only, is a notional sum taken into account. It is subject to the maximum provided in paragraph (b) itself. It is also subject to determinations as [section (1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s40.html) and [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s40.html) provide." 
This approach also reflected the view of Glass JA in Hill versus Bryant [(1974) 2 NSWLR 423] at 428 where his Honour considered how the compensation awardable under <case> of the 1926 Act (now <case> of the 1987 Act) was to be ascertained.

At p 428 Mr Justice Glass said as follows: "The enquiry to be undertaken in obedience to the section is designed to ascertain a weekly payment not to be exceeded, that maximum being the difference between two weekly amounts. The difference is obtained by subtracting from a sum hypothetically earned the larger of two sums one actually received as earnings and the other hypothetically earned." 
It is to be noted from Hill that the decision of Aitkin was apparently drawn to the attention of the court and had been cited in argument.
Thus clearly the court in deciding Hill was cognizant of what Sir
Frederick Jordan had said earlier in the decision of Aitkin.

In Arnotts Snack Products Pty Ltd versus Yacob <case>; [(1985) 155 CLR 171] the majority of the High Court said that under <case> an applicant's entitlement to compensation will depend upon his loss of earning power. This, it was said, flows not from the concept of partial incapacity for work but from the nature of the express limitation which the subsection placed on the amount of compensation payable.

I reject the employer's submission that because there was an ability to earn reflected in his Honour's findings through until October 1994 of $310 to $330 per week, that his Honour was compelled to apply the same approach to the respondent's ability to earn thereafter. In my view he was not bound to adopt such an approach. No point of law, in my view, is raised by this appeal.
Indeed, his Honour was entitled to adopt the view that it was not appropriate to apply to the period when the worker was working, the same test as to the period when she was not working. In any event, as to whether actual earnings truly reflect ability to earn is, to my mind, a question essentially of fact for the trial judge, to be approached in the light of the principles to which
I have made reference. In my view his Honour was entitled to rely on actual earnings as the appropriate measure of the continuing partial incapacity under s 40(1) of the Act.

For these reasons in my view the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

COLE JA: I agree. The critical point in the appeal flows from a consideration of Aitkin versus Goodyear Tyre & Rubber Company (Australia) Limited (1946) 46 SR 20 at 22. There the Chief Justice Sir Frederick Jordan said: "As to the phrase 'is earning' it has been held that if the partially incapacitated worker is earning something his actual earnings must, prima facie, be taken as the basis and the rate of compensation provided for by section 9 reduced by a calculation based on the excess of his pre-injury average weekly earnings above what he is actually earning. If, however, it is proved that his actual earnings are not a proper basis because there is some reason unconnected with his earning power which makes them lower than they should be the other alternative, what he is able to earn, must be adopted.
This is so where it is shown that he is deliberately taking lower paid work than he could get or is idling or on this account receiving less than he could reasonably be expected to earn or where his actual earnings have been compulsorily reduced by something unconnected with his injury or general earning power".

The critical point argued by the appellant was that because the respondent had taken employment, as it were, at the time with a nursing home and because the employer had offered her only limited hours of work it followed that the actual earnings which she received were, to quote the words of Sir Frederick
Jordan, "compulsorily reduced by something unconnected with the injury or general earning power". However, that submission overlooks the evidence which appears at p 19 of the appeal book which made it clear that the respondent works only limited hours and sought not to work longer because if she did so her knee became painful.

It follows that it cannot be said that the restriction of working hours was, in truth, compulsorily reduced by something unconnected with the injury.
Indeed, the restriction of working hours was related to the injury. It follows that the principal submission advanced in my opinion fails.

For those reasons and the reasons given by Justice Abadee I agree with the order proposed.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with the presiding judge and with Abadee AJA but would also add one short comment. In Aitkin, Jordan CJ held that the test to be applied in determining the rate of compensation to be awarded under <case> for partial incapacity was, prima facie, the person's actual earnings unless it is proved that the worker's actual earnings are not a proper test, because there is some reason unconnected with the worker's earning power which made them lower than they should be.

Jordan CJ stated at 23 that that will occur where a worker is "deliberately taking lower paid work than he could reasonably be expected to get; is idling or his earnings are compulsorily reduced for a reason unconnected with his injury or general earning power". These are instances, or examples, only and do not represent an exhaustive list of the circumstances in which it will be inappropriate to apply the "prima facie" test.

It is clear, not only from the statement of Jordan CJ but also from the manner in which this Court applied the test in Ludowici, that as a first step, one has to approach the matter on a prima facie basis and only move from that basis if the evidence establishes that the actual earnings are not, in the circumstances of the case, a proper test.

It is clear from the trial judge's judgment in this case (particularly at pp from P-S commencing "I did as I have said" to the passage as it ends on page 29 line F) that his Honour considered that, in this case, the respondent's actual earnings were the appropriate basis for the assessment of compensation.

I agree with the orders proposed.

COLE JA: The order of the court is the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
