

Regina versus Arnold John Brandy [1996] NSWSC 518 (28 October 1996) 
REGINA versus Arnold John BRANDY /96 October 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, IRELAND J, BELL AJ 
CATCHWORDS:Criminal law and procedure - Assault occasioning actual bodily harm - application for leave to go behind Notice of Abandonment - sentence appeal.

RESULT:Leave refused.

JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The applicant (Arnold John Brandy) was found guilty by a District Court jury of an assault occasioning actual bodily harm. Judge Saunders QC imposed a sentence of penal servitude for two years consisting of a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months. He appealed against his conviction and he sought leave to appeal against the sentence involved.

There are two procedural hurdles which the applicant must overcome. The first is that his Notice of Appeal was filed out of time, and he requires leave to appeal out of time. The Notice was filed almost a month after the twentyeight day period had expired. His solicitor asserted in the application for leave to appeal out of time that the applicant believed that his barrister at the trial was going to lodge the appeal on his behalf, an assertion which has not been disputed. If this were the only hurdle, I would propose that leave to appeal out of time be granted.

The second hurdle is a more substantial one. On 18 October - that is, just ten days ago - the applicant filed a Notice of Abandonment. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s27.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) deems an appeal to have been dismissed upon the filing of such a Notice. This Court has been told that he filed the Notice because of advice which he had received from the Aboriginal Legal Service, and following the withdrawal of his counsel and solicitor. He has now reconsidered his position, and notice of his intention to go behind his Notice of Abandonment was filed last Thursday. This
Court has an inherent jurisdiction to go behind r 27 to ensure that a miscarriage of justice does not go unremedied.[1] Even if the explanation proffered for the abandonment is weak, that circumstance will not necessarily stand in the way of the grant of leave to withdraw the abandonment if it be seen that there would be a miscarriage of justice if leave were refused.[2] In determining whether there would be a miscarriage of justice in such a case, regard is had to the applicant's prospects of success if his appeal were permitted to proceed.[3] In order to assess those prospects, the matter proceeded. Mr Miles from the Aboriginal Legal Service appeared on his behalf in order to assist him.

When the appeal was called on, we were informed that the appeal against conviction would not proceed but that the applicant would like us to consider his application for leave to appeal against the sentence.

The applicant and complainant had been living in a de facto relationship. It is not quite clear whether they were so living at the time in the premises in which the complainant was living and where the assault took place. The police intervened shortly after the assault had taken place. The complainant was observed to be crying, bleeding from a deep laceration under both eyes, and the surrounds of each eye was swollen. She was also bleeding from her nose and from cuts to the bridge of her nose and on the side of her mouth. She had bruising on both shoulders and her back, and her left hand was very swollen.
X-rays taken later disclosed fractures of both cheek bones, of the nasal bone and of a finger. They were very serious injuries indeed.

There are two factors which stand out in relation to the sentence which was imposed. Not only were the injuries very substantial, the assault was a savage one. That is one factor. The other is that the applicant has a very bad criminal record for violence. We were informed that all of the offences were directed towards the same woman. I do not see that that is a matter in mitigation. There are three convictions for assault occasioning bodily harm, four for assaulting a female and five for breaching apprehended violence and apprehended domestic violence orders, as well as a number of other convictions for offences involving violence. Those convictions stretch back over some eleven years. At the time when this offence was committed, the applicant was the subject of a recognisance to be of good behaviour for a breach of an apprehended domestic violence order. The judge considered, but rejected, the submission that there were special circumstances warranting a variation of the statutory ratio between the minimum and additional terms.

I see no error made by the judge in the exercise of his sentencing discretion.
I would refuse leave to appeal against the sentence imposed. In these circumstances, that there are no prospects of success if the applicant's application for leave to appeal against sentence were permitted to proceed, I propose that leave to go behind his Notice of Abandonment be refused.

IRELAND J: I agree.

BELL AJ: I agree.

HUNT CJ at CL: The order of the Court is as I have proposed.
 <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 431] at 437.
 [2] Regina versus Bell [(1987) 8 NSWLR 311] at 315.
 [3] Regina versus Bell (at 314); Regina versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR ]
at 246.
 * * * 
