

Sarah Jane Bailey (by her Tutor Philip John Bailey) versus Government Insurance
Office of New South Wales Matter No 15051/85 [1998] NSWSC 708 (29 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
SARAH JANE BAILEY (by her Tutor PHILIP JOHN BAILEY) versus GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /85 July 1998 
Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
This is a claim by the plaintiff, Sarah Jane Bailey, who is presently aged 19 years, for damages arising out of an accident which occurred on 24 February , her sixth birthday, when she was struck by a negligent motor cycle driver and sustained very serious injuries. The defendant has admitted liability and the matter comes before me for assessment of damages. It is a particularly sad case.

The plaintiff was born on 24 February 1979 and was at the time of the accident living with her parents in the Parramatta area. Her mother said that before the accident the plaintiff was in perfect health with a bright personality.
She had commenced first class at kindergarten about two weeks before the accident. She had a number of interests. She went to yoga classes, she was having violin lessons and she used to go to dance classes with her friends.
Indeed the accident happened when the plaintiff was crossing the road with friends to attend a "childs' disco" as a birthday occasion. The plaintiff was rendered unconscious by the impact and a bystander (who was a nurse) administered mouth to mouth resuscitation. She was taken by ambulance to
Westmead Hospital. Apparently she remained unconscious for about a week and was kept sedated because of the cerebral injury which she sustained. This involved a fracture of the occipital bone of the scalp, and a traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage. Orthopaedically, she sustained a fracture of the left superior pubic ramus and a fracture of the femur. A right sided hemiparasis affecting the upper and lower limbs was detected subsequently.

Her mother said that when she visited the plaintiff in hospital she was unrecognisable except for her clothing. Her face was swollen and she was "gravel rashed" from head to toe. She did not recognise the members of her family for a month. Mrs Bailey noticed that after Sarah commenced to speak, her speech was confused in that, for example, if she wished to say that her leg was hurting she would refer to her arm as hurting. The plaintiff was discharged from hospital on 19 April 1985.

The plaintiff was in a wheelchair when she was discharged and it was necessary for her to be taken to the Hospital Out Patients Department three or four times a week. It was necessary for her to have physiotherapy, occupational therapy and speech therapy. She also had exercises for her orthopaedic disabilities. It was necessary for her to learn to walk again because she had been in traction during the whole of her stay in hospital.

For the first year after the accident it was necessary for the plaintiff to attend the Out Patients Department regularly every week. During the second year she attended approximately once a month and thereafter about three times a year.

The plaintiff's shortening of one leg became a progressive problem and indeed when she was aged 14 Dr Dorsch was consulted and the question of an operative procedure was discussed. Dr Dorsch recommended against surgery and advised the plaintiff to wear orthotic shoes. Her right leg is almost one and a half inches shorter than her left but the plaintiff has resisted wearing orthotic shoes because, as a young girl, she was disinclined to present with such a disability. However the fact that she has worn normal shoes resulted in her compensating for the shortening of the leg with a resulting curvature of the back. That curvature started to develop when she was only 10.

The plaintiff has consistently complained about pain in her leg, her hips and her back. Her mother studied massage and has regularly massaged the plaintiff with apparent easing of the pain. The plaintiff also continually complained of headaches for which she was prescribed panadol.

From an emotional point of view, the plaintiff has, since the accident, continually demonstrated frustration and anger because of feelings of inadequacy and an inability to live a normal life.

Mrs Bailey has an intense devotion to her daughter and has managed to maintain a close relationship with her despite the traumatic aftermath of the accident.
Mrs Bailey said that the plaintiff explained her frustration this way: "She just hated her life. She wished she was dead. "I hate my life", "I wish
I was dead", "Why did you let that nurse, that lady save my life? I can't do anything, I can't read properly, I can't remember things, I keep forgetting where I put things. I hate living. I wish I was dead."" 
The reference to "that nurse" is a reference to the lady who administered mouth to mouth resuscitation at the time of the accident.

By reason of her brain damage the plaintiff had difficulty coping with school.
She attended Parramatta North Public School until she was 12, and thereafter she attended Macarthur Girls High School for six months. She did have some specialised help during her school years but, nevertheless, she was unable to cope. She left school in 1993.

The plaintiff has particularly attractive hair, and after she left school she tried to sit as a model for hairdressers. However that experiment only lasted a very short while because of the pain which it caused to her back. She also managed to obtain a position as a waitress but she was quite unable to perform that work in that she was unable to write the orders down and she could not tolerate the standing. That was in March 1994 for two days. Incidentally, during this period she wore built-up shoes but she found that they hurt her back.

The plaintiff attended TAFE a couple of times in an attempt to improve her reading and writing but without a satisfactory result.

It is common ground that she will never obtain paid employment.

It is convenient now to refer to certain of the neuropyschological evidence.
The plaintiff was assessed on 21 January 1993 by Dr Jennifer Batchelor, a clinical neuropsychologist. Her report is dated 29 January 1993 and annexed thereto are the test results of a neuropsychological assessment.

I note the following passage from Dr Batchelor's report: "It is concluded that the head injury she sustained at the time of motor vehicle accident has resulted in extremely severe and permanent brain damage.
The deficits identified on testing, are without doubt, sufficient to impact on an educational, occupational and interpersonal level and in each of these regards to render her significantly less able than the nonbrain damaged individual. Unfortunately, there is no form of treatment that would ameliorate deficits of the nature evident in the present case. Both Sarah and her family, are, however, likely to continue to require the support and assistance of a members of a Rehabilitation Team." 
A further neuropsychological assessment was carried out by Dr Batchelor on 3
July 1996. In her report of that date Dr Batchelor concluded: "Available evidence indicates that the head injury incurred in February 1985 has resulted in very severe cognitive and behavioural disturbances. The deficits described in the body of this report would, without doubt, be rated as sufficient to impact on a day to day level and to adversely affect her academic, occupational, and interpersonal prospects. In each of these regards she has been, and will remain, very much less successful than she was prior to the injury. Unfortunately, there is no form of treatment which would be expected to ameliorate deficits of the nature evident in the present case. It is therefore concluded that Miss Bailey is rendered permanently and very significantly disabled, on both a cognitive and behavioural level, as a result of brain damage from head injury." 
The plaintiff was examined by Dr P Sachdev, Associate Professor of
Neuropsychiatry of the Neuropsychiatric Institute of the Prince Henry Hospital on 16 December 1996. His conclusions were consistent with those of Dr
Batchelor. I note that he commented on more than one occasion in his report as to the pressure upon the plaintiff's parents as a result of the difficulties of coping with the plaintiff together with financial pressures which they were under.

Importantly Dr Sachdev made the point that the injury sustained by the plaintiff should be considered from a developmental perspective, as the brain, especially at the age of six or thereabouts, is a growing and plastic organ.

On 2nd April 1997 the plaintiff was examined by Dr Ronald Fine a consultant neurologist who acknowledged that the plaintiff's destructive and asocial behaviour and her disobedience have made her difficult to control at home and at school. He thought her prognosis was poor and that a long term follow up of such patients as the plaintiff shows that very few readapt into social life.
He thought that she had suffered from a severe deterioration of intellectual function following a significant head injury and the prospect of her returning to any meaningful form of employment was poor.

In evidence, her mother described the plaintiff's difficulties in maintaining relationships with other people. She said that she would have horrific arguments with any person to whom she got close. Thus she could not maintain interpersonal relationships. Somewhat remarkably, it may be thought, she had what was described as a relationship with a young man named Steven which according to her mother lasted on and off for probably twelve months. However the relationship was punctuated by frequent arguments which involved Sarah and
Steven screaming at each other. They had "horrific arguments". Eventually the relationship was terminated by Steven at the end of 1997 and, according to her mother, the plaintiff then "just had a total breakdown".

The plaintiff was undoubtedly in a very distressed state in December 1997 and
January 1998. She was admitted to Cumberland Hospital on three occasions during this period. The first admission occurred on 8 December 1997 when she was brought to the hospital by police. She was reportedly confused and had been found breaking pot plants in a stranger's house. On admission to hospital she was irritable, uncooperative, and aggressive. There was a note that she was a regular user of cannabis on the hospital records. However in the light of the totality of the evidence I do not attribute her bizarre behaviour to the ingestion of cannabis. At her father's request she was discharged on 10
December 1997. I do not accept that she is a regular user of cannabis.

The plaintiff's break up with Steven is related to her second admission to the
Cumberland Hospital, which was on 3 January 1998. On that occasion the Mt.
Druitt Police were called to Steven's home where the plaintiff was allegedly "going berserk and smashing things". She made bizarre accusations about
Steven's conduct and made inappropriate comments. Apparently when the police arrived she was washing a car but told them that she was watering the garden, when she was asked what she was doing. She was detained pursuant to [sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mha1990128/s29.html) and [33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mha1990128/s33.html)(1) of the [Mental Health Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mha1990128/).
According to the observations of the admitting medical practitioner she was "Ill kempt . Unable to give an account of what happened today. Says people are following her." According to the clinical notes, her boyfriend and flatmate had removed all the knives from the house, fearing she would hurt herself or them.

The plaintiff was discharged on 5th January 1998. She was prescribed 5 to 10 milligrams of diazapan to be administered by her father.

The plaintiff's third admission to Cumberland Hospital was on 11 January this year. According to the clinical notes the police were called to the plaintiff's family home as a result of an assault. Both parents informed police that Sarah had attempted to commit suicide at 11 pm on 10 January by taking several tablets saying "I'm going to kill myself". Her parents stated these tablets (Valium and Lagactil) only kept her awake all night.

About 8 am on 11 January Sarah began to throw items and food around the home and began assaulting her mother by punching her to the head and body. She then began to punch her twelve year old brother in the head and pull him around the room by his ear. Sarah's father came out and tried to restrain her. Sarah kicked her father several times to the groin and leg area.

The discharge summary notes that the plaintiff was discharged on 13 January in her absence. There is a notation "Behaviour settled. Was granted day leave-&gt;became absent without leave. Police were notified but were unable to locate her." She was again prescribed Diazapan whilst at the hospital. Those responsible for her care at Cumberland Hospital concluded that her behavioural problems were related to brain damage incurred in the motor vehicle accident.

Dr Batchelor's final report is dated 9 April 1998 and relates to a neuropsychological reassessment on the same date. Dr Batchelor concluded the report with the following opinion and conclusion:- "OPINION 
Ms Bailey sustained a very significant head injury in the accident that occurred on 24th February 1985. The results of this and all previous assessments have revealed evidence of severe and widespread cognitive deficits. Her intellect has not developed normally, she demonstrates evidence of impairment on tests of recent memory, her adaptive abilities remain disordered and her speed of information processing is extremely slow. There is no evidence to suggest that her poor scores were due to a deliberate attempt to underachieve (i.e .malingering). The deficits in evidence were entirely consistent with the injury that she sustained. There is now a large body of literature indicating that significant head injuries do impact on intellect, memory, adaptive abilities and information processing speed (see, for example,
Walsh, 1985; Lezak, 1995).

In the medical reports pertaining to Ms Bailey's admission to Cumberland
Hospital, it was concluded that her behavioural problems were due to brain damage. I would strongly agree with this conclusion. The results of all neuropsychological assessments have revealed evidence of a disturbance of frontal lobe functioning. The frontal lobes control the ability to regulate one's behaviour and to inhibit inappropriate responses. When damaged, the person tends to react in an inappropriate and excessive manner. Thus, something seemingly trivial can elicit a major response. I strongly suspect that the difficulties that Ms Bailey has in controlling her temper are due to frontal lobe damage. Frontal lobe damage also impairs the ability to evaluate the consequences of a particular action and to consider why one should not behave in a certain way. Thus, the person with damage to these areas of the brain is likely to be easily influenced and to engage in socially inappropriate/undesirable behaviours.(sic) 
To date, Ms Bailey has had difficulty in maintaining employment. This is not surprising in view of the nature and severity of her cognitive deficits. She would be expected to have great difficulty in remembering information that she is told/tasks that she is expected to complete, in dealing with any procedure for which she is not specifically trained and in completing even simple duties in the time that can most people. Her shortness of temper means that she is likely to come into repeated conflict with customers, other employees and her employer. The information reported by her parents during previous assessments indicates that she also had difficulty in motivating herself and in being on time or even presenting for work. Given the severity and nature of Ms Bailey's cognitive deficits, I would classify her as unemployable in the open labour market.

CONCLUSION 
Ms Bailey continues to demonstrate very severe cognitive deficits. I would agree that the behavioural problems necessitating her admission to Cumberland
Hospital are a result of brain damage imparted at the time of the motor vehicle accident. In view of the nature and severity of her cognitive deficits, I would classify Ms Bailey as unemployable on the open labour market." 
Dr Batchelor gave evidence and maintained strongly that the specific deficits disclosed by the plaintiff on neuropsychological testing were attributable to the head injury. She said that it was quite consistent with her frontal lobe damage that the plaintiff should be having difficulties with her boy friend.
One of the problems with frontal lobe damage is the inability to control temper, so relations are always extremely volatile and will always be full of conflict. Something really trivial can provoke a major reaction and that is a major brain damage feature.

On 29 October 1997 the plaintiff was examined by Dr Peter Klug forensic psychiatrist who reported on 4 December 1997.

Dr Klug concluded: "Nevertheless, she is now in a residual state of profound impoverishment with respect to virtually all aspects of her life. Her intellectual, emotional, occupational and interpersonal functioning have all been profoundly affected. She's incapable of employment in the open workforce. She's incapable of caring for a child or responsibly coping with raising her own family. 
Without constant care and protection, she would be at risk of being victimised and subjected to unscrupulous behaviour. (My emphasis) 
It is apparent that she has sufficient self perception to experience resentment and depression with respect of her functioning which she realises is poor. Her mother has said that she described herself as a child in a woman's body.

It is important to note that in addition to her obvious intellectual and cognitive impairments her behaviour overall has been affected. She manifests affective instability, poor impulse control, outbursts of aggression or rage out of proportion to the stresses she has been subjected to." 
Dr Klug's formal diagnoses were, firstly, dementia due to brain trauma and, secondly, organic personality syndrome due to brain trauma.

In summary, he said, she suffered global impairment affecting all aspects of her life as a result of the severe head injury with concomitant brain injury at the age of six.

In evidence, Dr Klug explained that the frontal lobes permit human beings to behave in an appropriate way in response to their environment. So when the frontal lobe function is affected by injury the person is likely to become disinhibited and underlying emotions surface in a fairly undiluted form and this refers to the instability of mood and any underlying emotions, particularly aggression, which would cause problems in a person's life and come to the attention of others.

Dr Klug said that the reports relating to the Cumberland Hospital admissions reinforced his opinion as to the plaintiff's organic personality syndrome. He said the plaintiff's behaviour leading up to the admissions is in keeping with the classical symptoms of an organic personality syndrome. When questioned about her turbulent relationship with Steven, Dr Klug expressed the view that it would be enormously difficult, if not impossible, for her to have a normal relationship with any partner or, indeed, with anybody.

Dr Klug said that the plaintiff is incapable of being taught to function properly in dangerous situations. For example, she could not be taught to appreciate the dangers of leaving the gas on a stove alight and to take necessary steps to avoid that situation occurring. As Dr Klug put it "She can't be taught to regain her memory and her ability to concentrate. They are simply direct and permanent results of the brain injury. She can't learn that." Dr Klug thought, on the evidence available to him, that prior to the accident the plaintiff would have had high average intelligence.

Dr Dan Milder a consultant neurologist examined the plaintiff on 10 November and subsequently perused the neuropsychological assessments performed on April 1998. He concluded that her deficits in cognitive and memory functions will persist indefinitely. She has a markedly diminished capacity to attain her previous potential in her personal and professional affairs. He concluded that she will require continuous care throughout each day for the remainder of her life. Dr Milder adhered to that view when he gave evidence in these proceedings.

In evidence, when he explained the plaintiff's diminished quality of life, he said: "This is a person who has, you know, continuous equilibrium (sic), is unable to assimilate information, unable to enjoy, unable to develop, is given to bizarre behaviour, given to, possibly, suicide attempts. This is all very close to absolutely minimum of personal-of the normal qualities of life." (Tpt.45) 
Describing the kind of in-house care which the plaintiff would require absent her parents to care for her Dr Milder said: "A. That would be my feeling, that there would be a need to have someone with her in the house continuously really throughout the day and throughout the night and I suppose if they established a reasonable relationship with her, she would quieten down to some extent. They would need to keep an eye on her and they would need to do things for her and she would be able to do very simple things and I suppose if that person - if she felt trustful of that person she could have a greater sense of calm about it, but someone would need to keep an eye on her, supervise her and do things for her really throughout the day and need to be there throughout the night as well. That would be my feeling." (Tpt.50) 
On 16 December 1996 the plaintiff was examined by Dr W Patrick an orthopaedic surgeon. He described her orthopaedic injuries as a comminuted fracture of the shaft of the right femur and a fractured right pubic ramus of the pelvis. He said the right femoral fracture healed with considerable shortening and Sarah developed a marked compensatory scoliosis with pelvic tilt. By 1992 she was being troubled by a number of falls. Some orthotic was recommended for her right shoe to correct the lower limb length discrepancy. However the plaintiff told him that she had special shoes for a time but she does not wear these any more. She was in traction for the fractured femur for eleven weeks after the accident and it was about another month before she was walking. Upon examination Dr Patrick found that there is a true shortening of the right lower limb at the femoral level with a slight rotational component. There is approximately 2.5 centimetres of true shortening of the right femur. There is an obvious compensatory scoliosis when standing.

The gait is abnormal and the overall impression is one of significant "deformity" associated with the short right leg gait. He found there was no exaggeration or embellishment. Range of movement of the cervical spine is reasonably full. The thoraco lumbar spine is somewhat stiff. She can flex achieving fingertips to ankles position - extension is 70% of expected and lateral flexion to right and left, 90 degrees of expected with discomfort at the extremes of rotation.

X-rays of the 14 July 1993 of the thoracic and lumbar spine revealed "a scoliosis convex to the right in the mid lumbar region. This is secondary to significant pelvic tilting, presumably due to femur shortening. No underlying vertebral abnormality is identified. There may be some early degenerative change in low lumbar right sided facet joints. The lumbar scoliosis is quite marked convex to the right centred on L4." 
X-rays of 25 October 1993 of the lower limbs revealed "a deformity at the proximal right femur consistent with a significantly displaced fracture which has gone on to bony healing." 
Dr Patrick concluded (inter alia) that the plaintiff has significant shortening of the right femur resulting from the fracture and there is a significant compensatory scoliosis and she has continuing back pain which is a significant problem. She should use a 2 centimetre orthotic with her footwear on the right to minimise the effects of the shortening. He said the orthotics will be the source of ongoing expense on a regular basis for her.

X-rays of the lumbar spine are suggestive of premature arthrosis at the right sided low lumbar facet joints, probably secondary to the compensatory scoliosis, and it is likely that this will become worse with the passage of years. The progression may be minimised if she uses an orthotic.

During the course of Dr Patrick's evidence, he said that he had assumed the plaintiff's scoliosis was a postural one resulting from the leg shortening, however, the possibility existed that it was a structural scoliosis which may have been the result of the impact at the time of the accident. In any event her back pain was consistent with her disabilities.

With regard to Dr Patrick's recommendation that the plaintiff use a 2 centimetre orthotic he said that this may be achieved, either by a build up on the heel of the shoe or the placing of an innersole inside the shoe.

Dr Patrick thought, however, that by reason of her frontal lobe injury it would be less likely that she would comply with his recommendation. He said the back pain could result from the altered gait associated with the lower limb length discrepancy and, in the plaintiff's case, he believed from the facet arthrosis which is at the lower lumbar spine, which could be post traumatic, or could result from the plaintiff walking for a long time without using an orthotic.

Dr Patrick thought the arthrosis (degenerative arthritis) would become worse with the passage of years. He did not think the pain would go away. He linked the disabilities to which he has referred to the motor cycle accident.

Dr Patrick is of the view that if the plaintiff were prepared to wear a properly designed and manufactured orthotic it would be of significant benefit to her in future in combating the scoliosis and the pain.

The defendant tendered a considerable number of reports which I have carefully considered. The only oral evidence called by the defendant was that of Dr
Brian Zeman, a rehabilitation specialist, who examined the plaintiff on 19 May this year that is to say after the evidence concluded on 28 April and before its resumption on 24 June this year.

As to the question of attendant care Dr Zeman expressed the view that currently, from an emotional and behavioural point of view, the plaintiff requires some supervision and possibly professional help as well as the family, but, in his opinion, this will not be required in the long term as these problems will settle with time as she matures. He said that from a cognitive and memory point of view, the level of care and supervision she requires is equivalent to that required for someone with an IQ of eighty such as someone with a developmental disability.

In evidence Dr Zeman gave some interesting evidence in relation to the possibility of the plaintiff residing in a group home. In his address counsel for the defendant did not press this alternative and it is not necessary for me to take the matter further. I cannot accept Dr Zeman's view that the degree of attendant care which the plaintiff requires is equivalent to that required by someone with an IQ of eighty. Dr Zeman has, in my view, in expressing this opinion, given insufficient weight to the serious behavioural and other problems flowing from the frontal lobe damage sustained by the plaintiff.

Dr Zeman expressed the view that the use of a shoe raise would correct the tilting of the plaintiff's spine. He said that many adolescents prefer not to use a shoe raise until they reach about 25 years. Further, he said that if the plaintiff used a shoe raise, she would need little if any massage. It is convenient to note at this stage that there is no institution catering for brain-damaged persons such as the plaintiff.

I will now deal with the assessment of damages under the specific heads raised during the course of argument.

GENERAL DAMAGES 
This is a particularly distressing case bearing in mind the extreme youth of the plaintiff when she was so gravely injured. Her accident has resulted in a multiplicity of injuries; she has had orthopaedic injury and her brain damage has left her with tragic mental and emotional problems for which there is no prospect of relief. The plaintiff seems to live her life in a state of perpetual mental and emotional torment from which she can find little (if any) peace. She has this desperate need to be like others and yet has sufficient insight to know that this can never be. She knows that life can never be for her, what it was before the accident. In Lindley versus Hawkins [(1973) 2 NSWLR ], the Court of Appeal was concerned with the assessment of general damages for a severely brain damaged woman who had (albeit restricted) consciousness of what she had lost. Hutley JA stressed the significance, when assessing damages for pain and suffering, of a deep sense of deprivation which can be one of the most painful of human emotions.

Fortunately over the lengthy period since her accident the plaintiff has had the devoted care, attention, and infinite patience of her parents, particularly her mother. I had the distinct impression during the course of the evidence that her father's devotion to her is such that he cannot come to terms with the severe deficits from which she suffers.

I am satisfied that prior to the accident Sarah was a person of high average intelligence, emotionally balanced, and in a state of perfect physical health.
Her younger brother possesses all these attributes.

The plaintiff has no prospect of a successful marriage , or, indeed, any satisfying relationship with a member of the opposite sex. She has no prospect of a satisfying career or, indeed, employment of any kind whatsoever. She is forever denied any form of intellectual stimulus or satisfaction. She will always have physical limitations and concomitant pain.

Sadly, her inappropriate behaviour renders her liable to exploitation and makes her very vulnerable. Thus her mother said, for example, that if she is in the street alone she may speak without inhibition to persons who are complete strangers to her.

I do not think that one can anticipate (in the light of the totality of the medical evidence) any improvement in her mental or emotional state and there is not a significant prospect of improvement in her orthopaedic disabilities and concomitant pain. It may be, one can only hope, that she will eventually accept the need to wear a raise in her shoe. It is understandable, however, that her desperate desire not to be different from others has militated, thus far, against her adopting this device. Unfortunately on this one occasion she did use the device, it did not prove satisfactory.

There is much more which could be said on this question of general damages but her claim to a very significant award under this heading is so self evident that I shall refrain from dealing with all those aspects.

The plaintiff's present life expectancy is 62.58 years.

I propose to allow under this head $260,000.00 
PAST ECONOMIC LOSS 
Upon the assumption that the plaintiff would have entered the work force at age eighteen (ie. at the commencement of 1997) and earned the average weekly earnings of a full time female employee in New South Wales with PAYE rates, she would have earned $39,508.00 to 30 June 1998.

Counsel for the plaintiff has submitted that I should allow a figure of this order. However, I consider that over this period the plaintiff would have been earning a lesser rate of pay as she would have probably been undergoing some form of training. In all the circumstances I propose to allow $20,000.00 as past economic loss: $20,000.00 
Interest on past wage loss to 30 June 1998 is $20,000.00 at 5.75% for 1.5 years = $ 1,725.00 
FUTURE ECONOMIC LOSS 
It is of course difficult to predict, other than in the most general terms, what course the plaintiff's working life would have taken if she had not been so severely injured at such a tender age.

It has been estimated that she would have had a pre-injury high average intelligence. She would in my estimation, have, uninjured, grown into a personable and attractive woman. In these circumstances I predict that she would have earned a figure to the order of the average weekly earnings of a full time female employee.

In Gulasi versus Gulasi (Unreported 4 July 1997), Simpson J, in a similar case to this, selected the age of 65 as the likely concluding date of the plaintiff's working life, uninjured, because of [s (5D)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ssa1991186/s23.html) of the [Social Security Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ssa1991186/) (Cth), which provides that a woman of the plaintiff's age reaches pension age when she turns 65.

The present defendant accepted that hypothesis and agreed to the calculation of future economic loss on the basis of a projected working life of 46 years.
There is however a difference between the parties as to the wage rate which should be used for this calculation. The plaintiff submits that I should take the net figure of $506.00 per week which is the current average earnings for full-time females on a PAYE basis. The defendant submitted that the appropriate figure is $400.00 per week net. Both parties agreed to a multiplier 812.68 which takes account of the conventional reduction of 15% for adverse vicissitudes. I note that in Gulasi Simpson J took the figure of $453.55 net, by agreement between the parties.

Bearing in mind the extremely long period in respect of which I am required to assess future wage loss, it seems to me, that a figure to the order of that applied by Simpson J would be more appropriate than the full average rate.

I propose therefore to allow 46 years at $460.00 per week less 15% = $373,833.00 
No question of any residual earning capacity arises.

PAST CARE [Section
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s35c.html) of the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/) applies to this accident. Therefore the maximum for which the plaintiff can claim is forty hours per week at the rate calculated by reference to the average weekly total earnings of all employees in New South Wales. The plaintiff claims the full forty hours per week from about 1 June 1985 when the plaintiff left hospital to 30 June 1998. This produces a calculation of $318,416.00. The defendant submits that this is excessive and contends that a figure of approximately 50% of that claimed by the plaintiff is more appropriate 
I have only one qualification with regard to allowing the plaintiff the full amount claimed under this head and that is the understandable lack of particularity.

I have no doubt that during most of this long period the plaintiff's parents would have spent more than 40 hours per week caring for her, but there may have been the occasional week when less than 40 hours was spent. I have in mind here the period in 1997 when she was attempting to develop a relationship with Steven. I am probably being excessively cautious in this regard but I propose to discount the figure claimed by 10%.

Therefore in respect of past care I allow: $286,574.00 
FUTURE CARE 
The appropriate allowance for future care presents considerable difficulties because of the multiplicity of factors involved. The evidence in these proceedings was taken on two occasions. The plaintiff's evidence was led on 27 and 28 April 1998 and the matter was then adjourned at the request of the defendant until 24 June 1998. At the conclusion of evidence on that day, counsel addressed. During the course of the adjournment, counsel for both parties had provided each other and the Court with draft submissions in relation to the various heads of damages. The draft provided by counsel for the plaintiff submitted that with regard to future care the allowance should be made upon the basis that for the ensuing twelve years it would be reasonable for the plaintiff to expect her parents to continue voluntary domestic assistance. By that stage Mr Bailey would have attained the age of sixty five and Mrs Bailey would be in her late fifties. That calculation would necessarily be at the rate of $606.00 per week as the maximum allowable under the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/) on the basis of a maximum of 40 hours per week. Thereafter the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff could reasonably expect to receive paid domestic assistance on a live in twenty four hour-seven day per week basis. The proposed rate in this regard is $1,635.55 (per week) being the appropriate rate for a Grade 2
Fieldstaffer in accordance with the Miscellaneous Workers Homecare Industry
Award. (See exhibit J).

Ms Dianne McKay of Drake Medox gave evidence that this regime is calculated on the basis of 2 carers sharing the 7 days on a 5:2 or 4:3 arrangement. The base rate is $233.65 per 24 hour period. This rate requires the carer to remain on duty for period of 24 hours duration. It includes the agency fees for obtaining carers and administering the arrangement and overheads such as superannuation, sick leave etc.

Ms McKay said that persons who take this work are unskilled people and there is a very high turnover rate.

On 27 April Mrs Bailey (during the course of evidence) agreed with counsel for the plaintiff that she proposed to continue looking after her daughter for as long as she was able to do so. When asked what her thoughts were about the situation after she was unable to look after her daughter Mrs Bailey replied: "I have worried about it, yes. I have wondered what will happen when we are not there to look after her. That does worry me." (T p20) 
Mrs Bailey went on to say that it is really necessary for someone to be with
Sarah all the time even though one is not necessarily doing things for her. In the light of the totality of the evidence I have no difficulty at all in accepting that statement. Her mother has explained "She requires constant supervision to ensure she does not harm herself either intentionally when in the state of depression, or accidentally through forgetfulness." 
Mrs Bailey went on to indicate how she herself was feeling the stress and strain of caring for her daughter. At times she felt she could not cope any longer.

May I say that it was apparent during the course of the hearing, as I have said before, ´that Mrs Bailey has unqualified devotion for her daughter, but nevertheless, it is manifestly apparent that she is wilting under the strain.
To a lesser degree, the same comment can be made about Mr Bailey . They have both dealt with the tragedy and the consequential stress and strain on their own lives with considerable stoicism but there is, nevertheless, some limit to the amount of stoicism which the average person can maintain.

During her evidence in chief on 27 April 1998 the plaintiff was asked questions in relation to an attempted suicide. She was asked: "Q. Have you ever tried to hurt yourself? 
A. Yes.

Q. When? 
A. Last year, I think.

Q. What with? 
A. I cut my wrists with a fishing knife.

Q. Why did you do that? 
A. Because I was - because I'm depressed all the time.

Because I was depressed and I didn't want to live any more.

Q. Why didn't you want to live any more? 
A. Because it's really hard for me.

Q. Why is it hard? 
A. Because I'm depressed all the time and I don't like my life sometimes and I've got nothing to do all the time.

Q. Do your mother and father look after you? 
A. Yes.

Q. Do you think they do a good job? 
A. Yes.

Q. Could you manage without them? 
A. No.

Q. Why not? 
A. I'd probably commit suicide if I didn't have my mum and dad. I wouldn't be able to look after myself.

Q. Say they went away, there was some accident or something, would you be able to look after yourself? 
A. No." (T pp62-63) 
When the matter resumed on 24 June the plaintiff was recalled and she stated that she would like to try living on her own with a paid carer, as soon as possible. She said she would like to try to be independent with the carer and for her parents to visit her on weekends. In cross examination she thought that she was a burden on her parents because they had looked after her for so long and she would like to give them a chance to live their own lives. She said she would like to move into her own home as soon as possible. Mrs Bailey was also recalled and she said: "Well, we have totally devoted the last thirteen years to Sarah. We are really worn out and I think Sarah would like her own independency (sic). She'd like to live by herself, try it out by herself." 
And further: "She'd need someone to live with her. She couldn't live on her (sic). She needs someone to help her." 
Mrs Bailey said that she would like that arrangement to come into operation as soon as possible. Mrs Bailey indicated that she would like to get back to work because the family was in desperate financial straits. In fact they have recently been served with an eviction notice. Mr. Bailey was also recalled and gave evidence to the same effect. He said that he would like to get back to work, being currently unemployed.

It seems to me perfectly reasonable that the plaintiff acquire and live in a residence of her own, probably an apartment, with the benefit of a carer. The evidence of Dr Milder together with the lay evidence satisfies me that the plaintiff has established a case for 24 hour-7 day a week live in carer attention. It would be far too dangerous to leave Sarah alone, as her mother pointed out so often, because of her emotional, turbulence, depression and inability to take care of herself. To be left alone would render her vulnerable to very real danger of varying kinds. Also from a psychological point of view, she requires, in my view, the stimulus of company.

However, one of the factors that arises for consideration here is whether she would be capable, through no fault of her own, of maintaining a reasonable relationship with a carer. Her relationships with others seem to be marked by turbulent outbursts and aggression. One must ask whether she could adequately survive without the constant attendance and devotion of her mother.
Unfortunately these are questions which are easy to pose but extraordinarily difficult to answer.

The basic rate upon which the plaintiff relies in the calculation of damages under this head for commercial assistance of $1,635.55 is, from experience in these cases, quite reasonable.

I accept the evidence of the plaintiff and her parents, that the plaintiff would wish to have independence and that they are in desperate need of some relief from the pressures which constant attention to their daughter imposes upon them.

It seems to me that in assessing damages for future care I must make allowance for the likelihood that the plaintiff will fall back upon her parents from time to time, for care. This may well involve her mother moving in with the plaintiff or the plaintiff returning home. One does not know. One must, however, acknowledge the volatility of the plaintiff.

It seems to me that I should accommodate this situation by taking for the next years the average between the statutory maximum for voluntary care of $606.00 per week and the commercial rate of $1,635.55, which average is $1,121.00. Thereafter the full commercial rate should be applied.

This gives rise to the following calculation: 
For the next 20 years, the formula is: $1,121.00 x 666.4 = $747,034.00 
For the ensuing 42 years the formula is: $1,635.55 x 931.6 x .377 = $574,426.00 $1,321,460.00 
I also propose to take into account the necessary delay in setting up the carer regime.

It seems to me, in all the circumstances, an appropriate figure for future care is $1,250,000.00 
PAST CHEMIST EXPENSES 
The claim here is $2,000.00 in aggregate for the past thirteen years, and which I allow $2,000.00 
FUTURE CHEMIST EXPENSES 
A claim is made here for $8.00 per week for the whole of the plaintiff's life, which I allow ($8 x 1017.5) $8,140.00 
The following two items in the plaintiffs claim may conveniently be dealt with together. They are as follows: 
COST OF ORTHOPAEDIC SHOES $2,240.00 per year: (See report from Shoe Tech).

Therefore, $43 per week for life $43 x 1017.5 = $43,752.00 
FUTURE MASSAGE THERAPY $195 a week for life (See evidence of Dr 
Patrick and costing of Drake Maddox) 
Therefore, $195 x 1017.5 = $198,413.00 
Certain aspects of the evidence need to be addressed here.

Mrs Bailey gave evidence that she massaged her daughter "most days for probably an hour or maybe two hours - half an hour in the morning and half an hour at night". She said that the massage also helps her cope with headache.

Unquestionably the plaintiff's parents could not afford to pay for professional massage.

In a report dated 6 May 1998, Dr Patrick stated that in his view Mrs Bailey's massage treatment was having some therapeutic effect and should continue to do so. He said: 
Such massage treatment administered two or three times weekly would have a therapeutic effect in the sense of providing symptomatic relief, thus adding to life quality, but not causing any structural alteration to underlying pathology. I would have no hesitation in recommending it as ongoing treatment, as long as it continues to provide symptomatic relief." 
Counsel for the defendant has submitted that the plaintiff should not be allowed the projected cost of massage as well as the projected cost of orthopaedic shoes because of evidence from Dr Zeman and Dr Donaldson that if the plaintiff wears orthopaedic shoes it will have the effect of removing or lessening her back pain.

Dr Donaldson said in his report dated 10 February 1997 that if the plaintiff does not take steps to equalize her leg lengths, she is at increased risk of developing long term osteoarthritic changes which could become symptomatic.

I have already referred to the plaintiff's reluctance, because of self image problems, to wear orthotic shoes. It should be noted that it was not until she was 14, that the plaintiff was advised by a doctor of the need to wear orthotics. She wore them at school but became embarrassed when the other children stared at her. After leaving school, she ceased wearing orthotics, except for the brief period when she worked in the restaurant. She complained that they made her back pain worse because she was not used to them.

However, she has left open the possibility that being older, she probably would wear them. Certainly I think some allowance should be made for orthotic shoes in the future.

I am satisfied that independently of the issue of orthotic shoes, massage does have considerable therapeutic benefit for the plaintiff and that an allowance should be made therefor.

I note that Dr Patrick expressed the qualification that massage is recommended "as long as it continues to provide symptomatic relief".

On balance it seems to me that I should allow the equivalent of one half of the aggregate claim under these two heads on the basis that if the plaintiff wears orthotic shoes the need for massage will be lowered but not removed.
Even if the plaintiff does not wear orthotics, I think the claim for massage should be moderated.

Accordingly, under these two heads, I allow a composite figure of: $121,083.00 
PAST MEDICAL, ETC, EXPENSES 
The agreed past medical etc expenses are: $2,615.00 
PROVISION FOR FUTURE MEDICAL AND 
HOSPITAL EXPENSES 
The plaintiff makes the modest claim of $5,000.00 under this head which I allow $5,000.00 
A summary of amounts awarded appears overleaf.

In summary therefore I have assessed damages under the various heads, as follows: 
General Damages $260,000.00 
Past Economic Loss $20,000.00 
Interest $1,725.00 
Future Economic Loss $373,833.00 
Past Care $286,574.00 
Future Care $1,250,000.00 
Past Chemist Expenses $2,000.00 
Future Chemist Expenses $8,140.00 
Cost of Orthopaedic Shoes & Future Massage Therapy $121,083.00 
Past Medical Expenses $2,615.00 
Future Medical and Hospital Expenses $5,000.00 
TOTAL: $2,330,970.00 
I propose to stand the matter over to allow the parties to agree upon the appropriate allowance for Funds Management, bearing in mind that an order has already been made under the Protective [Estates
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea103/).

The short minutes should also make provision for an immediate payment out to the plaintiff's parents in relation to past care.
 * * * 
