

Regina versus Robertson Matter No Cca 60594/97 [1998] NSWSC 154 (25 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 May 1998 
REGINA versus SHANE GEORGE ROBERTSON /97 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Smart J, Dowd J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus Shane George ROBERTSON 
SENTENCING - CROWN APPEAL - PROCEDURE AT FIRST INSTANCE - assault occasioning actual bodily harm - two victims - charge unclear - sentencing judge pre-empts calling of evidence by counsel - fails to consider aggravating features of case - imposes good behaviour bond - HELD - Crown appeal should be allowed but matter should be remitted to District Court for re-consideration of sentence. 
ORDERS Appeal allowed.
 Sentence imposed by Phelan DCJ quashed.
 Matter remitted to District Court for determination afresh of sentence.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a Crown appeal against the leniency of a sentence imposed upon the respondent, Shane George Robertson, by his Honour Judge J B Phelan at Wollongong on 17 October 1997. 
The procedural circumstances in which the matter comes to this Court are distinctly unsatisfactory. In particular there appears to be considerable uncertainty as to exactly what offence was being dealt with by Phelan DCJ and further, the manner in which the original sentencing proceedings were conducted appears to have resulted in a seriously inadequate presentation of the facts upon which the Crown would have wished to rely, and also an inability on the part of the legal representatives of the respondent to develop matters upon which the respondent might have wished to rely in mitigation.

The respondent and his wife found themselves before the Court in circumstances that arose out of a personal tragedy they had suffered, and their inappropriate and unwarranted response to those circumstances.

Because the present appeal does not involve the respondent's wife, it is unnecessary for me to make any further substantial mention of her role in the matter and, except to the extent that it is impossible to ignore that role, I will say very little about her position.

A young daughter of the respondent's wife, to whom the respondent himself was closely attached, was tragically killed in a car accident. The driver of the car was a man named Warren Barnes. The respondent evidently felt a deep sense of personal grievance against Mr Barnes and was especially resentful of what appeared to the respondent to be the leniency with which Mr Barnes was treated by the legal system. This, it seems, led the respondent to make threats against Mr Barnes. Those threats resulted in the making of an apprehended violence order against the respondent. At the time of the events I am about to describe the respondent was subject to that apprehended violence order.

It might be added that the respondent's own conduct as a driver appears to have been less than perfect. He was, at the time of the events I am about to describe, on a good behaviour bond as a result of a serious driving offence which he had committed some time previously.

In the early hours of the morning of 17 October 1996 the respondent, his wife, and an unidentified male person wearing a balaclava for disguise, went to the premises occupied by Mr Barnes and his de facto wife, Ms Julie Cartwright and their three young children.

The male person wearing the balaclava has never been identified. The respondent does not appear to have been given the opportunity to explain why he thought it necessary or desirable that he and his wife should be accompanied on this expedition by a third person. There is, however, a fairly obvious explanation, not to the respondent's credit, which comes to mind.

The three people forced their way into the premises occupied by Mr Barnes and
Ms Cartwright and their children. The description of the facts that was put before Phelan DCJ reads as follows: "The unidentified male person and the defendant then commenced to punch and kick the victim, Warren Barnes. The victim then ran to the back door of the flat in an effort to get assistance. The defendant and the unidentified male then again cornered the victim and continued to punch and knee him.

When the victim's wife, Julie Cartwright, entered the hall from her bedroom, the defendant punched her hard to the face before returning his attention to
Warren Barnes. Barnes was finally punched or kicked up against a back door with sufficient force to knock the back door completely off its hinges. At that point the trio left the premises. 
Police were summoned and conveyed both victims to Bowral District Hospital where they were treated for their injuries. Warren Barnes suffered a cut to the head, cut lip, bruising above the right eye, a swollen right eye and a possible fractured nose; Julie Cartwright sustained severe swelling to her right eye and cheek." 
Reference has already been made to the grievance which the respondent entertained against Warren Barnes. So far as I am aware Julie Cartwright had never done anything to the respondent, and have never engaged in any conduct towards him which could have warranted his violent attack upon her.

It is not clear what charges brought the respondent before Phelan DCJ.

In the opening sentence of his remarks on sentence, Phelan DCJ referred both to the respondent and his wife and said: "In each case the prisoner has pleaded guilty to a charge that on 17 October at Mittagong, they broke and entered and committed a felony, namely, they occasioned actual bodily harm to the occupants of a dwelling." 
Neither the Crown nor counsel for the respondent on this appeal has been able to inform the Court whether the charge against the respondent was a charge involving, amongst other things, occasioning actual bodily harm to Mr Barnes, or whether it was a charge involving occasioning actual bodily harm to Ms
Cartwright, or both.

If it were the latter, questions of duplicity may well arise but I make no further comment about that. If it were only the former, of course, then it is difficult to see what there would be to stop the Crown tomorrow charging the respondent with a fresh charge relating to the occasioning of actual bodily harm to Ms Cartwright.

There was a schedule of two matters to be taken into account on sentencing in addition to whatever exactly was the charge against the respondent, those matters being malicious damage to the premises of Mr Barnes and contravention of an apprehended violence order.

In his remarks on sentence, Phelan DCJ dwelt upon the tragic loss of the child, to which reference has earlier been made. He made no reference to the participation in the activities of the evening of the unidentified male person wearing the balaclava, or the significance that matter would have had for the criminality of the conduct of the respondent.

He made no reference in his remarks on sentence to the fact that at the time the respondent was on a good behaviour bond. Apart from recounting the bare fact of the entry into the premises of Mr Barnes and Ms Cartwright, his Honour made no reference to another extremely important aspect of the matter, that is to say, the element of home invasion that was involved in it.

The judge referred to the fact that the respondent had spent a month in pre- sentence full-time custody. That was a proper matter to be taken into account in his favour. He also referred to the role that alcohol had played in the behaviour of the respondent, and to what appeared to be the respondent's good work record and good prospects and of rehabilitation.

In the result, he ordered that the respondent and his wife enter into a bond to be of good behaviour, in the case of the respondent for two years, during which time the respondent was to be subject to the supervision of the
Probation Service. He formally recorded a conviction but imposed no sentence.

The Crown submits that the penalty which was imposed, which was in substance a good behaviour bond of two years, was manifestly inadequate. In that respect the Crown draws particular attention to some of the matters that I have already mentioned. They include the element of home invasion involved in the events of the evening, the aggravating circumstance that the respondent was on a good behaviour bond, the aggravating circumstance that the respondent was the subject of an apprehended violence order and the inexcusable brutality displayed by the respondent, in particular towards Ms Cartwright.

The Crown also refers to the fact that the decision by the respondent to be accompanied on this occasion by an unidentified male wearing a balaclava is an aspect of the matter that reflects seriously upon the criminality and culpability of the respondent's conduct.

There are, however, two aspects of the procedure that was adopted before
Phelan DCJ that are properly relied upon by counsel for the respondent. At a very early stage of the sentencing proceedings Phelan DCJ announced that the case appeared to him to be one that was appropriate for a good behaviour bond.
The solicitor who represented the Crown in the sentencing proceedings made no protest about that observation and, in particular, did not submit to his
Honour that he would be falling into appealable error if he were to adopt that course.

The announcement, however, also had an effect upon the conduct of the case for the respondent, which cannot be overlooked by this Court. We have before us an affidavit from the solicitor who represented the respondent. In that affidavit the solicitor said that he had available evidence that he had proposed to call in mitigation but which he did not call because of the announcement made by the judge at the outset of the sentencing proceedings. The affidavit explains the general nature of that evidence. In those circumstances, it would be unjust of this Court to deal with this appeal in the absence of the material which the solicitor did not call on the sentencing proceedings by way of mitigation.

It has been submitted on behalf of the respondent, as a primary subMsion, that we should, in the exercise of our discretion, disMs this appeal, principally because of the failure of the representative of the Crown at the sentencing proceedings to make a subMsion that the judge would have fallen into appealable error in taking the course which he did take.

In R versus Chad (Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported, 13 May 1997) some observations were made about the current state of the authorities in relation to this question. It is undoubtedly an important discretionary consideration in the present case that the representative of the Crown did not object to the course that was proposed by the Judge, but there are other considerations that also come into play.

Without wanting to express any concluded view about what ought to be, or ought to have been, the ultimate outcome of the sentencing proceedings, it suffices for present purposes to say that on the material we have before us, and without having had the opportunity to give proper consideration to the mitigating material on which the respondent would wish to rely, there seems to be a very substantial difference between the penalty that was called for, or might have been called for in this case, and the penalty imposed by the sentencing judge.

Furthermore, for reasons that have already been mentioned, the findings of fact expressed in the judge's remarks on sentence appear to overlook a number of potentially important matters that should have been taken into account.

Finally, there is the procedural problem relating to the specification of the precise charge against the appellant, to which reference has already been made. For those reasons I consider the Court should reject the primary subMsion advanced on behalf of the respondent.

Once we come to that point, there is no difference between the subMsions advanced on behalf of the Crown and on behalf of the respondent. Both counsel agree with the suggestion, originally made from the Bench, that in the circumstances of the case it would be impossible for this Court to do justice to both sides to this appeal, having regard to the way the matter was treated below, and to the material presently before us.

In my view this matter should go back to the District Court. The procedural question relating to the precise nature of the charge or charges against the respondent should be clarified. A sentencing judge should have an opportunity to consider fully all the matters to be relied upon by the Crown and, in addition, all the matters by way of mitigation upon which the respondent would wish to rely.

The state in which the matter comes before this Court is such that we could not do justice to the parties to this appeal on the material before us and the matter should be remitted to the District Court for determination of the facts relevant to sentencing according to law. On the bare material before us, the sentence has been shown to be manifestly inadequate, but I emphasise in that regard that the material before us does not include matter by way of mitigation, upon which the respondent wishes to rely, and I intend to express no concluded view on what might be a proper outcome of sentencing proceedings considered afresh in the District Court and conducted according to law.

I should also add in favour of the respondent that there is material concerning his rehabilitation which his counsel would have wished to have considered by this Court in the event that we had undertaken the task of re- sentencing, and I have not taken that material into account in the observations that I have made. It will, however, be matter to be taken into account by a sentencing judge when the matter is considered afresh in the
District Court.

It will be a matter for those involved in the administration of the District
Court to consider the question of the assignment of the matter, although, for what assistance it might be to those involved in making the decision, I would observe that it would seem inappropriate this Phelan DCJ should deal with the matter because both sides could claim an element of pre-judgment, and this could give rise to a further appeal, which would be most unfortunate.

The Court should exercise its power under section 12 of the Criminal Appeal
Act. The Crown appeal should be allowed and the sentence imposed by his Honour
Phelan DCJ should be quashed. The matter or matters should be remitted to the
District Court for the determination afresh of the proper sentence or sentences to be imposed upon the respondent.

SMART J: I agree. 
DOWD J: I also agree, but if I may just add a few remarks. His Honour the Chief Justice has referred to the potential issue of duplicity. There are dangers in this sort of proceeding. It appears that both assault occasioning actual bodily harm matters, which were presumably an assault by the respondent on the male and on the female occupants of the house, and the other assaults which were presumably back-ups to that, the section 61 of the Crimes Act 1902 matters, were all treated as being subsumed within the break and enter and commit felony offence. 
The two matters taken into account on the schedule were separate matters, but it appears that the assault on the female which was, of itself, a very serious matter, has gone into limbo. Because the break and enter and commit felony matter has subsumed both assaults, the danger of this procedure whereby back- up matters travel with section 51A of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/), is that there is no mechanism for proper supervision of those matters and that is why this
Court is placed in this situation.

It seems to me desirable that in these procedures we ensure they not go into limbo, particularly the assault on the female, and that may be a matter which ought to come back before whichever judge deals with the principal matters.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court are as I have proposed. * * * 
