

Simring versus Registrar, Court of Criminal Appeal [2004] NSWSC 297 (5 April )

Last Updated: 21 April 2004 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Simring versus Registrar, Court of Criminal Appeal <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 10651/04  
HEARING DATE{S): Monday 5 April 2004  
JUDGMENT DATE: 05/04/2004  
PARTIES: 
Gene Simring - Plaintiff 
Registrar, Court of Criminal Appeal - Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: Simpson J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL:  
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff in person 
J Shevlin for Crown Solicitor - Defendant  
CATCHWORDS:  prior appeal to Court of Criminal Appeal  jurisdiction  no second appeal to Court of Criminal Appeal  
ACTS CITED: 
Supreme Court Rules Part 13 Rule 5  
DECISION: 
Summons dismissed  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
SIMPSON J  
Monday 5 April 2004  /04 Gene SIMRING versus REGISTRAR, COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL  
JUDGMENT  HER HONOUR: By summons filed in this Court on 8 March 2004 the plaintiff, Gene Simring, seeks orders in the following terms:  "That 
The Registrar of the Court of Criminal Appeal in Sydney register the appeal put forward by the Plaintiff, and 
The Registrar of the Court of Criminal Appeal put the above appeal before the Court of Criminal Appeal in Sydney for consideration."  He supports his application by an affidavit sworn by himself on 23 February , and filed with the summons. Annexed to that are a number of documents, including submissions, which include submissions which, if the plaintiff is successful in this summons, will be put before the Court of Criminal Appeal.  When the matter was called on for hearing today, the plaintiff put before me an outline of submissions directed to the issues before me today. The defendant was given leave to file in court a notice of motion seeking the following orders:  "1 The Plaintiff's summons be dismissed or stayed pursuant to Part 13 rule 5 of the Supreme Court Rules on the grounds that either no reasonable cause of action is disclosed in the summons or the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious or the proceedings are an abuse of the process of the Court.  The Plaintiff's summons be dismissed or stayed pursuant to Part 15 rule 26 of the Supreme Court Rules on the ground that either no reasonable cause of action is disclosed in the summons or the claims sought in the summons cannot succeed or the proceedings are an abuse of the Court.  Costs  Such other orders as the Court sees fit."  The essence of the plaintiff's claim is dependent upon these facts. The plaintiff was convicted of a number of counts of sexual misconduct, said to have occurred over a period between 1974 and 1988. He appealed to the Court of
Criminal Appeal and the appeal was dismissed on 1 February 2002 in a judgment under the name of R versus GS <case>
The plaintiff was represented in the appeal by counsel.  He sought special leave to appeal to the High Court, but that application was dismissed. The plaintiff now seeks to appeal to the Court of Criminal
Appeal a second time, this time raising different grounds, grounds that he says could have been, but were not, raised in the original appeal.  The plaintiff has conducted his own research into the law, although, as he pointed out to me, he has been hampered in this by limitations on his access to legal materials. Nevertheless, he is aware of those authorities which hold that on completion of an appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal, that Court is deprived of jurisdiction to entertain a further appeal.  The plaintiff sought to distinguish the authorities, of which one is
Grierson versus The Queen <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 431], by pointing out that the grounds he now seeks to raise are different to those which were formerly raised. He therefore argued that his case is not caught by the principles stated in Grierson and other cases.  It might be true that these grounds were not raised in the earlier appeal, but that does not mean that the merits of the plaintiff's appeal have not been finally determined by the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal.
Accordingly, it is correct, as the plaintiff has been told, that the Court of
Criminal Appeal has no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal he now seeks to bring.  In those circumstances, the contentions made on behalf of the defendant that the summons is without any prospects of success must be accepted. There is no jurisdiction in the Court of Criminal Appeal to hear the appeal sought to be advanced now. The summons should be dismissed pursuant to Part 13 Rule 5 of the Supreme Court Rules and I so order.  
LAST UPDATED: 20/04/2004 * * * 
