

Mostyn versus Bosnjak Matter No 20572/97 [1997] NSWSC 591 (28 November 1997) 
Last Updated: 12 October 1998 
MOSTYN versus BOSNJAK /97 November 1997 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: The plaintiff sues for defamation alleged to arise out of three statements made by the defendant in November 1996 and May 1997. He alleges that at those times he was the Chief Executive Officer of the Bosnjak Group of Companies and that the defendant was a director of the holding company. The statements complained of are alleged to have been orally published at, respectively, a meeting of senior officers of a bank and other officers of the Bosnjak Group, at a meeting of officers of the Bosnjak Group, and to the Chief Accounting Officer of the Group at the Group offices. 
The matter complained of is to be found as Annexures A, B and C of the statement of claim. Annexure A contains a passage attributed to the defendant in terms highly derogatory of, inter alia, the plaintiff, followed by a further passage in which the defendant is alleged to have spoken directly to the plaintiff, again in highly derogatory terms. Between the two passages appear the words "the plaintiff then spoke to the defendant and the defendant responded". No words are directly attributed to the plaintiff or any other person present.

Annexure B contains two separate passages in similar vein. No words are attributed to any person other than the defendant.

In annexure C a question directed to the defendant is attributed to the alleged recipient of the matter complained of, the response to which constitutes the matter there complained of which again contains matter highly critical of, inter alia, the plaintiff. Apart from the identification of the question to which the matter complained of is allegedly a response, no words are attributed to any other person.

No defence has been filed. On 17 July 1997 the solicitors for the defendant wrote to the solicitors for the plaintiff requesting that the full text of the conversation as reflected in minutes or other records of the meetings be incorporated into the statement of claim. Particular reference was made to the text of the plaintiff's statements referred to in annexure A, where a brief note was made to the effect that the plaintiff had spoken to the defendant. A similar request was made in respect of annexure B, in which the matter complained of included the words "I do not want him [I take this to mean the plaintiff] to make statements accusing me any more." 
The plaintiff's solicitors responded on 24 September by agreeing to amend annexure A of the statement of claim by including therein, where the plaintiff was said to have spoken, the words "John Mostyn said, 'For God's sake'". They declined to amend annexure B by including any reference to anything which was said by the plaintiff or any others.

The defendant now seeks an order that the plaintiff amend the statement of claim in accordance with the request. He relies upon the principles stated by
Hunt J (as he then was) in Gordon versus Amalgamated Television Services Pty
Limited [[1980] 2 NSWLR 410.] His Honour noted the principle that, where a publication sued upon is in written form, a plaintiff is obliged to include within his pleading every passage which materially alters or qualifies the complexion of the imputation complained of (p 413). At p 414 (para 15), after considering the authorities, he concluded that the same principles apply where the defamation alleged is oral. However, this conclusion was restricted to those circumstances where the context of an oral defamation is agreed or is ascertainable. That was a case concerning publication by a broadcast on a television network, of which a transcript, and, presumably, recording, was available. The principle becomes exceedingly difficult to apply to a situation where, as here, a number of individuals are alleged to have been present, who may or may not have contributed to the discussion, and where there is no objectively verifiable record of what was said. His Honour was conscious of the difficulty of the situation where there is a dispute between the parties as to what the context was. What is not known, if the plaintiff does not plead an account of his entire version of the conversations, is whether there is any such dispute.

I have come to the conclusion that the decision in Gordon does require the application of the principles applicable to a written defamation to an oral defamation so far as those principles can properly be adjusted to the circumstances. It is to be noted that what is required is that a plaintiff plead, not the entire conversation as he recalls it, but every passage in the conversation "which materially alters or qualifies the complexion of the imputation complained of". It may be that there are no such passages, on the plaintiff's assessment, in the conversations from which he has extracted the matter complained of. I am not in a position to make this judgment. I do not propose to direct the plaintiff to plead the entirety of the conversations. I will direct him to plead any additional portion of the various conversations, if that is what they were, that materially alter or qualify the complexion of the imputation complained of. Whether there are any is a judgment the plaintiff will have to make.

Should the plaintiff choose not to take that opportunity I am about to afford him, but, at the trial, in response to any version of the conversations advanced on behalf of the defendant, put additional material which does or may (Gordon, p415, para 17) materially alter that complexion, it will be a matter for the trial judge whether he is precluded from adducing that evidence. It may be that the defendant should also be compelled to plead or at least particularise any version of the various meetings for which he contends.
No argument was put for such an order, and I do not propose to make it at this stage.

The order I make is that, within twenty-one days of to-day's date, the plaintiff plead any additional material contained in the conversations, discussions or meetings the subject of annexures A, B, and C to the statement of claim which may or do materially alter the complexion of the imputations complained of.

Costs 
The plaintiff sought an order for costs in his favour regardless of the outcome of the application. The basis for this argument was the absence of notice of the application prior to the date of hearing. Counsel for the plaintiff told me, without dissent, that he had been unaware, until 10 am on the morning the matter was listed, that the defendant's application would be made. He referred to the correspondence of which mention has already been made, and to two further letters written by the plaintiff's solicitors to the defendant's solicitors on 15 October and 30 October. In the first letter the plaintiff's solicitors asked that a defence be filed and warned that, if one was not received, the matter would be relisted for further directions. In the letter of 30 October the plaintiff's solicitors notified the defendant's solicitors that, as no defence had been delivered, arrangements had been made for the matter to be listed on 7 November. No reply to either letter was received. At no time did the defendant's solicitors advise the plaintiff's solicitors that the response of 24 September was considered to be inadequate or that the present argument was to be advanced.

The Defamation List was designed and intended to provide a speedy and relatively informal forum for the resolution of the myriad of interlocutory matters that can arise in defamation claims. To achieve that end, it has not been the practice to insist upon formal notices of motion to initiate such application. That does not mean that the List was ever intended to provide any party with an opportunity to ambush another. It is expected that, where arguments of substance are to occur, the initiating party will give reasonable notice of the nature of the matters to be raised to his, her or its opponent.
Such is not only common courtesy; it furthers the aim of the List, and of giving proper assistance to the court. In the present case, because counsel for the plaintiff was taken by surprise by the matters raised, believing that the proceedings were listed at his request, and for the purpose specified in the letter of 30 October, it was necessary to allow additional time for him to research the question and provide additional material after the hearing.
However, inconvenience to the court is not a basis for an award of costs in favour of one party against another. Unnecessary appearance by one party is such a basis. It is possible that, had counsel for the plaintiff been aware of the nature of the matter to be argued, some sensible resolution could have been achieved between the parties.

On behalf of the defendant it was argued that the plaintiff had full and adequate notice of the nature of the defendant's complaint and was able to write refuting the point raised. This argument misses the point. The plaintiff was entitled, in the absence of any notification from the defendant, to infer that the letter of 24 September was accepted as an adequate response to the defendant's earlier request.

I am of the view that the plaintiff has made good his claim for costs of the appearance on 7 November. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of that appearance.
 * * * 
