

Regina versus Guiseppe Martino [1998] NSWSC 1036 (21 August 1998) 
REGINA versus Guiseppe MARTINO /96 
Friday 11 April 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SIMPSON J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: This is an application for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed upon the applicant by her Honour Judge Sidis in the District Court after he pleaded guilty to a charge of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm, an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act which has a maximum sentence of seven years penal servitude. 
Her Honour sentenced the applicant to two years and eight months penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of two years to date from 21 August 1996 and an additional term of eight months.

The facts can be shortly stated: at about 12.30 in the afternoon of Sunday, 14
August 1994, the victim went to the applicant's home at Smithfield. According to him the applicant had telephoned him, asking him to come over to speak about the applicant's wife. At the home the applicant accused the victim of having intimate relations with his wife, and struck the victim about twenty times to the body with what the victim believed to be a wooden baseball bat.
As a result the victim suffered fractures to the right tibia, the left knee and the little finger of the right hand. He also suffered lacerations and bruising to the left temple area and quite a large number of other bruises and welt marks to the arms and body. Some of these injuries are apparent from photographs which were before the learned sentencing judge.

The applicant and the victim had previously been business partners. The applicant and his wife were separated at the time and it does seem that the incident was a passionate one arising from, at least as the applicant saw it, an illicit relationship between the victim and his wife. The statement of the victim discloses that, immediately after the incident, the applicant became tearful and apparently remorseful and took some steps to him.

To the police upon his arrest, to a probation officer, and to a psychologist who examined him for the purpose of the proceedings, the applicant maintained a considerably sanitised account of the incident, suggesting that it was less serious than in fact it was. There may be some slight differences between each of those accounts, but their effect was that the incident arose from some provocative conduct on the part of the victim which led to the applicant punching him twice, causing a small amount of bleeding. The applicant denied having used any sort of weapon. It was not until his evidence in the sentencing proceedings before her Honour that the applicant broadly acknowledged the truth of the victim's account, in particular admitting that he had struck him many times with a Hapkeido stick, a weapon used in martial arts.

The applicant is now thirty-six years old and has no prior convictions. He is a qualified architect who had been, in earlier years, successful in the practice of that profession. In the early nineties it seems that his business fell into financial difficulties and he subsequently became bankrupt and lost all of his assets. At the time of sentence he was conducting a business under the supervision of the Trustee in Bankruptcy.

The applicant at the time was married as I have said, but separated from his wife, that separation taking place in 1993. There are two young boys of that marriage. The applicant had maintained contact with them since the separation and, indeed, it is necessary to say a little more about that later in these reasons.

There were a large number of written testimonials before the sentencing court as to the applicant's character, all of which spoke highly of him and mentioned, among other things, his extensive involvement in beneficial community affairs. Several of them indicated that violence was out of character for him. Her Honour approached them with some reservation. Some of them had not been prepared for the purpose of the proceedings and, of those that had, it seems that they were based upon the earlier account of the incident which the applicant had given before he more fully admitted his involvement in the proceedings before her Honour.

The applicant gave evidence before her Honour that, at the relevant time, he had the care of the two young children of the marriage for the greater part of the week because his wife could not manage looking after them. He further said that he had asked his wife to resume the care of the children in the light of his current predicament, but she had told him that he would have to make his own arrangements for them. The hearing of the matter was adjourned part heard and, on the next occasion, the wife was called. She gave evidence significantly contradicting that of the applicant as to the day to day care of the children. It is sufficient to say that her Honour preferred the evidence of the wife and concluded that the applicant had lied in court about that matter.

Her Honour classified the offence as very serious and one calling for a full time custodial sentence. She found no special circumstances warranting a departure from the usual proportion of minimum and additional terms.

Her Honour treated as aggravating factors the fact that the applicant had lied to the police, the probation officer and the psychologist about the incident itself and the fact, as she found it, that he had lied about the care of the children at the relevant time. Before us it was argued that, in so doing, her
Honour fell into error. Clearly that is so: cf R versus White (CCA unreported, 25 May 1996) per Gleeson CJ at pp 16 and 17. The Crown concedes as much.

Accordingly, the application for leave to appeal must be granted and the appeal must succeed. It falls then for us to determine what the appropriate sentence should be. The Crown prosecutor submitted that, even on re-sentence, we should arrive at the same result as that imposed by her Honour and that the gravity of the offence, whilst making all due allowance for the favourable objective circumstances, calls for the same sentence as that which her Honour passed. I must say that that submission had some attraction on the face of it, until we were taken by Mr Bellanto QC, who appears for the applicant, to some
Judicial Commission statistics in relation to sentences for this offence.

We were also referred, in oral argument and in written submissions, to a few decisions of this Court relating to sentences for the offence, but their number is so small, and their circumstances such, that it is difficult to define any real pattern from them such as might assist us in arriving at an appropriate sentence here.

The effect of the statistics, based on a reasonable sized sample given that the whole system is relatively new, is that fulltime custodial sentences were passed in less than fifty per cent of the cases, and of those sentences full terms in excess of two years and minimum terms of two years sit in the upper range. The range is perhaps surprisingly low, given the wide variety of circumstances embraced by this offence and the wide variety of injuries embraced by the expression "grievance bodily harm".

Clearly, this Court must approach these figures with some caution and cannot be unduly circumscribed by them. Nonetheless, they lead me to the conclusion that the total sentence of two years and eight months is more than is fairly warranted, for this offence, taking into account the favourable subjective material. Nevertheless, the offence is a very serious one indeed. This was a sustained attack with a weapon causing quite severe injuries. The victim required hospital treatment and, upon his discharge, was on crutches for a considerable period of time.

Notwithstanding the favourable subjective case the applicant is able to make out, I remain of the view that the appropriate fulltime sentence is one of two years, and it does not appear to me that there are any special circumstances in the case warranting any departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms. On the evidence, there appears to be no reason why, in the applicant's interest or that of the community, he needs to be subject to the stricture of parole or to the benefit of supervision for any period longer than that which would normally flow from the operation of the Act.

I should also record that, for the purpose of re-sentence, we were informed from the Bar table that the applicant has since re-married, that he maintains contact by way of prison visits with the children of the previous marriage and that satisfactory arrangements are in place, upon his release, for his regular contact with those children. As I say, notwithstanding that favourable material, the matter still seems to me to be one calling for a significant sentence.

For those reasons I propose that the application for leave to appeal be granted, the appeal be allowed and the sentence imposed by her Honour Judge
Sidis quashed. For it I would substitute a sentence of penal servitude for two years, comprising a minimum term of eighteen months commencing on 22 August and concluding on 21 February 1998, and an additional term of six months commencing on 22 February 1998 and concluding on 21 August 1998.
 
SIMPSON J: I agree. The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Hidden J.
 * * * 
