

Jones versus The Public Trustee Matter No 1477/97 [1998] NSWSC 235 (27 May )

Last Updated: 4 August 1998 `LINDSAY ROBERT JONES versus THE PUBLIC TRUSTEE` `1477/97` `27 May 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application brought under the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) by a stepson of the late Frederick Joseph Hawkins. 
The plaintiff's mother married the deceased on 7 March 1969, having had a de facto relationship with him for about a year earlier. The plaintiff lived with the deceased and his mother as a family for at least three years. There is no contest that the plaintiff is an eligible person in category (d) for the purposes of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).

The plaintiff's last real contact with the deceased would appear to have occurred sometime in 1987. At that time the plaintiff had a de facto wife and a daughter was born in that year. The plaintiff and the deceased drifted apart, partly because the plaintiff was more focused on his young family, and partly because the plaintiff and the deceased often became emotionally upset when they met because of the circumstances of the plaintiff's mother's death.

The deceased died on 21 May 1991, aged 64 years. He died intestate.
Administration was granted to the Public Trustee on 2 August 1991. The estate, as at the present day, is worth $154,000, less the costs of this litigation.

It is more likely than not on the evidence before me that the deceased died without any blood relatives, who could inherit from him under the intestacy provisions, surviving him.

There is some doubt in the Public Trustee's mind, though I must confess it is not a doubt that has permeated through to my mind, that the deceased's father may still be alive. The doubt seems to come about because it was the plaintiff's recollection that the deceased had told the plaintiff that the deceased's father died in the war, yet the material received from the Army does not match with the date of birth of the person who was the deceased's father.

However, the marriage certificate of the deceased and the plaintiff's mother shows both the parents of the deceased had died at that stage. That is obviously material which has come from the deceased, made on a solemn occasion when he made the appropriate declarations to enter into marriage. Had either of the parents turned up in the time between 1969 and 1987 doubtless both the plaintiff and others would have heard about it. Thus we have a situation where the deceased was telling people that his father had died in the war, made solemn declarations that both his parents were dead and did not see his parents for 18 years, and yet somehow or other the Public Trustee considers that the father of the deceased may still be alive and that he should not do anything with the moneys in the estate, other than pay them in due course into
Unclaimed Money. Nor does the Public Trustee feel inclined to make any application to the court. I find that strange, but so be it.

Returning to the case before the court. The plaintiff filed his summons for relief under the Act on 24 February 1997. This is well outside the period which is laid down by the law for claims to be made. Under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s16.html) of the Act the court is not to make an order after the prescribed time unless sufficient cause is shown for the application not having been made within that period.

The words "sufficient cause" have been used in quite a number of statutes. In connection with the motor vehicle third party legislation the High Court said in Sophron versus The Nominal Defendant <case>; [(1957) 96 CLR 469] at 475: "It is a mistake to attempt to reduce the expression "sufficient cause" to a closer or more rigid definition than the legislature has chosen to provide.
The words no doubt are concerned with the justice of the case. There must be some positive reason for concluding that as between the parties it would be just to extend the period for giving notice. Fault on the part of the claimant in failing to give notice ... must be an element affecting the justice of extending the time and so on the other side must be the prejudice which the nominal defendant has or may have suffered because of that failure." 
There have been attempts under the present Act to be more specific about what is "sufficient cause" and I must say that many of the decisions trying to define the term have been mine. I most recently reviewed the authorities in
Bearns versus Bearns-Hayes (6 and 7 May 1997, unreported), where I set out most of the tests that had been applied by judges over the last 50 years, including the Salmon 6 test derived from the decision of Megarry VC in Re Salmon;
Coard versus National Westminster Bank Ltd [[1981] Ch 167], 175-6.

The High Court in Neil versus Nott <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 509] showed that a more benign attitude was to be taken to extension of time applications where there was no real prejudice caused to anybody than had perhaps been taken by single judges both here and in
Victoria. The decision of the court seems to suggest that it may be sufficient cause to extend the time merely because the plaintiff was in poverty and was unrepresented.

There has not been, as far as I am aware, any case where the sole ground for showing that there is sufficient cause has been that the plaintiff did not know that the deceased had died. In the present case that is really all there is.

Mr Ellison, who appeared for the Public Trustee, said that that was not enough because if a person was sufficiently close to the deceased to warrant the making of an application he should have been close enough to him to know that he had died, and that if he did not know that he had died then that was a matter of the plaintiff's own fault.

It does, however, seem to me that where the court has gone into what is sufficient cause under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), that where there is a fairly strong case and where there is no-one who is going to be unacceptably prejudiced, it is usually just to extend the time. Perhaps the high point of this line of authority is Re Nassim <case>; [[1984] VR 51.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1984%5d%20VR%2051 "View LawCiteRecord" )

When one looks at approaches in other statutes one gets the same flavour. I have touched upon the extension of time in motor vehicle cases. In applications under <case> of the Wills Probate and Administration Act for recognition of a will where there is a two year time limit, it has been accepted that where no-one is prejudiced and everyone is before the court, a fortiori if no-one objects, then that in itself is sufficient cause for extending the time; see Taylor versus Estate of Haygarth, Hodgson J, 23
September 1994, unreported.

Mr Ellison's main points were that no sufficient ground had been shown that could warrant sufficient cause and in addition that as the claim should fail in any event it would be a waste of time to make such an order.

I do not, with respect, think this is a weak case and, accordingly, this point must naturally just fall.

Each of these cases on extension of time must depend on its own facts and circumstances. Doubtless there will be some academic at some stage in the future who will analyse all these single cases and say there are inconsistencies. Probably inconsistencies will appear on the surface, but what one needs to do is look at each set of facts in the surrounding circumstances and it seems to me in the instant case there is such cause for extending the time, and I will in due course do so.

The second point is whether the plaintiff is an eligible person. This has been conceded.

The third matter I need to consider is whether under s 9 of the Act having regard to all the circumstances there are factors which warrant the making of the application. That factor was considered by McLelland
J in Re Fulop [(1987) 8 NSWLR 679], 681 and by the Court of Appeal, in which Priestley JA gave the leading judgment, in
Churton versus Christian [(1988) 13 NSWLR 241] at 252-3.

The court on each of those occasions ruled that the factors referred to in <case> are those which, when added to the mere fact of eligibility, showed that the applicant was really to be recognised as being in one of the classes of people to whom the testator would be considered by the community to provide for on his death.

Doing that exercise in the instant case, the material shows that in his teenage years the plaintiff was in the position of a son to the deceased, and so his case should be considered in the same way as an adult son's case. It does not seem to me the mere fact that the relationship between the parties later faded cuts across there being factors which warrant the making of the application.

The fourth matter to consider is whether the court is satisfied that the deceased did not make appropriate provision for the plaintiff.

The deceased died intestate. The plaintiff is not a blood relative and would not take on intestacy under the Wills Probate and Administration Act. There is a possibility that the plaintiff could make a claim for the Crown to exercise its grace in his favour, either under <case> of the Wills Probate and
Administration Act or under the Crown's ordinary largesse.

There has been some debate before me as to whether this really is a bona vacantia case or not. It is intellectually amusing that the arguments for and against this proposition were actually put by the wrong counsel.

On the evidence before me, it is more likely than not that this is a bona vacantia case, but even if it were not then all one does is to assess that there may be under certain contingent circumstances moneys flowing through to the applicant.

I dealt with these problems in Gregory versus Hudson (No 2), 18 September ,unreported, and I really think that one cannot say that of itself a possible right to make a claim for the Crown to exercise its grace in respect of bona vacantia is proper provision to be made for a son.

The fifth matter is whether the community would expect a person in the position of the deceased to make provision for the plaintiff. It is not every case where a person has adult children, even in a traditional family, that the children are entitled to a share of their parents' estate. Often they will be, but often they will have made their own separate lives and the mere blood relationship will not be sufficient: (see for instance Shearer versus The Public
Trustee an unreported decision of mine given on 31 March 1998).

However, there are situations in life where there has been a falling away of relationships between the parties where the community would still expect a parent to make provision for an adult child, even if there had been no close relationship for many years. The factors that may bring this about are the poverty of the applicant, and the lack of other claimants: Le Povoux v
Betts a decision of mine given on 23 December 1994 is an example. That case is merely an illustration because as Mr Ellison pointed out, the facts in
Shearer versus The Public Trustee (supra) fell out the other way.

Mr Ashhurst for the plaintiff put that on the facts of this case there was a relationship, that that relationship gradually fell away without fault on either side, the plaintiff was living in relatively humble circumstances and that a wise and just, not fond nor foolish, testator would have thought that his duty was to make provision for the only relative he could call a son.
Putting that another way, and perhaps a way which is now more acceptable to appellate courts, the community would have expected that such a person would have made provision for his son.

The evidence about the plaintiff's situation in life is rather vague. The plaintiff is in the building trade and used to earn quite good money, but currently he is a proprietor of a subcontracting business which is not doing very well. Indeed, his income is about $200 less than his expenses, part of which may be covered by moneys from his de facto wife, but it would seem part is also just going on to credit cards. He does not have his own home. He has one child, who is a talented musician and he is looking forward, if at all possible, to help her go to Montreux where the school band has planned an excursion. He wishes, if he can have it, to have moneys to provide for more permanent housing and to provide for his daughter's education.

Would the community expect that a person with $150,000 and with a stepson, whom he had not seen for five years or so, to make provision for that stepson? 
In my view the answer to this question is yes. I would have thought that the community would think that having married the plaintiff's mother and having the plaintiff in his home as a school boy, treating him as a son, even though the relationship later faded away, that when the deceased died, having only $150,000, if he had known about the poverty and conditions of his stepson he would have made provision for him.

The sixth matter is what provision ought to have been made. I think there is little doubt that with such a small estate and with no other claimant, the plaintiff should receive the whole of the estate.

Mr Ellison puts that a person is entitled to leave his money as he thinks fit and the mere fact that a person has left his money to charity or by dint of the law to the State of New South Wales as bona vacantia is his right and that that factor should not mean that the plaintiff should find it easier to prove his case. There is something in that submission, but there is also quite a lot in the opposing submission that a plaintiff's case is easier when there are no competing claimants on the testator's bounty.

The order is, accordingly, that the time for making this application be extended to the date of filing of the summons. I further order that the Public
Trustee be directed to hold the whole of the estate of the late Frederick
Joseph Hawkins on trust for the plaintiff. The defendant's costs are to be paid out of the estate.
 * * * 
