

Regina versus Adam Isaac; Regina versus Jawad Tajeddine; Regina versus Radwan Elachi Nos.
 of 1995 [1996] NSWSC 39 (4 March 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(1), DUNFORD(2) AND DOWD(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 25
September 1995 #DATE 5:2:1996 #ADD 4:3:1996 
Counsel for Appellant Isaac     T Game 
Solicitors for Appellant Isaac 
Arden Associates 
Counsel for Appellant Tajeddine   P Skinner 
Solicitors for Appellant Tajeddine  Jenny Bull 
Counsel for Appellant Elachi     P Burgess 
Solicitors for Appellant Elachi   Leigh Johnson 
Counsel for the Crown     
A.M. Blackmore 
Solicitor for the Crown       S.E. O'Connor, Solicitor for 
Public Prosecutions
ORDER
Appeals allowed
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL These are appeals pursuant to [s 5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against the dismissal of demurrers to an indictment presented in the
District Court against the appellants (Adam Isaac, Jawad Tajeddine and Radwan
Elachi) charging them with conspiracy to commit a robbery. The trial judge (Judge Johnston QC) having certified that his order dismissing the demurrers is a proper one for determination on appeal, leave to appeal is not required.
((1) [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), [s 5F(3)(b).)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html)
The indictment alleges against the three appellants jointly that: "... between 10 September and 24 September 1993 in the
State of New South Wales, (they) did conspire amongst themselves to commit the offence of robbery in the Australian Capital
Territory."
The particulars supplied of the overt acts upon which the Crown relied revealed that the agreement to commit a robbery in Canberra is alleged to have been formed as a result of telephone calls and meetings between the three appellants in
Sydney. They then travelled to Canberra, where further planning for the robbery took place at the home there of one of them, although the
Crown case is that the agreement was complete in New South Wales before they travelled to Canberra. They were arrested by the police in the ACT on the way to the address in Canberra where the robbery was to be carried out. Those particulars were not part of the indictment, and were therefore irrelevant to any issue which the judge had to determine. ((2) Regina versus Glynn [(1994) 71 A
Crim R 537] at 538. The risk of confusion which may arise from treating such particulars as part of the indictment, rather than formally amending the indictment to add what is necessary by way of averment is discussed by Allen J at 538-540.) But the particular issue which arose for determination was sufficiently raised by the terms of the indictment itself - the words "in the
Australian Capital Territory" having been added by the Crown to do so.
The basis of the demurrers is described by the judge as being that the
District Court - "...has no jurisdiction to try (the accused) in relation to any crime alleged in the indictment." 
The actual demurrers themselves are not before this Court, but it appears from such note of the argument as appears in the District Court transcript that counsel for at least one of the appellants argued not only that the courts of this State had no jurisdiction to try the matter but also that the indictment did not disclose any offence which is known to the law of New South Wales. The two issues are quite distinct.
((3) Regina versus Martin [(1956) 2 QB 272] at 19.) The authorities to which I will be referring later describe the second of those issues interchangeably as whether a conspiracy formed in one country (or jurisdictional area) to commit an offence in another country (or jurisdictional area) is "known" to the law of the first country or whether it is "indictable" or "justiciable" in that country.
The first of those two issues may be disposed of speedily. Assuming that the indictment does disclose an offence justiciable in New South Wales - namely, a conspiracy to commit a criminal offence - the courts of this State clearly do have jurisdiction to try such an offence. The offence of conspiracy consists of the agreement by two or more persons to do an unlawful act, or to do a lawful act by unlawful means. ((4) Mulchay versus The
Queen [(1868) LR 3 HL 306]; [(1988) CLR 87] at 93.) The offence of conspiracy is committed as soon as such agreement has been reached; it matters not that the objective of the agreement (here the commission of the robbery) has not been carried out, and the existence of the offence of conspiracy continues as long as the intention to carry out that objective continues.((5) Regina versus Aspinall [(1876) 2 QBD 48] at 822-823, 827, 835; Regina versus GFSandW [(1974) NSWLR 31] at 458;
The Queen versus Rogerson <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 268] at 8.)
Upon the assumption so made, therefore, the conspiracy to commit a criminal offence alleged in the present case was complete when the appellants agreed to commit the robbery, such conspiracy having taken place in New South
Wales according to the averment in the indictment The District Court thus had jurisdiction to try such an offence. That conclusion is reached upon ordinary common law principles, that jurisdiction over an offence belongs to the country (or the jurisdictional area) where the offence is committed. ((6)
Macleod versus AG for NSW [(1891) AC 455] at 551;
Thompson versus TheQueen (at 23-25,33).) It does not depend in any way upon the extra-territorial provisions of <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), to which reference will be made somewhat later.
The real question in these appeals, in my view, is whether a conspiracy which is formed in New South Wales to commit a robbery in the Australian
Capital Territory is justiciable (or known to the law) in this
State. That question has been treated by the cases as being dependent upon the nature of the crime of conspiracy itself.
An agreement to commit a crime precedes an attempt to commit that crime, and it is merely auxiliary to the law which creates the contemplated crime agreed to be committed. The justification for making the agreement itself a crime flows from the preventative purpose of the law of conspiracy, in that it enables the law to step in and to frustrate that agreement even before it has reached the stage of amounting to an attempt to commit the contemplated crime.
As the purpose is to prevent the commission of the contemplated crime, the crime of conspiracy is said to be "all part and parcel of the preservation of the Queen's peace within the realm" - or, in the more modern cases, it is said to protect society in the country (or jurisdictional area) in which the contemplated crime was to have been committed. ((7) I have taken those propositions from a number of authorities - chiefly, Board of Trade versus Owen [(1957) AC 602] at 244-245, 250-251.)
Because the crime of conspiracy is of such a nature, various courts have held that a conspiracy formed in the country (or jurisdictional area) of the forum to commit a crime elsewhere is not justiciable (or not known to the law) in that forum, although a conspiracy formed elsewhere to commit a crime in the country (or jurisdictional area) of the forum is justiciable there. It is necessary to refer briefly to some of those cases.
In Board of Trade versus Owen, ((8) [(1957) AC 602)] it was alleged that a conspiracy was formed in England to defraud a government department in Germany by making false representations in Germany to the department which were designed to obtain the issue of export licences for German goods. As both the unlawful acts and the ultimate object of the conspiracy were outside England, it was held not to be justiciable in England.
Although Board of Trade versus Owen concerned a conspiracy to attain a lawful object by unlawful means, and not a conspiracy to commit a crime, Lord
Tucker (with whom the other Law Lords agreed) made it clear that the House of Lords was being asked to expound the law in relation to both types of conspiracies and that that was what he intended to do. ((9) (at 624, 634)) He held ((10) (at 634)) that the Court of Criminal Appeal in that case had been correct when it said: "In our opinion the true rule is that a conspiracy to commit a
crime abroad is not indictable in this country unless the contemplated crime is one for which an indictment would lie here." ((11) Regina versus Owen [(1957) 1 QB 174] 
As the general rule of English law is that - statutory provisions excepted - offences committed by British subjects out of England are not punishable by the English criminal law ((12) Ibid (at 188); Regina versus Page [(1954) 1 QB 170] at ) and, as no statutory provision applied in this case, no offence would have been committed in Germany for which the appellants could have been indicted in England. ((13) Lord Goddard CJ, giving the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal, said that "no offence was committed in Germany for which the appellants could have been indicted in England" , but he was referring to the contemplated crime. That is how Lord Tucker interpreted it (at 634).)
Consequently, the conspiracy alleged in that case was not justiciable (or known to the law) in England. As Lord Tucker encapsulated it ((14) (at 634)): "... a conspiracy to commit a crime abroad is not indictable in this country unless the contemplated crime is one for which an indictment would lie here..."
The justiciability in England of a conspiracy formed there to commit a crime outside England (other than murder and, probably, treason) was directly rejected by the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in Regina versus Cox, ((15) [(1968) 1 WLR 88] at 757.) The decision of the House of Lords in Board of
Trade versus Owen has never been questioned in England. It has been applied by both the Court of Appeal and the Queen's Bench Divisional Court. ((17) In addition to the two decisions of the Court of Appeal already cited, See also Regina v
Governor of Brixton Prison; Ex parte Bush [(1969) 1 WLR 165] at 171; Regina v
Governor of Pentonville Prison; Ex parte Khubchandani (1980) 71 CAR 241 at .) It has been referred to with apparent approval in the House of Lords itself. ((18) Treacy versus DPP [(1971) AC 537] at 244-245) the Privy
Council (in an appeal from Hong Kong), when holding that a conspiracy formed in Tbailand to traffick drugs in Hong Kong was justiciable in
Hong Kong, based that decision in part upon Board of Trade versus Owen. ((20) The
English
Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) has held that this decision of the
Privy Council should now be regarded as the law of England:
Regina versus Sanson CAR 115 at 120. It has also been accepted by this Court as stating the common law of this State: Regina v Fan [(1991) 24 NSWLR 60] at 64-65.) When discussing the English common law of conspiracy, Lord Griffiths (who gave the advice of the Privy Council) summed up the reason for the restrictions in the nature of that crime in this way ((21) (at 244): "As a broad general statement it is true to say that English criminal law is local in its effect and that the common law does not concern itself with crimes committed abroad. The reason for this is obvious; the criminal law is developed to protect English society and not that of other nations which must be left to make and enforce such laws as they see fit to protect their own societies. To put the matter bluntly it is no direct concern of English society if a crime is committed in another country. It was for this reason that the law of extradition was introduced between civilised nations so that fugitive offenders might be returned for trial in the country against whose laws they had offended."
The Board of Trade versus Owen decision has been referred to with apparent approval in the High Court of Australia, ((22) Thompson versus The Queen (at 28)) and in the Court of Appeal of this State, ((23) Connor v Sankey [(1976) 2 NSWLR ] at 598) although in each case not upon this precise point. More importantly, it has been considered and followed upon the precise point in issue in these appeals by the Appeal Division of the Supreme Court of
Victoria, in Re Hamilton-Byrne, ((24) <case>; [(1995) 1 VR 129)] and by Matheson J in the Supreme Court of South Australia, in Regina versus Saverio Francesco
Catanzariti. ((25) (18 October 1995, unreported).)
The relevant conspiracy alleged in Re Hamilton-Byrne was formed in
Victoria. Its objective was to defraud the New Zealand
Registrar-General by having him falsely register a number of children as having been born to the accused in that country. It was dealt with by the Appeal Division as a common law conspiracy, ((26) The common law offence of conspiracy to defraud has been retained in Victoria despite the statutory context in which the law of criminal conspiracy is now to be found there.) but (like that in Board of
Trade versus Owen) one to achieve a lawful object by unlawful means. Those unlawful means included the making in Victoria of the false statements to be submitted to the New Zealand Registrar-General. It was held that the conspiracy was not justiciable (that is, not known to the law) in Victoria. ((27) (at 140).)
The conspiracy alleged in Catanzariti was formed in South Australia. Its objective was to cultivate cannabis on a property near Katherine, in the
Northern Territory. Application was made to quash the indictment upon the ground that there was no offence justiciable (or known to the law) in South
Australia, relying upon the decisions in Board of
Trade versus Owen and Re
Hamilton-Byrne. Matheson J upheld the application and quashed the indictment.
The Board of Trade versus Owen decision was distinguished by Wright J of the
Supreme Court of Tasmania in Mayer versus Henderson, ((28) [(1993) 68 A Crim R 155)] a case in which the two accused were charged with a conspiracy formed in
Tasmania to defraud various banks in Victoria. Wright J distinguished Board of
Trade versus Owen upon the basis that the Crown proposed to lead evidence that the cheques or telegraphic transfers (for which there were insufficient funds in the accounts gainst which they were drawn) were sent through the banking system from
Tasmania to Victoria by one of the co-conspirators. Section 8 of the Tasmanian Criminal Code provides that, where facts occur which together would constitute a crime against the law of that State if they all occurred in the State, any person who does any act or makes any omission in the State which (if all the facts had occurred in the State) would make him a party to such crime shall be guilty of that crime. Thus - adopting the rule stated in
Board of Trade versus Owen - an indictment would he in Tasmania for the crime contemplated by the conspiracy, and consequently for the conspiracy itself.
The judge described the conspiracy formed in Tasmania as not "a 'bare' conspiracy" of the kind debated in the English cases. ((29) (at 161-162).)
Wright J also, however, saw considerable weight in the submission by the
Crown that the principles laid down in Board of Trade versus Owen and the subsequent English cases to which I have referred are not applicable in
Australia where the conspiracy charged was formed in the State where the charge is laid to commit a crime in another State or Territory. He relied in support of that view upon the judgment of Deane J in Thompson versus The
Queen, ((30) <case>; [(1989) 169 CLR 1] at 34-35) where his Honour said that the local laws of the various States and Territories of the Commonwealth are the components of a single national legal system, so that the substantive law of Australia is the common law which transcends internal State or
Territorial boundaries and operates as an entire system. Wright J went on to say ((31) (at 160)): "It may be said that in the
Commonwealth of Australia there is little reason to limit the prophylactic effect of a prosecution for conspiracy in one
State where the Commission of the substantive crime or proscribed act is to occur in another part of Australia." 
He saw it as at least arguable that none of the considerations bearing upon the decision in Board of Trade versus Owen had any direct relevance to the
Australian situation, but he was able to distinguish that decision upon the basis to which I have already referred.
 .
Mayer versus Henderson does not appear to have been cited to the Supreme Court of Victoria in Re Hamilton-Byrne. It was cited to the
Supreme Court of South
Australia in Regina versus Catanzariti, but it was distinguished by Matheson J upon the same basis as Wright J distinguished the facts of the case before him from those in Board of Trade versus Owen. His Honour did not mention the additional observations by Wright J to which I have referred.
The point does not appear to have arisen elsewhere in Australia or in New
Zealand. The decision in Board of Trade versus Owen was referred to by the New
Zealand Court of Appeal in Regina versus Sew Hoy, ((32) [(1994) 1 NZLR 257)] a case in which the appellant had been charged with a conspiracy to defraud the
Customs, the crime contemplated being one which the conspirators failed to commit because the means they adopted were inappropriate to accomplish their purpose. Board of Trade versus Owen was referred to ((33) (at 260)) only as an authority for the proposition that the justification for making the agreement constituting the conspiracy itself a crime is that it enables the law to prevent the commission of the substantive offence before it has even reached the stage of an attempt, a proposition subsequently interpreted by the House of Lords as placing the crime of conspiracy in the same class and category as attempts to commit a crime: DPP versus Nock ((34) [(1978) AC 979] at 997) - an interpretation which the New Zealand Court of Appeal disputed. ((35) (at 267).
See also Regina versus George Mark Barbouttis (CCA, 18 September 1995, unreported), per Gleeson CJ (at 12-13), Dunford J (at 2); cf Smart J (at 22).)
There is nothing in that decision to indicate what view the courts of New
Zealand would take towards the justiciability of a conspiracy formed in New
Zealand to commit a crime outside that country. Two New Zealand textbooks refer to Board of Trade versus Owen as authority for the proposition that such a conspiracy would not be justiciable in New Zealand, however without reference to any local authority: "Criminal Law In
New Zealand" (1981), Garrow and
Caldwell; ((36) (at 28)) and "Adams on Criminal Law" (1992), Robertson. ((37) (at par 385.21).)
The Board of Trade versus Owen decision has not been accepted in Canada. Its varying fortunes, and the refutation of the principle which it stated, are traced in the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Libman versus The Queen, ((38) [(1985) 2 SCR 178](http://scc.lexum.umontreal.ca/en/1985/1985scr2-178/1985scr2-178.html "View Case" ) at 201-207) a case in which the appellant had been charged with a number of counts of fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit fraud. Some of the activities upon which the charges were based took place in the United States. The more robust approach of the
Canadian courts is exemplified by one of the earliest, Rex versus Bachrack,((39) [(1913) 21 CCC 257)] in which the accused were charged with a conspiracy formed in Ontario to procure an abortion in the United States. Meredith JA of the Ontario Court of Appeal said ((40) (at 265)): "The law would be lame if it were powerless to reach conspirators so long as they took care to agree to carry into effect their wrongs beyond the borders of the country in which they conspired to do the wrongs. It must be borne in mind always that the crime of conspiracy may be complete without any thing having been done to carry it out."
The Supreme Court in Libman versus The Queen laid down its own test of what were termed "the limits of territoriality": that all that is necessary to make an offence subject to the jurisdiction of the Canadian courts is that a significant portion of the activities constituting that offence took place in
Canada - it is sufficient that there be a real and substantial link between the offence and that country. ((41) (at 212-213).) La Forest J, who gave the judgment of the Court, saw the English cases as expressing a narrow view of the territorial application of English law so as to ensure that they did not unduly infringe upon the jurisdiction of the other states - that is, the notion of comity (or "kindly and considerate behaviour towards others"). ((42) (at 213-214)) His
Lordship dismissed this approach with his own robust comments ((43) (at 214)): "How considerate is it of the interests of the
United States in this case to permit criminals based in this country to prey on its citizens? How does it conform to its interests or to ours for us to permit such activities when law enforcement agencies in both countries have developed co-operative schemes to prevent and prosecute those engaged in such activities?
To ask these questions is to answer them. No issue of comity is involved here. ...(W)e should not be indifferent to the protection of the public in other countries. In a shrinking world, we are all our brother's keepers. In the criminal arena this is underlined by the international co-operative schemes that have been developed among national law enforcement bodies."
The decision in Libman versus The Queen, however, did not in the end turn upon the application of that test to a conspiracy formed in Canada to commit a crime outside Canada, as the crime contemplated by the conspiracy charged was of the same nature as the substantive crimes with which the appellant had also been charged, and a significant portion of the activities constituting those crimes had taken place in Canada and fell within that test. La Forest
J accordingly found it unnecessary to consider whether the principle stated in
Board of Trade versus Owen was appropriate for Canada.
((44) (at 192, 214-215).)
The test laid down in Libman versus The Queen was nevertheless applied to such a conspiracy in a subsequent case, by the Ontario Court of Appeal: Regina v
Douglas. ((45) [(1989) 51 CCC (3d) 129.)] The two appellants had entered into an agreement with an American undercover police officer in Canada to supply cocaine to that officer in the United States. The deal fell through when it appeared that the appellants were having some difficulty with their supplier.
Nothing at all had been done in Canada in relation to the commission of the crime contemplated by the conspiracy. At the first trial, the appellants successfully applied for a nonsuit on the basis that "there was no evidence of jurisdiction to prosecute the accused in Canada for the offence charged". The
Court of Appeal allowed the appeal upon the basis of the decision in Libman v
The Queen and ordered a new trail. ((46) The judgment in the first appeal is quoted at 132.)
The evidence at the second trial was substantially the same as at the first, and the appellants were convicted. They raised what is described as the jurisdictional issue again in the second appeal. No reliance was placed by the
Court of Appeal upon a recent provision in the Canadian Criminal Code which deems a conspiracy formed in Canada to do something outside Canada (which is an offence under the laws of that place) to be a conspiracy to do that thing in Canada, ((47) <case>, now <case>) because the Court was again satisfied that the mere making of the agreement which constituted the conspiracy in
Canada manifested the substantial link with that country as Libman versus The Queen required, and that there was nothing in the requirements of international comity which dictated that Canada should refrain from exercising its jurisdiction ((48) (at 136-137).)
The Crown concedes that, in order to succeed in the present case, this
Court must either depart from the law as laid down in Board of Trade versus Owen or accept that the extra-territorial provisions of <case> of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) now cure the position. I propose to deal with each of those two arguments separately. The Crown says, and it is obvious, that this
Court is not bound by any of the decisions to which I have referred, notwithstanding its acceptance of the Privy Council decision in Liangsiriprasert versus United States as stating the common law of this State. ((49) Regina versus Fan (at 64-65). An acceptance that a conspiracy formed in Hong Kong to import heroin into Australia is justiciable here does not necessarily entail an acceptance that a conspiracy formed in Australia to import heroin into Hong Kong is or is not justiciable here.)
Next, the Crown says (in effect) that, as the crime of conspiracy is complete upon agreement, it matters not that the object of the conspiracy was to commit a crime in another jurisdictional area as that objective may never be carried out. Reliance was placed upon the decision of the New
Zealand Court of Appeal in Regina versus Sew Hoy and the dissenting judgment of Gleeson CJ in
Regina versus George Mark Barbouttis, ((50) (CCA, September 1995, unreported) at ) when it was held that a conspiracy to effect an object which was factually impossible of performance was nevertheless an offence known to the law. An analogy was drawn between those cases (in which there was a "factual impossibility" in performance) and the Board of Trade versus Owen line of cases (in which, it was said, that there is a "legal impossibility" in performance.
The phrase "legal impossibility" was taken from the speech of Viscount
Dilhorne in Haughton versus Smith, ((51) (1975) AC 476 at ) a decision which is no longer accepted. ((52) Regina versus Mai [(1992) 26 NSWLR 371] at 381-384; Regina v Sew Hoy (at 263).) It was dealing with attempts to commit crimes. I fail to see how it can be applied to conspiracies to commit a crime outside the jurisdictional area. I see nothing in the judgment of the Chief Justice in
Regina versus George Mark Barbouttis which assists the Crown here.
The Crown drew attention to the remarks of Lord Griffiths in
Liangsiriprasert versus United States ((53) (at 244)) which I quoted earlier as to the reason for the restrictions imposed in the nature of the crime of conspiracy in
England - put bluntly by his Lordship, that it is of no direct concern of English society if a crime is committed in another country - and it was submitted that such considerations were inapplicable in Australia. In the present case, the crime contemplated by the conspiracy formed in this State was to take place in the Australian Capital Territory, which lies wholly within this State. Reliance was placed upon the judgment of Deane J in
Thompson versus The Queen ((54) (at 34-35)) concerning a simple national legal system in this country - to which I referred earlier when discussing the
Tasmanian case of Mayer versus Henderson - as demonstrating that Board of Trade v
Owen had no relevance to Australian conditions. This is the argument which attracted Judge Johnston QC in the present case, as it did Wright J in Mayer v
Henderson.
Deane J was in that judgment repeating - although in the context of the criminal law - much of what he had said a little earlier in relation to the principles of private international law in this country, in Breavington v
Godleman. ((55) <case>; [(1989) 169 CLR 41] at 86-87) the theory espoused by
Deane J of a national unitary law operating as he suggested is not one which has commanded general acceptance in the High Court. ((57) See Amalgamated
Society of Engineers versus Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd <case>; [(1920) 28 CLR 129] at 36.) It was not accepted by this Court in Brownlie versus SPCC, and the High Court refused special leave to appeal from that decision.
((58) Brownlie versus EPA [(1993) 179 CLR 673.)]
A contrast may also be drawn between the reason for the restrictions unposed by the English courts upon the nature of the crime of conspiracy (as summed up by Lord Griffiths) and the more robust attitude expressed by the
Canadian courts in the passages which I earlier quoted. But the contrast is an unsatisfactory one, because the Canadian cases have all proceeded upon the basis that the House of Lords had decided Board of Trade versus Owen upon a jurisdictional question only. ((59) See, for example, Libman versus The Queen (at -192).) That was, with respect, an erroneous interpretation. The decision was based upon the justiciability of a conspiracy to commit a crime outside the jurisdiction - that is, whether such a conspiracy was known to the law - not whether there is (or should be) jurisdiction to hear such a charge. ((60)
Treacy versus DPP (at 563); Re Hamilton-Byrne (at 138).) The Canadian cases appear simply to have assumed that such a conspiracy was known to the law in England.
As pointed out earlier, Canada now has a statutory provision which deems a conspiracy formed in Canada to do something outside Canada (which is an offence against the laws of that place) to be a conspiracy to do that thing in
Canada, ((61) Canadian Criminal Code <case>.) so that the issue is no longer of relevance in that country.
The Crown says that this Court should nevertheless now define the crime of conspiracy for this State in terms which would include a conspiracy formed in this State to commit a crime in another State or Territory of the
Commonwealth. It points out that only two of the local decisions to which reference has been made dealt with such conspiracies, Re Hamilton-Byrne being concerned with a Victorian conspiracy to defraud the Registrar-General in New
Zealand. Both decisions dealing with such conspiracies are by single judges.
However, that of Wright J in Tasmania favouring the Crown view was, on this point, no more than obiter, and he too may have proceeded upon the basis that the Board of Trade versus Owen case was concerned solely with a jurisdiction issue.
((62) (at 159).)
That of Matheson J in South Australia against the Crown view was directly in point. I am informed that no appeal has been filed against that decision.
The Crown has argued that the decision of Matheson J is distinguishable, in that Catanzaniti was not concerned with a common law conspiracy - as was that in Board of Trade versus Owen and Re Hamilton-Byrne and as is that in the present case. As ultimately indicted, the accused were charged with conspiring in South Australia to do an unlawful act in the Northern Territory - namely, to cultivate a commercial quantity of cannabis contrary to <case> of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1990 (NT). ((63) (See pp 4-5 of the judgment).) It is true that
Matheson J did refer to the fact that, as the cultivation of cannabis is not a crime at common law, neither is a conspiracy to cultivate it such a crime, ((64) (at 18)) but that had no effect upon the reasoning by which he came to his decision. The rule stated in Board of Trade versus Owen ((65) (at 634)) was that a conspiracy formed in England to commit a crime abroad is not indictable in England unless the contemplated crime is one for which an indictment would lie there. Matheson J said ((66) (at 18)): "The object of the alleged conspiracies is a breach of
Northern Territory law. Even if all the alleged facts occurred within this State, the accused could not be charged here with breaches of the Northern Territory Misuse of Drugs
Act." 
That conclusion fell squarely within the rule stated in Board of Trade versus Owen.
In the present case (and subject to s 3A of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), to which I will turn shortly), as the appellants could not be indicted in this State for a robbery committed in the Australian Capital
Territory, then an acceptance of the law laid down in Board of Trade versus Owen means that no crime of conspiracy formed within the State to commit that crime is justiciable (that is, known to the law) in this State.
What the Crown is really asking this Court to do is to formulate a new criminal offence so that the law can step in to frustrate a conspiracy formed in this State to commit a crime in another State or Territory of the
Commonwealth before it has reached the stage of amounting to an attempt to commit the contemplated crime. There is much to be said in support of the existence of such an offence in the political and geographical circumstances of the Australian Federation. The restrictions imposed by the law as it is laid down in Board of Trade versus Owen are highly artificial in these circumstances. Although the point was not developed, it was suggested by the
Crown that there could perhaps be difficulties in a prosecution in the
Australian Capital Territory in the present case, in relation to the admissibility of evidence lawfully obtained in this State by way of listening devices but for which no warrants were obtained pursuant to the Territory's laws. Those difficulties may well be met by the operation of [s 118](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s118.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) upon the [Listening Devices Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lda1984181/) , but it is unnecessary to decide that here. The point is that it is logical, efficient and convenient to prosecute in the State where all of the activity took place.
There are, however, a number of answers to the Crown's request. Although the courts may always apply well established principles to new facts, they no longer have the power to create new criminal offences. ((67) Regina v Knuller (Publishing, Printing and Promotions) Ltd [(1973) AC 435] at 857-859, 863, 877; The Queen v
Rogerson (at 304).) If the crime charged in the present case is presently unknown to the law here, the extension of the crime of conspiracy to cover the present case requires this Court to do what it has no power to do. However protean a crime conspiracy may be because of the many different factual situations to which it may be applied, ((68) DPP versus Withers (at 861)) it is nevertheless restricted to those cases where the objects or means are in substance of such a quality or kind as has already been recognized by the law as criminal. ((69) Ibid (at 860, 866).) I do not believe that it is open to this Court to extend the law of conspiracy as requested.
In any event, it is in my view more appropriate for the Legislature, rather than the courts, to make the necessary extension to the law. That was the view expressed by the House of Lords in Board of Trade versus Owen ((70) (at )) and by the Appeal Division of the Supreme Court of Victoria in Re
Hamilton-Byrne, ((71) (at 142-143)) although the latter's view may have been affected by the statutory provisions relating to conspiracy enacted in that
State in 1984. There are at least four different categories of crime contemplated by the locally formed conspiracy which the new criminal offence could cover - those which are offences against the laws of the State or
Territory where the crime is to be committed, ((72) (As in the Canadian
Criminal
Code, <case>).) those which if carried out in this State would necessarily amount to or involve the commission of an offence against a law of this State, ((73) (As in the [Crimes Act 1958](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ca195882/) (Vic), [s 321A(2)).)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ca195882/s321a.html) those which must comply with both criteria, ((74) (As in the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , s
A, which gives power to arrest a person in this State for an offence committed outside the State).) and those which amount to a crime equivalent to one known to the law of this State ((75) (As in Extradition (Foreign States)
Act 1966 (Cwth), <case>(1A))) - in the sense of an act or omission which would be the same as the act or omission which is an element of the law of the foreign state were it not for the fact that the law of the foreign state requires (whether or not for reasons of jurisdiction) that the act or omission should have occurred in or in relation to some place or thing in or connected with the foreign state. ((76) Riley versus Commonwealth <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 1] at 8.) It is for the Legislature, not the courts, to make the policy choice involved.
I turn now to <case> of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). That section provides that an offence is committed against the law of this State if all elements necessary to constitute the offence (disregarding territorial considerations) exist and if a territorial nexus exists between this State and at least one element of the offence. Such a territorial nexus exists if an element of the offence includes an "event" which occurs in this State or an "event" which occurs outside the State but while the person alleged to have committed the offence is in the State, and the existence of the territorial nexus is presumed unless rebutted by the accused at the trial. An "event" is defined to mean any act, omission, occurrence, circumstance or state of affairs but to exclude intention, knowledge or any other state of mind.
Section 3A was introduced by each State and Territory, by agreement between the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General, in order to overcome the jurisdictional problems identified in Thompson versus The Queen. ((77) Hansard,
Legislative Council, 19 November 1992, pp 9359-9366.) That was a case in which the appellant had been charged in the Australian Capital Territory with murder. The bodies of the two deceased were found in a motor vehicle some fortyfive to fifty metres inside the border of the Territory near to a highway. The appellant told the police that he was driving into the Territory when he was blinded by the lights of an oncoming vehicle, as a result of which the vehicle he was driving left the road, hit a tree and burst into flames.
Section 25 of the Crimes Act , which applied in an amended form to the
Territory, provided in that amended form that, where the cause of death occurred outside the Territory but death occurred inside the Territory, the offence of murder may be dealt with, in all respects, as if the same had been wholly committed inside the
Territory. ((78) Section 25 of the NSW Act was repealed when <case> was enacted.) The High Court was concerned only with proof that the death of the deceased took place inside the Territory, but there is some discussion in the judgments as to the nature of the jurisdiction to try a crime where some elements of the crime took place outside the jurisdictional area in which the charge is laid.
Section 3A resolves the problem where not all of the elements of a crime took place within this State by making the offence constituted by all the elements an offence against the law of this State provided that all those elements existed and that there is a territorial nexus (as defined) with this
State. The section does not create an offence if none previously existed.
In the present case, the agreement to commit the robbery in the
Australian Capital Territory existed, and all of the events necessary to establish that agreement occurred within this State. There was no event which occurred outside this State to which <case> could apply. Even the intention to carry out the robbery (which, as a state of mind, is excluded from the definition of an event) existed in this State. Insofar as the appellants still held that intention when they travelled to Canberra, again that intention does not amount to an event (as defined) which occurred outside the State. If the agreement formed inside this state to commit a crime in the Australian Capital
Territory did not constitute an offence known to the law of this State (as
Board of Trade versus Owen says that it does not), then <case> did not constitute it an offence against the law of this State simply because the object of the agreement or conspiracy involved the commission of a crime in another State or
Territory of the Commonwealth. Section 3A is irrelevant to the present case.
In my judgment this Court (being an intermediate appellate court) should apply the law as laid down in Board of Trade versus Owen and accepted in both
Victoria and South Australia as stating the law of those States. I should make it clear that this decision is not intended to affect an indictment charging a common law conspiracy formed in one State or Territory to commit a
Commonwealth offence in another State or Territory. An example may be a conspiracy formed in New South Wales to make false or misleading statements to the Passport Office in Victoria for the purpose of obtaining the issue of a passport. The contemplated offence is created by <case> of the Passports Act (Cwth). It is unnecessary for the purposes of this case to decide the justiciability of such a issue which has yet to be determined. ((79) One problem for the Crown in such a crime may be that - although there is an element of protection of the Australian society involved in such a contemplated crime (The King versus Kidman <case>; [(1915) 20 CLR 425] at 436, 444-445), thus overcoming the stated policy behind the restrictions imposed upon the nature of the crime of conspiracy (Liangdriprasert v United States, at 244) - <case> of the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) (which requires the bid on indictment of any
Commonwealth offence to be held "in the State where the offence was committed") would appear to preclude the Crown's satisfaction of a necessary ingredient of the crime of conspiracy, that an indictment would lie in
New
South Wales in relation to the contemplated crime in Victoria (Board of Trade v Owen, at 634). The matter was not argued before us and, as I say, it is unnecessary in the present case to resolve that particular problem.)
Accordingly, I propose that the following orders be made: 
The appeals are upheld. 
The indictment in the District Court is quashed.
JUDGE2
DUNFORD J 
I agree with Hunt CJ at CL.
JUDGE3
DOWD J I have read the judgement in draft form of Hunt CJ at CL. I agree with the reasons set out therein and the orders proposed.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/39.html  
