

Leung and Anor versus Good Friend Development Pty Ltd and Ors [2007] NSWSC 713 (26 June 2007) 
Last Updated: 5 July 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Leung & Anor versus Good Friend Development Pty Ltd & Ors <case>  
JURISDICTION: Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2906/07  
HEARING DATE{S): 26 June 2007  
JUDGMENT DATE: 26 June 2007 
EX TEMPORE DATE: 26 June 2007  
PARTIES: 
Pin Ko Leung - First Plaintiff 
Fook Cheung Leung - Second Plaintiff 
Good Friend Development Pty Ltd - First Defendant 
Kim Hung Kwong (aka Sherman Kwong) - Second Defendant 
Sandy Kwong (aka Wai Kwan Ng) - Third Defendant 
Belinda Wong (aka Yuk Ling Belinda Wong) - Fourth Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: Palmer J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Ms. T.A. Iskra (Sol) - Plaintiffs 
C. Moschoudis - Defendants  
SOLICITORS: 
Harris Freidman Hyde Page - Plaintiffs 
Ren Zhou Lawyers - Defendants  
CATCHWORDS: 
INTERLOCUTORY INJUNCTION - Whether evidence demonstrates serious question to be tried.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CASES CITED:  
DECISION: 
Injunction refused.  
JUDGMENT:  /07 Pin Ko Leung & Anor versus Good Friend Development Pty Ltd & Ors  
JUDGMENT - Ex tempore  June, 2007  On 1 June 2007, Brereton J made orders by consent restraining the Third and
Fourth Defendants from dealing with a property at Bexley until further order.
The matter has come back into the Duty List today because the Defendants wish to have that interim injunction dissolved.  Very briefly, the question which has been agitated is whether or not the
Plaintiffs have demonstrated a prima facie case or serious question to be tried in support of their contention that they have some proprietary interest in the subject property, whether by way of security or constructive trust or otherwise.  Ms Iskra, solicitor, has appeared on behalf of the Plaintiffs and has directed me to the evidence in support of the Plaintiffs' contention that they have some form of interest in the subject property which requires protection pending resolution of the disputes between the parties. Ms Iskra points to paragraph 52 of the First Plaintiff's affidavit of 29 May 2007 as supporting the interest claimed by the Plaintiffs in the subject property.  However, on a reading of that evidence, it seems to me that it goes no higher than alleging an agreement between the parties whereby the Plaintiffs would lend a sum of money to the Defendants at interest on the understanding that the Defendants would use that money to develop the subject property and that, when the property was completed, out of the profits of that property the
Plaintiffs would receive the repayment of the loan and a further consideration of a sum of $60,000.  As the evidence presently stands, there does not appear to be any common intention or understanding between the parties, let alone an explicit agreement, that the Plaintiffs were to have any secured interest or other equitable interest in the subject property. The mere fact that the Plaintiffs lend money to the Defendants so that the Defendants may use that money for the improvement of a property for profit does not, of itself, give the Plaintiffs an equitable interest in the property upon which the loan money has been expended.  I am unable to be satisfied that the Plaintiffs have demonstrated a serious question to be tried that they have any interest in the property such as would support the continuation of injunctions restraining the Defendants from dealing with it or dealing with the proceeds of sale.  Miss Iskra does not submit that there is other evidence to demonstrate a real likelihood that the Defendants will, unless restrained, dispose of the proceeds of sale of the subject property or of other assets in such a way as to defeat the Plaintiffs in recovering a judgment on the claimed debt if the
Plaintiffs succeed in obtaining judgment.  Accordingly, I cannot see any basis for continuing the injunctions as freezing orders to protect the Plaintiffs' possible fruits of judgment.  For those reasons, the orders restraining the Third and Fourth Defendants made on 1 June 2007 by consent are now dissolved.  I will also dissolve the order in paragraph 3 of orders made on 1 June
I should add, of course, that the orders which I now make are made in the state of the evidence as it presently is and nothing that I have said today precludes the Plaintiffs from making any further application to the
Court to protect their position, if so advised on other evidence.  I order the Plaintiffs to pay the Defendants' costs of today.  - oOo -  
LAST UPDATED: 5 July 2007 * * * 
