

Regina versus Gregory Allan Roberts [1996] NSWSC 75 (22 April 1996) 
REGINA versus Gregory Allan ROBERTS /95 
Monday 22 April 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, ALLEN J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The appellant, who is a man who has been in trouble with the law on many occasions and has a somewhat complicated custodial history, was tried before his Honour Judge Coleman QC and a jury in March 1995 on a charge of armed robbery. The armed robbery took place on 2 October 1990 at Wickham. This was a second trial. The appellant had previously been convicted of the same offence but the conviction was set aside on an appeal to this Court.

Two other men have also been convicted in respect of the same armed robbery.
One of them was a man named Bragg, who was convicted after a plea of guilty.

Following his conviction, the appellant was sentenced to a substantial term of penal servitude, which was to commence on 1 May 1995 at the expiration of a term of imprisonment he was serving in relation to other matters.

The facts in relation to the armed robbery were not in dispute. The issue at the trial was whether the appellant was one of the three men involved in the robbery. It is therefore unnecessary to go into much detail about the circumstances of the offence.

It suffices to say that on 2 October 1990 Laurence Ryan, who was the proprietor of a firm named Vista Electronics at Wickham, was working at he business premises of that firm, together with an employee named Joan Garvey.
At about closing time, when they were in the course of concluding business for the day, a man armed with a sawn-off shotgun and others entered their premises. Mr Ryan and Mrs Garvey were forced to lie face down on the ground.
Their hands were taped behind their backs, and bags were placed over their heads. They made some very brief observations of the man with the sawn-off shotgun and his companions, but they did not profess to be able to identify any of the men. In particular, as the Crown case was conducted at the second trial, they did not profess to be able to identify the appellant. I make that last observation because at the first trial there was an in-court identification of the appellant. One of the reasons why the conviction following the first trial was set aside concerned the inadequacy of directions concerning the dangers of an in-Court identification.

The intruders stole a quantity of cash and some other goods and then decamped.

The appellant was arrested and charged on 10 October 1990. Earlier on that day
Bragg had been found in possession of some of the stolen goods and had been arrested. It is material to note that, following his arrest, Bragg participated in a signed record of interview in which he made substantial admissions, but in which he made no mention of the appellant as being one of the other participants in the robbery.

The Crown case against the appellant depended entirely upon alleged verbal admissions of guilt said to have been made by the appellant to police officers on 10 October 1990. The principal police witness was Sergeant Henderson, whose evidence in this respect was supported by other police officers. Sergeant
Henderson gave evidence to the effect that when he originally approached the appellant and told him that he had been nominated as responsible for the armed robbery at Vista Electronics at Wickham, the appellant denied any involvement.
However, according to Sergeant Henderson, when the appellant was taken to the
Newcastle Police Station and saw Bragg present at the Station, the appellant admitted to Sergeant Henderson that he had participated in the robbery, asserting however that it was Bragg who had carried the sawn-off shotgun.

Sergeant Henderson gave a lengthy account of a conversation he had with the appellant. The conversation, according to Sergeant Henderson, began as follows. Following a caution Sergeant Henderson said: "'We have arrested Stephen Bragg this morning at 62 McMichael Street,
Maryville. He has nominated you as responsible for the armed robbery at Vista
Electronics with him.' The appellant said, 'I saw the cunt in that other room, did he tell you he had the fuckin' gun?' Sergeant Henderson said, 'No, he alleges you had the gun.' The appellant said, 'Bullshit, let me front him up, he had the fuckin' gun.' Sergeant Henderson said, 'What happened?' The appellant said, 'He set it up, he lives near there, he knew about the fuckin' guns there.' 
Sergeant Henderson said, 'What happened?' The appellant said, 'He told me that he wanted some help to do it over. I just went along.' Sergeant 
Henderson said, 'Who supplied the gun?'. The appellant said, 'He did. I don't know where it come from.'" 
According to Sergeant Henderson the appellant then went on to give further information about the circumstances of the robbery and about what happened to the stolen goods following the robbery. According to Sergeant Henderson the appellant was asked whether he wished to participate in an identification parade and declined to do so.

Sergeant Henderson said that he made notes of the conversation with the appellant and asked the appellant whether he would be willing to sign the notes as a record of what had been said. The appellant declined to sign the notes, saying that he did not wish to say any more.

The appellant did not participate in any formal record of interview and there was no signed record of any admissions made by the appellant. In an unsworn statement the appellant denied making any admissions to the police. He also denied his involvement in the robbery. However, the appellant did not dispute that Sergeant Henderson had confronted him with the assertion that Bragg had implicated him in the robbery. According to the appellant, when he was confronted with that assertion he denied any involvement.

Whilst it was not in dispute at the trial that Sergeant Henderson had asserted to the appellant that Bragg had implicated the appellant in the robbery, there was a major issue at the trial about whether Bragg had in truth implicated the appellant. As was mentioned earlier, Bragg in his signed record of interview did not name the appellant as having been involved.

The appellant set out to establish an alibi. He claimed that at the time of the robbery he was with a woman at a certain recreational area. The defence called that woman and another female to support the alibi. Their evidence was not entirely successful in that they suffered a degree of damage in cross examination. However, they stuck to their alibi story.

The defence also called as a witness the man Bragg. He was serving a sentence for the robbery in question. He told the jury that, although he himself was one of the robbers, the appellant was not involved. He also denied having told the police that the appellant was involved in the robbery.

It was common ground in this appeal that, if the jury had been instructed as to the relevance of the evidence from the police on the one hand and Bragg on the other, as to whether Bragg had implicated the appellant in the robbery, they should have been told that the only relevance of that evidence was that it went to Bragg's credit.

Bragg was called to give direct evidence that the appellant was not a participant in the robbery. He could have been confronted with a prior inconsistent statement. No doubt anticipating this, trial counsel for the appellant opened up in cross examination of Sergeant Henderson the question as to what Bragg said to Henderson about the appellant's participation in the robbery. The issue was then pursued through the evidence of a number of witnesses.

In cross examination of Sergeant Henderson, counsel for the appellant put to him that, contrary to his assertion to the appellant, Bragg had not implicated the appellant. Henderson denied this and maintained that Bragg had told him that the appellant was involved in the robbery.

Another police officer was also questioned about what Bragg had said concerning the appellant, and in due course Bragg gave evidence about what he had said concerning the appellant.

The jury therefore had before them a lively contest as to what had been said by Bragg, at least about the appellant's involvement in the robbery. However, as the appellant complains in one of his grounds of appeal, the learned trial judge did not give the jury any direction or instruction as to the use they could make of that evidence. In particular, his Honour did not direct the jury that if they accepted the police evidence as to what Bragg had said to them concerning the appellant, that did not amount to evidence of the truth of what
Bragg was asserting. Its relevance, as I have indicated earlier, was that it went to Bragg's credit. Bragg's credit, in turn, was under question because of his evidence that the appellant had not accompanied him in the robbery.

The jury were given certain warnings by the learned trial judge of the kind contemplated in McKinney versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 468]. However, senior counsel for the appellant submitted that the warnings given were inadequate. He further submitted that the jury were misdirected in certain respects; and further that the quality of the evidence in the Crown case was such that the verdict should be set aside as being unsafe or unsatisfactory.

In my view the jury's verdict is unsafe and should be quashed, for a combination of the following reasons.

First, the Crown case depended entirely upon the uncorroborated evidence of police officers of verbal admissions made to them at the police station. In that respect it was a weak case. There was no evidence against the appellant of a kind that is sometimes called, not without reason, "real evidence".

Second, although no complaint was made by trial counsel about the directions given by the learned trial judge, and leave is required under r4 to raise the criticisms that are now made, such leave should be given because the jury were, in certain respects, misdirected in relation to matters which were of fundamental importance to the trial.

Third, in one significant respect the warnings given to the jury pursuant to
McKinney versus The Queen were inadequate.

The learned judge warned the jury about the disadvantage at which an accused person in a police station is placed and the difficulty involved in challenging evidence of a number of police officers. He told the jury that it was more difficult for an accused person to challenge such evidence than it was for police officers to fabricate such evidence. This was because the person in custody was unable to support his version of events by any independent witness. He also warned the jury that police officers were trained to give evidence in court and were skilful and experienced witnesses. His
Honour then said: "When considering whether the accused would have been likely to make a full admission, you must also make allowance for the fact that he was alone and without legal advice. In those circumstances, if you find that there is no reliable confirmation, that the confessions or admissions were in fact made, the law requires me to warn you that before convicting on the basis of the alleged admissions, you must consider the dangers in doing so." 
Pausing there, it is to be observed that it was common ground at the trial, and is common ground on this appeal, that the police evidence that the alleged confessions were made was entirely uncorroborated. There was in fact no confirmation reliable or otherwise of the making of the confessions.
Consequently his Honour should not have left open to the jury the possibility that there was reliable confirmation for them to find in the evidence. He should have pointed out to them that since there was no reliable confirmation, the law required him to give the warning that he went on to give. His Honour then said: "In fairness to the police officers, I must add that it would be quite wrong to suggest that just because they are members of the Police Force, their evidence is likely to be false. That is not so, and it is not the reason for the warning which I have just given you. That warning is required to be given because the accused was at a disadvantage in being held alone and without the opportunity of obtaining corroboration for his account. I am not attempting to suggest that you should not convict on the basis of the alleged admissions.
If, after considering the matters that I have raised, you are convinced beyond reasonable doubt that the admissions were made and that they were true, then you should indeed act on them. It is by no means unknown for guilty people to make full confessions and then to have second thoughts and to deny having done so.
 
You should be looking in the evidence for objective signs that may assist you in determining where the truth lies, remembering that you are not dealing with the Police Force as such, but with the evidence of Detectives Henderson,
Mitchell, Hall and Brooks.
 
When you come to deal with the evidence concerning Mr Bragg, you will remember ladies and gentlemen that the Crown evidence is that Mr Bragg nominated the accused, that is, said that he was one of the persons responsible for the robbery.
 
When you come to assess that evidence and assess whether or not he spoke those words, remember ladies and gentlemen, he denied that he had nominated the accused as a person responsible for the robbery. When you come to assess that, ladies and gentlemen, you should apply the same principles as I have outlined in relation to the alleged confessions or admissions made by the accused at the police station." 
Senior counsel for the appellant pointed out that, once again, in that passage in indicating to the jury that they should look for objective signs that might assist them in determining where the truth lay, his Honour appeared to have overlooked the fact that there were no such objective signs in the evidence. More disturbing, however, is the possibility that the jury would have understood what his Honour said as indicating that, if they had accepted that Bragg had nominated the appellant as one of the people involved in the robbery, that itself might have been an objective sign supporting the truth of the police evidence as to the verbal admissions.

As was mentioned earlier, there was no dispute at the trial that Henderson had asserted to the appellant that Bragg had nominated the appellant as being involved in the robbery. There was, however, a substantial dispute at the trial as to whether that assertion was true, and as to whether Bragg had in truth implicated the appellant. As was mentioned, he had not implicated the appellant in his signed record of interview. This was a case in which the jury required careful direction as to the use they could make of the evidence from the police on the one hand and from Bragg on the other hand as to what, if anything, Bragg had said to the police about the appellant.

In the absence of an appropriate warning, there was a clear risk that the jury might have thought that they could use police evidence of what Bragg had told them about the appellant as evidence of the truth of what Bragg had said.
There was a clear risk that if the jury accepted the evidence of Sergeant
Henderson they might have concluded that Bragg had said that the appellant was implicated in the robbery and that this in turn was evidence that the appellant had been implicated in the robbery. Furthermore, in the context of what his Honour had said immediately before concerning "objective signs" the jury might easily have understood that they were entitled to treat the police evidence of what Bragg had said to them about the appellant, if they accepted it, as an objective sign supporting the truth of the police claims that the appellant had made verbal admissions about his guilt.

Because the case against the appellant, as was acknowledged, depended entirely upon uncorroborated police evidence of verbal admissions of guilt by the appellant, it is appropriate for this Court to scrutinise the evidence and the directions given to the jury with particular care, to see that they were made aware of the full significance of the fact that this was a weak Crown case, depending entirely on police evidence of verbal admissions. There was one additional criticism of the McKinney directions that, in my view, is of validity. As the High Court has pointed out, it is not sufficient for trial judges simply to give warnings in a general way about the dangers of convicting upon uncorroborated police evidence of verbal admissions. The jury should be directed appropriately to the circumstances of the individual case insofar as they bear upon that danger.

In the present case the trial judge should have pointed out to the jury that one of the features of the case that made conviction dangerous was that the police suggestion that Bragg had implicated the appellant was not supported by
Bragg's signed record of interview and depended, itself, upon the attribution to Bragg by the police of an uncorroborated oral admission.

In all those circumstances therefore, that is to say the inherent weakness of the Crown case, the risk that the jury might have seriously misunderstood the significance of the evidence about what, if anything, Bragg said to the police concerning the appellant, and the incompleteness of the warnings that were given to the jury pursuant to McKinney versus The Queen, I am driven to the conclusion that the verdict was unsafe and should not be permitted to stand.

I would propose that the appeal be allowed, the conviction and sentence be quashed. I do not propose that in the circumstances there should be a new trial.

ALLEN J: I agree with everything that has fallen from the Chief Justice, including the orders he has proposed.

JAMES J: I also agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice and the orders proposed by the Chief Justice.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as follows. The appeal is allowed. The conviction and sentence will be quashed. A judgment of acquittal should be entered in lieu thereof.
 
CRIMINAL LAW - UNSAFE VERDICT 
The appellant was convicted of armed robbery. The only evidence against him was uncorroborated police evidence of a verbal admission. There was a dispute of fact as to whether another man had told the police the appellant was one of the robbers. That dispute, went only to the credit of the other man, who was a witness in the defence case. The jury were never instructed as to the limited use they could make of evidence of what that other man said to the police. Additionally, the McKinney warnings that were given to the jury were incomplete - HELD - The conviction was unsafe.

O R D E R S Appeal allowed.
 Conviction and sentence quashed; judgment of acquittal entered.
 * * * 
