

Regina versus B Alameddine [1996] NSWSC 598 (4 December 1996) 
REGINA versus BASHIR ALAMEDDINE /96 
THURSDAY 24 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT - On application for bail 
HIS HONOUR: Bashir Alameddine has applied for bail in respect of charges of knowingly take part in supply of prohibited drug and supply prohibited drug. The matter has been adjourned for hearing to 4 December 1996 at Sutherland Local Court.

At the time of those alleged offences, the applicant was on bail in respect of six charges of supply prohibited drug, a charge of possess prohibited drug and a charge of possessing implements and a charge of goods in custody.

In respect of all these matters, as I understand it, the applicant has bail.
The evidence before me indicates some very unsatisfactory features in relation to the charges of supply prohibited drug and there would seem to be considerably more background information which should be available. No doubt that will be a matter for the Magistrate who sentences, to give consideration to.

The applicant is aged twenty-one and while he has some previous matters, they are not of such a nature or order as to lead to a refusal of bail. The applicant has now been in custody for three weeks and he has found gaol uncongenial. It is very obvious that he needs help with his drug rehabilitation.

What I propose to do is to grant bail on the following conditions. He is to attend court on the dates appointed. The applicant is to enter into an agreement to, without security, to forfeit the sum of $3,000 if he fails to comply with his bail undertaking. An acceptable person is to enter into an agreement to forfeit the sum of $10,000 if the applicant does not comply with his bail undertaking and is to either deposit cash or lodge security in that amount. I have been told that his mother or a member of the family has a fixed deposit in the sum of $12,000 which does not mature for some eight months.
That would be acceptable subject to the appropriate transfers of the deposit and account into the name of the prothonotary or registrar to ensure compliance with the bail undertaking. I will leave it to the registrar to attend to the appropriate security requirements.

The applicant is to reside at 40 Carnation Avenue, Bankstown with his mother and family. The applicant is to report each Monday and Thursday between the hours of 6.00am and 8.00pm to the Officer in Charge of Bankstown Police
Station. Within seventy-two hours of his release on bail, the applicant is to report to the Officer in Charge of the Bankstown Probation and Parole Service and comply with the directions of the officers of that service and I have in mind in particular that that service will supervise the applicant's drug rehabilitation. The applicant is to seek and endeavour to retain employment preferably full-time employment and I have noted the offer of Koala Timber
Blinds. The applicant is to be of good behaviour and any breach of the bail conditions will render him liable to be re-arrested. The applicant is not to associate with persons engaged in the supply of or dealing with drugs and he is to remain himself drug free and not to be involved in any way in drug dealing, use or supply.

I would like to emphasise to Mr Alameddine that if he strays he is going to cost his family $10,000 and the members of the family, if they understand if he strays and does not tread the path that has been mapped out, it will cost them $10,000. That might just help everyone to focus.
 * * * 
