

Re Mabrouk P/L [1996] NSWSC 51 (18 March 1996) 
Re Mabrouk Pty Ltd /95 
Monday, 18 March 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 31 July 1995 the plaintiff served on the defendant a statutory demand for the payment of $45,916.00 said to be owing by the defendant to the plaintiff for electrical installation work carried out by the plaintiff for and at the request and direction of the defendant between May and November 1994. That demand was accompanied by an affidavit of 27 July 1995 by Mr P W Brown, the managing director of the plaintiff, verifying that the debt was due and payable by the defendant to the plaintiff. The demand was not complied with and no application was made by the defendant for an order setting the demand aside. On 8 September 1995 the plaintiff as a creditor of the defendant commenced proceedings by summons for the winding up of the defendant in reliance on the failure by the defendant to comply with the defendant. The summons was accompanied by an affidavit of 1 September 1995 by Mr Brown verifying that the debt was due and payable by the defendant.

By notice of motion filed 8 November 1995 the defendant applied for an order that the proceedings be dismissed, or alternatively stayed, on the ground that the commencement of the proceedings was an abuse of process. That application was heard and determined by Master Macready on 9 February 1996. Before the
Master the defendant relied on two matters as giving rise to an abuse of process, namely (1) that at the time of service of the statutory demand and at all material times thereafter the plaintiff was aware that the debt relied on was genuinely disputed by the defendant and the statement required by Part 80A rule 15 of the Supreme Court Rules that the deponent believes that there is no genuine dispute about the existence or amount of the debt to which the demand relates was deliberately omitted from the affidavit accompanying the demand (it had been included in an affidavit accompanying an earlier demand), and (2) that the plaintiff intentionally withheld information from the defendant relevant to the defendant's checking the amount of the alleged debt until well after the date of service of the demand.
 
The Master dismissed the application. In relation to the first ground he made the following finding: "It is perfectly obvious, given the evidence before me, that the second demand was sworn without the required paragraph because the deponent well appreciated or, alternatively, his solicitor well appreciated, that it would be false to say that there was no genuine dispute about the existence or the amount of the debt. Clearly there was a dispute. Everyone knew it and it related to disputed conversations about the terms of the contract as well as the quantum." 
However the Master held that this ground should not succeed because the defendant could have applied for an order setting aside the demand, but did not do so. The Master also rejected the second ground relied on by the defendant.

The defendant has appealed from the Master's decision by notice of appeal filed 7 March 1996. Grounds 4 and 5 in that notice of appeal which relate to the second ground on which the application to the Master had been made, have not been pursued. The grounds of appeal which have been pursued are (with minor corrections) as follows: The Master erred in finding that there was no abuse of process because the defendant could have moved the Court to set aside the demand under s.459J of the Corporations Law.
 The Master erred in not taking into account that the summons was not accompanied by an affidavit complying with s.459Q of the Corporations Law and
Part 80A rule 16(e) of the Supreme Court Rules.
 The Master should have found, based on his findings concerning the plaintiff's knowledge that the defendants disputed its liability for the debt and the quantum of the debt and based on the failure of the plaintiff to comply with Part 80A rules 15(1)(e) and 16(e) of the Supreme Court Rules that the institution of the proceedings herein was an abuse of process.

It is common ground that the particular matter referred to in ground 2 was not the subject of any submission before the Master. In view of this, the defendant has made a further application by notice of motion filed 7 March for an order that the proceedings be dismissed on the ground of the plaintiff's failure to comply with s.459Q of the Corporations Law and Part 80A rule 16 of the Supreme Court Rules.

Presently before the Court are (1) the appeal from the Master's decision of 9
February 1996, and (2) the defendant's application for dismissal of the proceedings pursuant to the notice of motion filed 7 March 1996.

It is convenient first to deal with a submission put on behalf of the plaintiff to the effect that there was no evidence to support the Master's finding which I have set out above. This submission was not elaborated and in my opinion it must fail. The Master was entitled to make that finding, based in particular on the evidence in the affidavit of Joseph Cernigoi of 9
November 1995.

I turn next to the question whether on the appeal from the Master's decision the defendant is entitled to rely on ground 2 in the notice of appeal, being a matter which was not raised before the Master. The principles governing an appeal from a decision of a Master to the Court constituted by a Judge are, relevantly, identical to those governing an appeal from a Judge (or Master) to the Court of Appeal. One of those principles is: "... that a point cannot be raised for the first time upon appeal when it could possibly have been met by calling evidence below. Where all the facts have been established beyond controversy or where the point is one of construction or of law, then a court of appeal may find it expedient and in the interests of justice to entertain the point, but otherwise the rule is strictly applied. ..." (Water Board versus Moustakas <case>; [180 CLR 491] at )

The Master's relevant finding related only to the reason why the paragraph required by Part 80A rule 15(1)(e) of the Supreme Court Rules was omitted from the affidavit under s.459E accompanying the statutory demand. Although on the evidence before the Master it is highly likely that he would have made an equivalent finding as to the reason why the paragraph required by Part 80A rule 16(e) of the Supreme Court Rules was subsequently omitted from the affidavit under s.459Q accompanying the summons, if that point had been raised, there is the possibility that, if the point had been raised before the
Master, it could have been met by calling further evidence. I therefore consider that the defendant is not entitled to rely on ground 2 in the appeal from the Master's decision.

The next question is whether the defendant should be permitted to rely on the same point under its notice of motion filed 7 March 1996. This raises the question whether a party should be permitted to make a second interlocutory application for the same relief, earlier refused, on a ground which could have been, but was not, raised in the first application. The established rule of practice is that where an interlocutory application has failed, a second application for the same relief should, as a general rule, not be entertained, except to accommodate a change of circumstances or where evidence has become available which was not available at the time of the first application. This rule was discussed and applied, in the context of a second application for a permanent stay of proceedings, with reference to the relevant authorities, by
Sperling J in Wentworth versus Rogers (28 April 1995 unreported). In my opinion, there is nothing in the particular circumstances of the present case to render the application of this general rule of practice unjust or inappropriate, and accordingly the notice of motion filed 7 March 1996 should be dismissed for that reason.

This will not preclude the defendant from raising this matter to the extent that it may be shown to be relevant, on the hearing of the winding up application.

So far as grounds 1 and 3 of the notice of appeal raise matters which could have been raised on an application to set aside the statutory demand, I think that the policy reflected in s.459S is that once a winding up application has been made, such matters should not be permitted to be raised in opposition to the winding up proceedings without a grant of leave under that section. It may be that the defendant has a case for the grant of leave under s.459S but no such order has yet been made or applied for. In the absence of such an order I think that the Master was right to refuse to summarily dismiss the proceedings as an abuse of process on the basis of those matters. If leave under s.459S is hereafter sought and granted, the matters relied on may be raised by the defendant at the hearing of the winding up proceedings, which should be brought on without delay.

So far as ground 3 relies on Part 80A rules 16(e) of the Supreme Court Rules, it is covered by what I have already said concerning ground 2.

The order of the Court is: Order that the appeal from the Master be dismissed with costs.
 Order that the defendant's notice of motion filed 7 March 1996 be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
