

Chint Australasia Pty Limited versus Cosmoluce Pty Limited [2008] NSWSC 635 (27
June 2008) 
Last Updated: 2 July 2008 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Chint Australasia Pty Limited versus Cosmoluce Pty Limited <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity Division 
Commercial List  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /07  
HEARING DATE(S):  /05/08 - 20/05/08  
JUDGMENT DATE:  June 2008  
PARTIES: 
Chint Australasia Pty Limited (Plaintiff) 
Cosmoluce Pty Limited (Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Einstein J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr MJ Leeming SC, Mr MJ O'Meara (Plaintiff) 
Mr R Stitt QC, Mr S Balafoutis (Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Corrs Chambers Westgarth (Plaintiff) 
Dibbs Abbott Stillman (Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACT 
Breach 
Loss of bargain damages 
ENTITLEMENT TO TERMINATE 
Waiver 
Breach consists of failure to comply with a time provision 
Contract requires notice unless the breach is 'not capable of being remedied' 
Breach capable of remedy 
No election to affirm may occur before the right to terminate arises 
Repudiation 
Breach of non-essential term not causative of the breach of the opposite party does not prevent termination 
MISREPRESENTATION 
Contravention of the Trade Practices Act 
Words must be proved with a degree of precision 
Circumstances that may render the conduct misleading 
Held that representations did not occur and/or were not misleading and deceptive 
Reliance not established 
No entitlement to rescind 
Same considerations apply as per rescission in equity 
Estoppel excluded by entire agreement clause 
Rule Jones versus Dunkel  
LEGISLATION CITED: 
Trade Practices Act (1974) (Cth)  
CATEGORY: 
Principal judgment  
CASES CITED: 
Ajit versus Sammy <case> 
Akron Securities Ltd versus Iliffe <case>; <case> 
Arnot versus Hill-Douglas <case> 
Australian Co-operative Foods Ltd versus Norco Co-operative Ltd <case>; [(1999) 46 NSWLR 267] 
Australian Steel & Mining Corporation Pty Limited versus Corben <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(2001) 117 FCR 424] 
Burger King Corporation versus Hungry Jack's Pty Limited <case> 
Campbell versus BackOffice Investments Pty Ltd <case> 
Canning versus Temby <case>; <case> 
CG Mal Pty Limited versus Sanyo Office Machines Pty Limited <case> 
Cornwall versus Henson <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] 
Digi-Tech (Australia) Ltd versus Brand <case>; <case>; <case>; <case> 
Green versus Sevin <case>; <case>; <case>; <case> 
Immer (No 145) Pty Ltd versus Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust  <case>; [(1993) 182 CLR 26] 
Ingot Capital Investments Pty Limited & Ors versus Macquarie Equity Capital
Markets Ltd & Ors (No 6) <case>; <case>; <case>; <case> 
Lantry versus Tomule Pty Limited [(2007) ANZ Conv R 187]; <case> 
Larking versus Great Western (Nepean) Gravel Ltd (In liq) <case> 
Laurinda Pty Limited versus Capalaba Park Shopping Centre Pty Limited <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 623] 
Leda Holdings Pty Limited versus Oraka Pty Limited [(1998) ATPR 41-601] 
Legione versus Hateley <case>; <case>; <case> 
Mangrove Mountain Quarries Pty Limited versus Barlow <case> 
McDonald versus Denny Lascelles <case>; [(1933) 48 CLR 457] 
Moukhayber versus Camden Timber & Hardware Co Pty Limited <case> 
Ogle versus Comboyuro Investments Pty Limited <case>; <case>; <case>; [[1980] AC ] 
Poulet Frais Pty Limited & Anor versus The Silver Fox Company Pty Limited (as trustee for the Baker Family Trust) & Ors [(2005) 220 ALR 221] 
Reg Russell & Sons Pty Limited versus Buxton Meats Pty Limited [(1994) ATPR -127] 
Roadshow Entertainment Pty Limited versus ACN 053 006 269 Pty Limited (Receiver and
Manager appointed) (formerly CEL Home Video Pty Limited <case>; <case> 
Schellenberg versus Tunnel Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; <case>; <case> 
Watson versus Foxman <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 245] 
Whittet versus State Bank of New South Wales [(1991) 24 NSWLR 146]  
TEXTS CITED: 
D Byrne and JD Heydon, Cross on Evidence, 6th ed (2000) Butterworths 
CB Morison, Rescission of Contracts, (1916) Stevens and Haynes 
JW Salmond and PH Winfield, Principles of the Law of Contracts, 1st ed (1927)
Sweet & Maxwell 
EB Sugden, The Law of Vendors and Purchasers of Estates, 14th ed (1862) Sweet  
DECISION: 
Short minutes of order to be brought in.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
COMMERCIAL LIST  
Einstein J  
Friday 27 June 2008  /07 Chint Australasia Pty Ltd versus Cosmoluce Pty Ltd  
JUDGMENT  
The proceedings These proceedings arise out of a Distribution Agreement entered between the plaintiff, Chint Australasia Pty Limited, and the defendant, Cosmoluce Pty
Limited. By this agreement, the plaintiff appointed the defendant as its exclusive distributor in Australia and New Zealand for particular electrical products manufactured in China by Zhejiang Chint Electrics Co Limited ['Chint products'].
 The Distribution Agreement was for a term of five years commencing on about October 2005. The agreement was written, had been the subject of negotiations between the parties and was ultimately executed by two directors of the defendant.
 The Chint products included switches, power-points, telephone and computer sockets and circuit breakers and housings and casings for those products.
Products of this kind are commonly known as "bakelite products".
 
Overview of the respective claims  During the hearing, the case brought against the second cross-defendant was dismissed by consent and the cross-claimant's claims for loss or damages was confined to the entry into of the agreement and being exposed to the risk of these proceedings for breach of the agreement.
 The plaintiff's overview submissions conveniently summarise the remaining claims and the state of the pleadings as follows: 
Chint Australasia's claim i. Clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement required Cosmoluce to purchase from Chint Australasia minimum quantities of Chint products as set out in Annexure D to the Distribution Agreement. For the nine month period from 1 October 2005 to 30 June 2006, Cosmoluce was obliged to purchase a minimum of US$2 million of Chint products from Chint Australasia.
 ii. There is no dispute that Cosmoluce failed to comply with its minimum purchase obligations for the nine month period ending 30 June 2006.

Chint Australasia 's purported termination iii. On 11 December 2006 Chint Australasia claims to have terminated the
Distribution Agreement pursuant to clause 16.3 of the Distribution Agreement, relying on Cosmoluce's breach of clause 11.3 or, alternatively, Cosmoluce's repudiation of the Distribution Agreement by the letter of Cosmoluce's solicitors of 28 November 2006 [CB 920].

Loss of bargain damages iv. Chint Australasia seeks loss of bargain damages against Cosmoluce.
The quantum of those damages is agreed at USD $5.196 million: (see
Joint Experts' Report dated 6 June 2008, para 20). 
Cosmoluce's claims v. Cosmoluce contends that Chint Australasia's termination of the
Distribution Agreement was not valid, because it had previously waived its right to terminate for Cosmoluce's breach of clause 11.3. As a result, Chint
Australasia's purported termination of the Distribution Agreement was a repudiation of the Distribution Agreement which Cosmoluce accepted (see paragraphs 35 to 40, Further Amended Defence).
 vi. Further, Cosmoluce contends that, by reason of certain alleged breaches of the Distribution Agreement by Chint Australasia concerned with the supply of a customer list and promotion material for Chint products (eg display boards, catalogues, a magazine advertisement), Chint Australasia was not, at all times, ready, willing and able to perform the Distribution
Agreement. Thus, Cosmoluce contends that Chint Australasia was not entitled to terminate the Distribution Agreement on 11 December 2006 (see paragraphs 28 - , Further Amended Defence).

Cosmoluce's misrepresentation claim vii. Cosmoluce contends that by reason of certain pre-contractual material misrepresentations of fact by Chint Australasia, Cosmoluce was entitled to and did rescind the Distribution Agreement on 28 November 2006 (see Further Amended Defence, paragraphs 13 - 22).
 viii. Cosmoluce also relies on an alleged contravention of section , [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) by reason of those same misrepresentations as a defence to Chint Australasia's claim for damages for breach of contract (see paragraphs 23 - 27, Further Amended
Defence); it is not necessary for present purposes to debate whether such a pleading is a valid defence (cf Bank of New Zealand versus Spedley Securities Ltd (in Liq) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 91] at 98G -
E per Kirby P, 105B - 106G per Mahoney JA, 108B - C per Hope AJA, Drabsch v
Switzerland General Insurance Co Ltd [(1996) 130 FLR 127] at 154 - per Santow J, Bitannia versus Parkline Constructions Pty Limited <case>; <case> - , [104] per Basten JA (with whom Hodgson JA agreed with additional observations at 13, [6] - 17, [15] and Tobias JA agreed).
 ix. More particularly, Cosmoluce contends that there was a pre- contractual representation to the effect that if Cosmoluce failed to achieve its minimum purchase obligations under the Distribution Agreement for the period ending 30 June 2006, Chint Australasia would resume the role of distributor of Chint products without consequence to Cosmoluce (the "Resumption Representation" - see Further Amended Defence at paragraph 17(o)).
On this basis, Cosmoluce asserts that Chint Australasia is estopped from asserting an entitlement to damages against Cosmoluce for a breach of clause .3 of the Distribution Agreement (see paragraph 34, Amended Defence); x. by reason of the same alleged misrepresentations on which it relies to support its purported rescission of the Distribution Agreement,
Chint Australasia is said to have contravened [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). It is contended that Cosmoluce entered into the Distribution Agreement by reason of those misrepresentations (see paragraphs 3 to 11, Further Amended Cross
Claim); xi. on the basis of the alleged contraventions by Chint Australasia of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), Cosmoluce contends that it is entitled to orders under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html), [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) declaring the Distribution Agreement void ab initio. Alternatively, Cosmoluce contends that the Distribution Agreement should be varied to delete clause .3 or, in the further alternative, that the Court should refuse to enforce clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement. 
Summarising the principal issues The principal issues appear to be as follows: i. the termination issue: whether Chint Australasia was entitled to terminate the Distribution Agreement on 11 December 2006.
 ii. the misrepresentation issues: whether Cosmoluce has established that Chint Australasia made the pre-contractual misrepresentations alleged by Cosmoluce and, therefore, contravened [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).
 iii. the reliance issue: on the assumption that Cosmoluce is able to establish the pre-contractual misrepresentations on which it relies, whether Cosmoluce entered into the Distribution Agreement in reliance on those misrepresentations.
 iv. the rescission issue: on the assumption that Cosmoluce is able to establish the pre-contractual misrepresentations and that it entered into the Distribution Agreement in reliance on those misrepresentations, whether
Cosmoluce was entitled to rescind the Distribution Agreement on 28 November or, alternatively, is now entitled to orders under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html), [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) effectively rescinding the Distribution Agreement.
 v. the estoppel issue: on the assumption that Cosmoluce is able to establish the Resumption Representation, whether Chint Australasia is estopped from asserting an entitlement to damages against Cosmoluce for a breach of clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement.
 
The key provisions of the Distribution Agreement It is convenient to firstly identify the key provisions of the Distribution
Agreement: i. By clause 2.1 of the Distribution Agreement Chint Australasia (referred to as "the Supplier) appointed Cosmoluce (referred to as the "Distributor") its exclusive distributor in Australia and New Zealand (referred to as the "Territory") for certain Chint products identified in
Annexure A to the Distribution Agreement (referred to as "the Products") for the period from 1 October 2005 to 30 September 2010 (referred to as "the
Term").
 ii. By clause 11.1 of the Distribution Agreement, Chint Australasia was obliged to arrange, on an annual basis, 5000 catalogues containing "the
Suppliers Product", 100 display boards containing the "Suppliers Product" and one "A4 page advertisement, to a maximum value of $5000 in Electrical
Connection magazine".
 iii. Clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement provided as follows: 
Minimum quantities 
The Distributor shall purchase the minimum amount of the Product from the
Supplier as set out in annexure D during the periods specified and subject to clause 3.1. The Supplier may by written notice to the Distributor increase the minimum purchase quantities of the Product as set out in annexure D if the range of the Product is increased.
 iv. The minimum purchases quantities set out in annexure D to the
Distribution Agreement were to the following effect.

No 
Period 
Quantity  ---  October 2005 - 30 June 2006 
US$ 2 million  July 2006 - 30 June 2007 
US$ 5 million  July 2007 - 30 June 2008 
The value of actual purchases made by Cosmoluce in the previous year plus 20% or US$6 million (which ever is greater)  July 2008 - 30 June 2009 
The value of actual purchases made by Cosmoluce in the previous year plus 20% or US$7.2 million (which ever is greater)  June 2009 - September 2010 
The minimum purchase requirement for the 2009 financial year and such percentage increase as agreed  v. Clause 16.2(a) of the Distribution Agreement provided as follows: 
Termination for breach 
Either party may terminate this document with immediate effect by written notice to the other if the other party commits any substantial breach of the provisions contained in this document and does not remedy the breach within 30 days after receipt of written notice requiring it to do so. If the breach is not capable of being remedied, the party not in breach is entitled to terminate this document with immediate effect by written notice to the other.
For the purposes of this clause, a substantial breach is a breach of clause .4, 2.5. 3.1 4, 11.3, 12, 13 or 14.
 vi. Clause 19.10 of the Distribution agreement provides as follows: 
Entire Understanding 
This document embodies the entire understanding and document between the parties as to the subject matter of this document.

All previous negotiations, understandings, representations, warranties, memoranda or commitments in relation to, or in any way affecting, the subject matter of this document are merged in and superseded by this document and are of no force or effect whatever and no party is liable to any other party in respect of those matters.

No oral explanation or information provided by any party to another: affects the meaning or interpretation of this document; or constitutes any collateral document, warranty or understanding between any of the parties".
 
The relevant market By way of background, the parties went to some lengths to set out the characteristics and parameters of the relevant market, that is, the market for bakelite goods in Australia. For all the extensive cross examination which occurred on this issue, it appears that there was very little in contention regarding the basic facts. In summary, these are as follows: i. The market for bakelite products consists of manufacturers and distributors, who produce the bakelite products and distribute them under a particular brand, and wholesalers, who purchase goods from the distributors.
The wholesalers then on-sell the products to electricians and others in the construction industry, who install the products in homes and businesses.
 ii. The leading brands of bakelite products in Australia are HPM and
Clipsal [who both manufacture and distribute bakelite products]. While there was some dispute over the exact proportion of the market controlled by these two brands, it is clear that they dominate the Australian market to a significant extent. At least 50% of the bakelite products sold in Australia are HPM or Clipsal branded [there was some evidence that 90% of the market was so controlled by these two entities, however that evidence was retracted on cross examination].
 iii. On the wholesaler side, there are various types of purchasers.
There are large, branded hardware chains [such as Bunnings warehouse] who individually have significant purchasing power. There are also groups of independent wholesalers who form associations [sometimes referred to as 'buying groups'] to increase their chance of negotiating price discounts with the manufacturers and suppliers. Finally, there are truly independent wholesalers, who are not members of any buying group.
 iv. Exhibit P 8, reproduced below, notes some of the significant major wholesalers and buying groups to which Cosmoluce was either selling, or seeking to sell its products. As is apparent from the diagram, HPM and Clipsal were also selling bakelite products to these entities.
 v. The evidence is that HPM and Clipsal used various economic tactics to keep smaller distributors out of the market. As a result, small manufactures or distributors of bakelite products, such as Lumbalite Pty Ltd, the original distributor of Chint products in Australia, often found it difficult to break into the market and sell their products to the major buying groups. They could be confined to selling their products to the independent wholesalers, or marketing their goods directly to electrical contractors and consumers as a cheaper alternative to the major brands.
 
The evidence The evidence accepted as reliable [comprising contemporaneous documents as well as evidence given by witnesses accepted as reliable] establishes the following events as having taken place. Most of the facts which follow were not in issue. Where the parties were in dispute regarding the content of particularly significant conversations, the cross contentions are examined in more detail later in these reasons.

Background to the Distribution Agreement: i. Mr Tony Frangi operates a retail lighting store called "Holroyd
Lighting" which is located in Merrylands in Western Sydney. In 2003 Mr Keng
Soon ("Albert") Chew (Mr Albert Chew) began supplying to Holroyd Lighting bakelite electrical products manufactured in China by Zhejiang Chint Electrics
Co Limited (Chint China). In February 2004 Mr Tony Frangi, together with his sister and his sister-in-law, established Lumbalite Pty Limited (Lumbalite) to distribute Chint products in Australia. Also in February 2004, Mr Fred Frangi joined Lumbalite and, soon after, assumed main responsibility for developing
Lumbalite's distribution of Chint products. Throughout 2004 and the first half of 2005 Mr Fred Frangi worked to develop Lumbalite's distribution business for
Chint products, marketing to electricians, building and construction contractors and smaller independent electrical product wholesalers.
 ii. In October 2004 Mr Tony Frangi approached Mr Jim Emirian (Mr
Emirian), a director of Cosmoluce, to seek Mr Emirian's assistance in introducing Chint products to the developer Mirvac. Cosmoluce had been a supplier of products to Holroyd Lighting since 2001. In June 2005, following a request from Mr Emirian, Mr Fred Frangi and Mr Tony Frangi held a number of meetings with Mr Emirian and, during those meetings, gave him a demonstration of Chint products. During these meetings, the prospect of Cosmoluce becoming a distributor of Chint products was first raised.
 iii. On 18 July 2005 Mr Fred Frangi and Mr Tony Frangi again met with Mr Emirian and Mr Cane Graoroski (Mr Graoroski), the then Chief Executive
Officer of Cosmoluce. At that meeting, Mr Fred Frangi gave a presentation entitled "Cosmoluce - Chint Australasia Distribution Launch" which concerned the proposal that Cosmoluce become a distributor of Chint products in
Australia and New Zealand to wholesalers, lighting shops, hardware and other retailers.
 iv. Further meetings between Mr Fred Frangi, Mr Tony Frangi and Mr
Emirian and Mr Graoroski occurred during the latter half of July 2005 and
August 2005. On 2 August 2005 Mr Fred Frangi met with Mr Graoroski and supplied him with a spreadsheet that modelled, on the basis of some assumed sales figures and assumed product distributions, Cosmoluce's likely profit margins on Chint products.
 v. On 18 August 2005 Mr Fred Frangi and Mr Tony Frangi held a further meeting with Mr Graoroski and Mr Emirian. At that meeting Mr Fred
Frangi gave a presentation entitled "Draft Heads of Agreement Cosmoluce and
Chint Australasia" which addressed the proposed terms of the intended
Distribution Agreement with Cosmoluce concerning Chint products. On 19 August Mr Fred Frangi again met with Mr Graoroski and supplied him with two documents, "Lumbalite Pty Limited Who's Buying" and "Lumbalite Pty Limited
Sales by Month".
 vi. On 23 August 2005 the Board of Cosmoluce resolved to "acquire the CHINT bakelite business for $500,000" [a price which reflected the value of stock purchased, and did not include any amount for goodwill]. Cosmoluce requested that the proposed Distribution Agreement be the subject of formal documentation. On 30 August 2005 Mr Fred Frangi emailed to Mr Graoroski a draft of the Distribution Agreement.
 vii. On 1 September 2005 Chint Australasia was incorporated. Its directors were Mr Fred Frangi, Mr Tony Frangi and Mr Albert Chew and its share capital was owned by companies owned or controlled by each of Mr Fred Frangi,
Mr Tony Frangi and Mr Albert Chew. On 17 September 2005 Chint Australasia entered into a Distribution Agreement with Chint China by which Chint
Australasia became the exclusive distributor of Chint products in Australasia for five years [with an option to renew for a further five years] ('Chint
China agreement'). Chint Australasia was obliged to achieve certain minimum sales figures for Chint products which are identified in clause 4.3 of the
Chint China agreement.
 viii. On 30 September 2005 Mr Graoroski and Mr George Tsagaris (Mr
Tsagaris), Chairman of Cosmoluce, attended Lumbalite's premises at Northmead in Sydney and met with Mr Fred Frangi and Mr Tony Frangi. The discussion at that meeting centred around the measures necessary to implement Cosmoluce's distribution of Chint products.
 ix. On 7 October 2005 (a Friday) Mr Fred Frangi gave to Mr Graoroski a further draft of the Distribution Agreement which included amendments negotiated by the parties. Mr Graoroski says he gave a copy to Mr Tsagaris to look at over the weekend. Mr Tsagaris says he signed the Distribution
Agreement that weekend and returned it to Mr Graoroski the next week. On 10
October 2005 (a Monday) a further meeting between Mr Emirian, Mr Graoroski and
Mr Fred Frangi occurred. At some stage between 7 October 2005 and 10 October , Mr Emirian also signed the Distribution Agreement.

Operation of the Distribution Agreement: x. Following the execution of the Distribution Agreement, Lumbalite ceased its distribution of Chint products and effectively transferred that business to Cosmoluce. On 11 October 2004 (and again on 14 November 2005)
Chint Australasia provided to Cosmoluce a list of Lumablite's wholesale customers. In November 2005 Lumbalite transferred its stock of Chint products to Cosmoluce for a price in the order of AU$517,000.
 xi. In November 2005, Chint Australasia supplied some promotional material to Cosmoluce. The exact number of display boards and catalogues supplied was in dispute, however it was acknowledged that the number supplied was less than the quantities required by clause 11.1.
 xii. On 10 February 2006 Mr Graoroski attended a meeting with Mr
Mike Robinson (Mr Robinson), the Business Manager of an electrical products buying group known as the Gemcell Group (Gemcell). During that meeting, Mr
Robinson made it clear Gemcell would not accept Chint products. This was confirmed by Mr Robinson in an email of 10 March 2006 to Mr Graoroski.
 xiii. Over the period of January - April 2006, Cosmoluce placed various orders for Chint products, amounting to significantly less than US $2 million. Over this period numerous emails were sent by Chint expressing concern over the quantity of orders being placed by Cosmoluce.
 xiv. On 17 and 18 April 2006 Mr Fred Frangi and Mr Tony Frangi travelled to China to meet with Chint China representatives to discuss, inter alia, the quantities of Chint products which had been ordered by Cosmoluce.
An amendment to the Chint China agreement was negotiated and documented.
During the course of the meetings with the Chint China representatives, Mr
Fred Frangi and Mr Tony Frangi placed a telephone call to Mr Emirian and passed on to him Chint China's concerns, in response to which Mr Emirian stated, in effect, that Cosmoluce would place a further order in 2 weeks time and a further order in May 2006. Mr Emirian's promise was noted in the document which recorded the amendment of the Chint China agreement reached between Chint China and Chint Australasia at that meeting. On 27 April 2006
Cosmoluce placed an order with Chint Australasia for Chint products to the value of US$99,986,90, subsequently paid for it by a letter of credit in that amount.
 xv. No orders for Chint products were placed by Cosmoluce in May or June 2006. On 16 June 2006 Chint China sent an email to Mr Tony
Frangi enquiring as to the status of next order for Chint products. In a conversation shortly thereafter, Mr Emirian informed Mr Tony Frangi that due to other commitments Cosmoluce could not then place any further orders for
Chint products. On 3 July 2006 Gemcell rejected Cosmoluce's application to be a preferred supplier for the financial year ending 30 June 2007.
 xvi. On 7 July 2006, 16 July 2006 and 21 July 2006 Chint China sent further, increasingly insistent, emails to Chint Australasia complaining as to the lack of orders for Chint products by Cosmoluce. On 18 July 2006 Mr Tony
Frangi sent an email to Mr Emirian, referring to a telephone conversation of
Friday, 14 July 2006, seeking a meeting on 19 July 2006 "to discuss
Cosmoluce's desire to exit the Chint distribution". On 25 July 2006 Cosmoluce placed an order with Chint Australasia for Chint products to the value of
US$46,094, subsequently paid for by a letter of credit issued by Cosmoluce in favour of Chint Australasia in that amount.
 xvii. On 28 July 2006 Mr Tony Frangi sent an email to Mr Emirian and
Mr Tsagaris noting that "Cosmoluce's default under our agreement has the real risk of Chint China terminating our agreement with them" and seeking "your proposal to comply with Cosmoluce's obligations under our agreement to provide
L/C's to the value of US$2 million as at 30 June 2006". On the same day Mr
Emirian replied that "[a]t this time Cosmoluce cannot make any formal agreements regarding the Letter of Credit as there are not enough sales at the moment to warrant another Letter of Credit".
 xviii. On 26 August 2006 Mr Tony Frangi sent a letter to Mr Emirian and Mr Tsagaris stating (inter alia) that (emphasis in original): "We have also repeatedly reminded you that your continued breach of our agreement is placing our agreement with Chint China at increased risk of being terminated.
 
The continued delay is not acceptable.
 
We reserve all rights relating to your continued breach of our agreement and again call on your to IMMEDIATELY comply with your obligations under the agreement, and in particular clause 11.3.
 
We note that as at the end of August 2006, you will be US$2.096Million in arrears of your minimum purchase obligations under our agreement.
 
We intend to take action to enforce our rights under the agreement without further delay".
 xix. On 10 September 2006 Cosmoluce placed an order with Chint
Australasia for Chint products to the value of US$54,828.85 which was subsequently paid for by Cosmoluce issuing a letter of credit to Chint. On 19
September 2006 Mr Fred Frangi sent an email to Mr Graoroski and Mr Emirian seeking details of a further order of Chint products from Cosmoluce. On 6, 10 and 11 October 2006 Mr Fred Frangi and Mr Tony Frangi and Mr Graoroski exchanged emails referring to a proposed or promised order for Chint products from Cosmoluce in the amount of US$183,264.56. That order did not materialise and Cosmoluce made no further orders for Chint products from Chint
Australasia.

Termination of the Distribution Agreement: xx. On 4 October 2006 Chint Australasia commenced these proceedings, then seeking (inter alia) orders for specific performance by Cosmoluce of the Distribution Agreement. On 2 November 2006, Mr Fred Frangi sent an email to Mr Graoroski and Mr Emirian noting that "it has been pointed out to me by several customers that Cosmoluce is in a continued out of stock situation" and listing 12 "key items which are currently out of stock". Mr Fred Frangi continued, saying "you are yet again in breach of your contractual obligations and your out of stock situation is having a major impact on the
Chint / Lumbalite brand and reputation in the market place".
 xxi. On 6 November 2006 Chint Australasia issued a notice under clause 16.2(a) of the Distribution Agreement giving Cosmoluce notice that it was in "substantial breach" of the Distribution Agreement by failing to comply with its obligation under clause 11.3 thereof to purchase $US2 million worth of Chint products in the period 1 October 2005 to 30 June 2006. The notice went on to require Cosmoluce to remedy that breach by 8 December 2006 and stated that, if it failed to do so, Chint Australasia would terminate the
Distribution Agreement.
 xxii. On 22 November 2006 Cosmoluce sent a letter to Chint
Australasia stating that various Chint products had been ordered and paid for by Cosmoluce but had not been supplied. Other items had been over supplied, or had been supplied but not ordered by Cosmoluce. This letter alleged that: "Based on the above investigation and information now confirmed,
Chint Australasia Pty Limited is in breach of Cosmoluce Pty Limited Letter of
Credit No.:Al2006259817, dated 18th July.
 
Cosmoluce now hold Chint Australasia Pty Limited fully and totally responsible and accountable for loss of revenue and damage to Cosmoluce's reputation in the market due to above breach in not supplying the above 15 line items, over supplying the above 3 items and supplying the above 7 items not ordered.
 
Cosmoluce requires Chint Australasia Pty Limited to deliver to it by 5pm on Wednesday, 29 November 2006 all items ordered and paid for as referred to above and to make arrangements to collect all oversupplied or incorrectly supplied items as referred to above by contacting the writer on (02) 9773 ." xxiii. On 28 November 2006 the solicitors for Cosmoluce responded to
Chint Australasia's notice of 6 November 2006 stating (inter alia): "Our client does not accept the validity of the purported notice or
Chint Australasia's entitlement to issue any such notice. Nevertheless, it is obvious that the contractual relationship between the parties cannot continue and our client agrees that it should now come to an end. Our client would be happy for that to occur upon the date nominated in the purported notice, namely on 6 December 2006".
 xxiv. On 11 December 2006 Chint Australasia served a notice on Cosmoluce purporting to terminate the Distribution Agreement, relying on Cosmoluce's unremedied breach of clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement or, alternatively, its repudiation of the Distribution Agreement in its solicitors letter of 28 November 2006. This notice reads as follows: 
Notice of Termination: 
We refer to the Notice pursuant to clause 16.2(a) of the Distribution
Agreement dated 6 November 2006, which we served on Cosmoluce Pty Limited on 6
November 2006 (Default Notice). We also refer to the attached letter from your lawyers, Dibbs Abbott Stillman, to our lawyers, Corrs Chambers Westgarth, dated 28 November 2006.
 
This letter makes it clear that Cosmoluce Pty Limited has no intention of complying with the Distribution Agreement in the future. It constitutes a repudiation of the Distribution Agreement. In any event, we note that
Cosmoluce Pty Limited has not complied with the Default Notice.
 
Chint Australasia Pty Limited hereby terminates the Distribution
Agreement.
 
We draw your attention to clause 16.3 of the Distribution Agreement headed "Consequences of termination or expiration of this document".

Following termination of the Distribution Agreement: xxv. Following the termination of the Distribution Agreement, Lumbalite resumed the distribution of Chint products in Australia. Chint Australasia re- purchased from Cosmoluce certain of its stock on hand of Chint products pursuant to the terms of the Distribution Agreement. Following termination of the Distribution Agreement, Chint China declined to supply Lumabalite products other than on a cash basis, causing Lumbalite difficulties in sourcing a supply of Chint products. In the six months to 31 December 2007, Lumablite made a loss of $130,728.23.
 
Dealing with credit issues 
Mr Fred Frangi  Mr Fred Frangi, although obviously having a partisan interest in the outcome of the proceedings, gave evidence which is accepted as reliable. He was extensively challenged by reference to exhibit P 6 [previously MFI D2] which was a document which he prepared for the purpose of submitting it to
Chint China at a meeting which took place in China in July 2005.
Notwithstanding the contention put by Mr Stitt SC, I formed the view that Mr
Frangi carried out his best endeavours to recall the events in question and that his credit was not compromised. The central purport of the cross- examination constituted an endeavour to establish that, whereas compensation was sought from Chint China by reason of product problems, none of those product problems were disclosed to Cosmoluce in the negotiations leading up to the entry into the Distribution Agreement.
 A useful summary of the evidence given by Mr Fred Frangi in cross- examination includes the following answers by way of a short anthology of the answers given to this close cross-examination: 
Transcript 49.31-40: 
Q. And may we take it that you were concerned if your product was not up to scratch in the market? 
A. Absolutely.

Q. And of course in that period between July '04 and August '05 your product was not up to scratch, was it? 
A. On a whole our product was up to scratch. We had some - we had some faulty products as a result of early teething issues with any newly launched product.

Transcript 55.50-54: 
Q. Let me suggest to you that you had these continuing problems from after the time you started selling the Chint products through to July '05. Do you agree that that's the relevant time span? 
A. No, I believe that the problem was rectified prior to July '05, that we hadn't been to China in that period.

Transcript 62.46-49: 
Q. And you see, this just didn't happen overnight, did it? It was a long process week after week, month after month, defective product being sold by your company? 
A. No, I don't believe that's the case.
 
Transcript 66.47-67.15: 
Q. You didn't tell them that you had losses of $356,452, did you? 
A. Not that number.

Q. You didn't tell them any number, did you? 
A. We brought to their attention that we had some issues with quality that had been since rectified and the batches...
 
We told Cosmoluce that we had some issues with some of the quality in the early stages. We also mentioned to them that in the last, I think it was six months, that we hadn't had problems because most of which had been rectified.

Transcript 71.32-38: 
Q. You must have known that that was a false statement [the statement of products sold and the potential for an increase in sales]? 
A. It wasn't. Our actual books had shown that those actual sales did occur.

Q. But your actual books didn't say that there had been total losses of $356,452, did they? 
A. Our actual books were a net statement.

Q. But you didn't tell them about the losses or the way they were created, did you? 
A. We did tell them that we had some defective material.

Transcript 80.15-51: 
Q. But the quality by July 2005, it was still the same product, wasn't it? 
A. I don't believe it was the case. I believe we had rectified the power points. I believe by July 2005 we had actually remoulded the double power point and the single power point and I believe we had rectified or Chint had rectified the majority of the problems that we had been confronted with earlier, your Honour.
 
Q. But you hadn't told Cosmoluce representatives about those problems at all? 
A. I had.

Q. That you had had all these problems, is that what you are telling us? 
A. I told them that we had some early teething problems, sir.

Q. When did you do that? 
A. During the course of our discussion.

HIS HONOUR: 
Q. I just didn't hear you. You said you told them that? 
A. I told them that we had had some earlier teething problems with the product, sir. Your Honour, sorry.

MR STITT: 
Q. When did you say that? 
A. I can't recall the exact time but it was during our discussions.

Q. But before or after you had been to China in July? 
A. I believe it may have been before I went to China, and in fact, if I can recall, I think I may have shown Jim at the time the new double power point that we had modified.

Transcript 83.27-84.16: 
Q. On 18 August you said to the Cosmoluce representatives that "Chint is being well accepted in the market". Do you remember saying that? 
A. And we had been, yes. Yes.

Q. And you knew when you said that that there were complaints about defective product which required you to make a claim for compensation on Chint
China? 
A. They were much earlier in the piece, sir.

Q. But they were nevertheless still relevant to the market place, were they not? 
A. We had brought the teething issues to Cosmoluce's attention and they were much earlier in the piece and the batch problems, as I have previously stated, had been rectified, sir.

Q. But, Mr Frangi, once good will is lost it's very hard to regain, isn't it? 
A. I agree.

Q. And once you have got somebody who is not prepared to buy your product with a repeat order, it is difficult to suggest that they in those circumstances were accepting Chint product? 
A. We did a lot of work to regain confidence in the market place and we were quite successful in doing so.

Q. Mr Frangi, you weren't successful at all. After the distribution agreement was signed you couldn't sell the product in any great quantities at all because of the buyer resistance, could you? 
A. I reject that.

Q. That's why the distribution agreement didn't make its sales target? 
A. I totally reject that.

Q. You're suggesting that you did sell a lot of product? 
A. I put it to you that after we had the issues in late 2004 and early , we had rectified them and once we had new batches in place, well prior to the distribution agreement, we had actually increased our sales and started to provide suitable progress within the market place and our sales figures represent that, your Honour.
 
Mr Tony Frangi Likewise Mr Tony Frangi gave evidence which is accepted as reliable. He was also closely questioned in relation to the suggestion that problems with quality should have been disclosed to Cosmoluce and again his credit did not seem to be affected by what I regarded as reliable evidence given in response to these questions. That cross examination included the following: 
Transcript 135.22-35: 
Q. And did he explain to you the difficulties that he was experiencing right from the outset? 
A. Yes, he did.

Q. Did you understand that the quality of the product was a highly significant factor in any attempt to sell into that market? 
A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you understand that it was crucial to have good quality product? 
A. Absolutely.

Q. And did you understand that there were difficulties with the quality of the Chint product? 
A. Yes, we did have some difficulties, yes.

Transcript 146.41-147.10: 
Q. Well, by July 2005 you knew at least to the extent of the products identified in this document that there were problems with quality? 
A. Yes, sir.
 
Q. And you knew the nature of those problems? 
A. Yes, I did.
 
Q. And you knew the extent of those problems? 
A. Yes, I did.
 
Q. And you also knew the cost which your company had incurred because of those problems, did you not? 
A. Yes, sir, that's right.
 
Q. But as you say, you didn't think it was necessary to say anything about that to anybody? 
A. Only because the returns as a percentage of the total volume was small and it was considered to be normal to get faulty goods back in our industry.
 
Mr Tsagaris Mr Tsagaris left the negotiation of the arrangements leading to the distributorship Agreement and the contractual documentation to his son-in-law
Mr Emirian and his chief executive officer Mr Graoroski. He had a very poor recollection of the close detail concerning the contemporaneous events which occupied so much of the court time. In consequence his evidence cannot be accepted as reliable unless corroborating by contemporaneous documents or by the evidence of other witnesses who in turn were accepted as reliable.
 
Mr Graoroski Mr Graoroski cannot be accepted as having given reliable evidence. On a number of occasions he gave answers which could not reflect the contemporaneous position, and in some cases deliberately avoided answering the question put to him where the matter was particularly sensitive. He was not a totally disinterested party, despite the fact that he is no longer employed by
Cosmoluce. While Mr Graoroski did not disclose the precise extent of his current relationship with Cosmoluce, giving indirect answers to questions put to him in cross examination, it is clear that Cosmoluce continues to be a significant customer of Mr Graoroski's current business, Megaman Lighting
Australia [cf T279.18-281.10].
 MFI P 7 was an e-mail from an to Mr O'Connor and copied to Mr Emirian of 30
January 2006 reading: " Chint Bakelite & Lumbalite accessories ... We have now been selling the Chint product for the three months & all is good. Nice product and also section retail market...." Under cross-examination the following questions and answers were given [this section of the transcript includes comments from Mr Leeming]: 
Q. John O'Connor lives in New Zealand, doesn't he? 
A. Yes, at that time.

Q. At that time he was your contact in the New Zealand store that sold Cosmoluce products? 
A. John at that time was part of Rexel Pacific. He was the general manager of Impel, being the Rexel group in New Zealand. Impel is the importer distributor and sold to Rexel and Ideal who are part of the Rexel group
Pacific.

Q. So that if you were selling Cosmoluce product to New Zealand,
John O'Connor would be a man you would talk to? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you had a longstanding relationship with him? 
A. Depending what you mean by the definition of longstanding, but I had a relationship with him.

Q. How long had you been dealing with Mr O'Connor? 
A. Two years.

Q. Thank you. Do you see where you say, "We have now been selling the Chint product for three months and all is good. Nice product and also suits the retail market." Were you telling the truth? 
A. Well what I refer to is, "All is good with the Rexel group".

Q. I can't help but noting that you look 55 seconds to give that answer. Let me ask you the question again. Were you telling the truth? 
A. I was telling the truth regarding the Rexel group when I am talking to the Rexel Pacific group.

Q. Perhaps I am not being clear. I read out two sentences to you.
Let's do it one at a time. One of the things you say is, "We have now been selling the Chint product for three months and all is good." When you said that were you telling the truth? 
A. What I am trying to do is define what I meant by "all is good".

Q. Please try and answer the question. I note it has been another minute. You have difficulty answering the question, don't you, Mr Graoroski? 
A. I'm just trying to define during that time when I say that, what did I mean. Did I mean just in normal terms or was I trying to be more specific about the Chint product or all is good with the group. I am just trying to - you are asking if it's true or not but when I wrote it - obviously I've written it, yes, so what did I mean by "all is good".
 It was quite plain that Mr Graoroski, faced with a matter adverse to
Cosmoluce's case, was simply not prepared to answer the question. At other times during the cross-examination, his answers were not responsive or hedged with qualifications which were not called for.
 It is appropriate to observe that Mr Graoroski accepted under cross- examination that he knew right from the outset that there would be pressure from Clipsal and HPM once Cosmoluce started selling Chint product.
 
Mr Robinson There were no issues as to Mr Robinson's credit. The reasons below deal with the question of whether or not the evidence which he gave under the voire dire are to be allowed into evidence.
 
The voir dire issue Cosmoluce called Mr Robinson to give evidence on its behalf. He was before the court on a subpoena to give evidence. Before he ascended into the witness box, a question arose as to whether or not he was being called as an expert witness, in which case it was significant that he had not signed to the experts code of conduct. It was said by counsel appearing for Cosmoluce that his evidence would be 'lay evidence'.
 Because of the possible difficulties in the admissibility of evidence to be given by the witness, a direction was given that the evidence would be taken on a voir dire basis. During final address, Counsel were given the opportunity to make submissions as to whether or not all or some of the evidence should be admitted as evidence in the proceeding.
 In the event, Mr Leeming consented to that evidence which was referred to by the defendant in its written and oral submissions being admitted. The remainder, he objected to on the grounds of relevance.
 Mr Robinson's evidence related to the nature of the Australian electrical goods market in mid-2005. Specifically, he gave evidence that the electrical goods market at the time was dominated by two major players who strenuously fought to exclude other smaller manufacturers, including brands such as Chint which sold Chinese bakelite, from the market. Various commercial tactics were used by Clipsal and HPM to maintain their market share, and to prevent electrical wholesalers from agreeing to purchase Chinese bakelite.
 Mr Robinson at first gave evidence that Clipsal and HPM controlled somewhere around 90% of the Australian market, however on cross examination he admitted that this did not take into account those products which were sold by wholesalers who were not affiliated with any buying group [non-aligned wholesalers].
 Mr Robinson was not a witness who answered questions responsively. Time and time again his answers extended across many many many minutes and he seemed content to express opinions on all manner of subjects, interspersing those opinions with hearsay material. In consequence the evidence which he gave could only be of limited value, if permitted to be adduced at all.
 Ultimately I have determined to allow the evidence and to treat with the difficulties involved in accepting the evidence as a matter of weight. In that regard the readiness of Mr Robinson to venture opinions outside of the questions asked of him very severely limits the ability of the Court to accept the evidence save where it was corroborated by contemporaneous documents already in evidence or by the evidence given by other witnesses whose credit was unassailable.
 Ultimately, Mr Robinson's evidence was not of any great utility to the
Court. All he was able to establish was that the electrical goods market was dominated by two major players - HPM and Clipsal, and that these large manufacturers used various commercial tactics against their competitors in the market. Neither of these facts was in dispute. In addition, Mr Robinson's evidence regarding the nature of the market was primarily relevant to the question of whether the market share and sales representations allegedly made by the plaintiff were misleading and deceptive. For reasons set out below, the finding is that the pleaded market share and sales misrepresentations were not made out.
 
The evidence given by Mr Adam Thomas Mr Thomas commenced working for Cosmoluce in May 2006, some time after the agreement was entered into. Prior to this, he was employed as a sales representative by HPM. As with Mr Robinson, a large part of Mr Thomas' evidence went to the nature of the electrical goods market. He also gave evidence as to the difficulties he experienced while trying to sell Chint products as an employee of Cosmoluce.
 The plaintiff did not successfully raise any issues as to Mr Thomas' credit. Ultimately, the main area of dispute with regards to Mr Thomas' evidence did not concern his evidence per se, but rather the inferences which the defendant sought to draw from this evidence regarding the allegedly misleading and deceptive nature of the various representations allegedly made by the plaintiff. To the extent it was necessary for the Court to decide these issues, they are discussed further below.  
The termination issue - Did Chint Australasia waive its rights to terminate the Distribution Agreement? The termination issue raises a number of matters, each of which has been carefully addressed by the plaintiff in its detailed written submissions. In relation to this issue, the plaintiff's submissions are generally accepted, and are incorporated into the following reasons.
 The finding is that Chint Australasia did not waive its rights to terminate the Distribution Agreement. This finding is informed by the following considerations.
 
Proposition 1 Chint Australasia's entitlement to terminate the Distribution Agreement by reason of Cosmoluce's breach of clause 11.3 was governed by the provisions of clause 16.2(a) of the Distribution Agreement. Clause 16.2(a) specifically identifies a breach of clause 11.3 as a "substantial" breach to which the mechanism provided in clause 16.2(a) for the termination of the Distribution
Agreement applied.
 
Proposition 2 Cosmoluce's breach of clause 11.3 was not a breach "not capable of being remedied" within the meaning of the second sentence of clause 16.2(a) of the
Distribution Agreement. Cosmoluce could have remedied its breach of clause .3 by simply purchasing the outstanding amount of Chint products, as the notice of 6 November 2006 invited it to do.
 
A reference to authorities The judgment of Rein J in Waters Lane constitutes [at 70 and following] an illuminating summary of both the principles and the manner of their application across a number of authorities.
 At [87] - [89] His Honour observed as follows: 
In his analysis of the notice clause at [247]-[264], Rolfe J in Burger
King <case> made the following points: 
A clause of this type must be given a commercial meaning and the purpose of such clause is to give the party the opportunity of curing the position for the future and is aimed at certainty: at [248]-[249].

The giving of notice is a condition precedent to the right to terminate: at [249].

The reference to a "breach capable of being cured" was not a reference to a breach capable of being cured within a particular period: at [248], [256].

The fact that the restaurants could not be established within 30 days (this was conceded) did not render the breach one that was not capable of being cured: at [262], [264], [266].

The contrary construction removes an element of certainty because it intrudes into consideration the question of by whom it is to be decided that the breach is capable of being cured within the specified time: at [248].
 "Capable of remedy" is not concerned with whether the breach will be remedied: at [254].

Clause 15.2 in Burger King "is covering the widest possible range of breaches", and it is not appropriate to place too fine a call on the party giving the notice. Rolfe J gave the following example at [255]: "Thus, let it be assumed that the breach was the failure to have in a restaurant a particular piece of equipment, which was required to be imported from the United States. Let it nextly be assumed that usually such equipment was transported from the United States to Australia by sea and took, from the time of order to the time of delivery, more than thirty days to arrive in Australia. On that hypothesis it could, if Mr Oslington's submission be correct, be said that the breach was not capable of being cured. However, bearing in mind that the consequence of not curing the breach is potential termination of the Development Agreement, HJPL may, if given notice of the default, organise for the piece of equipment to be flown to Australia. At the end of the day it may or may not succeed in curing the breach, but it cannot be hypothesised at the date the notice is given in those, and indeed in very many, circumstances that the breach will not be cured".
 
Even breaches which as at the date of the notice appear to be incapable of being cured within the 30 days require notice: at [262].
 "Remedy" means, in accordance with Batson, Schuler and
Tricontinental, "setting things right for the future": at [258].

It will be observed that the notice clause in the Burger King case specifically drew a distinction between breaches that were capable of cure and breaches that were not. Rolfe J did advert to that point at [262].
 
The Court of Appeal expressed the view that the first question was whether the breach was capable of remedy and not whether it was capable of remedy within the 30 day period: at [118]. The second question was "Is a breach, which is a once and for all breach, for example, failure to comply with a time provision, capable of being cured?": at [119]. The Court referred to the passage in Lord Reid's judgment in Schuler which I have set out above, and also referred to the judgment of Sugerman J in Batson versus De Carvalho <case>; [(1948) 48 SR 417], and Samuels JA and Waddell A-JA in Tricontinental Corporation Ltd versus HDFI Ltd [(1990) 21 NSWLR 689.] These authorities, said the Court of Appeal in Burger
King, supported Rolfe J's construction of clause 15.2 which they considered to be correct: at [124].
 Importantly for present purposes, in dealing with Schuler, Rein J observed [at 94] as follows: "It is clear that Lord Reid envisaged in Schuler that there may be cases in which it is obvious that a breach is incurable. He gave the example of a breach of confidentiality. If the breach involved disclosure in public it would be clearly impossible to put matters right, but one can envisage a situation where a limited breach of the obligation could be put right (for example where the party in breach retrieves the document containing the information and obtains a binding and effective undertaking by the recipient of the confidential information, not to produce the product the subject of the confidential information). The advantage of notice to a party in default is that it at least gives that party an opportunity to see what is can do to "put matters right", even in circumstances where it might appear to the innocent party that there is nothing that can be done." [emphasis added] In short, the fact that the temporal period in which the obligation had to be performed had expired does not prevent the breach from being a breach which is "capable of being remedied:" see Batson versus De Carvalho <case>; [(1948) 48 SR 417] at 427 ("[a] breach may be remedied even ... though the time for doing the thing under the contract may have passed"), Tricontinental Corporation Ltd v
HDFI Ltd [(1990) 21 NSWLR 689] at 702 and 722 - 723, Burger King Corporation versus Hungry Jacks Pty Limited <case> at <case> - [124], Mangrove Mountain Quarries Pty Limited versus Barlow <case> at <case>.
The present case is in contradistinction with decisions holding that such clauses apply even if in fact the obligation cannot readily, if at all, be cured: cf: Waters Lane Pty Limited versus Sweeney <case> at <case> - [95].
 
Conclusion As a result of propositions one and two, Chint Australasia had no entitlement to exercise its clause 16.2(a) contractual right of termination by reason of Cosmoluce's breach of clause 11.3 until it issued a written notice requiring the remedy of that breach and that breach was not remedied within 30 days after the receipt of the notice. Chint Australasia issued a notice under clause 16.2(a) on 6 November 2006. Thus, Chint Australasia's entitlement to terminate the Distribution Agreement by reason of the breach of clause 11.3 arose no earlier that 7 December 2006.
 The acts, matters and circumstances relied on by Cosmoluce as being actions "unequivocally ... inconsistent with the [Chint Australasia's] exercise of the right to terminate" all occurred prior to 7 December 2006 (see paragraph 37, amended defence). However, because no right to terminate had arisen prior to 7
December 2006, those matters cannot be actions "inconsistent with the exercise of ... [Chint Australasia's] right to terminate" and cannot constitute an "election to affirm the Distribution Agreement".
 It is axiomatic that no waiver of the right to terminate could be effected by Chint Australasia prior to the right to terminate arising. Prior to that right arising there can be no confrontation between mutually exclusive courses, which is the essence of waiver or election: Immer (No 145) Pty Ltd v
Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust  <case>; [(1993) 182 CLR 26] at 41.
 There is no substance in Cosmoluce's proposition that in commencing these proceedings seeking specific performance, Chint Australasia is seen to have affirmed the Distribution Agreement. Ogle versus Comboyuro Investments Pty
Limited <case>; [(1978) 136 CLR 444] involved a vendor who was entitled to rescind a contract for the sale of land because of the purchaser's failure to complete on time, despite the fact that he had elected to sue for specific performance. It was found that the vendor was not precluded from later rescinding the contract and claiming damages for the continued refusal by the purchaser to complete if the purchaser's conduct evinced an intention no longer to be bound by the contract.
 The following observations were made by Gibbs, Mason and Jacobs JJ [at -459]: 
The commencement of the action for specific performance did not waive the breach of contract. It waived reliance by the vendor on the breach of contract as the breach of a fundamental term thereof entitling the vendor to rescind.
It has been submitted that events thereafter up to 18th November were no more than a continuation of a preceding breach, reliance upon which as a ground for rescission had been waived. We do not agree. By the time of the repudiation and rescission alleged in the current statement of claim, it had become clear that the purchaser had no intention of completing within a reasonable time, or probably at all. Much reliance was placed by the purchaser on the decision of this Court in Carr versus JA Berriman Pty Ltd <case>; [(1953) 89 CLR 327] in support of the proposition that continuance of a breach which the other party had not elected to treat as a ground for rescission could not thereafter be a ground for such rescission unless a further breach amounting to repudiation of the contract was proved. See also Larking versus Great
Western (Nepean) Gravel Ltd (In liq.), per Dixon J <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 221], at p 237. But in Carr versus JA Berriman Pty Ltd Fullagar J.
enunciated the further principle that "a failure to remedy the breach might continue so long and in such circumstances as to evince an intention ... no longer to be bound by the contract". Fullagar J continued (1953) 89 CLR, at p :
 "In other words, the only legitimate inference might be that he is saying: 'Not only have I broken my contract by not doing the thing on the due day, but I am not going to do the thing at all', or 'I am not going to do the thing at all unless and until I find it convenient to do it'. In this way a right to rescind might arise which is not based on breach of the particular promise as such. That promise, even if essential to begin with, has become non-essential by reason of the election of the promisee, but the promisee may nevertheless be able to establish that the conduct of the promisor with respect to his promise amounts to a refusal to be bound by the contract." 
When this principle is particularly applied to contracts for the sale or purchase of land and where the breach is a failure to complete on the due date, a party who has waived a right to treat that failure to complete on the due date as the breach of an essential term may nevertheless thereafter call on the other party to complete and a failure on the part of the latter to complete on or by a further named day fixed reasonably ahead or even a continued long failure to complete will amount to a refusal to be bound by the contract (Holland versus Wiltshire, per Kitto J <case>; [(1954) 90 CLR 409] and a repudiation thereof entitling the other party to rescind and to claim damages for loss of the bargain. In this particular context there is no different in consequence between regarding the conduct subsequent to the actual breach as a further breach of the contract and regarding it as a refusal to be bound by the contract and consequently a repudiation thereof. Or it may perhaps better be said that the first breach is a failure to complete on the due date and the later breach is a failure to complete at all. (at p459) 
If after a purchaser fails to complete at the time fixed for completion, when that time is an essential term of the contract, a vendor elects to treat the contract as on foot, there will not usually be a basis for regarding the contract as repudiated by a purchaser until a further time has been fixed in a way that shows an intention on the part of the vendor to make that further time of the essence of the contract. See Balog versus Crestani, per Gibbs J <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 289], at pp -298, for the analogous principle applicable where time was not originally of the essence of the contract. These circumstances must be distinguished from the circumstances where the breach of the agreement is not unconditionally waived but further time is allowed on condition that completion takes place at the further nominated time. See Holland versus Wiltshire, per Dixon CJ (1954) 90
CLR, at p 415 (at p459).
 Having found that Cosmoluce could remedy its failure to purchase US $2,000,000 in the period until 30 June 2006 by purchasing further goods in the following financial year, there is no substance in Cosmoluce's contention that
Chint Australasia had a right to terminate the Distribution Agreement which arose on or about 25 September 2006. The proposition put by Cosmoluce is that the right to terminate arose on that date because: i. on 26 August 2006, Chint Australasia sent a letter to Cosmoluce requiring the breach of clause 11.3 to be remedied included: '[we] again call on you to IMMEDIATELY comply with your obligations under the agreement, in particular clause 11.3.' ii. on about 25 September 2005, 30 days had passed without Cosmoluce purchasing approximately US $1.5 million worth of goods required to meet the minimum purchase obligations for the period ending 30 June 2005.
 The proposition put by Cosmoluce is flawed because the letter of 26 August does refer to clause 16(a) and does not state that if the notice is not complied with the party giving it will treat the contract as at an end. The matter is dealt with in the High Court in Balog versus Crestani <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 289] by Gibbs at 296-297: 
Where a contract contains a promise to do something within a particular time, but time is not of the essence of the contract, the failure by one party to fulfil his promise within the stipulated time does not entitle the other party to rescind the contract; in those circumstances, "the promisee can, generally speaking, only rescind after he has given a notice requiring performance within a specified reasonable time and after non-compliance with that notice". Carr versus JA Berriman Pty Ltd <case>; [(1953) 89 CLR 327], at pp 348-349. The authorities that deal with the application of these rules to contracts for the sale of land very strongly suggest, even if few of them actually decide, that to be effective the notice requiring performance must inform the party to whom it is given that the party giving it will treat the contract as at an end if the notice is not complied with. In Sugden on Vendors and Purchasers, 14th ed, at p. 268, the principle was thus stated: "Where time is not made of the essence of a contract by the contract itself, although a day for performance is named, of course neither party can strictly make it so after the contract; but if either party is guilty of delay, a distinct written notice by the other, that he shall consider the contract at an end if it be not completed within a reasonable time to be named, would be treated in equity as binding on the party to whom it is given." 
Similar words appear in many cases, and it is usual to describe a notice given for this purpose as a notice limiting the time at the expiration of which the party giving it "will treat the contract as at an end" if the notice has not been complied with: see, e.g., Taylor versus Brown <case>; [(1839) 2 Beav 180], at p 183 <case>; [(48 ER 1149], at p ) ; Green versus Sevin [(1879) 13 Ch D 589], at pp -600 ; Stickney versus Keeble [(1915) AC 386], at pp 418, 423 ;
Ajit versus Sammy [[1967] 1 AC 255], at p 258 ;
Perry versus Sherlock <case>; [(1888) 14 VLR 492], at pp 507-508 ; and Lenneberg versus McGirr <case>; [(1919) 19 SR 83], at p 86 . Of course it is not necessary that the notice should use any particular form of words; it is the substance of what it conveys that matters.
For example, it will obviously be sufficient to state that if the notice is not complied with, the party giving the notice will treat the contract as abandoned (Stickney versus Keeble <case>; [(1905) 3 CLR 419], at p 431) or will put an end to it (Wendt versus Bruce <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 245], and there is no reason to doubt that it will be sufficient for a vendor, under a contract similar in form to that in the present case, to give notice that upon non-compliance he will terminate the agreement and either sue the purchaser for breach of contract or resell the property as owner and recover the deficiency, if any, arising on such resale... [Emphasis added] 
The repudiation of the Distribution Agreement by Cosmoluce on 28 November 2006  Whilst it is unnecessary to go further it may be observed that even had
Chint Australasia lost its right to terminate the Distribution Agreement by reason of Cosmoluce's failure to comply with its minimum purchase obligations in clause 11.3, Chint Australasia's termination of the Distribution Agreement on 11 December 2006 also relied upon and is supported by Cosmoluce's repudiation of the Distribution Agreement in the letter of its solicitors of November 2006.
 A party who waives the right to terminate following an essential breach of contract by the other party may, nonetheless, terminate the contract if the subsequent conduct of the guilty party [including a persistence by the guilty party in their breach] manifests a repudiation of the contract: see Ogle v
Comboyuro Investments Pty Limited <case>; [(1978) 136 CLR 444] at 461 - 462, The Millstream Pty Limited versus Schultz [[1980] NSWLR 555] C - G, per McLelland J.
 In Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal Land Council versus Sanpine Pty Limited <case>; [(2007) 82 ALJR 345], the majority decision dealt with the different senses in which the term repudiation falls to be used. The first was identified as a reference to conduct which evinces an unwillingness or inability to render substantial performance of the contract. Their Honours observed that this is sometimes described as conduct of a party which evinces an intention no longer to be bound by the contract or to fulfil it only in a manner substantially inconsistent with the party's obligations. That form of conduct may be determined renunciation: "The test [for repudiation or renunciation of a contract] is "whether the conduct of one party is such as to convey to a reasonable person in the situation of the other party either renunciation of the contract as a whole or of a fundamental obligation under it:" <case>; <case> The finding is that Cosmoluce clearly renounced the Distribution Agreement in the letter of Cosmoluce's solicitors of 28 November 2006. "It is obvious" the solicitors stated "that the contractual relationship between our parties cannot continue and our client agrees that it should now come to an end".
 By that letter Cosmoluce evinced its intention "no longer to be bound" by the Distribution Agreement: see Laurinda Pty Limited versus Capalaba Park Shopping
Centre <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 623] at 634, at 647 - 648, at 657 - 658; Koompahtoo Local
Aboriginal Land Council versus Sanpine Pty Limited <case>; <case>.
 The short background context against which the letter requires to be read involves very substantial non-compliance by Cosmoluce with the terms of the
Distributorship Agreement over an extended period of time.
 The material events have already been referred to, but it is perhaps convenient to shortly thumbnail them in the one place: i. Chint Australasia had on 26 August 2006 reminded Cosmoluce that they had repeatedly pointed out that its continued breaches of the agreement was placing the agreement at an increased risk of being terminated; that the continued delay was not acceptable and that they reserved all rights relating to that continued breach of agreement. They called on Cosmoluce to immediately comply with its obligations under the agreement, in particular clause 11.3 and observed that they intended to take action to enforce their rights under the agreement without further delay; ii. Then on 6 November 2006 Chint Australasia had sent a formal notice pursuant to clause 16.2 (a) putting Cosmoluce on notice of its relevant breaches of clause 11.3 in terms of its failures to purchase the minimum amount of products as required by that clause; and requiring Cosmoluce to remedy the breach by purchasing additional products to a stated nominate value by 8 December 2006. The notice had explicitly referred to clause 16.2 (a) as defining a breach of clause 11.3 as a 'substantial breach' and had made clear that if Cosmoluce failed to remedy the breach of clause 11.3 in accordance with the notice, Chint Australasia would terminate the distribution agreement; iii. there had been some correspondence on 22 November 2006 from
Cosmoluce to Chint Australasia contending that the latter was in breach of a letter of credit and generally dealing with a claim by Cosmoluce that it held
Chint Australasia responsible and accountable for loss of revenue; [There was a handwritten note admitted into evidence which suggested that Mr Graoroski had followed up on this communication by speaking to Mr Fred
Frangi who had said that the letter was funny and that he found it amusing but that he could not talk to Mr Graoroski about the matter because his lawyers had told him not to do so and that the letter had been passed on to Chint
Australasia's lawyers] iv. By facsimile of 28 November 2006 Mr Vuaran, the partner dealing with the matter on behalf of Cosmoluce, had written to Corrs observing that: a) Cosmoluce did not accept the validity of the purpose of notice given on 6
November 2006; b) adding that: "Nevertheless, it obvious that the contractual relationship between the parties cannot continue, and our client agrees that it should now come to an end. Our client would be happy if that to occur upon the date nominated in the purported notice, namely on 6 December 2006". [Ex PX at 921] The crucial context against which the 28 November 2006 facsimile was sent was simply the content of the letter of 6 November 2006 requiring Cosmoluce to cure its breach failing which Chint Australasia would terminate the
Distribution Agreement. The 20 November 2006 facsimile response to this clear threat was to say that it was obvious that the contractual relationship between the parties could not continue. This was a very important facsimile.
The statement that Cosmoluce agreed that the contractual relationship should come to an end and would be happy if that would occur upon the date nominated in the purported notice, cannot gloss over the significance of the statement that it was obvious that the contractual relationship between the parties could not continue, which was clearly repudiatory in all of the circumstances. It was the antithesis of a communication that Cosmoluce intended to comply with its contractual obligations.  By letter of 11 December 2006 Corrs had responded to the 20 November 2006 facsimile by stating that the facsimile made it clear that Cosmoluce had no intention of complying with the distribution agreement in the future; that the facsimile constituted a repudiation of the distribution agreement; and that in any event, it was noted that Cosmoluce had not complied with the default notice dated 6 November 2006. This letter had enclosed the formal notice of termination.
 By letter of 18 December 2006 Cosmoluce had written directly to Chint
Australasia referring to the clause "16.3 consequences of termination or expiration of this document" clearly acknowledging that the agreement had come to an end.
 It has to also be recalled that there was a litigious context whereunder: i. Chint Australasia had commenced the proceedings by statement of claim filed on 14 October 2006 which had sought inter alia an order for the specific performance by Cosmoluce of obligations which were outstanding under the
Distribution Agreement; ii. in early November 2006 Chint Australasia's solicitor had informed the solicitor on the record for Cosmoluce that Chint Australasia proposed to abandon its claim for specific performance, to terminate the
Distribution Agreement and to amend its statement of claim to seek damages; iii. it was on 6 November 2006, that with a view to terminating the distribution agreement, Chint Australasia served a notice on Cosmoluce requiring it to remedy certain breaches; iv. after the 30-day period prescribed by clause 16.2 (a) had expired the document purporting to terminate the distribution agreement effective on 18 December 2006 was sent; v. in accordance with directions made in 11 December 2006, Chint
Australasia filed its amended statement of claim, the proceedings continuing without the claim for specific performance relief.
 To the extent that it is necessary to do so, I reject the proposition put by senior counsel for Cosmoluce to the effect that in some fashion the Court may take into account the probability that the solicitor for Cosmoluce would not have had authority to send the facsimile of 28 November 2006. The letter was written against a considerable background. The finding of the court is that against that background, a fair reading of the letter is that Cosmoluce not longer intended to be bound by the agreement. If it be relevant, a reasonable bystander having the knowledge of that background would have formed the view that the letter exhibited an acceptance that the contract should now come to an end.
 
Whether or not Chint Australasia was disentitled from terminating due to absence of readiness and willingness  Cosmoluce relies on an alleged breach by Chint Australasia of its obligation in clause 11.1 of the Distribution Agreement to provide 5000 catalogues, 100 display boards and an advertisement in Electrical Connection magazine as constituting an absence of readiness and willingness on the part of Chint Australasia which disentitled Chint Australasia from terminating the
Distribution Agreement in December 2006 (see paragraphs 28, 31 and 33 Further
Amended Defence).
 The applicable principle has been recently stated by White J in Lantry v
Tomule Pty Limited [(2007) ANZ Conv R 187]; <case> at <case>: "... in the case of termination for breach, a party seeking to terminate for the opposite party's breach is not precluded from doing so by reason of his own breach of contract if he has not repudiated the contract, if his breach is of a non-essential term, and if there is no causal relationship between his breach and that of the opposite party.
 [See also: Roadshow Entertainment Pty Limited versus ACN 053 006 269 Pty
Limited (Receiver and Manager appointed) (formerly CEL Home Video Pty Limited <case>; [(1997) 42 NSWLR 462] at 479G -
A - B, Krywood versus Drinkwater <case> at <case> - [160] per Powell JA (with whom Meagher JA agreed) at [231] - [250] per
Fitzgerald JA; Idameneo Pty Limited versus Ticco Pty Limited <case> at <case> per Santow JA (with whom Mason P and Hodgson JA agreed).] There was some dispute over the exact number of catalogues and display boards supplied by Chint Australasia, although there was no dispute that this number fell short of the amount required under clause 11.1. On the plaintiff's case, approximately 70-80 display boards were provided [out of the 100 required], and around 300 catalogues [out of a required 5000]. The defendant claimed that only 20 display boards and 50-100 catalogues were received.
 There was no dispute regarding the fact that the advertisement in
Electrical Connection magazine was never published. The plaintiff noted, however, that this advertisement could have been published by Cosmoluce independently if it so required, in which case they would have had the right to seek to be reimbursed by Chint Australasia for the expense [amounting to under $5,000].
 I accept that whatever the shortfall in Chint Australasia's supply of colour catalogues and display boards, and despite the failure to publish the advertisement, Cosmoluce has not been able to establish that: i. the failure to comply with clause 11.1 was of such significance that it was a fundamental breach because it deprived Cosmoluce of "substantially the whole benefit which it was intended it should have from the" Distribution Agreement, or that it caused Cosmoluce "serious prejudice" or went "to the root of the contract": see the expressions occurring in
Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal Land Council versus Sanpine Pty Limited <case>; <case> - [54]; or ii. the failure to comply with clause 11.1 caused Cosmoluce's breach of its minimum purchase obligations in clause 11.3 or its repudiation of the
Distribution Agreement on 28 November 2006.
 Cosmoluce relies additionally on an alleged breach by Chint Australasia of an obligation to supply the names and contact details of 60 customers, a term said to arise from the pre-contractual course of dealing and an implied obligation to co-operate. This failure to provide the customer list is alleged to constitute an absence of readiness and willingness on the part of Chint
Australasia which disentitled it from terminating the Distribution Agreement in December 2006 (see paragraphs 29, 30 and 32 and 33 Further Amended
Defence).
 As Chint Australasia has contended, this analysis is misconceived by reason of the following matters: i. insofar as the alleged obligation to provide the names and contact details of 60 customers is said to arise from the pre-contractual dealings of
Chint Australasia and Cosmoluce, it is excluded by the "entire agreement" clause in clause 19.10 of the Distribution Agreement: Hope versus RCA Photophone of Australia Pty Limited <case>; [(1937) 59 CLR 348] at 358, at 363, Etna versus Arif <case>; [[1999] 2 VR 353] at 371, <case> per
Batt JA (with whom Charles and Callaway JJA agreed); ii. no obligation to provide the names and contact details of 60 customers arises from the contractual obligation to co-operate. The
Distribution Agreement contained no express obligation on the part of Chint
Australasia to provide the names and addresses of the customers who had purchased Chint products. Nor did it contain an obligation on the part of
Cosmoluce to sell Chint products to those customers. As the Court of Appeal (Mason P, Stein and Beazley JJA) pointed out in Australis Media Holdings Pty
Limited versus Telstra Corp Limited [(1998) 43 NSWLR 104] at 124D "there cannot be a duty to co-operate in bringing about something which the contract does not require to happen". The Court continued (at 125A): "A contract may "contemplate" many benefits for the respective parties, but each can only call on the other to provide, or co-operate in the providing of, benefits promised by that party".
 iii. As established below, when the same issue is dealt with in terms of the misrepresentation allegation, the pre-contractual statement of Mr Fred
Frangi was to the effect that Chint Australasia would supply the names and addresses of Lumbalite's wholesale customers, but the electrician customers would be transferred to Holroyd Lighting. The names of the wholesale customers were duly supplied; and iv. even assuming there was a term in the Distribution
Agreement requiring Chint Australasia to supply to Cosmoluce the names and contact details of 60 customers, the breach of that term was not a fundamental breach and did not cause Cosmoluce's breach of clause 11.3 or its repudiation of the Distribution Agreement and, therefore, did not disentitle Chint
Australasia from terminating the Distribution Agreement on 11 December 2006.
 
The misrepresentation issues While a large number of misrepresentation claims were made in the initial pleadings, only some of these claims were pressed at trial. The six alleged misrepresentations still pressed are as follows: 
The market share representation i. Cosmoluce could reasonably expect to expand significantly the market share currently held by Chint Products in the Australian market for bakerlite power point, light switch and socket products and MCB products as well as electrical lighting accessories "the Australian Market"; 
The brand awareness representation ii. the Chint brand of bakerlite products was a well-recognised and well-accepted brand, with a good name, in the Australian Market; 
The sales representations iii. Cosmoluce could confidently expect to achieve purchases of US $2 million between 1 October 2005 and 30 June 2006; iv. the minimum quantities of Chint Products required to be purchased by Cosmoluce under the Distribution Agreement were reasonable and achievable by Cosmoluce; 
The customer base representation v. Chint/Lumbalite has 60 existing account customers and was able to, and would, provide to Cosmoluce the names and details of those customers if
Cosmoluce entered into the Distribution Agreement; 
The resumption representation vi. in the event Cosmoluce had not by 30 June 2006 achieved purchases of
US $2 million, Chint would end the Distribution Agreement and resume the role of distributor of Chint Products without other consequences to Cosmoluce.
 
The factual question - were the representations made by the plaintiff?  One approach to dealing with these allegations of misrepresentation is to divide the issue into a number of stages, starting with the factual question as to whether the representations were made, before turning to the question of whether (if made) the representations were misleading and deceptive.
 The conflicting evidence relied upon by each party with regards to this factual dispute is set out below: 
The market share representation and the sales representations The defendant's evidence in support of both the market share representation and the two sales representations is contained within the affidavits of Mr
Graoroski, CEO of Cosmoluce over the relevant period, and Mr Tsagaris, director and chairman of Cosmoluce.  Mr Graoroski gives evidence that, on or about 2 August 2005, he met with
Fred Frangi to discuss a spreadsheet relating to profit margins on the Chint products (Exhibit CG-1).
 Mr Graoroski claims that, while reviewing the document, Mr Fred Frangi pointed to the last page and said "this is the turnover and gross profit that you can expect to make" [Graoroski Affidavit at 25].
 Under cross examination, Mr Graoroski's evidence was more equivocal. It was put to him, and he agreed, that "(w)hat in effect (Mr Fred Frangi) said was if
Cosmoluce buys the stock that is set out in this spreadsheet, at the discount in this spreadsheet, at the exchange rates that are built into this spreadsheet then the numbers at the bottom will be the gross profit and turnover" (T325.52-326.3).
 Mr Tsagaris' evidence on this matter was in a similar vein. When asked about the spreadsheet, he said that Tony or Fred Frangi had explained to
Cosmoluce that "if we sell so many things we make so much" [T229]. On re- examination he confirmed this evidence, stating that he was told "if Cosmoluce can keep selling those items Cosmoluce could make that much money" [T231].
 Mr Graoroski also gives evidence of the following conversation, which took place on 10 October 2005 when the parties were preparing to sign the
Distribution Agreement: "Mr Emirian: "You haven't changed the numbers, c'mon Fred. The numbers still seem a bit high." 
Mr Fred Frangi: "We won't agree to less. You will achieve these numbers."  Mr Tsagaris, gave evidence that he was involved in 'a few' meetings with
Fred and Tony Frangi at Cosmoluce's offices. At these meetings, Mr Tsagaris claims [without providing any specific details regarding the date or time] that either Fred or Tony Frangi made the following representation: 
We've only sold about $80,000 but with your distribution network, you can expect to receive a lot more. With your distribution network, the target of $US 2 million purchases in the first year is achievable. [Affidavit Tsagaris 6
March 2008 at 12].
 
The plaintiff's evidence Mr Fred Frangi denies that he made the representations alleged by Mr
Graoroski. At the meeting on 2 August 2005, Mr Fred Frangi denies that he told
Mr Graoroski that "this is the turnover and gross profit that you can expect to make". Rather, he recalls that he made a statement to the following effect: "This spreadsheet gives you some idea of how an order for US$315,000 worth of stock would look and the profit you would make on that stock. If that was your monthly order, you could expect a gross profit of about AU$270,000 on total sales of about AU$760,000." [Affidavit Fred Frangi at 91].
 Mr Fred Frangi also denies having the conversation which Mr Graoroski claims took place on 10 October 2005 [Affidavit Fred Frangi at 114].
 Mr Fred Frangi denies that he made the representation alleged by Mr
Tsagaris. Instead, he recalls saying words to the effect of: "So far this year we have turned over about $800,000. Jim and Cane have been telling us about your distribution network. Compared to just me doing the selling, you should be able to do a lot more." [Affidavit Fred Frangi at (c)].
 Under cross examination, Mr Frangi admitted that he had told Cosmoluce that the Chint product market share could be expanded [T81.21].
 Mr Tony Frangi similarly denies that he made the representation alleged by
Mr Tsagaris. He also recalls Fred Frangi saying to Mr Tsagaris words similar to those set out above [Affidavit Tony Frangi 18 April 2008 at 55].
 
Finding of fact - the market share representation and the sales representations The alleged market share and sales misrepresentations depend almost entirely on oral statements alleged to have been made by Mr Fred or Tony
Frangi. What documentary evidence there is is equivocal, such as the existence of the excel spreadsheet referred to above.
 As McLelland CJ in Eq pointed out in Watson versus Foxman [(1995) 49 NSWLR ]
at 318-319: 
Where, in civil proceedings, a party alleges that the conduct of another was misleading or deceptive, or likely to mislead or deceive ... within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth)... it is ordinarily necessary for that party to prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the court: what the alleged conduct was; and circumstances which rendered the conduct misleading.

Where the conduct is the speaking of words in the course of a conversation, it is necessary that the words spoken be proved with a degree of precision sufficient to enable the court to be reasonably satisfied that they were in fact misleading in the proved circumstances. In many cases (but not all) the question whether spoken words were misleading may depend upon what, if examined at the time, may have been seen to be relatively subtle nuances flowing from the use of one word, phrase or grammatical construction rather than another or the presence or absence of some qualifying word or phrase, or condition. Furthermore, human memory of what was said in a conversation is fallible for a variety of reasons, and ordinarily the degree of fallibility increases with the passage of time, particularly where disputes or litigation intervene, and the processes of memory are overlaid, often subconsciously, by perceptions or self-interest as well as conscious consideration of what should have been said or could have been said. All too often what is actually remembered is little more than an impression from which plausible details are then, again often subconsciously, constructed. All this is a matter of ordinary human experience.
 [McLelland CJ in Eq further pointed out (at 319) serious difficulties attend the proof of a case relying on spoken words as the foundation of a cause of action "in the absence of some reliable contemporaneous record or other satisfactory corroboration".] The observations of McLelland CJ in Eq in Watson versus Foxman have received appellate approval: see Moukhayber versus Camden Timber and Hardware Co Pty
Limited <case> at <case> per
Heydon JA (Beazley and Santow JJA agreeing) and Aneve Pty Limited versus Bank of
Western Australia Ltd <case> at <case>,
Hodgson JA with whom Santow and Bryson JJA agreed); see also Ingot Capital
Investments Pty Limited versus Macquarie Equity Capital Markets Ltd & Ors (No ) [(2007) 63 ACSR 1] at 107, [353] - [354].
 The comments of McLelland CJ in Eq are particularly apt in these proceedings. The factual dispute between the parties, with regard to these alleged misrepresentations, comes down to a very fine distinction. In the case of the 2 August 2005 conversation, it comes down to a dispute over whether
Cosmoluce was told that the spreadsheet represented an actual forecast of what
Cosmoluce was likely to make selling Chint products, or whether they were simply told that the spreadsheet set out the amount which Cosmoluce would make if it sold a given number of products. This is the sort of nuance of meaning that could be highly dependent on the context in which the words were spoken. Even if the Court knew the exact words which passed between the parties, it would also be necessary to establish the context in which these words were exchanged, in order to determine how they would have been understood by the relevant parties.  In this sort of situation, where all that is available is the 'fallible human memory of conversation', there is insufficient evidence to establish the particular words which make up the alleged representations with the necessary degree of precision required. This is particularly the case where the defendant's own witnesses gave evidence which conflicted not only with the plaintiff's evidence, but also, at times, with their earlier evidence.
 Ultimately, the finding is that the defendant has not discharged its onus of proving that the plaintiff made the market share and sales representations alleged.
 
In the alternative - were the sales and market share representations misleading and deceptive?  Even if the defendant had succeeded in establishing that one or more of the sales and market share representations had been made, the finding would have been that the plaintiff had established that the alleged misrepresentations as to future matters were based on reasonable grounds. The plaintiff would therefore have been successful in discharging its onus under <case> of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). This conclusion is based on the following facts: i. when the plaintiff allegedly made the sales and market share representations, the plaintiff was aware of Cosmoluce's claim to be "a major
Australian lighting manufacturing, distributor and supplier" with sales offices, warehousing and distribution facilities in every Australian state.
There was no reason for the plaintiff to doubt Cosmoluce's claims; ii. based on this fact, there was every reason to expect that
Cosmoluce would increase the sales of Chint products above those that had been achieved by Lumbalite who had only one person (Mr Fred Frangi) dedicated to the task of selling them; iii. given that Lumbalite had (with only one person doing the selling) achieved sales of $870,851.93 of Chint products in the period of 1
July 2004 to 19 August 2005, and given that Cosmoluce would bring very considerably increased sales and distribution resources and customer base to the marketing of Chint products, there was a reasonable basis to predict that
Cosmoluce would achieve US$2 million worth of purchases of Chint products in the period between 1 October 2005 to 30 June 2006.
 Based on the evidence of Mr Graoroski [Affidavit of Mr Graoroski at 83 and
Ex PX 307], Cosmoluce appears to have held these view contemporaneously.
 
The brand awareness representation The dispute with regards to the brand awareness representation is similarly extremely narrow. The defendant alleges that the plaintiff made the representation that the Chint brand of bakerlite products was a well recognised and well accepted brand, with a good name, in the Australian
Market. The plaintiff accepts that it made the representation that Chint was a globally well recognised brand, but claim that they made it clear that it was only a start up brand in Australia, with growing market recognition.
 Before going further it is important to observe that, although the defendant sought to cross-examine the plaintiffs witnesses on the subject of whether they failed to failure of the disclose that the Chint product was defective [or had suffered from significant defects in the past], no such misrepresentation had been pleaded or particularised. The pleaded and particularised representation was that the Chint brand of products was: i. a well recognized brand and ii. a well accepted brand and iii. had a good name in the Australian market.
 There was not a syllable which referred to the notion of a misrepresentation by silence in the failure to communicate that the subject products were of poor quality.
 There was no application to amend the pleadings to raise any such case.
Clearly had such an application being brought there would have been major issues of prejudice to the plaintiff which could have called lay evidence about what it actually did to ensure that any quality issues that were real had been resolved or what they had done to satisfy the regulators. The plaintiff might also have elected to call expert evidence. Had an amendment to the pleadings been sought, it would have been necessary to allow the plaintiff a full opportunity to treat with such a case.
 Notably, when this issue was raised [at transcript 261-268], the offending question and line of cross-examination was disallowed. Later the defendants indicated that they did not require any reasons for that decision.  Returning to the misrepresentation alleged on the pleadings: There is considerable evidence, both in terms of witness testimony and contemporaneous documents, to suggest that the plaintiff represented to Cosmoluce that Chint was a well recognised and accepted brand. To cite only a few examples: i. Mr Graoroski gives evidence that at the meeting on 18 July 2005,
Mr Tony Frangi or Mr Fred Frangi said: "The stronger brand is Chint. It has a reputation for high quality products. It is well recognised. It has high brand equity. We should have that brand." ii. Mr Graoroski's evidence is supported by notes he made at the time, noting that "Awareness - Image = Equity".
 iii. The PowerPoint presentation given at the 18 July meeting expressly states that "Chint is a Global well recognised brand", and makes no qualification about Chint's lack of recognition in the Australian market.
 iv. The PowerPoint presentation made at the 18 August 2005 meeting made statements including: a. Lumbalite has worked hard to give Chint a good name in the Australian market place; and b. Chint is being well accepted with many repeat orders from satisfied customers.
 Having established the conduct which is alleged, it is necessary to turn to the second stage of the McClelland test. This involves a close examination of the relevant circumstances to determine whether these statements, in the particular context in which they were made, would have had conveyed the meaning which the defendant claims [regarding the strength of the Chint brand in the Australian market] and would in consequence have been misleading. As will appear from the reasons which follow, the statements, in the context in which they were made, were not misleading.
 The defendant's submissions claimed that the statements made above were misleading and deceptive because they failed to mention three significant matters, and therefore created a false impression of the strength of the Chint brand in the Australian market. These significant omissions were: i. that Chint was a start up brand in the Australian market, and not well established; ii. that Mr Fred Frangi had experienced difficulties in getting major wholesalers to stock Chint products, as a result of pressure from the larger brands who used their market dominance to exclude smaller manufacturers; and iii. that there had been quality issues with some of the earlier batches of Chint products supplied to Chint Australasia, which had damaged
Chint's reputation and goodwill in the Australian market.
 The defendant also relied on evidence from Mr Thomas, currently the
National Sales Manger of Cosmoluce and previously a sales representative of
HPM (a competitor of Chint). Mr Thomas gave evidence that he had never seen or heard of the Chint name or products prior to mid-late 2005, despite his extensive experience in the industry. He also gave evidence that, once he began selling Chint products for Cosmoluce, he encountered a number of customers who were unwilling to buy Chinese-made or Chint brand products.
 The difficulty with the defendant's case is that it fails to take into account the context in which the negotiations took place. Specifically, it ignores the fact that some of the alleged 'omissions' were either told to Mr
Graoroski, as CEO of the defendant, or were known to him due to his experience in the industry.
 Specifically, Mr Graoroski admitted, under cross examination, that he was aware in July 2005 that: i. Chint was a start up brand in Australia [T322.22]; and ii. that HPM and Clipsal (the two major manufacturers of bakerlite products) would not 'take favourably' to the entry of Chint products into the market [T 296.25-296.35], and that there would be likely to be opposition from these major players [T293.1-293.11].
 With regards to the quality issues, Mr Fred Frangi gave evidence that he told Cosmoluce that there had been some problems with quality in the early stages, which had since been rectified [T67.12]. He admitted that he had never informed Cosmoluce of the extent of those problems [T66.39]. However, as noted above, the defendant did not plead a case of misrepresentation with regards allegedly defective Chint products. In any event, issues with quality would only be relevant if the defendant could establish that the allegedly defective products caused damage to Chint's reputation in the Australian market. Had this been found to be the case, then the fact that some products may have been defective may have constituted indirect evidence that the representation that "Chint is a well recognised and well accepted brand, with a good name, in the Australian Market" was untrue.
 
Finding of fact - brand awareness representation Ultimately, the defendant fails on this point because it has not effectively demonstrated the causal link between the quality issues in the early Chint batches and the misleading and deceptive nature of the alleged representations. It has not shown that that the problems with defective goods, which arose prior to the distribution agreement, had caused such significant damage to the Chint brand that the representations which were made in July regarding the strength of the Chint brand in the market were misleading and deceptive.
 Mr Tony Frangi gave evidence, which was not substantially refuted by the defendant, that the problems experienced with the early batches of Chint products involved only a small percentage of the total volume of Chint products, and that the return of small numbers of goods was considered normal within the industry [T147].
 Mr Fred Frangi's evidence, which is accepted as reliable, is that, in the wake of the early batches of defective goods, Chint Australasia "did a lot of work to regain confidence in the market place and we were quite successful in doing so" [T83.48].
 It is true that the Frangi brothers had claimed, in their approach to
Chint China for compensation, that "the Chint brand is starting to be affected" by the defective stock [Ex P6]. Nonetheless, these kind of statements are not sufficient to establish that Chint was no longer, in July a "well recognised and well accepted brand, with a good name, in the
Australian Market", as this representation would have been understood by
Cosmoluce in the circumstances.
 Similarly, Mr Thomas' evidence that he personally, as a representative of competitor brand, had not come across the Chint brand prior to mid-late 2005 is insufficient to establish that the alleged representation was false. This is true especially where Cosmoluce would have been interpreting the representation in light of its own knowledge that Chint was a start up brand in Australia, and with regard to their own knowledge of the dominance of HPM and Clipsal in the relevant market.  
The customer base representation In relation to the 18 July 2005 meeting, Mr Graoroski gave evidence that
Mr Tony Frangi and Mr Fred Frangi gave Mr Graoroski a printed PowerPoint presentation. On the bottom of the 5th page of the presentation is the statement: "Note: in the short term Lumbalite will retain its existing customers until a distributor agreement is signed. After signing, Lumbalite customers will deal directly with Cosmoluce. [Ex PX at 125] A similar note appears in a PowerPoint presentation presented on 18 August [Ex PX at 389].
 Mr Graoroski gives evidence that, on 19 August 2005, Fred Frangi provided
Cosmoluce with a customer list showing the number of customers and the quantity of orders, with the individual names of the customers blacked out. At this time, the following conversation is said to have occurred: 
Mr Fred Frangi: "Here, we have a customer base of about 60 and they'll all go to you once you have signed the agreement. We have a good, loyal customer base. We haven't given you the names because we don't want you sniffing around our customers in case you don't go ahead with the agreement." 
Mr Graoroski: "Who is one of the big ones then?" 
Mr Fred Frangi: "That's Holyroyd and this one is Ray, my brother, who is an electrician and he buys a fair bit." [pointing to entries on the list].
 [Affidavit Graoroski at 39] Mr Graoroski also recalls the following conversation which took place at a meeting on 31 September 2005: 
Mr Graoroski: "You have to change your customers and orders over to
Cosmoluce. You will have to provide to us your list of customers and you need to write a letter to the customers to send them Cosmoluce account forms. We also have to set up a wholesaler display stock stand for the launch." 
Mr Fred Frangi: "That's fine, we agree with that." [Affidavit Graoroski at 48(c)] During the meeting, Mr Graoroski recorded the following handwritten notes: 
Check List th October 2005 . Customer change over to Cosmoluce + Orders...
 . List of customers Cosmoluce letter plus A/C Forms Mr Tsagaris gives evidence that he recalls either Fred or Tony Frangi making the following statement at a meeting at Cosmoluce's offices: 
When you take over the product, we will transfer all our customers to
Cosmoluce. You can supply all of them, including us [Holroyd].
 
The plaintiff's evidence The evidence of Tony and Fred Frangi is that there was never any promise to transfer all of the customers, or to transfer any specific number of customers. Rather, only the names of the wholesale customers were to be given to Cosmoluce. The retail customers would continue to be supplied by the plaintiff's company (Holroyd), which, in turn, would need to purchase its stock from Cosmoluce.
 Mr Fred Frangi's evidence is that he communicated this to Mr Graoroski at the meeting on 15 August 2005, saying: "We have a customer base of about 60 customers. Some of these are wholesale customers, and some are electricians. Once you sign the agreement, we will give you the names of the wholesale customers. We will continue to service the electricians, by transferring them over to Holroyd." [Affidavit Fred Frangi at 109] Mr Tony Frangi gives evidence that he recalls his brother making a statement to that effect [Affidavit Tony Frangi at 37].
 Mr Fred Frangi also gives evidence that he did, in fact, provide the names of the 27 wholesale customers to Cosmoluce on or about 11 October 2005. He claims that he was never approached by anyone from Cosmoluce complaining about the customer list not containing 60 names [Affidavit Fred Frangi at 118-120].
 
Finding of fact - the customer base representation While there was no express qualification of the statement made in the two
PowerPoint presentations, that "(a)fter signing, Lumbalite customers will deal directly with Cosmoluce", it appears that, in the context in which the parties were negotiating, it was clear to both parties that Cosmoluce, as a distributor, would be dealing with wholesale, and not retail customers. The word 'customers' in this context therefore has a narrower meaning, and is confined to wholesale customers of Lumbalite.
 Under cross examination, Mr Graoroski acknowledged that the only customers to whom Cosmoluce was selling Chint products were wholesalers and lighting retailers. He also accepted that Cosmoluce only expected to have the wholesale customers transferred, and not any electrical contractor customers. He was aware that these electrical contractors would continue to go through Holroyd [T302.43 and T326.23-326.29].
 Taking this mutual understanding of the parties into account, and accepting that the names of the wholesale customers were given to Cosmoluce in
October 2005, the finding is that there was no relevant misrepresentation by
Chint Australasia.
 
The resumption representation Mr Graoroski gives evidence that the following conversation [which is in part repetitive of the conversation already set out in the market share and sales representations section above] took place on 10 October 2005, when the parties were preparing to sign the Distribution Agreement: "Mr Emirian: "You haven't changed the numbers, c'mon Fred. The numbers still seem a bit high." 
Mr Fred Frangi: "We won't agree to less. You will achieve these numbers." 
Mr Emirian: "Ok, if you feel that we can get those numbers, Fred, then we'll sign. But if we don't make the number you're taking the distribution and stock back and the agreement is over." 
When [Mr Emirian] made that statement, I observed Fred nod his head, he may also have said "yes" but I cannot now remember. I got the definite impression that Fred had agreed to [Mr Emirian's] condition.
 Mr Fred Frangi denies that this conversation occurred, or that he would ever have accepted such a proposal. He gives evidence that he perceived the minimum purchase obligations as: he price at which Chint Australasia was willing to sell the distribution business. If Cosmoluce didn't commit to these minimum purchase obligations, Chint Australasia might have been letting its business go for next to nothing.
 [Affidavit Fred Frangi at 114-115].
 Mr Fred Frangi also gives evidence that: 
Before signing the Distribution Agreement, I never had any discussions with Tony or Albert about Chint Australasia simply taking the stock and the distribution business back if Cosmoluce failed to meet its minimum purchasing obligations. I certainly could not have made a decision this significant without first speaking to Tony or Albert.
 [Affidavit Fred Frangi at 116] 
Finding of fact - the resumption representation The finding is that the defendant has not discharged its onus of establishing that this representation was made. The defendant's evidence depends upon Mr Graoroski's recollection of a possibly equivocal gesture made by Mr Fred Frangi on the day the contract was signed.
 On this matter, Mr Graoroski's evidence is rejected for the following reasons: i. as discussed above, with regards to the judgment of McClelland CJ in Eq in Watson versus Foxman, it is necessary that any alleged words [or conduct] alleged to be a misrepresentation be proved with a degree of precision sufficient to enable the court to be reasonably satisfied that they were in fact misleading. The evidence offered by the defendant is insufficiently clear and precise; ii. it is inherently improbable that this representation was made by
Chint Australasia. The benefit of the Distribution Agreement for Chint
Australasia was that it guaranteed it a minimum income from Cosmoluce in return for which it gave Cosmoluce the opportunity to make a profit from the distribution of Chint products. A representation to this effect would mean that Chint Australasia gave to Cosmoluce the opportunity to make a profit from the Distribution of Chint products but received no corresponding benefit; iii. Mr Fred Frangi did not have the authority to make such a significant change to the agreement without the consent of the other directors of Chint Australasia. There is no evidence that Mr Fred Frangi ever discussed the proposal with Mr Tony Frangi or Mr Chew; and iv. it is unclear why Mr Fred Frangi would have agreed to such an alteration at this late stage of the agreement, particularly as the deal had already been agreed to by the Cosmoluce board on 23 August 2005.
 
The reliance, rescission and estoppel issues Chint Australasia further or in the alternative, put forward submissions seeking to make good the following propositions: i. on the assumption that Cosmoluce was able to make out one or more of the misrepresentations it pleads, considerable difficulties attend it establishing that it relied on and was induced by those representations into entering the Distribution Agreement; ii. on the assumption that Cosmoluce was able to make out one or more of the misrepresentations it pleads, it was not entitled to rescind the
Distribution Agreement or, alternatively, no orders rescinding the
Distribution Agreement (in full or in part) should be made under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html), [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/); iii. the Court should find that Chint Australasia is not estopped from asserting an entitlement to damages against Cosmoluce for a breach of clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement.
 Here again the plaintiff's submissions were of substance and are generally adopted in what follows.
 
The reliance issue:  I accept that if and to the extent that Cosmoluce can establish any of the pleaded misrepresentations, Cosmoluce must also establish that it relied on that representation to enter into the Distribution Agreement.
 This requirement applies to Cosmoluce's claim that it validly rescinded the Distribution Agreement because of a pre-contractual misrepresentation (see
Australian Steel & Mining Corporation Pty Limited versus Corben <case> at <case> and at [78] - [83]) and to its claims under the under the Trade Practice Act: see
Ford Motor Company of Australia Limited versus Arrowcrest Group Pty Limited <case>; [(2003) 134 FCR 522] at 537, <case> - , [123], Digi-Tech (Australia) Ltd versus Brand <case>; [(2004) 62 IPR 184] at 210, <case> - , [159].
 The finding is that Cosmoluce has not been able to show that it relied on or was induced by any of the pleaded misrepresentations to enter into the
Distribution Agreement. That finding is informed by the following matters: i. Cosmoluce appears to have resolved to proceed with the transaction with Chint Australasia in its board meeting of 23 August 2005. Any representations made after that date can have only an attenuated relationship with the decision of Cosmoluce to enter into the Distribution Agreement. In particular, the alleged resumption representation [and some conversations relied upon in relation to the sales representation] occurred at the meeting between Mr Fred Frangi, Mr Graoroski and Mr Emirian on Monday, 10 October
On the previous Friday, 7 October 2005, an execution copy of the
Distribution Agreement had been provided for Mr Tsagaris to sign. By 10
October 2005 Cosmoluce's decision to enter into the Distribution Agreement may have been irrevocable.
 ii. the officers who executed the Distribution Agreement for
Cosmoluce were Mr Emirian and Mr Tsagaris. Mr Tsagaris was not an active or frequent participant in the pre-contractual negotiations leading up to the execution of the Distribution Agreement. He was not at the meetings of 18 July or 18 August 2005. His reasons for entering into the Distribution
Agreement related mainly to the "long term relationship with the Frangi family" and his resultant confidence that "they would do the right thing by
Cosmoluce". Mr Emirian did not give any evidence of his motivations for entering into the Distribution Agreement [the inferences which the parties sought to draw from Mr Emirian's absence are dealt with further below].
 iii. Cosmoluce's case that it relied on or was induced by the misrepresentations to enter into the Distribution Agreement must contend with the operation of clause 19.10 of the Distribution Agreement, which sought to negative any such representations.
 iv. In relation to claims under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) the effect of an "entire agreement" clause is to heighten the burden Cosmoluce bears in proving reliance on the relevant misrepresentation: see Leda Holdings Pty
Limited versus Oraka Pty Limited (1998) ATPR 41-061 at 40,515 - 40-516 (FCAFC),
Poulet Frais Pty Limited versus The Silver Fox Company Pty Limited [(2006) 220
ALR 221] at [75] - [81].
 
The rescission issue  If it had been successful in establishing one or more of the alleged misrepresentations, the defendant had sought that the Court should make orders under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) validating its purported rescission of the Distribution Agreement or, alternatively, orders under those Acts whose effect is to delete clause 11.3 of the
Distribution Agreement.
 As the defendant has been unsuccessful in its misrepresentation cases, the question of whether any of the alleged misrepresentations would have entitled it to this relief does not strictly need to be answered. Nonetheless, the finding is that, even if the defendant had succeeded in any of its misrepresentation cases, it would not have been entitled to this remedy.  Here again the submissions of the plaintiffs are of substance and are generally adopted in what follows.
 The power of the Court to make orders in the nature of rescission under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) is guided (but not controlled) by the same considerations as affect the availability of rescission in equity: see Akron Securities Ltd versus Ilife [(1997) 41 NSWLR ]
at 367E, Campbell versus BackOffice Investments Pty Ltd <case> at <case> per
Giles JA. In equity, the availability of rescission depends on the ability of the Court to make orders for restitution which effect practical justice between the parties: see Alati versus Kruger <case>; [(1955) 94 CLR 216] at 223 - 224.
 At least where (as here) no question of fraud is involved, orders for rescission are not made by way of punishment of the representor and are not occasions to extend benevolence to the representee: see Spence versus Crawford  <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] at 48.
 For the reasons set out below, orders for rescission of the whole of the
Distribution Agreement or of clause 11.3 thereof would not, in the circumstances of this case, be practically just: i. An order for rescission of the whole of the Distribution Agreement or for rescission of clause 11.3 would not operate evenly as between Cosmoluce and Chint Australasia. It would leave Cosmoluce in the position of having enjoyed the benefit of the Distribution Agreement but deprive Chint
Australasia of any benefit in return.
 ii. The substance of the commercial transaction in the Distribution
Agreement was that, in return for the minimum purchase obligations, Chint
Australasia sold to Cosmoluce the opportunity to make profit by the distribution of Chint products during the term of the Distribution Agreement.
Cosmoluce had that opportunity and the attendant benefit of possible gain for the currency of the Distribution Agreement. That is a benefit that cannot now be restored to Chint Australasia and, given the deterioration of the relationship with Chint China, is unlikely to be of much value in the future to Chint Australasia. An order for rescission of the whole of or clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement would permit Cosmoluce to retain the benefit of the commercial opportunity it received under the Distribution Agreement while entirely depriving Chint Australasia of any of benefit in return.
 iii. Put another way, far from being a substantial restoration of the status quo ante, rescission of the whole of the Distribution Agreement or of clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement would transform the commercial bargain between Chint Australasia and Cosmoluce into one in which Cosmoluce had the whole of the commercial benefit associated with the opportunity to distribute Chint products but was immunised from any commercial risk.
 iv. Rescission would not be a proportionate remedial response to the wrongdoing of Chint Australasia: see Akron Securities Ltd versus Ilife [(1997) 41 NSWLR 353] at 368E - F. Many of the alleged misrepresentations concern matters which were not at the centre of the commercial bargain contained in the Distribution Agreement. In those circumstances, the "total dismantling of the parties' relationship ex post" would not be an appropriate remedial response: Akron Securities Ltd versus Ilife [(1997) 41 NSWLR 353] at 368E.
 v. The quantum of damages suffered by Cosmoluce from the (alleged) misrepresentations would represent a fraction of the value of the bargain of which Chint Australasia would be deprived if an order for rescission was to be made.
 vi. In relation to the vast bulk of the pleaded alleged misrepresentations there is no apparent causal connection between them and the inability or unwillingness of Cosmoluce to comply with its minimum purchase obligations in the Distribution Agreement: Akron Securities Ltd versus Ilife [(1997) 41 NSWLR 353] at 366F, quoting with approval Ipp J (as he then was) in Reg
Russell & Sons Pty Limited versus Buxton Meats Pty Limited [(1994) ATPR -127](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%20ATPR%2046%2d127 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 53,614.
 vii. Cosmoluce delayed until after Chint Australasia had served a notice under clause 16.2(a) of the Distribution Agreement before asserting an entitlement to rescind the Distribution Agreement. This was well after the time when it must have been aware of the (for present purposes, assumed) misrepresentations. Delay in the assertion of a right to rescind an agreement is a relevant consideration both at general law and under the [Trade
Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/): see Henjo Investments Pty Limited versus Collins Marrickville Pty Limited (No 1) <case>; [(1988) 39 FCR 546] at 564 - 565. Cosmoluce was content to delay the assertion of its right to rescind until it had exhausted exploiting the commercial opportunity it acquired in the Distribution Agreement and then did so in order to avoid paying the price for that commercial opportunity which it had agreed to pay.
 viii. Cosmoluce's conduct following the termination of the
Distribution Agreement is inconsistent with its purported rescission of the
Distribution Agreement on 28 November 2006. After its purported rescission of the Distribution Agreement, on 18 December 2006 Cosmoluce performed the terms of the Distribution Agreement relating to the re-purchase by Chint Australasia of Chint products held in stock by Cosmoluce following termination.
 For these reasons, even if the defendant had succeeding in any of its misrepresentation cases, no order rescinding or validating the purported rescission of the Distribution Agreement or clause 11.3 of that Agreement would have been made.
 
The estoppel issue  Cosmoluce attempts to establish, in answer to Chint Australasia's claim for breach of contract, a promissory estoppel based on the final alleged misrepresentation (the Resumption Representation). This, it is claimed, bars
Chint Australasia from asserting an entitlement to damages against Cosmoluce for a breach of clause 11.3 of the Distribution Agreement (see paragraph 34,
Further Amended Defence).
 Cosmoluce's estoppel case fails on the facts. No representation to the effect of the Resumption Representation was made by Chint Australasia.
 In any event, the conduct of Mr Fred Frangi, which is alleged and relied on to form the foundation of the estoppel (being a nod of the head or other apparent indication of agreement when Mr Emirian put the substance of the
Resumption Representation to Mr Fred Frangi), is not sufficiently clear and unambiguous to form the foundation of an estoppel: see Legione versus Hateley <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 406] at 435 - .
 Further, the attempt by Cosmoluce to establish an estoppel on the basis of the Resumption Representation is excluded by the entire agreement clause 19.10 of the Distribution Agreement.
 The capacity of an "entire agreement" clause in the nature of clause 19.10 of the Distribution Agreement to exclude an estoppel arising from pre- contractual conduct has been the subject of a division in the authorities. It is supported by the judgment of McLelland J in Johnson Matthey Ltd versus AC
Rochester Overseas Corp [(1990) 23 NSWLR 190] at 195G -
D, the judgment of Miles CJ in Skywest Aviation Pty Limited versus Commonwealth of Australia [(1995) 126 FLR 61] at 102 - , the judgment of Bryson J in Australian Co-operative Foods Ltd versus Norco
Co-operative Ltd <case>; [(1999) 46 NSWLR 267] at 279, <case> - [52], the judgments of Young CJ in Eq in CG Mal Pty Limited versus Sanyo Office
Machines Pty Limited <case> at <case> - [54], and Arnot versus Hill-Douglas <case> at <case> - <case> at <case> - [97].
 In State Rail Authority of NSW versus Heath Outdoor Pty Limited [(1986) 7
NSWLR 170] McHugh JA (at 193) rejected the ability of the parties to exclude, by contract, an estoppel based on pre-contractual conduct (see, to the contrary, Kirby P at 195 - 196). McHugh JA's view was followed by Rolfe J in Whittet versus State Bank of New South Wales [(1991) 24 NSWLR 146] at 153D -
D. The authorities were discussed by Allsop J in Branir Pty Limited v
Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty Limited <case>; [(2001) 117 FCR 424] at 543, <case> - , [447], where the view of McHugh JA in State Rail Authority of NSW v
Heath Outdoor Pty Limited was (in obiter) preferred.
 In Ryledar Pty Limited versus Euphoric Pty Limited <case> at <case> - [214] Tobias JA discussed the authorities but expressly left the question open.
 In my view the plaintiff is correct in its submission that, notwithstanding the division in the authorities, the balance of the authorities in the Equity Division of the Supreme Court of New South Wales favours the view that no estoppel based on pre-contractual conduct can be established in the light of an "entire agreement" clause of the kind contained in clause 19.10 of the Distribution Agreement.
 
Clause 16.3(p) Clause 16.3(p) of the Distribution Agreement was in the following terms: 
Consequences of termination or expiration of this document .......
 
No rights other than as this document: subject as otherwise provided in this document and to any right or obligations which have accrued prior to termination or expiration, neither party has any further obligation to the other under this document.
 Cosmoluce contended that the plain and ordinary meaning of this clause was to provide that, after the termination of the agreement, the parties would have no rights, remedies or benefits that were not contained in the
Distribution Agreement. The proposition was that the clause had two purposes: i. the first was to preserve the effect of the clauses which were intended to survive the termination of the Distribution Agreement: namely confidentiality, restraint of trade and the like; ii. the second was to ensure that the accrued rights and obligations of the parties survive the termination, such as the plaintiff's accrued right to sue Cosmoluce for breach of clause 11.3 for the period ending 30 June 2006.
 Cosmoluce argued that this clause did not preserve Cosmoluce's obligation to pay Chint loss of bargain damages. This is based on the view that the obligation to pay loss of bargain damages is an 'anticipatory secondary obligation' (as described by Lord Diplock in Photo Production versus Securicor <case>; [[1980] AC 827] at 848-850) which does not accrue prior to termination of the
Distribution Agreement.
 There is no substance in these contentions. It is unnecessary to go beyond the judgment of Dixon J in McDonald versus Denny Lascelles <case>; [(1993) 48 CLR 457] at 476-477 to recall the basic principles: 
When a party to a simple contract, upon a breach by the other contracting party of a condition of the contract, elects to treat the contract as no longer binding upon him, the contract is not rescinded as from the beginning.
Both parties are discharged from the further performance of the contract, but rights are not divested or discharged which have already been unconditionally acquired. Rights and obligations which arise from the partial execution of the contract and causes of action which have accrued from its breach alike continue unaffected. When a contract is rescinded because of matters which affect its formation, as in the case of fraud, the parties are to be rehabilitated and restored, so far as may be, to the position they occupied before the contract was made. But when a contract, which is not void or voidable at law, or liable to be set aside in equity, is dissolved at the election of one party because the other has not observed an essential condition or has committed a breach going to its root, the contract is determined so far as it is executory only and the party in default is liable for damages for its breach. (See Boston Deep Sea Fishing and Ice Co versus Ansell [(1988) [39 Ch D 339]]; Hirji Mulji versus Cheong Yue Steamship Co. [[1926] AC 497];
Cornwall v. Henson [(1989) 2 Ch 710]; Salmond and Winfield, Law of
Contracts, (1927), pp. 284-289; Morison, Principles of Rescission of
Contracts (1916), pp. 179, 180.) The words in 16.3(p) "subject as otherwise provided in this document and to any right or obligations which have accrued prior to termination or expiration" make it clear that the construction for which Cosmoluce contends it is misconceived.
 
The foreign exchange issue During the hearing the parties resolved the currency conversion issues which had previously separated them.
 
The Rule in Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] Mr Leeming SC submitted that there was special significance in the failure of Cosmoluce to call Mr Emirian to give evidence.
 In dealing with this contention it is to be noted that there is before the
Court evidence given by Mr Swayn, a director of Cosmoluce, seeking to explain
Mr Emirian's unwillingness to give evidence on behalf of Cosmoluce. That evidence amounted to the following: 
Mr Emirian resigned from his position as a director of Cosmoluce on 24
August 2007. Mr Emirian was married to one of the directors of Cosmoluce,
Tina Emirian (Mr Tsagaris' daughter), but they are now separated. Mr Swayn requested that Mr Emirian give evidence on behalf of Cosmoluce, but Mr Emirian refused to assist until he reached a property settlement with his wife.
 Mr Swayn's evidence is unchallenged.
 The Court requires to be particularly cautious in dealing with claims that a witness should have and could have been called by a party to proceedings, especially where the failure to call such a witness is said to have been explained. In this regard Mr Leeming contended that Cosmoluce could have called Mr Emirian pursuant to a subpoena to give evidence.
 The principles which obtain in this area of discourse may be conveniently discerned from the following observations: i. The rule only applies where a party is "required to explain or contradict" something. What a party is required to explain or contradict depends on the issues as thrown up in the pleadings and by the course of evidence in the case. No inference can be drawn unless evidence is given of facts "requiring an answer".
 [Cross on Evidence, Butterworths, [6th Ed] D Byrne, JD Heydon vol at <case>; [(2000) 170 ALR 594] at 608 - 609].
 ii. In Adler versus Australian Securities and Investments Commission <case> at <case>
Giles JA, with Mason P and Beazley JA agreeing, held that: "This instance of a Jones versus Dunkel inference, ... also available where there is unexplained failure by the party to call a witness or tender documentary evidence, can entitle the judge or jury more readily to accept the evidence of the opposite party which might have been contradicted, or more readily to draw any inference fairly available from the evidence called by the other party. A Jones versus Dunkel inference cannot fill gaps in the evidence, or convert conjecture and suspicion into inference, but unless it is to be empty of content the inference if drawn may weigh the scales, however slightly, in favour of the opposing party." iii. In Dilosa versus Latec Finance Pty Ltd (1966) 84 WN [(Pt )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s1.html)  at 582 Street J held: "The inference which a court can properly draw in the absence of a witness, where such absence is not satisfactorily accounted for, is that nothing which this witness could say would assist the case of the party who would normally have been expected to have called that witness. The significance of this inference differs according to the closeness of the relationship of the absent witness with the party against whom the inference is sought to be propounded. Where the absent witness is a party himself then considerable importance may well attach to the inference." In truth, even if it were found that the failure of Cosmoluce to call Mr
Emirian was not properly explained by the evidence given by Mr Swayn, all that the Court could infer from the failure of Cosmoluce to call Mr Emirian is that his evidence would not have assisted Cosmoluce's case. That inference, even if drawn, would not materially strengthen the plaintiff's case because the inference still leaves the Court in the dark as to what evidence if any Mr
Emirian would actually have been able to give.
 In those circumstances I have not relied upon Cosmoluce's failure to call
Mr Emirian for the findings made in these reasons.
 
Conclusion In the result, the plaintiff's claim for damages for breach of contract is successful and the defendant's cross claim is dismissed.  
Short minutes The parties are to bring in short minutes of order, on which occasion costs may be argued.
 *
 
LAST UPDATED:  June 2008 * * * 
