

In The Matter of J and E Holdings Pty Limited and The Corporations Law J and E Holdings Pty Limited versus Vaughan T/as Johnston Vaughan Nos. Ca 40257/95 and Ed 1182/95 Summons [1995] NSWSC 124 (3 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
PRIESTLEY(1), SHELLER(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 2 June 1995 #DATE 15:6:1995 #ADD 3:11:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:     RF Driver 
Solicitors for the Appellant:    Johnston
Vaughan 
Counsel for the Respondent:     PG Maiden/K Solari 
Solicitors for the Respondent:   Cowley Harne
ORDER
The summons should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
PRIESTLEY JA I agree with Sheller JA.
JUDGE2
INTRODUCTION
SHELLER JA On 10 April Cohen J removed into the Court of Appeal proceedings brought by the plaintiff, J and E Holdings Pty Limited, by summons filed out of time for an order extending the period for it to apply to the
Court, pursuant to <case> of the Corporations Law (the Law), to set aside a statutory demand the defendant, Michael John Vaughan, had served on it. The principal issue was whether <case> or s 467A of the Law empowers the Court to extend the time for such an application. In Cavetina Pty Limited versus Synthetic
Dyeworks Industries
Pty Limited [(1994) 14 ACSR 274] the Queensland Court of
Appeal by a majority (Macrossan CJ and Demack J) held that <case> should not be regarded as excluding the
Court's jurisdiction to extend time for bringing applications to set aside statutory demands. McPherson JA dissented. The majority declined to follow the decision of Hayne J in Texel Pty Limited v
Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1994) 2 VR 298] At 299300; 536-7
Hayne J said: "In my view the intent of Pt 5.4 is clear. It is to prescribe a scheme regulating the winding up of companies in insolvency and the whole of the statutory demand procedure: the making of such demands, their setting aside, their variation.

In those circumstances I do not consider that the general provisions of s1322 may be applied to extend the time so emphatically prescribed in s459G (2) even if, as I assume, <case> is ordinarily to be given a wide construction.
The operation of the general provisions of <case> would be repugnant to the special scheme enacted by Div 2 of Pt 5.4 and in particular <case> (2):"
In David Grant and Co Pty Limited versus Westpac Banking Corporation <case>; [(1995) 15
ACSR 771] the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of Victoria held the
Court had no power under the Law to extend the time for application.
The
Victorian Court carefully considered the reasons of the Queensland Court in
Cavetina. Despite the desirability for uniformity in decision between State courts their Honours were convinced that the Queensland decision was plainly wrong as it failed to consider the impact of an extension of time on the operation of <case>. In Sydar Pty Limited versus K Simmonds Finance Pty Limited [(1995) 16 ACSR 384] Santow J declined to follow David Grant and followed
Cavetina. These circumstances explain the removal of the proceedings to the
Court of Appeal. 
PART 5.4 OF THE LAW
Part 5.4, headed "Winding up in insolvency", was inserted into the Law in and took effect from 23 June 1993. Section 459A empowers the Court, on an application under <case>, to order that an insolvent company be wound up in insolvency. The Court must presume that the company is insolvent if, during or after the 3 months ending on the day when the application was made, the company failed (as defined by <case>) to comply with a statutory demand; s
C (2) (a). Section 459E enables a person to serve on a company a demand relating to a debt or debts that the company owes to the person, that is due and payable and whose amount is at least the statutory minimum. Section 459E stipulates that the demand must be in writing in the prescribed form signed by or on behalf of the creditor, must include the amount of the debt or debts and must require the company to pay the amount of the debt or debts or secure or compound for that amount within twenty-one days after the demand is served on the company. Unless it is a judgment debt an affidavit verifying the debt must accompany the demand; <case> (3). If, as at the end of the period for compliance, the demand is still in effect and the company has not complied with it, the company is taken to fail to comply with the demand at the end of that period; <case> (1). Section 459F (2) provides as follows: "(Period for compliance)
The period for compliance with a statutory demand is: if the company applies in accordance with section 459G for an order setting aside the demand: if, on hearing the application under section 459G, or on an application by the company under this paragraph, the Court makes an order that extends the period for compliance with the demand - the period specified in the order or in the last such order, as the case requires, as the period for such compliance; or otherwise - the period beginning on the day when the demand is served and ending 7 days after the application under section 459G is finally determined or otherwise disposed of-, or otherwise - 21 days after the demand is served."
Section 459G (1) permits the company to apply to the Court for an order setting aside a statutory demand served on it. The following subsections are critical to the issue before us: "459G (2) (Time limit on application An application may only be made within 21 days after the demand is so served.
G (3) (Requirements for effective application An application is made in accordance with this section only if, within those 21 days: an affidavit supporting the application is filed with the
Court; and a copy of the application, and a copy of the supporting affidavit, are served on the person who served the demand on the company." .
Section 459H provides for the determination of a dispute or offsetting claim and <case> for setting aside a demand on other grounds.
An order under s
H or 459J may be made subject to conditions; <case>. Section 459R (1) stipulates that an application for a company to be wound up in insolvency is to be determined within 6 months after it is made. Subs (2), (3) and (4) are as follows: "(2) (Grounds for court to extend period) The Court may by order extend the period within which an application must be determined, but only if: the Court is satisfied that special circumstances justify the extension; and the order is made within that period as prescribed by subsection (1), or as last extended under this subsection, as the case requires.
 (Application dismissed if not determined as required) An application is, because of this subsection, dismissed if it is not determined as required by this section.
(Order under subs (2) may have conditions) An order under subsection (2) may be made subject to conditions."
Section 459S provides: "(1) (Grounds disallowed without leave) In so far as an application for a company to be wound up in insolvency relies on a failure by the company to comply with a statutory demand, the company may not, without the leave of the Court, oppose the application on a ground: that the company relied on for the purposes of an application by it for the demand to be set aside; or that the company could have so relied on, but did not so rely on (whether it made such an application or not).
(No leave unless ground material to solvency) The Court is not to grant leave under subsection (1) unless it is satisfied that the ground is material to proving that the company is solvent." 
PART 5.4 B OF THE LAW
Part 5.4 B, headed "Winding up in insolvency or by the Court", includes s
A which provides: "An application under Part 5.4....... must not be dismissed merely because of one or more of the following: in any case - a defect or irregularity in connection with the application; in the case of an application for a company to be wound up in insolvency - a defect in a statutory demand; unless the Court is satisfied that substantial injustice has been caused that cannot otherwise be remedied (for example, by an adjournment or an order for costs)." 
PART 9.5 OF THE LAW 
Part 9.5 of the Law invests the Court with general powers including those in <case>. In that section, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to a proceeding under "this Law" is a reference to any proceeding whether a legal proceeding or not; subs (1).
Subs (4) provides that subject to the following provisions of the section but without limiting the generality of any other provision of "this Lam," the Court may make - "(d) an order extending the period for doing any act, matter or thing or instituting or taking any proceeding under this Law or in relation to a corporation (including an order extending a period where the period concerned ended before the application for the order was made) or abridging the period for doing such an act, matter or thing or instituting or taking such a proceeding; and may make such consequential or ancillary orders as the Court thinks fit."
Subsection (6) provides that the Court shall not make an order under the section unless it is satisfied: "(c) in every case - that no substantial injustice has been or is likely to be caused to any person." 
SECTIONS 459G AND 1322 
The meaning of <case> (2) and (3) is plain. A company upon which a statutory demand has been served is permitted to apply to the
Court to have it set aside within 21 days after the demand is served. The right granted to make that application may be exercised during the 21 days and thereafter may not.
The question is does <case> invest in the Court power to extend the period during which the right to apply may be exercised. Section 1322 (4), if it applies to proceedings under <case>, would enable the Court to extend the period and to do so even where the 21 day period had ended before the application was made. The question whether <case> applies, turns upon the use of the word "only" in both subs (2) and (3) of <case>.
Section 1322 is a remedial provision which confers on the Court a broad power to relieve against injustice; compare FAI General Insurance Co Limited v
Southern Cross Exploration NL <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 268] at 283. The section gives a very full discretionary power. In principle, a free discretion should not be fettered by limitations which are nowhere enacted; Hyman versus Rose [(1912) AC 623] at 631. However, in my opinion, the language of <case> (2) and (3) denies the conferral on the Court by virtue of <case> of a power to extend the period within which application under the section may be made.
If the legislature had intended that the entitlement to make an application and the requirement to file a supporting affidavit and serve the application and the affidavit within 21 days after service of the demand be subject to a statutory discretion in the Court to extend that period whether it had already passed or not, the word "only" could and should have been omitted. If the section is so construed the word achieves nothing and is otiose.
The use of it twice: - as a matter of language emphasises that compliance with the time requirement is of the essence of the right to apply. Once the time has expired the right is lost.
-.points to a legislative intention contrary to the existence of any power in the Court under <case> to extend the period of time to apply under <case>.
The legislature insists upon compliance as a pre-condition of the right to apply. Unless the presence of the word has the consequence I have suggested this emphasis is lost. 
THE SCHEME OF PART 5.4
The legislative scheme of Part 5.4 supports the conclusion I have reached. Mr Fabian
Gleeson, counsel for The Australian Securities Commission which appeared on the hearing to assist the Court, helpfully outlined the statutory context which, he submitted, supported the conclusion that the Court had no power to extend the 21 day period. In summary, the legislature has segregated disputes about the existence and amount of an insolvent company's debts from the question of whether an insolvent company should be wound up. If a creditor wishes to apply to have a company wound up in insolvency the creditor may serve a statutory demand in the required form. If there is a dispute about that debt, the company is compelled to take steps quickly to satisfy the Court that the dispute is genuine. It is undesirable that the question remains unresolved until the application for winding up is heard.
If the company applies to set aside the statutory demand, the period for compliance is extended to 7 days after the application is finally determined or otherwise disposed or for such other period as the Court may order under s
F (a). If the company does not apply within 21 days or if the application to set aside the demand is dismissed, on an application to wind the company up made within 3 months, the Court must presume the company is insolvent; <case> (2). This scheme imposes some certainty about the position of both creditor and company and fits comfortably with the requirement of s
R (1) that an application for a company to be wound up in insolvency is to be determined within 6 months after it is made. Section 459R (2) empowers the
Court to extend that period, but only if there are special circumstances and the order is made within the period prescribed by subs (1) or as last extended under the subsection. This subsection itself strongly supports the argument that Pt 5.4 contains its own code about time limits and when they may be extended to the exclusion of the existence of any general power in the Court pursuant to s .
Section 459S (1) provides that a company may not, without the leave of the Court, oppose an application for winding up in insolvency based on non compliance with a statutory demand on a ground that it relied on or could have but did not rely on for the purposes of having the demand set aside.
Subsection (2) provides that the Court is not to grant leave under subs (1) unless it is satisfied that the ground is material to proving that the company is solvent. Once the period <case> allows for compliance has passed, the issue the Court is required to determine is not whether the plaintiff creditor has a debt or the amount of it, but whether the company is insolvent and should be wound up. If the company, now with the onus because of the presumption of insolvency, can prove in the ordinary way that it is solvent, disputes about the plaintiff's debt are irrelevant, unless the debt or the amount of it relates to the issue of its solvency. In that case the Court may grant leave to the company to rely upon material showing that the debt was not owing or not owing in the amount claimed in order to demonstrate its solvency.
The Law Reform Commission,
Report No 45, General Insolvency Inquiry, (the
Harmer Report), vol 1, paras 148-155 and the model 1992 legislation WU 8 support the conclusion that the legislature intended that the Court should have no power to extend the period for compliance. The Commission considered that the existing, largely unregulated, procedure in relation to notices of demand too often produced disputes about the debt at the hearing of a winding up application. The Commission was anxious to avoid this as well as the need for companies to bring injunction proceedings where a debt claimed in a demand was disputed. Provided the company does not get out of time, the procedure in
Pt 5.4 of filing an application for an order setting aside a statutory demand together with a supporting affidavit and serving a copy of the application and supporting affidavit on the person who served the demand is simple and automatically extends the period for compliance until the application is finally determined or otherwise disposed of The prescribed form which the demand must take under <case> (2) includes an address for service of the person serving the demand; Corporations Regulations 1.03 (1), Schedule 2
Form
H, para 6. 
INJUSTICE OR HARDSHIP
While there is no reason for us to decide the point, I do not think that
Pt 5.4 in any way inhibits the Court exercising its inherent jurisdiction to prevent an abuse of its process by the institution of proceedings for an improper purpose; see generally Williams versus Spautz <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 509] at 518 and following. Aside from abuse of process, the decided cases have thrown up examples of suggested hardship or injustice where an application to set aside a statutory demand has been lodged one day late or there has been difficulty or delay in obtaining a supporting affidavit. Santow J helpfully annexed a summary of the principal decisions on ss 459G and 1322 (4) (d) of the Law to his judgment in Sydar Pty Limited versus K Simmonds Finance Pty Limited at 395 and following. The facts of some of them suggest apparent injustice where the application was served within the prescribed period but in an unauthorised way (CFC Corporation Pty Limited versus Lanier (Australia)
Pty Limited (1993) 11 ACSR ), the application and affidavit were filed within time but not served , and the application was filed within time but served one day late (Bartex Fabrics Limited versus Phillips Fox [(1994) 13 ACSR 667).] In Bartex Fabrics at 675 Young J adverted to the possibility that there would be no way in which a company which was one day late in filing or serving an application to set aside the statutory demand but was completely solvent could prevent the issue of a winding up summons. He said: "The issue of such a summons may have very drastic commercial consequences. For instance, it may trigger rights in mortgagees to call up the whole of the principal of mortgages, or it may cause the crystallisation of floating charges. (Section 459S) is really not much of a safety net if because the company is one day late, it may, with the leave of a court, be allowed to defend a winding up summons and show that it has $12.7 m worth of shareholders' funds, yet be completely ruined because secured creditors have been able to accelerate payment of their debts and all this without the petitioner being responsible at all for the damage to the company.

With great respect to Hayne J, the view that he has taken and others have followed since, that there is some exclusive code in Pt 5.4, runs quite contrary to the whole spirit of the 
Corporations Law that technicalities are not to crucify companies."
In Cavetina at 277 the Chief Justice said that if any time limit at all was to apply to the making of an application to set aside, including a time limit which may only provisionally be applicable and be subject to a power in the Court to order an extension, then the time limit would have to be prescribed in mandatory language.
 "It would serve no purpose at all if a provision were enacted indicating merely that, an applicant might, if he chose, make his application within twenty-one days. There would in fact be no time limit, not even a provisional one, unless the statute uses some form of mandatory language. More traditional language used in imposing time limits, if employed here, may have resulted in something along the lines that the application 'shall' be brought within a specified number of days.
However, this kind of provision would not ordinarily be thought to exclude the jurisdiction of a court to rely upon general powers found elsewhere in the statute to extend time for bringing applications or doing acts. "
With the greatest respect I do not agree with this analysis. As I have said no more was required to limit the time within which the right to make an application might be brought than to say that it "may be made within 21 days after the demand is so served." A power in the Court to extend the time, whether it had passed or not, would have to be found elsewhere. In the Law it would be found in <case> (4). I agree with Hayne J that the word "only" adds emphasis and the effect of the emphasis is that the power under <case> to extend time cannot be invoked. The same emphasis with the same result is found, in my opinion, in <case> (2). I agree, with respect with McPherson
JA in Cavetina when he said at 281 that "it remains impossible to identify the function or utility of the word 'only' in <case> (2) if it does not mean what it says, which is that the application is to be made within 21 days of service of the demand, and not at some time thereafter."
In David Grant at 776 Brooking and Phillips JJ said that if the time for the making of an application under <case> could be enlarged by the Court notwithstanding the apparently emphatic wording of the section, there was difficulty in giving <case> sensible operation. In particular they referred to the uncertainty about the position of the alleged debtor, pending the making of an application and the rights of the claimant creditor in the meantime. It is undoubtedly important to remember not only that an application to wind the company up must be made within 3 months of non-compliance but that the application is to be determined within 6 months after it is made. The legislature stresses the importance of speedy resolution of the question of a company's insolvency and its consequences. At 776-7 their Honours said: "It must follow then, if the time for the making of an application under <case> can be enlarged under <case> (4) as the appellants argue, that it will not be possible to say, when the 21 day period specified in the statutory demand expires, whether that is and will remain the applicable period of compliance with the demand. That will be the case days, weeks or even months after the notice has, according to its tenor, expired - as Re
Bowes and Brown Pty Limited [(1994) 15 ACSR 438] shows. In that case, on 15 August 1994, the day before the making of the application to set aside the demand, the period for compliance was, on the argument of the present appellants, still defeasible; it was still not possible to say whether the period for compliance allowed by <case> (2) was 21 days after service of the demand or not. That is surely a most improbable result to flow from legislation apparently intended to provide a means of establishing simple and speedily the relevant ground for winding up a company in insolvency. And had the improbable been intended, some express provision to that effect would surely have been made; yet all that is found in the Law is to the contrary."
Later in their judgment at 778-9 their Honours referred to the considerations raised by Young J and said: "Of course cases can be imagined where it might be thought unjust that an application to set aside a demand cannot be made out of time - and cases of minor delay occasioned by the neglect of legal advisers might be thought to be examples. As to this, there is, however, the possibility of obtaining leave under s 459S (1). It is true that that leave may be granted only if the ground sought to be raised bears upon solvency or no, so that the point of dispute is enlarged from the debt in the statutory demand to the wider issue. But that is consistent with the debtor company's having already allowed time to pass since the service of the statutory demand and with its having failed to apply within time to have the demand set aside; it cannot be forgotten that that initial default was the debtor's, not the creditor's.

It is then contended that leave under <case> is but a poor substitute for action to prevent the filing of the application for winding up which itself may be a trigger for other consequences under, say, security documents.
But if it be a trigger only for some action on the part of the secured creditor if he chooses to take it, the consequence will turn on more than the mere existence of the trigger; and if it be self-executing, is it not also possible that noncompliance with the statutory demand win itself be a trigger by the terms of the instrument, a trigger which by then will have been pulled in any event? Could subsequent application out of time to have the demand set aside 'un-pull' it? But whatever might be the position under particular security documents, the difficulty raised in argument means only that any debtor company which is confronted with a statutory demand should not delay in making application within the time for compliance to have it set aside.

Further, there is always the possibility, in an extreme case, of obtaining an injunction to prevent the making of a winding up application - and this is a possibility that has by no means gone unnoticed in the decided cases. In general, the availability of the statutory remedy provided by <case> would afford reason for declining to intervene by injunction.
But we do not see why, in a strong enough case, where the statutory remedy was not available because time had run, an injunction could not be granted. On an application for an injunction one relevant consideration would be how it had come about that an application to set the demand aside had not been made in the manner required and within the time allowed by s 459G."
It is neither necessary nor desirable to indicate in what cases, if any, other relief may be available to a company which has failed to comply with the statutory demand. I agree with respect with their Honours' remarks. The legislative scheme, which is, I think, clear, does not enlarge greatly if at all the potential for real injustice. The purpose is to resolve quickly the issue of solvency and whether the company should be wound up, untrammelled by disputes about debts, unless these are raised duly and promptly.
In Sydar Pty Limited versus K Simmonds Finance Pty Limited Santow J, after a careful review of the case law and particularly cases concerned with the meaning of the word "may", preferred the conclusion arrived at by the
Queensland Court in Cavetina. I am indebted to his Honour's research and the full and careful summary of sixteen decisions in various jurisdictions since
Pt 5.4 was introduced.
With respect I disagree with his Honour's conclusion in substance because I believe it does not give appropriate weight, in the context of the legislation, to the use of the word "only". 
SECTION 467A OF THE CORPORATIONS LAW
I do not think <case> helps the plaintiff.
There is no application under
Pt 5.4 before the Court. There is no question of such an application being dismissed because of a defect or irregularity in connection with the application. The position is quite simply that unless the Court has a power to extend the time within which the application to set aside the statutory demand can be made, the plaintiff has no right to make it. That is not a situation which <case> addresses in any way; see Cavetina at 279. 
COMITY
In Australian Securities Commission versus Marlborough
Goldmines Limited <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 485] at 492 the High Court stressed the importance of uniformity of decision in the interpretation of uniform national legislation such as the
Law and said that that was a sufficiently important consideration "to require that an intermediate appellate court - and all the more so a single judge - should not depart from interpretation placed on such legislation by another
Australian intermediate appellate court unless convinced that that interpretation is plainly wrong." In the present case I agree with the interpretation placed upon <case> by the Appellate Division of the Victorian
Supreme Court in David Grant. This is the latest decision by an intermediate appellate court on the point. Their Honours carefully reviewed the arguments and concluded that the majority decision of the Queensland
Court of Appeal was plainly wrong. Even if I retained some residual doubt about the Victorian
Court's conclusion I think we should follow it. To do otherwise would seem to me to be giving but lip service to what the High Court has said. Certainty in the law, in my opinion, requires that only in an extreme case would an intermediate appellate court or a judge of first instance not follow the latest decision by an intermediate appellate court if, in that latest decision, the arguments have been fully reviewed and a conclusion reached that an earlier decision of another intermediate appellate court was plainly wrong.
 
CONCLUSION
In my opinion the summons should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I agree with Sheller JA.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/124.html  
