

Breton Investments Ltd versus Birdon Marine Pty Ltd Matter No 2489/97 [1997]
NSWSC 205 (20 May 1997) ` 
Breton Investments Limited versus Birdon Marine Pty Ltd` ` 2489/97` `20 May 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 - BRETON INVESTMENTS LIMITED versus BIRDON MARINE PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT  
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for an interim injunction brought by the owner of a motor yacht presently located at the defendant's slipway. The parties have signed an agreement pursuant to which the defendant has possession of the yacht but cl 11 of the agreement provides that the plaintiff is to have access to it. The plaintiff wishes to exercise that right of access by having its employee Geraint Morris board the yacht and prepare it for sailing. The defendant objects to Mr Morris going anywhere near its property or onto the yacht. 
The plaintiff says that the matter is urgent and that it needs to have an immediate injunction today to protect its rights under the agreement because the yacht is about to sail into the Indian Ocean and the waters there at this time of year will be tricky for it unless it sails soon, so that any day lost is critical.

The summons was filed in court at 2.30 this afternoon and Mr Farthing, for the plaintiff, sought to have it heard on an interlocutory basis forthwith. Mr R
Byrnes, solicitor, appeared for the defendant and opposed that course submitting that he had only been served a very little while ago and that, in any event, there was an arbitration clause in the document which should be invoked. Mr Farthing said that the time taken to invoke the arbitration clause would not enable the matter to be considered with the urgency that the exigency of the situation demanded.

When a plaintiff seeks to have its case heard on an interlocutory basis, I believe that the duty of the court is to hear it. If the justice of the situation so requires, then an interlocutory order can be made preserving the status quo until the defendant is ready. However, it is far easier to get a prohibitory injunction holding the status quo than it is to get a mandatory injunction which alters the status quo.

The fact that there is an arbitration clause in the agreement does not deprive this court of jurisdiction. It just means that under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/s53.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/) the court may and usually does stay the proceedings. However, until a formal application for stay is made the court can exercise jurisdiction, and it has been customary to deal with urgent interlocutory applications for injunction before there is time to commence the arbitration.

An additional factor in the instant case is that the plaintiff is a company incorporated in the Cayman Islands and because of that fact, exacerbated by the fact that the Cayman Islands companies are notoriously difficult to sue, the court would almost certainly order substantial security for costs if this action were to extend any further.

Despite that, what should be done today? 
Clause 11 of the agreement does not contain a negative stipulation.
Accordingly, what the plaintiff is seeking is an interlocutory mandatory injunction. The effect of that order would be to compel the defendant to have on its premises a person to whom it has a deep objection. The access given by cl 11 is a contractual licence. The contractual licence is not coupled with a grant. Equity will, in certain circumstances, grant a prohibitory injunction to restrain revocation of such a licence but will not always do so. Helsham J considered the way in which the court applies the law and discretionary factors in Graham H Roberts Pty Ltd versus Maurbeth Investments Pty Ltd [[1974] NSWLR 93.] That was a situation where a builder was endeavouring to get an injunction, which amounted to specific performance of his access right to a building site. Helsham J declined to give any relief holding that it was inappropriate for equity to interfere and that any relief should be by way of damages only. Whilst not completely analogous, I believe that is the map that
I should follow in the instant case.

The court accordingly declines to give any interlocutory relief. The plaintiff must pay the costs of today, and I will adjourn the summons to the Registrar's list on 29 May 1997 at 9.30 am.
 * * * 
