

Regina versus Mansour Aala [1996] NSWSC 169 (30 May 1996) 
REGINA versus MANSOUR AALA /95 60541/95 
THURSDAY 30 MAY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
MEAGHER JA, BADGERY-PARKER J, SPERLING J 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: The appellant, Mansour Aala, was charged with wounding his wife, Mary Razi, with intent to murder her or, in the alternative, wounding her with intent to do grievous bodily harm. The second count gave rise to the further statutory alternative of malicious wounding. 
The appellant was tried before Finlay J and a jury. On 10 August 1995 the jury convicted the appellant only of malicious wounding. The offence carries a maximum penalty of seven years' penal servitude.

On 16 August 1995 Finlay J sentenced the appellant to penal servitude for two years and ten months comprising a minimum term of 13 months (commencing on 9
August 1995) and an additional term of 21 months. His Honour fixed this sentence on the basis that the appropriate head sentence was three and a half years, that is 42 months, broken into a minimum term of 21 months and an additional term of 21 months, his Honour finding special circumstances.
However, since there had been eight months earlier custody relating to this offence, his Honour deducted the period of eight months from both the head sentence and the minimum term.

The appellant has appealed against the conviction. He has conducted that appeal without legal representation. The Crown has appealed against sentence pursuant to [s.5D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5d.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). In the
Crown appeal, Mr Aala, who I will continue to call "the appellant", has been represented by Mr Green of Queen's Counsel.

Concerning the appeal against conviction, the appellant has written a letter dated 3 April 1996 addressed to the Principal Registrar of the Court. The letter and a subsequent letter, to which I shall refer, are the only sources from which to ascertain the grounds of appeal.

I will do my best to distil from the letter the points which the appellant wishes to make: 
Ms Razi claimed that the knife used had a brown wooden handle, but she was using a black-handled knife when the argument occurred.

The account of the events in the appellant's unsworn statement is re- stated in the letter as being the true account of what occurred.

The blade with blood on it was found inside a cosmetic basket but there was no blood in the basket. So the blade must have been put there after the blood had dried.

The cuts on Ms Razi's hands were not defensive wounds but self-inflicted.

The black-handled knife broke when Ms Razi fell down with it.

Ms Razi stabbed herself with both knives.

Ms Razi's story is not consistent with objective evidence in various respects, such as the absence of blood on certain shoes or slippers.

The red stain in the bathroom sink and the wet shower room were not evidence against the appellant because there can have been no need for him to wash in both places and the shower room was her washing area anyway, not his.

The police failed to do fingerprint tests on wall stains and on the knives in order to find out who did the crime.

The video recording of the police interview had been misheard as the appellant saying he fell "on the top of her" whereas he had said he fell "on the top of here".

Ms Razi had given inconsistent accounts of how much money she had in her purse.

The appellant should not have been found guilty without an independent witness nor because Ms Razi had inflicted the injuries on herself nor because there was insufficient evidence to implicate him nor because Ms Razi had told lies about what had occurred.

These points are introduced in the first letter by the sentence: "I rely on the following important facts which has not been told to the jury in my trial". I take this to mean that the gist of the appellant's complaint is that the trial judge failed to put to the jury certain reasons for rejecting Ms
Razi's account of events having regard to his own account. The fundamental feature of Ms Razi's account is that it was the appellant who inflicted the wounds upon her, in contrast with the appellant's assertion that the wounds were self-inflicted or in part occasioned by accident (when Ms Razi fell down) and in part self-inflicted.

Today, the appellant has put before the Court a further letter, dated 9 May
In that letter, he asserts that there were previous attacks on him by his wife. This is not fresh evidence. These matters could have been put to Ms
Razi in cross examination; they could also have been included in the appellant's unsworn statement or, if relevant, could have been given by the appellant in evidence.

A number of points of detail are advanced in the further letter concerning the events which gave rise to the charge. These include observations by the appellant concerning the state of the bedroom and concerning blood stains on clothing. None of these points amount to fresh evidence; they amount to argument in favour of accepting the appellant's account of events rather than that of Ms Razi. These points can, therefore, only be relevant to whether the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory. I will come to that.

In the second letter, the appellant also says that there was no interpreter at the time he spoke to the police. That is not fresh evidence.

Lastly, there is reference in the second letter to a visit to the appellant at the gaol, subsequent to the trial, by a person who I take to be Ms Roni Razi, a sister of the appellant's wife. The appellant asserts in the letter that, on this occasion, the sister ascribed a motive to the appellant's wife for telling lies. The suggested motive was revenge for failure by the appellant to pay to his wife (or, perhaps, her sister - it not being clear from the letter which was intended) a sum of $300,000 as requested by the appellant's wife.
This is not fresh evidence. Assuming such a demand was made, it was known to the appellant at the time of the trial.

I think the starting point in considering the appellant's appeal has to be the nature and extent of the wounds sustained by Ms Razi. These were multiple stab wounds to the head, chest, abdomen, both limbs and legs. One stab wound to the chest penetrated the lung. A wound to the abdomen penetrated the liver. A laparotomy was required to treat that wound. It was noticed in the course of the operation that the diaphragm had also been perforated. There were five or six stab wounds to the left chest, five or six stab wounds to the upper abdomen, two or three stab wounds on each arm, stab wounds on the right leg and a wound to the ear and over the angle of the jaw. The victim was in hospital for ten to fifteen days. Scars could still be seen in photographs taken four months later. There was also bruising around the eyes which was conformable with Ms Razi's evidence that the assault had commenced with punches to the head.

The jury found that the wounds were deliberately inflicted by the appellant.
That is necessarily implicit in the verdict.

No application was made by the appellant's counsel prior to verdict, requesting the trial judge to vary or add to his directions to the jury along the lines now raised by the appellant. That being so, leave to appeal is required pursuant to r 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules, 1986. I am of the opinion that leave to appeal should not be given in this case. The appellant was represented at the trial by experienced counsel. Further, for the reasons that follow, it does not seem to me that the appeal is sufficiently meritorious to warrant granting leave to appeal.

I am not satisfied that different or further directions were required along the lines outlined by the appellant. But, even if they were, there is no reasonable possibility that the outcome of the trial might have been other than it was had such further or other directions been given. I say this because of the inherent unlikelihood that such extensive and serious wounds were caused accidentally or in part by accident and in part by Ms Razi's own hand. The appeal should therefore be dismissed pursuant to the proviso in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), even if there were merit in the appellant's assertion that different and/or additional directions should have been given to the jury by the trial judge.

The Crown has responded to the appellant's letter by raising in a comprehensive way whether any error on the part of the trial judge is disclosed by a full reading of the trial judge's summing up. For myself, I detect no such error.

The Crown has also raised in a comprehensive way whether there may have been any error in the admission or rejection of evidence. Again, for myself, I detect no such error.

Lastly, the Crown has raised for consideration whether the verdict should be set aside as unsafe and unsatisfactory. As I have said, the jury must be taken to have found that the wounding was by the appellant's deliberate act. That is my conclusion also on a reading of the evidence. Any hesitation in reaching that conclusion would be dispelled by acknowledging the advantage which the jury had in seeing and hearing the witnesses. Accordingly, there is no basis on which to set the conviction aside on this ground.

In all the circumstances of this case, I am satisfied that the appellant has had a fair trial and that he has no legitimate ground for complaint. Indeed, the appellant was very fortunate, in my view, not to have been found guilty, at least, of wounding with the intention of causing grievous bodily harm, for which a much heavier sentence would have been required.

Insofar as the appeal rests on asserted misdirections, and non-directions, I would refuse leave to appeal. I would otherwise dismiss the appeal. However, in the circumstances of the case, I think that the only order which needs to be made is that the appeal should be dismissed.

I come then to the appeal by the Crown against sentence: This appeal should, in my opinion, be dismissed for the following reasons.

In Everett <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295], the majority of the Court said of the corresponding section in the Tasmanian Criminal Code, but with equal application to <case> of the
New South Wales legislation: "Such a jurisdiction has become commonplace throughout this country and the common law world. Nonetheless, in its exercise, a Court of Criminal Appeal must, in the absence of clear statutory direction to the contrary, recognise that there are strong reasons why the jurisdiction to grant leave to the
Attorney General to appeal against sentence should be exercised only in the rare and exceptional case. An appeal by the Crown against sentence has long been accepted in this country as cutting across the time-honoured concepts of criminal administration by putting in jeopardy for the second time the freedom beyond the sentence imposed. That being so, a 'Court entrusted with the jurisdiction to grant or refuse such leave should give careful and distinct consideration to the question whether the Attorney General has discharged the onus of persuading it that the circumstances are such as to bring the particular case within the rare category in which a grant of leave to the
Attorney General to appeal against sentence is justified'. In determining whether that question should be answered in the affirmative a Court of
Criminal Appeal should be guided by the following comment of Barwick CJ in
Griffiths versus The Queen: 'an appeal by the Attorney General should be a rarity, brought only to establish some matter of principle and to afford an opportunity for the Court of Criminal Appeal to perform its function in this respect, namely, to lay down principles for the governance and guidance of courts having the duty of sentencing convicted persons.' 
The reference to 'matter of principle' in that passage must be understood as encompassing what is necessary to avoid the kind of manifest inadequacy or inconsistency in sentencing standards which Barwick CJ saw as constituting 'error in point of principle'." 
It may be noted that manifest inadequacy is a sufficient ground for appeal.
However that phrase is to be read with the observation, earlier in the passage, that such an appeal "should be exercised only in the rare and exceptional case".

As is so often the situation, it is the business of the law to reconcile the irreconcilable. In this instance, two conflicting considerations are to be taken into account. First, there is the interest of the community in the adequacy and consistency of sentencing. Secondly, there is the prejudice to an accused of double jeopardy. Necessarily, the resolution of these conflicting considerations is a matter for normative judgment on a case by case basis.

The Crown does not dispute the findings made by his Honour in his remarks on sentence. Nor does the Crown assert any error of principle other than error implicit in what is alleged to be sufficient inadequacy to warrant the interference of this Court.

The burden of the Crown case is that the objective seriousness of the offence is such that the case falls within the worst category of cases. There are two limbs to that argument: first, the Crown relies on the extent of the wounding and, secondly, the Crown refers to the importance of general deterrence where an offence of this kind involves the use of a knife in a domestic situation.
In consequence, it is said that a head sentence of less than one half of the maximum penalty for the offence must be manifestly inadequate.

It is plain from the result that his Honour did not regard the case as being within the worst category of cases. I am not persuaded his Honour was wrong in that regard. His Honour recognised that the wounding was objectively serious.
Nor can it have escaped his notice that the case involved the use of a knife in a domestic situation, nor that this made general deterrence an important.

His Honour found that all the wounds referred to above were inflicted by the appellant "when he lost control of himself in the argument which took place".
Earlier in his remarks on sentence his Honour found that such an argument had been the precursor of the attack. The appellant had been in receipt of unemployment benefits. When these ceased, his wife told him that she had been responsible for terminating the payments, giving as her reason that he spent all his money on himself. This, his Honour found, had led to the argument and the attack. Later in his remarks on sentence his Honour re-stated his finding that the appellant had lost control of himself in terms that he was "in a state of emotional turmoil". His Honour found explicitly that there was no premeditation.

The jury's verdict, acquitting the appellant of the more serious offences and convicting him of the lesser offence of malicious wounding, fixed certain parameters. These were that the respondent had not inflicted the injuries with the intent to kill or cause grievous bodily harm, but that he had done what he did intentionally and without lawful excuse. The only rationale for such a finding, having regard to the nature and extent of the wounding, was that the appellant had so far lost control of himself and was in such a state of emotional turmoil that, although inflicting the wounds intentionally, he did not appreciate that his acts would cause really serious injury. The implication is one of a substantial interference with cognitive function. The trial judge's findings are conformable with that implication.

If the extent of the wounding were the only relevant consideration there would be force in the Crown's submission that this case fell within the worst category of cases for the offence. However, when one has regard to the mental element to which I have referred, that is not necessarily so. A premeditated wounding after calm deliberation could reasonably be regarded as a much more serious case than more extensive wounding inflicted without premeditation and with the degree of cognitive disturbance implicit in the jury's verdict in the present case. The extent of the wounding does not,therefore, place this case into the worst category of cases for the offence necessarily.

Subjective considerations were strongly favourable to the respondent and need not be reiterated.

In these circumstances, I am not satisfied that the head sentence was manifestly inadequate, so as to make this one of the rare and exceptional cases where an appellate court should override the discretion of the trial judge. No point is taken by the Crown impugning the trial judge's finding of special circumstances pursuant to [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) nor as to the implementation of that finding once the head sentence was fixed.

Accordingly, the Crown appeal should, in my opinion, be dismissed.

I propose the following orders in relation to this hearing as a whole: 
In the appeal against conviction, appeal dismissed.

In the Crown appeal against sentence, appeal dismissed.

MEAGHER JA: I agree.

BADGERY-PARKER J: I agree with Mr Justice Sperling.

MEAGHER JA: The order is as proposed by Mr Justice Sperling.
 * * * 
