

Regina versus Ronald Arthur White [1999] NSWSC 1351 (6 April 1999) 
REGINA versus Ronald Arthur WHITE /95 
Monday 7 April 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SIMPSON J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: Ronald Arthur White pleaded guilty in the District Court to an indictment containing two charges of armed robbery and one charge of stealing a motor vehicle, and asked that there be taken into account on a Form 2, two charges of stealing from retail stores. 
In due course the proceedings were heard before Nield DCJ and, on 21 August , his Honour sentenced the applicant in respect of one of the armed robberies to penal servitude for eight years, consisting of a minimum term of five years to date from 6 April 1995, the date on which the applicant was taken into custody, and an additional term of three years.

On the other charges the applicant was sentenced to fixed terms concurrent with the minimum term to which I have referred and, in fixing the sentences to which I have referred, his Honour took into account the matters on the Form 2.
The applicant seeks leave to appeal against those sentences.

The facts of the matter need not be considered in detail, but the sequence of events is of some importance. The applicant had been released on parole in
November 1994 and was subject to that parole order at the time these offences were committed. On 28 February 1995 he stole some fishing tackle from K-Mart at Bankstown. This was one of the matters on the Form 2. He was arrested, charged and released on bail.

Whilst subject to that bail undertaking, he committed the other offence on the
Form 2 of stealing a shirt from David Jones at Bankstown on 3 April 1995.
Again he was arrested and, yet again, he was released on bail. The three offences on the indictment accordingly were committed whilst he was still subject to the parole order and whilst subject to the two bail undertakings.

Those offences were committed on the same day, 5 April 1995. He stole a motor vehicle and he used that vehicle for the purpose of the two armed robberies to which he pleaded guilty. In the evening of that day he threatened the attendant at a bottle shop at Liverpool and robbed him of about $400 in cash.
He then drove to the BP Service Station at Yagoona where he threatened the attendant with a rifle and robbed him of about $300 in cash.

He was arrested in the small hours of the following day, 6 April 1995. He made no admissions to the police but, as I have observed, he did ultimately plead guilty upon his arraignment in the District Court.

His Honour accepted that the applicant had significant emotional problems at the time, to which I shall refer in a moment. The applicant put forward an explanation for his actions in a handwritten statement and in oral evidence, but about that explanation his Honour was justifiably sceptical.

The applicant has a long record, mainly for matters of dishonesty, including two prior robberies, and he has in the past been sentenced to prison on quite a number of occasions. He is now forty years old.

He has had a very difficult background which does elicit some sympathy for him. A significant aspect of that background is a serious asthmatic condition from which he has suffered from an early age. This involved his frequent hospitalisation and caused serious disruption to his social and educational development. He has a history of drug abuse, but it seems that he has made some commendable efforts in recent years to deal with this. In recent times also he has made good progress in literacy skills courses.

It seems that he was the victim of a serious sexual assault a few years ago which has affected him deeply, and which was the source of the emotional stress he was undergoing at the time of the offences with which we are dealing. At the time of sentence he had been on strict protection whilst in custody, the necessity for that protection arising from the sexual assault to which I have referred. I do not believe I need say any more about the circumstances of it.

This material was before his Honour from the evidence of the applicant himself, from a pre-sentence report, from two psychiatric reports, and a report of the Canterbury Community Health Service. His Honour had regard to all of that and said of the applicant, perhaps with some force: "Perhaps he is a man who, after having served so may prison sentences, is unable to live away from a controlled prison life." 
His Honour assessed the sentences with an eye to totality of criminality, and he found special circumstances in the applicant's need for appropriate psychiatric and psychological treatment on his release.

Before us, the effective sentence passed by his Honour has not really been challenged in the light of the material which was then before the Court. The application for leave to appeal is based entirely upon the applicant's state of physical health. Before his Honour the evidence of that was, to say the least, spare.

The applicant himself gave evidence that he had contracted emphysema and had been told by doctors that he probably had about six years of quality life left. Apart from a passing reference in one of the psychiatric reports, there was no medical evidence of this emphysemic condition. There was, of course, abundant reference to his long history of asthma. Before his Honour there was no evidence of the effect, if any, on the applicant's prison conditions as a result of his emphysema. His Honour made no reference to that condition, or indeed, to the applicant's physical health at all in his remarks on sentence.

For the purpose of this application Mr Scouler of counsel, who represents the applicant, has tendered fresh evidence. That evidence was objected to by the
Crown prosecutor, but the hearing of the application proceeded on the basis that we would determine its admissibility in due course, having considered the material. That evidence is in the form of an affidavit of the applicant of 3
April 1997, to which are annexed two medical reports relating to his respiratory problems. The effect of those reports is that, apart from the asthma from which the applicant has long suffered, he does now suffer from emphysema and, as a result, has what is described in one of the reports as "quite a severe air flow obstruction". The condition is exacerbated, hardly surprisingly, by the fact that the applicant still smokes, although the evidence discloses is that he has in more recent times significantly reduced his daily smoking.

What the affidavit does disclose is that his respiratory problem has a significance effect on his day-to-day prison life, and reduces considerably his capacity to comply with the regime of the prison at Junee where he is currently contained. It seems that everyday activities such as getting up, washing himself, cleaning his cell, are increasingly more difficult. The fact that his movement is significantly slowed by his condition makes it difficult for him to comply with the day-to-day prison regulations in a number of respects. He has difficulty attending musters on time and has been told that that is a requirement which he must meet, and about which there will be no relaxation of the rules. Perhaps more importantly, it seems that his condition affects his capacity to undertake work within the prison and education courses. As a result of that, his progress through the classification system is limited, as it seems that he would not achieve a C classification unless he were fit to work.

The Crown prosecutor objects to this fresh material on the basis that it is evidence which could, and should, have been led in the sentence proceedings themselves, and on the basis that it is evidence of events after sentence which might attract the intervention of the executive government, but are not properly the subject of consideration by a sentencing court and, in particular, by this Court as an appellate court.

In my view the evidence is admissible in this appeal, although I have arrived at that view not without some misgiving. It is not immediately apparent that this material, or material of this nature, could not have been presented before the learned sentencing judge. Nevertheless, and not without some hesitation, I have formed the view that it is admissible as evidence for the purpose of explaining the full extent and implication of the applicant's condition of health which existed at the time of sentence, and I lift those words from the frequently quoted passage of King CJ in Regina versus Smith [(1987) 27 ACR 315] at 316.

Having determined that the evidence is admissible, it is clearly relevant to the assessment of the appropriate sentence to be passed upon the applicant.
This Court had occasion in recent times to consider the authorities relating to the illness of an offender when it comes to passing sentence in Regina v
L (unreported, 17 June 1996) at pages 6 to 8 of the joint judgment, and it is unnecessary to repeat what appears there.

The applicant's criminality is grave indeed, especially when considered against the background of his criminal record, and the fact that he was subject to conditional liberty of more than one form at the time these offences were committed. As I have said, counsel does not argue with his
Honour's assessment of sentence on the material which was before him, nor could any such argument have been respectably mounted.

However, in the light of the fresh material, I am satisfied that the applicant is entitled to a greater degree of leniency. In the light of that material and the material that was before his Honour, I am satisfied that there are special circumstances warranting a departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms.

Accordingly, leave should be granted and the appeal allowed.

In the view I have formed, the appropriate effective sentence is one of penal servitude for seven years, comprising a minimum term of four years to date from 6 April 1995, and an additional term of three years. It appears to me that the practical way to achieve that is as follows.

In respect of the first count of armed robbery, I would quash the fixed term of five years fixed by his Honour and substitute for it a fixed term of four years to date from 6 April 1995. In respect of the second count, the other armed robbery, I would quash the sentence imposed by his Honour and substitute for it a sentence of seven years penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of four years to date from 6 April 1995 and to expire on 5 April 1999, and an additional term of three years to commence on 6 April 1999 and to expire on 5
April 2002.

I would confirm the fixed term in respect of the third count, the offence of stealing a motor vehicle.

I should add that, in sentencing him for the second count, the armed robbery carrying the term of penal servitude for seven years, I would take into account the matters on the Form 2. I would propose orders accordingly.
 
SIMPSON J: I agree. The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Hidden J.
 * * * 
