

Gilbarco Australia Ltd versus Saad [1996] NSWSC 455 (27 September 1996) 
GILBARCO AUSTRALIA LIMITED versus SAAD /93; DC 33993/86 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, HANDLEY JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS:NEGLIGENCE - SHEET METAL WORKER - WHETHER SAFE SYSTEM REQUIRED PROVISION OF GLOVES AND A PRISE BAR AND A DIRECTION THAT WORKER USE THEM AT ALL TIMES 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:ALLOWED 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: The respondent sued his employer, the appellant in respect to an injury to his left wrist which occurred during his work on 18 April 1983. 
His claim came before Nash DCJ who found in his favour and awarded him damages. The appellant has appealed challenging both the finding on liability and the award of general damages. The respondent has cross-appealed claiming that his Honour erred in failing to make any allowance for impairment of future earning capacity.

The respondent, who was ordinarily employed as a spray painter, was on the occasion of his injury operating a machine known as an EPD. The process that was followed in the use of this machine required the operator to lift a metal sheet which was 4 feet by 2 feet by 1 millimetre in thickness from a stack and attach the sheet to two hooks on an overhead conveyer. The operator then started the conveyor and the sheet passed through a number of processes, and when it had completed the circuit the operator was required to remove the sheet from the conveyer and stack it in order that it could later be painted.

Gloves were available to be used during the operation and were in fact used by the operator to remove the sheet from the oven, because at this point of the process the sheet was hot.

The accident occurred when the respondent lifted a sheet, fixed one corner to the conveyor and the sheet then slipped from his hand and cut his left wrist.
His case was that the system of work employed was not a safe one insofar as there was a risk of injury arising from the fact that the edges of the sheet were quite sharp.

This risk could have been avoided by, according to the respondent's case, any one of a number of means. I think it is fair to say his Honour rejected all the means except for one, and that was that the appellant could have provided a prise bar to enable the respondent to lift the sheet while wearing gloves, and in that way the respondent could wear gloves at all sections of the process.

The appellant at the trial and again before this court pointed to the evidence of the respondent that he did not wear gloves because he could not separate the sheet from the stack in a convenient manner whilst wearing the gloves. He said for that reason it was impractical for him to wear them and accordingly, although they were available, he didn't use them. In his cross-examination he said that he could not use the gloves to move the sheet in the first place and added "and to carry with the gloves you will not have a proper grip to hang it up". This answer provoked the appellant's counsel to submit that even if the prise bar had been provided that would not have furnished any answer to the problem because of the respondent's statement that he could not carry the sheet conveniently with the gloves.

All these arguments were put to his Honour who, as I have said, accepted the task as a simple one. The case that the respondent made at trial was that a safe system required the provision of the gloves and the prise bar and a direction that the respondent wear them at all times. The appellant's submission was that because of the difficulty in handling the steel sheet when an operator was wearing gloves, the provision of those items did not afford a practicable means of obviating the risk of injury.

His Honour found that there was a risk of injury involved in the task and this finding has not been challenged. His Honour also, however, rejected the submission made by the appellant's counsel which was phrased in these terms: 
Lifting sheet metal is an ordinary incident of the employment and of working in this industry. The ordinary care and caution on the part of a member of such staff should be sufficient safeguard in the circumstances of this case.

That rejection was not surprising as there was a deal of evidence which supported the contrary view that it was reasonably practical to minimise the risk of injury by supplying the two items of equipment to which I made reference.

In those circumstances, I do not think that this court should interfere with the trial judge's ruling, or that the appellant has demonstrated that his
Honour made an error. It is true to say that the task being undertaken was a simple one and there was no question of time pressures or a need to meet quotas.

It may well be thought unrealistic to suggest that an employer was negligent in failing to provide equipment which made the task absolutely safe in circumstances in which it may well have been that the work could normally have been done safely and that employees would not be disposed to use the equipment. However, there have been many cases in the last 10 years which have made it plain that the duty imposed upon an employer is now an onerous one and is not met by suggesting simply that the task in hand was an easy one which could have been safely carried out, notwithstanding that there were means available to make it safer. In the circumstances, and despite my feeling that this was a thin case on negligence, I am not disposed to disagree with the trial judge's finding.

His Honour award the sum of $45,000 general damages. The appellant submits that is too much, that it is outside the range. The respondent sustained a laceration to his left wrist which involved a partial laceration of the median nerve. He is a right-handed person. He had two minor surgical procedures, the first in May 1993 and the second in November 1993, which were carried out by
Dr Isaacs.

In January 1984, Dr Isaac certified the respondent fit to return to light duties, which he did, and he was able to cope until he hurt his back in May
In August 1986, when he was reviewed by Dr Isaacs, the doctor reported that over the past 12 months the respondent had been coping well with his duties as a spray painter. He no longer had any constant pain in his left wrist but still had diminished sensation, mainly in the middle and ring fingers of the left hand. He demonstrated a full range of movement at his wrist. Dr Isaacs saw him again in 1989 on 21 December. The doctor then said: "This man has a persistent median neuritis as a result of partial laceration of the median nerve. The median neuritis has settled to a point where he is able to do the majority of tasks but he would have difficulty with sustaining very heavy work using the hand. I believe he is genuine and his symptoms certainly would be aggravated by cold weather.

I assess his disability as being permanent and I regard this disability as amounting to 10 per cent loss of efficient use of the left hand." 
In cross-examination the appellant's counsel challenged the respondent on the complaints which he had made in his evidence-in-chief. In particular he was confronted with histories which he was said to have given doctors in which he made no reference to any problem with his wrist. He agreed that he had made no reference to those problems but said that he was being seen about his back and he wasn't asked about his wrist.

His reaction to the questions prompted his Honour to ask whether it was a fair summary to say that he could carry out his duties so far as his wrist was concerned, that is, his ordinary duties as a spray painter, but with some discomfort in the hands and wrist. This question or suggestion prompted the response "Yes there is some pain". He then agreed that if his back was alright he could do his ordinary work. In summary, he injury was a moderate one which has left him with some modest permanent disability in the left hand, and which does not interfere with his earning capacity as a spray painter.

In the circumstances I am of the opinion that an award of $45,000 is beyond the permissible range. A figure of that size reflects a much more serious injury and disability than this man has suffered and I would propose substituting an award of $20,000 instead of that awarded by his Honour.

In the cross-appeal the respondent asserted that his Honour was in error in failing to make any allowance for what was said to be the respondent's impaired earning capacity. I think there is a simple explanation why his
Honour made no allowance of that element of damages, and that is that it was not claimed.

His Honour does not mention the claim in the judgment and of course makes no allowance for such a claim. If one has regard to the terms in which his Honour expressed himself it seems reasonably clear to me that he expressly dealt with all of the claims which were specifically made by the respondent at the trial.
I would add that even if a claim had been made I do not think his Honour was in error in failing to make any allowance for that element of damages. I would, however, rest my decision upon the fact that no claim was made for future loss of earning capacity.

It is necessary to apportion the general damages as to the past and as to the future. I would propose adopting the procedure of making an allowance of $12,500 for the past. That is, until the date of the trial and $7500 for the future. A consequential adjustment to the interest is necessary. It would seem that the interest should therefore be reduced by $2675, leading to a result that the judgment which should be substituted to take effect from the date of the trial is $23,085.

I will not make formal orders until the parties have an opportunity to check those figures.

HANDLEY JA: I agree.

COLE JA: I also agree.

CLARKE JA: Do you want to check those figures? If you would like more time we can mention this at quarter to 1 and we can get on with the next case? 
BARRY: Yes your Honour, that might be more convenient. The only other question your Honour is the question of costs. We would be able to agree, I imagine your Honours, in relation to the mathematical calculations.

CLARKE JA: Do not costs follow the event? 
BARRY: Yes, your Honour. Except we would ask for a certificate in relation to the, with respect your Honours the appeal was on the grounds of liability and general damages. We succeeded on the issue of liability so we would seek the costs.

CLARKE JA: It is an unusual order. Yes, is there anything you want to say? 
McILWAINE: Your Honour, I would submit that the appeal was upheld, that the appellant should have the costs. Particularly as the cross appeal failed.

CLARKE JA: We will deal with that, let us say 20 to 1.

SHORT ADJOURNMENT 
BARRY: Your Honours with the assistance of a calculator Mr McIlwaine and I have done the reassessment. Can I tell your Honours what we agree on would be the appropriate figures given your Honours' judgments. They are general damages $20,000, interest on $12,500 for 10.5 years at 2 per cent $2625, past wage loss $6698, out of pocket expenses $5819, loss of opportunity $500. The total of that is $35,642 from which the appellant was entitled to credit in the amount of $12,517 by way of payments under the Workers Compensation Act, producing a net judgment of $23,125 and Mr McIlwaine has reduced that to writing after I have read it out to your Honours.

CLARKE JA: This is agreed? I will have this recorded then. Since the Court gave judgment in this matter that parties have considered the adjusted figures and have produced a document setting out the components of the damages which leads to a judgment figure of $23,125. I will initial that document and place it with the papers. 
Accordingly, the orders of the Court will be that the appeal is allowed; the judgment of Nash DCJ set aside. In lieu thereof there should be judgment for the respondent in the sum of $23,125 to take effect from 22 October 1993. The respondent must pay the costs of the appeal and is to have a certificate under the Suitor's Fund Act in respect of those costs. The order as to costs made by
Nash DCJ will stand. The cross appeal will be dismissed with costs.
 oOo * * * 
