

R and S Pastoral Investments Pty Ltd versus Porter and Anor Matter No 10136/97 [1997] NSWSC 277 (30 July 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
R & S Pastoral Investments Pty Limited versus Porter & Anor /97 July 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - R & S Pastoral Investments Pty Limited versus Porter & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff is the registered proprietor of a Mortgage given by the first defendant. It was executed on 29 November 1995. 
There has been default under that Mortgage. Default judgment has been obtained against the first defendant (in respect of a monetary sum and possession).

The plaintiff now seeks summary judgment as against the second defendant. An order is sought in terms of paragraph 11 of the Amended Statement of Claim.
The subject property is known as 13 Council Street, St Peters (the property).

The plaintiff relies on two affidavits sworn by Shirley Loneragan (a Director of the plaintiff). The second defendant himself has sworn an affidavit. The second defendant has filed a Defence and Cross-Claim. He has been given leave to file an Amended Cross-Claim.

There is abundant authority for the proposition that summary judgment should only be given in what has been described as clear cases (Webster versus Lampard <case>; [116 ALR 545).] The Court has a discretionary power to grant summary judgment. The onus of demonstrating an entitlement to that relief rests with the applicant.

In resisting the application for summary judgment, the second defendant argues only one matter as giving rise to an issue which should be allowed to go to trial. It is a matter which is founded on a claim for relief made pursuant to the Contracts Review Act, 1980.

The representatives for the parties made brief oral submissions on this question. They were given the opportunity to supplement those submissions, by subsequent written submissions.

It seems that the first defendant was the executor of the Will of the late
Geoffrey Gordon Smith (the deceased). The first defendant became registered as proprietor of the property. He granted the Mortgage to the plaintiff.

The second defendant is in occupation of the premises. He claims to be a beneficiary under the Will of the deceased. As I understand the position, he claims to be entitled to an equitable life tenancy. He says that he was not consulted about the matter of the giving of the Mortgage and that he did not authorise the first defendant to enter into the Mortgage. The interest claimed by the second defendant is not noted on the title to the property.

There is material to suggest that the first defendant may have left the State after taking out loans against the property. There has been default under the
Mortgage.

For the purposes of the Act, the relevant contract is identified as the
Mortgage. It is accepted that the second defendant is not a party to that contract. Despite this, it is contended that the second defendant has an arguable case for relief under the Act.

His contention is said to be based on a construction of the statutory language. No authority was advanced to support the arguments relied on by the second defendant.

In support of the second defendant's contention, reference has been made to section 12 of the Act. It is a provision which has the heading, "Interests of non-parties to contract". It is in the following terms:- . (1) Where in proceedings for relief under this Act in relation to a contract it appears to the Court that a person who is not a party to the contract has shared in, or is entitled to share in, benefits derived or to be derived from the contract, it may make such orders against or in favour of that person as may be just in the circumstances. 
The Court shall not exercise its powers under this Act in relation to a contract unless it is satisfied: that the exercise of those powers would not prejudice the rights of a person who is not a party to the contract; or that, if any such rights would be so prejudiced, it would not be unjust in all the circumstances to exercise those powers, but this subsection does not apply in relation to such a person if the Court has given the person an opportunity to appear and be heard in the proceedings.

It is said that the second defendant is a person who "is entitled to share in, benefits derived or to be derived from the contract".

Initially, it was said that his residence in the property from about March until January 1996 satisfied the requirement of "benefits". This contention was soon abandoned. Subsequently, it was said to be the loan moneys advanced pursuant to the Mortgage. These moneys were said to be the subject of a constructive trust.

I have not been referred to any authority which assists me in the task of construing section 12. It appears to be a provision which has application where proceedings for relief under the Act are on foot and it appears to the
Court that a person who is not a party to the contract "has shared in, or is entitled to share in," the said benefits. These being benefits "derived or to be derived from the contract". The section enables the Court to make such orders against or in favour of that person as may be just in the circumstances. It contemplates the giving to the person of an opportunity to appear and be heard in the proceedings.

Whilst the question has not been fully argued before me, I am not presently satisfied that the section enables a person who is not a party to the contract to bring proceedings for relief under the Act. The section contains language which is not consistent with the second defendant's contention. However, whatever may be the position on that question, the contention that the second defendant is a person entitled to share in such benefits is, in my view, unarguable.

I shall briefly make some additional comments. There are no benefits derived from the contract in respect of which the second defendant is entitled to share. In support of his contention, he does not rely on any contractual provision. He merely claims some equitable life interest. Such a claim does not carry any entitlement to moneys borrowed on the security of the property.

The law does provide a remedy for the protection of the interest claimed by the second defendant. He may lodge a caveat against the title. He did not avail himself of that remedy. This failure enabled the first defendant to deal with the property in the manner that he did.

In my view, the plaintiff has clearly demonstrated an entitlement to summary relief for possession of the property. It may be that the second defendant is a victim of the activities of the first defendant. He does have other remedies available to him.

I direct the entry of judgment for possession of the property. The second defendant is to pay the costs of the application for summary judgment.
 * * * 
