

Regina versus I H Saxon [1998] NSWSC 1012 (1 April 1998) 
REGINA versus IAN HALL SAXON /91 
THURSDAY 1 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: On 21 February this year the prisoner pleaded guilty on arraignment to the following: 
One count of importing not less than the commercial quantity of cannabis resin contrary to subs 233B(1)(b) of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for life: <case>(c).

Three counts of supplying not less than a large commercial quantity of cannabis resin contrary to [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for life or a fine of $500,000 or both: [s (3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s33.html) 
One count of money laundering by disposing of the proceeds of crime contrary to <case> of the [Proceeds of Crime Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) , which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for twenty years or a fine of $200,000 or both.

Two counts of possessing prohibited imports, namely trafficable amounts of cannabis resin contrary to subs 233B(1)(c) which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for twenty-five years or a fine of $100,000 or both: <case>(d).

Three counts of possessing money or property which is proceeds of crime contrary to <case> of the [Proceeds of Crime Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/) which carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for twenty years or a fine of $200,000 or both.

The agreed facts are set out in the Statement of Facts (Ex A) which may be deemed to be incorporated in these reasons, but which may be summarised as follows.

In late 1988 the prisoner arranged with Garry Roy Morton and a man referred to in the proceedings as Andrews for Morton's yacht, the Rolling Thunder, to be used for the importation into Australia of a large amount of cannabis resin.
On 3 January 1989 the prisoner telephoned Andrews (in Perth) and informed him that the shipment was due. Andrews flew to Sydney and was met by the prisoner and driven to Coffs Harbour where the Rolling Thunder was moored. The prisoner showed Andrews a photo of a rig tanker and gave him details of where the rendezvous was to occur. The next day the Rolling Thunder left Coffs Harbour with Morton, Andrews and Lloyd Saxon (the brother of the prisoner) on board.
After some delay they met the rig tanker (or mother ship), transferred to the
Rolling Thunder approximately ten tonnes of cannabis resin (in 500 canvas bags) and returned to Broken Bay where they were met by the prisoner on a houseboat which he had hired in the meantime. The cannabis resin was transferred to the houseboat and the prisoner gave twenty-five kilograms of the cannabis resin to Andrews, who returned to Western Australia. The prisoner subsequently paid Morton $1 million for his part in the importation and Lloyd
Saxon twenty-five kilograms of cannabis resin.

Between 8 January and 18 January 1989 the cannabis resin was transferred from the houseboat to an unknown shore destination by the prisoner, Lloyd Saxon,
Peter Hamill and, in the later stages, by Andrews (who returned to Sydney with his then de facto wife for this purpose) using, inter alia, a speedboat purchased and a four-wheel drive vehicle hired by the prisoner. The prisoner paid Hamill twenty-five kilograms and waived a debt owing of $20,000 by
Andrews in respect of an earlier drug purchase. On 19 January the prisoner sold Andrews a further twenty kilograms, and on 11 April 1989, sixty kilograms of cannabis resin.

Between January and November 1989 the prisoner sold 9,974 kilograms of cannabis resin through a chain of some seven wholesale distributors including
Andrews, Hamill, Lloyd Saxon and one Tamas Laslo Schneiders. According to records kept by the prisoner, the gross receipts from the sale of the entire cannabis shipment totalled $77,523,530.

Between 1 November and 8 December 1989 the prisoner, with the assistance of
Schneiders, arranged for approximately $8 million in cash to be transferred overseas through a person referred to in these proceedings as Bennett, who in turn caused the actual bank deposits to be made by Robert James See and Brian
John Buckett.

Of $8 million delivered to Bennett, about $930,000 was traced to the prisoner's account with Grindlay's Bank in the Channel Islands. Some was restrained by the authorities when a cash deposit by Bennett and others aroused the suspicions of the Bank of Singapore, some was traced to persons in the United Arab Emirates, and according to books and records of the prisoner $53 million was paid to an American referred to as "Sep", but it is not known if this was the final disposition of the whole of such amount.

The prisoner was arrested on 26 January 1990 and a search of his apartment at
Darlinghurst revealed two one kilogram blocks of cannabis resin (part of the original shipment), $192,000 in cash, and diamonds valued at $72,000. On 29
January 1990 a search warrant was executed on garage premises at 8/9 Carr
Street, Coogee rented in the name of Lloyd Saxon's company, Nowsan Pty Ltd, and four more one kilogram blocks of cannabis resin, $5,530,000 in cash, forty gold Krugerand coins and three gold bars were located.

The committal hearing commenced on 10 October 1990 for the prisoner and six others and on 5 September 1991 the prisoner was committed for trial and bail refused, but on 3 March 1993 he escaped from the Metropolitan Remand Centre and remained at large until recaptured in the United States of America on 21
April 1995.

The first count in the indictment relates to the importation, the second, third and fourth counts to the supply to Andrews (on 8 and 18 January and 11
April 1989), the fifth count to the sending of the proceeds overseas in
November 1989, the sixth and seventh counts to the cannabis resin, money and jewellery found in the prisoner's apartment at the time of his arrest, and the eighth, ninth and tenth counts to the cannabis resin, cash, gold (in the form of Krugerand coins and bars) found in the garage on 29 January 1990.

Although the prisoner's escape from the Metropolitan Remand Centre whilst on bail forms part of the Agreed Facts, it is not the subject of a count in this indictment and accordingly no part of the penalties I impose relates to that escape. I understand it is intended that the escape be the subject of a later indictment.

This was a most serious set of offences involving as it did the importation and distribution of a massive quantity of a prohibited drug in blatant breach of the criminal law for no motive other than unmitigated greed. The amount involved in the importation was almost ten tonnes or two hundred times the commercial quantity as defined by Schedule VI of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/).

The detection of illegal importations is difficult and not always successful, and those who engage in this pernicious trade are prepared to weigh the risks of detection and conviction against the massive profits to be made. In such circumstances the element of general deterrence assumes added importance in the sentencing process. The seriousness with which the community views such offences is shown by the maximum penalties provided by the Parliaments including (in respect of the importation and the supply offences) life imprisonment, and I refer to the remarks of Hunt J (as he then was) in R v
Jeffreys (30 August 1991) at pp 9-10.

It has been submitted on his behalf that the prisoner's part in the operation was no greater than that of Garry Morton, and it has been pointed out that they had both been involved in preliminary discussions with the person referred to as Andrews, Morton was the owner of the Rolling Thunder, the evidence was that Morton received $1,500,000, whereas the only money directly traced to the prisoner was $1,900,000, that they evidence on sentence was that there were overseas interests involved including persons from the Middle East,
Pakistanis and Americans, and that one of the Americans referred to as "Sep" appeared from the records to have received $53 million and was present in
Sydney at the time of the importation, as was his aunt Oleta Williams (referred to as CC) who according to the prisoner's diaries was paid $2 million, and there was evidence in the committal proceedings (read on to the record in these proceedings) that a person with an American accent was on the
Rolling Thunder when Andrews arrived with the prisoner the night before it left Coffs Harbour.

This was a massive importation of cannabis resin and undoubtedly there was a number of persons involved at different stages of the purchase, shipment, importation and distribution of, and payment for the drugs. Whether "Sep" was the principal of the importation into this country or whether he was merely the representative of the vendors or shippers who was on the spot to watch their interests, particularly in regard to payment and the repatriation of funds, cannot be determined on the present state of the evidence. The $53 million said to have gone to "Sep" may have been disbursed by him to others, for example vendors, et cetera; and the prisoner, who may have full knowledge of these matters, has (as is his right) declined to provide further information.

However, the following matters clearly emerge from the evidence. The prisoner was involved in the initial planning for the pick-up with Morton, he recruited
Andrews and Hamill for their respective roles (and also presumably his brother
Lloyd), he was the person who supplied to Morton and Andrews the shipping coordinates to meet the mother ship, he organised the houseboat, the speedboat and the four-wheel drive vehicle for the unloading, whilst Morton merely provided the Rolling Thunder and played no further part after it arrived at
Broken Bay and the goods were transferred to the houseboat. The prisoner was then in charge of the distribution. He received the money and (along with
Schneiders) he organised Bennett to find the money launderers, See and
Buckett. He in effect kept the accounts in his diary recording who received what amounts. He had keys to the garage at Coogee which when raided on 29
January 1990 contained four kilograms of cannabis resin, $5,530,000 in cash as well as the gold coins and bars. He received at least $1,900,000 which was sent off shore to Grindlay's Bank in the Channel Islands and following his escape whilst on remand he was able to leave the country and live without detection for two and a half years until his arrest in the United States of
America; matters which one would expect would require access to not inconsiderable sums of money.

I can only deal with the evidence I have and the prisoner has not seen fit to give evidence which may tend towards a different conclusion. This is not to reverse the onus of proof, but does enable me to more readily draw the inferences suggested by the evidence I do have.

In all the circumstances, whether or not the person "Sep" was at the top of the hierarchy, I am satisfied the prisoner was in charge on a day to day basis of the Australian end of the importation and distribution and was also involved, although not necessarily as principal, in the laundering of the money overseas - and played a much bigger part than Morton, who was only involved in the importation, and Lloyd Saxon, who played a minor role in the importation, and merely, it would seem, on occasions assisted the prisoner with the distribution of the drugs and collection of the purchase moneys.

The prisoner was born in Auckland, New Zealand, on 19 January 1943 so is now aged fifty-three years. He is unmarried but since his re-arrest in the United
States of America he has discovered he has a daughter in New Zealand who has made contact with him and who herself has four daughters (grand daughters of the prisoner.) He also become engaged to a woman whom he knew thirty years ago when they both worked at the Latin Quarter Night Club in Sydney and who visits him in gaol. He has spent most of his adult life involved with the entertainment industry, in most recent years as a manager of tours for rock singers and musicians. He has previous convictions for drug offences; in
August 1977 in California of possession of more than one ounce of concentrated cannabis for which he was fined $US 500 and placed on probation for three years, and in September 1980 in Tahiti for importing two kilograms of cocaine and importing goods without declaring them; for the first matter he was sentenced to imprisonment for four years and for the second he was fined ,672,725 CPF ($A 796,618) or two years imprisonment. In respect of the
Tahiti offences his co-accused was Garry Morton.

Evidence shows that whilst in gaol in respect of these offences he has (with the fundamental exception of the escape) behaved as a model, cooperative prisoner, using his time usefully and being involved in a number of programs including that for young offenders.

The prisoner has pleaded guilty, but not until after the committal proceedings had been concluded, he had been committed for trial, escaped, been extradited and a date fixed for trial.

In December 1995 the prisoner first indicated he wished to plead guilty, subject to the facts being agreed on, and on 5 February this year he advised the Crown he was prepared to plead guilty to the indictment in its present form. He has, according to his fiancee and daughter, expressed regret for what he has done and wishes to put it behind him and start his life anew; but it is not clear whether this is genuine contrition for breach of the law and the harm he has done to the lives of others, or merely regret at being caught with its penal consequences. In any event he has by his pleas saved the
Commonwealth the expense of a lengthy trial and I give him credit in sentencing on this account and for such contrition as is involved in the pleas of guilty. I have also taken into account each of the matters referred to in [s
A(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) and am satisfied that having regard to the number and seriousness of the offences there is no appropriate alternative to imprisonment [(s
A(1)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s17a.html)
I note that the sentence is to be served in New South Wales where there are no remissions and I have taken this into account (s 16G). I also have regard to the principles of parity and totality.

Lloyd Saxon, after pleading not guilty, received sentences of seven years for the importation, two years cumulative for the receipt from Andrews of part of the purchase price of some of the cannabis resin, and in respect of the various items found in the Coogee garage on 29 January 1990 an effective cumulative four years, making a total of thirteen years in respect of which I fixed a non-parole period of eight and a half years. However, in respect of the importation Lloyd Saxon was sentenced on the basis that he was not on the
Rolling Thunder when it met the rig tanker and his only involvement in the importation was unloading the houseboat.

Garry Morton, after pleading not guilty, was sentenced to an effective twelve years for his part in the importation, and for three money laundering offences to three years, a total of fifteen years with a non-parole period of ten years before adjustments were made to take account of pre-trial custody. These sentences were upheld by the Court of Criminal Appeal on 6 December 1994.

Lloyd Saxon had no prior convictions.

Peter Hamill's only involvement was in unloading the houseboat and, after pleading not guilty, he was sentenced to imprisonment for seven and a half years with a non-parole period four and a half years.

Robert James See and Brian John Buckett were also involved in sending part of the money overseas and were convicted of offences under <case> of the [Proceeds of Crime Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/poca1987160/), which carries maximum penalties of imprisonment for two years or a fine of $5,000 or both. See was charged as a principal and was for four charges fined a total of $4,000 and sentenced to twelve months periodic detention. Buckett was only charged as an accessory and was ordered to perform 300 hours of community service.

Schneiders absconded whilst on bail and remains a fugitive.

Having regard to the fact that the prisoner played a more significant role in the importation that Lloyd Saxon, Garry Morton or Peter Hamill, and was involved in additional offences, especially the three counts of supply, and the money laundering offences (although Lloyd Saxon and Garry Morton also had some money laundering matters but less than the prisoner); but having regard also to the fact that unlike the others the prisoner pleaded guilty, I consider that the appropriate sentences, after allowing for the fact that there are no remissions in New South Wales, should be: for the importation, fourteen years; for the three supply counts together (counts 2, 3 and 4) eight years; for sending the moneys overseas (count 5) four years; and for the various items found in his apartment at the time of his arrest on 26 January and in the garage at Coogee on 29 January 1990 (counts 6 to 10) taken together, a further five years, making a total of thirty-one years; but principles of totality dictate that these sentences be telescoped to some degree to achieve what is just and appropriate having regard to the totality of the criminal behaviour, and for this reason I reduce the total sentences to twenty-four years, with an effective non-parole period of sixteen years. A further complication is that the supply charges are State offences whilst the other offences are Commonwealth matters and so I must have regard to <case> of the Commonwealth [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/).

It is also necessary to have regard to pre-trial custody which amounted to four years and one hundred and fourteen days up to 5 July, and is therefore now an effective four years and four months.

In these circumstances the primary consideration is not how the individual sentences on the different counts are broken up, but the total sentences when aggregated. In order to achieve this object, complicated as it is by the difference between Commonwealth and State sentencing regimes, I have decided to firstly impose sentences for the State offences (counts 2, 3 and 4) and to adjust the Commonwealth sentences so as to achieve the result I have indicated, namely total head sentences of twenty-four years with an effective non-parole period of sixteen years. In respect of the State offences, [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) would in the absence of special circumstances (of which I find there are none) require a sentence of eight years to be divided into a minimum term of six years and an additional term of two years. There is, however, little point in setting an additional term in this case because of the Federal sentences to follow and for this reason I will accordingly impose fixed terms of six years for these offences and thus state my reason for doing so [(s (3))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s6.html); and these sentences will be reduced by four years and four months to take account of the pre-sentence custody.

Ian Hall Saxon, for the offences to which you have pleaded guilty I sentence you as follows.

On each charge of supplying a large commercial quantity of cannabis resin (counts 2, 3 and 4), imprisonment for a fixed term of one year and eight months, such sentences to be concurrent with each other, to commence today and to expire on 31 March 1998.

On the charge of importing a commercial quantity of cannabis resin (count 1), imprisonment for fourteen years, such sentence to be cumulative on the sentences imposed on counts 2, 3 and 4, and to commence on 1 April 1998.

On each of the other charges (counts 5 to 10 inclusive), imprisonment for four years, such sentences to be concurrent with each other and cumulative on the sentences imposed on the first count.

Pursuant to <case>(d), in respect of all the Federal offences I fix a single non-parole period of ten years commencing on 1 April 1998 and expiring on 31 March 2008.

Pursuant to [s
F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16f.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/),
I am required to explain these sentences to you. The sentences have been structured so as to provide for effective head sentences totalling twenty-four years and an effective non-parole period of sixteen years. But you have already served approximately four years and four months in custody, so there remains to be served further head sentences of nineteen years and eight months which will expire on 31 March 2016. I have also fixed a non-parole period in respect of the Federal offences of ten years which commences when you commence to serve the Federal offences on 1 April 1998 and expires on 31 March 2008.
That means that service of the sentences will entail imprisonment until 31
March 2008 and then, if a parole order is made, a period of service in the community called the parole period to complete the balance of the sentence.

If such a parole order is made, that order will be subject to conditions relating presumably to your behaviour whilst on parole, where you are to live and reporting to a parole officer.

Any such parole order may be amended or revoked, and if you fail without reasonable excuse to fulfil the conditions of the parole order it is likely to be revoked and you may be returned to prison for up to the expiry of the head sentence.
 * * * 
