

Alemite Lubrequip P/L versus B E Adams [1996] NSWSC 45 (11 March 1996) 
ALEMITE LUBREQUIP P/L & ORS v. BRIAN ELLISTON ADAMS & ORS /88 March 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
I refer to my judgments of 1 October 1993 and 8 April 1994 and that of the
Court of Appeal of 30 September 1994. I will not recapitulate the facts.

I directed that judgment be entered for the plaintiffs with damages to be assessed. In my later judgment I noted that there were some difficult questions as to interest which could arise. The Court of Appeal remitted the matter to me to assess damages. The parties have been unable to agree on damages.

Except in relation to the plaintiff Hamish Alistair MacLachlan there is no disagreement as to the amounts paid to the defendants. I proceed on the basis that the defendants are correct in their statement of the amounts paid to them by Mr MacLachlan but reserve leave to Mr MacLachlan to move within 7 days to challenge that basis.

The plaintiffs contended that interest should be charged at the usual mercantile rates on the amounts paid to the defendants. As at 8 December 1995 this resulted in a claim for $1,209,580 for amounts paid to the defendants (excluding the MacLachlan adjustment of $8,800) and $2,447,513.50 for interest. Subject to an adjustment for MacLachlan the parties seem to be agreed on the mercantile rate calculations.

Alternatively, the plaintiffs claimed that they should be awarded interest at the trustee rate of 8% daily compounded. As at 2 February 1996 this resulted in compound interest of $2,239,290.20 on the plaintiff's calculations. On the defendant's calculations compound interest is $2,216,631.31. The difference is just under $23,000 which is not of great moment given the sums at issue and should be capable of easy resolution. Where compound interest is awarded, the calculations are, as a matter of practice, usually based on yearly rests.

The defendants submitted that simple interest at the trustee rate should be awarded. On the defendants' calculations as at 2 February 1996 excluding the
MacLachlan adjustment, the simple interest is $1,314,815.60.

The trustees acted honestly and in good faith. They were prevailed upon by the wily skills of the fraudulent promoter (Mrs Roche) to pay the moneys to the wrong person. Until she absconded with the proceeds they had no reason to distrust her. They had earlier noted her willingness to seek and take advice.
Their failures were not gross. They obtained no profit or personal advantage from the erroneous payment. They did not use the moneys. It was intended that the moneys would be held by the defendants for a short period and, subject to conditions, paid out and applied in developing and cultivating the turf farms and associated purposes. The investors expected that their moneys would be applied in the business and hoped for high returns. They would also have realised, despite the glowing terms of the brochures that the business might incur losses. In any event there were believed to be tax savings of an enticing order. The amounts advanced by the investors were not large.

I would summarise the principles to be applied in the awarding of interest as follows:
The basis on which interest is awarded is discretionary. The prime task of the court is to select the rate of interest and manner of calculation which is appropriate to the circumstance of the case. A flexible approach should be adopted. Amongst other matters the court considers the character of the breach of trust and the degree of fault of the trustees.
Where trustees have used the trust moneys for their own use and benefit the mercantile rate (the bank overdraft rate) is often applied. The trustees are presumed to have made a profit as a result of the misapplication. If it is shown that a profit has been made the position is even stronger. The law is astute to ensure that trustees do not make a profit out of misapplying trust funds for their own use. There may be cases where there are extenuating or mitigating circumstances which may not lead to the application of the mercantile rate.
The mercantile rate may also be ordered where there has been a wilful breach of trust, or fraud or serious misconduct on the part of the trustees.
Usually, more than mere negligence is required.
There has been an increasing tendency on the part of the courts to order the mercantile rate because of the changes in monetary and economic conditions, the volatility of interest rates and the opinion that the mercantile rate better reflects the reality of the market place.
Nevertheless, and despite anomalies, the courts still continue to use and prefer the trustee rate and depending on the circumstances, to order, either compound or simple interest. This preference tends to emerge in traditional trustee type situations and situations analogous to trustee responsibility.
They are to be distinguished from essentially commercial cases. The trustee rate is 8%.

A trustee rate was thought to reflect the return which trustees could have got from trustee investments which were generally regarded as less rewarding.
In some instances the emphasis has been on ensuring that trustees do not retain any profits (whether actual or presumed) from their breaches. This is particularly so where the trustees have used the trust moneys for their own purposes. In other instances the emphasis is on compensation which restored the beneficiaries or injured parties to the position which they would have been in had the breach not occurred. The approach to be taken depends in large part on what has occurred including the nature of the case or situation, the character of the breach of trust, the degree of fault on the part of the trustees and the actual or potential benefits those sought to be obtained.
Compound interest with yearly rests is usually ordered where the trustees have used the moneys for their own commercial purposes or been guilty of fraud or serious misconduct.
Where the situation is more analogous to trustee responsibility than a commercial one and the trustees have acted honestly and in good faith but have made a mistake or an error of judgment or been negligent (but not grossly so) and have not: profited from the breach of trust; or used the moneys for their own purposes; or been guilty of fraud, serious misconduct or gross negligence; or received compound interest on the moneys in question; simple interest at the trustee rate is usually selected.
It has yet to be specifically decided in Australia whether it is relevant that the plaintiff has been forced to borrow at high rates of interest because of the loss. There is no evidence on this point and it does not arise in the present case. In Canada it has been treated as a factor bearing upon the selection of a higher rate of interest. I would regard it as a factor but not a determinative one. I would attach greater weight to the nature of the breach and the conduct of the trustees.

This is not an exhaustive summary. I regard the summary of principle numbered as applying to the present case.

In the course of their submissions the plaintiffs characterised the payment made by the trustees as a wrongful appropriation. This was disputed by the trustees. I have preferred not to enter into that debate but to reflect upon what happened and the surrounding circumstances.

I have previously made detailed findings. Earlier in this judgment I have highlighted salient facts which bear upon the question of interest. Upon the findings I have made as to the facts, this is a case where the trustee rate of interest of 8% should be applied and the interest should be simple interest.

It is unnecessary for me to deal with the defendants' argument that the plaintiffs are not entitled to claim compound interest because they had not claimed compound interest in the statement of claim.

I attach a list of the authorities and texts to which I have had regard and from which I have borrowed.

The parties should check the MacLachlan position and bring in short minutes to give effect to this judgment within 7 days with simple interest calculated to the day on which the judgment is to take effect.

I earlier made an order that the defendants should pay the costs of the plaintiffs of the action. These should not include the costs of the argument as to interest.

SCHEDULE OF AUTHORITIES AND TEXTS /88 - ALEMITE LUBREQUIP PTY LTD & ORS V. BRIAN ELLISTON ADAMS & ORS 
Cases: 
AE Goodwin Ltd versus AG Healing [(1979) 7 ACLR 481] at pp 492-4 
Attorney-General versus Alford (1855) 4 De GM & G 843 
Burdick versus Garrick (1870) LR 5 Ch App 233 
Hagan versus Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308] at p392-3 
Morgan Equipment Co versus Rodgers [(1993) 32 NSWLR 467] 
Murphy & anor versus Permanent Trustee Co Ltd, unreported, Supreme Court of
NSW, Equity Division, 20 October 1995, McLelland CJ in Eq 
Re Dawson; Union Fidelity Trustee Co Ltd versus Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd (1966) WN (Pt 1) 399 at 408-9 
Re Hatton Developments (Aust) Pty Ltd and the Companies Act (1978) 3 ACLR 
Southern Cross Commodities versus Ewing (1987) 11 ACLR 818 at 829-31, 839-841, -45, 847 
Wallersteiner versus Mohr (No 2) [[1975] QB 373] esp. at p388 
Texts and Articles: 
Aitken, L. "UK Court rules on compound interest in equity" (1992) 8(4) Australian Banking Law Bulletin, pp25-7 
Advocates Quarterly, (1985-6), Vol 6, Canada Law Book Co, Ontario, pp 442-3 
Finn, P.D. Fiduciary Obligations, The Law Book Co, Sydney, 1977, pp113-7.

Ford H.A.J. & Lee, W.A., Principles of the Law of Trusts, 2nd ed., Law
Book Co., Sydney, 1990, pp732-3.

Keir, John C & Keir, Robin C, "Opportunity Cost: A Measure of Prejudgement
Interest" November 1983, 39(1) The Business Lawyer, Chicago, Illinois, 129 at pp144-5.

Meagher R.P & Gummow, W.M.C, Jacob's Law of Trusts in Australia (5th ed), Butterworths, Sydney, 1986 at p617 
Scott, A.W. & Fratcher, W.F. Scott on Trusts, 4th ed, Vol III, Little
Brown & Co, Boston, 1988 at pp255-66.
 * * * 
