

Regina versus Jjt Matter No Cca 60475/96 [1997] NSWSC 601 (3 December 1997) 
Regina versus JJT /96 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Ireland J, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA V JJT 
CRIMINAL LAW - JURY VERDICTS - INCONSISTENCY - Appellant charged with four counts of sexual assault - acquitted of three and convicted of one - alleged inconsistency - HELD - differences in verdicts explicable on a rational basis. 
McKenzie versus The Queen (1996) 71 ALJR 91 applied.

ORDER 
Appeal Dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The appellant was tried before his Honour Judge Craigie QC and a jury on four charges alleging indecent assault of his niece S. 
The first charge related to an offence said to have occurred in 1993. The second, third and fourth charges related to offences said to have occurred in .

The appellant was convicted of the second charge and acquitted of the first, third and fourth charges. In relation to the offence of which he was convicted, he was sentenced to imprisonment involving a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months.

He appeals against his conviction. No complaint is made in relation to the sentence.

The facts as alleged against the appellant may sufficiently, for present purposes, be summarised as follows.

In July 1995 the complainant S was aged fifteen. She was almost sixteen. She was a member of a Police Citizen's Youth Club of which the appellant was also an active member and committee member. The complainant was interested in the sport of gymnastics.

The first count in the indictment arose out of an allegation by the complainant that in August 1993, at a barbecue, the appellant squeezed her breast. It is unnecessary to say anything further about that allegation.

The second and third counts in the indictment related to events alleged to have occurred shortly before the departure of the complainant, and the appellant, and others involved in the club, on an overseas trip for the purposes of a gymnastics competition.

On the evening in question the appellant and his daughter K were staying with the complainant and her family overnight prior to the overseas departure. The complainant's father had gone to bed and the appellant, K and S were left together in a rumpus room. S was lying on a lounge and the appellant was seated next to her. K, the appellant's daughter, was seated opposite. The complainant alleged that while she was lying down the appellant began to scratch her back. She told him to stop. She was wearing a T-shirt and track pants with underwear. The appellant, according to the complainant, undid her bra, then he put his hand down her tracksuit pants and underpants, and placed his hand on her vagina. He was smiling and laughing and the complainant was protesting and endeavouring to get away from him. This was the subject of the second count.

According to the complainant, almost immediately afterwards, as the complainant was getting ready to leave the room, the appellant put his arm around her throat. He pulled down her T-shirt and bit her on the breast. She left the room in tears and went to her bedroom. The biting on the breast was the subject of the third count.

The fourth count concerned an occurrence that took place later that night in the complainant's bedroom. It also allegedly involved indecent handling of her breast.

As was observed earlier, the jury acquitted the appellant in respect of counts , 3 and 4 and convicted in respect of count 2.

Two grounds of appeal are relied upon.

The first ground is that the verdict in respect of count 2 was inconsistent with the verdict in respect of count 3.

No complaint of inconsistency is made based upon the verdicts in respect of counts 1 and 4. The reason for that is clear. The jury were given careful warnings about the danger of convicting on the basis of uncorroborated evidence. The evidence of the complainant in relation to counts 1 and 4 was uncorroborated. Nothing more need be said about those counts.

In order to understand the argument in relation to counts 2 and 3, however, it is necessary to say something more about the course of the trial.

The complainant gave evidence substantially to the effect outlined above. The
Crown called the appellant's daughter K. K generally supported the evidence of the complainant. In particular, she said that she observed the incident the subject of count 2. In her evidence in court she claimed also to have observed the incident the subject of count 3. In the course of cross-examination of K, cross-examining counsel for the defence questioned her about a somewhat confusing piece of evidence she had given in the committal proceedings.

In the course of the committal proceedings it had been put to her, and she had accepted, that she did not actually see the appellant bite the breast of "Nicole." Who Nicole was or how she might have come into the matter was unexplained in the evidence. This subject obviously puzzled the jury and resulted in a question to which reference will be made below.

There were other aspects of the evidence of K in relation to the breast-biting incident which were somewhat puzzling. She gave an account of the physical movements of the complainant, and her observations of the complainant, which made it rather difficult to understand how the appellant could have bitten the complainant on the breast. Furthermore, she gave her account of the events in a sequence different from the sequence outlined by the complainant. She said that the appellant had bitten the complainant's breast before he put his hand down her pants.

The evidence showed that on the day following the incidents the subject of counts 2 and 3 the complainant made a complaint to a police officer who was also a member of the Youth Club. The complaint was in the following terms: "Last night (the appellant) undid my bra and put his hands down my pants." 
The complaint to the police officer made no reference to any biting on the breast.

The appellant gave no evidence at the trial. Something that the trial judge said in relation to that matter is the subject of the second ground of appeal.

Following the conclusion of the summing-up to the jury, the jury sent the trial judge a question concerning the cross-examination of K about the evidence that she had given at the committal, and the question included a reference to someone called Nicole.

After discussion with counsel, Craigie DCJ answered that question in the following way: "Now ladies and gentlemen that is the only possible foundation for that statement that the recollection was, I think she said she did not see anything in relation to the committal proceedings. But the question was put to her in the committal proceedings, 'So you didn't actually see your dad biting Nicole on the breast?' Whether the cross-examiner in the committal proceedings was aware of the mistake he had made or not or anyone else pick it up, we are not to know, but so far as the evidence here is concerned it was not appropriate to test her on something that was not in fact inconsistent. She had been giving evidence about seeing her father and S. No mention of any contact between her father and Nicole. And so that is the only possibility and my comment to you is ladies and gentlemen, I do not think there is anything where she said, in relation to the committal proceedings, she did not see anything." 
The principles to be applied in considering a submission such as that involved in ground 1 of the grounds of appeal were stated by the High Court in
McKenzie versus The Queen (1996) 71 ALJR 91 at 100-102.

It is argued on behalf of the appellant that no reasonable jury who applied their minds properly to the facts of the case could have had a doubt about the guilt of the appellant in relation to count 3 in the indictment and no doubt about the guilt of the appellant in relation to count 2 in the indictment. It is not suggested that there is any legal or technical inconsistency between the two verdicts, but it is argued that there is a practical inconsistency of the kind encapsulated in the submission to which I have just referred.

In my view, there is a proper way by which this Court may reconcile the verdicts on counts 2 and 3. The explanation is to be found in a combination of the following circumstances.

First, there were the strong directions and warnings that were given to the jury by Craigie DCJ in relation to the care which needed to be taken before convicting the appellant in the circumstances of the case.

Next, there was the circumstance that the complaint made to the police officer on the day following the alleged events made no reference to the alleged biting on the breast which was the subject of count 3 but fairly and squarely raised an allegation against the appellant in relation to the matter the subject of count 2.

True it is, as the jury were instructed, that the complaint did not amount to corroboration. Nevertheless, the question of consistency was one which the jury were entitled to regard as important and they were entitled to regard the complaint that was made on the day following the events as inconsistent with the evidence in relation to count 3, but as consistent with the evidence in relation to count 2.

Next, there is the evident confusion that arose at the trial in relation to what was suggested by trial counsel in cross-examination to be some kind of discrepancy between the evidence of K at the committal and her evidence at the trial in relation to the breast-biting incident.

These matters combined might well have led the jury to the conclusion that in all the circumstances they should have had a doubt about the guilt of the appellant in relation to count 3, whilst at the same time entertaining no doubt about his guilt in relation to count 2.

The first ground of appeal should fail.

The second ground of appeal is a matter in respect of which the appellant acknowledges that leave is required. In my view, leave to rely upon the ground should be refused.

The second ground of appeal complains about the manner in which the trial judge directed the jury concerning the fact that the appellant gave no evidence in his defence. The particular part of the direction complained about is in the following terms: "Suspicion may play no part in your function as judges of the facts. No not even the gravest suspicion will suffice as proof beyond reasonable doubt.

Now ladies and gentlemen, you will recall that the accused pleaded that he was not guilty and he must be found not guilty unless the Crown proves each element of each of the allegations against the accused.

The accused is entitled to say nothing at all in his defence and still to ask you to find that some element or some elements in the Crown case have not been proved beyond reasonable doubt.

That is what he has done in this case and the fact that he has placed no material before you does not constitute any kind of admission of guilt. On the other hand, he has not denied or sought to explain any particular piece of evidence in the prosecution case and it is proper to have in mind that it is usually easier to accept uncontradicted evidence than evidence which is actively disputed.

Whether that is so in this case is for you and for you alone to consider. You must decide the case on the evidence that has been given." 
This was a case in which before the commencement of the summing-up the trial judge, in the absence of the jury, had a discussion with counsel as to the directions that it might be appropriate to give. In the course of that discussion the trial judge indicated to counsel that he had in mind that he would give a direction dealing with the circumstance that whilst the appellant had pleaded not guilty he had said nothing in his defence. No demur was taken to that course, nor was the judge asked to elaborate or explain in any way the direction he had in mind.

After the judge gave the direction which I have just mentioned, no complaint was made about it by trial counsel. There was no application for any redirection.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the direction might or would have given the jury to understand not merely that the appellant had not given any evidence to dispute what the complainant and other witnesses said, but that the Crown case was unchallenged. In that respect it was pointed out there was a plea of not guilty and that in an interview with the police the appellant had in substance said that he knew nothing about any of the allegations being made against him. It was also pointed out that in cross- examination certain parts of the evidence of the complainant were obviously called in question.

It is to be borne in mind that at p 25 of the summing-up the trial judge in outlining the defence case to the jury set out a variety of things which, according to him, the accused "said" in his defence. Reading the summing-up as a whole, it is perfectly clear that in the context of what was said in the directions the subject of particular complaint the trial judge was making observations about, and only about, the failure of the accused to give evidence.

This summing-up followed argument to the jury by counsel. The relevant passage of the summing-up commenced with the observation that the accused had pleaded not guilty. It was followed later in the summing-up by parts of various things the accused "said" in his defence. What the judge was doing was nothing more than making observations about the fact that the accused had not given any evidence.

As was pointed out in the course of the judgments in Weissensteiner versus The
Queen (1993) 1 [78 CLR 217], if the trial judge had said nothing at all about the failure of the accused to give evidence it would have been highly probable that the jury would have drawn, and readily drawn, inferences adverse to the appellant which they were not entitled to draw. The relatively limited observations that were made by Craigie DCJ in the present case were probably made for the protection of the appellant and were in the circumstances not unfair to the appellant. As was noted earlier, they drew no complaint from trial counsel for the appellant and complaint should not be permitted to be raised for the first time on appeal.

One particular complaint that was made on this appeal was that the trial judge did not point out to the jury that there may be reasons not known to them why an accused person may not give evidence. If the trial judge had been asked to make that additional observation to the jury by trial counsel he could very easily have done so. It might also be added that the result in relation to counts 1 and 4 indicates that the jury did not fall into the error against which the trial judge was setting out to warn them, that is to say, the error of treating the silence of the appellant as some form of implied admission of guilt.

For those reasons, I consider that the appellant should not be permitted to raise the second ground of appeal. In addition, I should say that I consider that the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant in relation to the second ground of appeal do not persuade me that there was any risk of a miscarriage of justice arising out of what was said by the trial judge in relation to the matter of the failure of the appellant to give evidence.

I consider that the appeal should be dismissed.

IRELAND J: I agree. 
BRUCE J: I agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court will be as I have proposed. * * * 
