

Cogent Management versus Ausfec [1996] NSWSC 393 (2 September 1996) 
COGENT MANAGEMENT versus AUSFEC /96 
Thursday 20 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a motion for an interlocutory injunction restraining the defendant from holding a meeting of its members, which is currently convened to be held at 9 o'clock tomorrow morning, and at that meeting passing a resolution amending regulation 101 of the defendant's Articles of Association.

On the plaintiff's case the effect of the amended regulation would be to permit the expropriation of its shares and the shares of other members proposed at a price which was only a fragment of the true value of the shares.

There is an existing regulation 101 which provides for the potential compulsory sale of shares. There is a timetable fixed, and a procedure at the end of which it is possible that the shares in question are to be sold at a price based on the net tangible assets of the company as at the preceding 30
June year end, calculated and/or valued by the company's auditors.

The proposed new regulation substitutes a different procedure with a different timetable, and provides the potential at least for sale of the shares at par value. The evidence suggests that until at least recently the net tangible value of the shares meant that the shares might be compulsorily sold pursuant to the existing regulation 101 for a figure exceeding $13, whereas the par value of the shares is $1.

It seems to me that in those circumstances there is a serious question to be determined to the general effect that if the proposed new regulation is brought into effect it will result in oppression to minority shareholders.

There is really nothing to be said on the evidence as to the balance of convenience. It seems to lie all one way in favour of the plaintiffs. It is perhaps possible that some shareholders are already on their way to Sydney from distant places to attend tomorrow mornings meeting, but there is no evidence of that.

I note the usual undertakings as to damages given by the plaintiff by its counsel. I order that until the date when judgment is given after the final hearing the defendant be restrained in terms of par 1 of the summons.

I appoint 3 July before a Registrar for the return of subpoenas and notices to produce. I direct the plaintiff to file and serve all further affidavits proposed to be relied upon by 31 July 1996. I direct the defendant to file and serve all further affidavits proposed to be relied upon by 21 August 1996. I direct the plaintiff to file all affidavits in reply on or before 28 August .

I stand the matter over until 2 September 1996 before the Company Judge and reserve the question of costs.

The affidavit of Mr Jones sworn 20 June 1996 is returned to the plaintiff for photocopying purposes, to be returned to the Court within seven days.
 * * * 
