

Bitel and Ors versus Ruddock and Anor [2001] NSWSC 43 (9 February 2001) 
Last Updated: 19 February 2001 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT 
CITATION: Bitel & Ors versus Ruddock & Anor <case> 
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law 
FILE NUMBER(S): 20445 of 1999 
HEARING DATE{S): 2 February 2001 
JUDGMENT DATE: 09/02/2001 
PARTIES: 
DAVID LEE BITEL 
LAWRENCE JOHN GRAVES 
MALCOLM PHILIP BERSTEN 
MICHAEL TERENCE JONES 
HARSIMRAN BHAR v

PHILIP RUDDOCK (First Defendant) 
DAVID SYME & CO LIMITED (Second Defendant) 
JUDGMENT OF: Levine J 
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable 
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable 
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable 
COUNSEL: 
R A Campbell 
P T Taylor (First Defendant) 
SOLICITORS: 
Parish Patience 
Australian Government Solicitor (First Defendant) 
CATCHWORDS: 
Imputations - capacity - radio broadcast - identification - particulars 
ACTS CITED: 
DECISION: 
See paragraph 25 
JUDGMENT: 
DLJ: 1 <case> 
THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DEFAMATION LIST 
No. 20445 of 1999 
JUSTICE DAVID LEVINE 
FRIDAY 9 FEBRUARY 2001 
DAVID LEE BITEL 
LAWRENCE JOHN GRAVES 
MALCOLM PHILIP BERSTEN 
MICHAEL TERENCE JONES 
HARSIMRAN BHAR v

PHILIP RUDDOCK (First Defendant) 
DAVID SYME & CO LIMITED (Second Defendant) 
JUDGMENT (Imputations - capacity - radio broadcast - identification - particulars) By a Statement of Claim filed on 6 October 1999 the plaintiffs initiated proceedings for damages for defamation against the defendants. The publication of the first defendant relied upon is that constituted by a broadcast over
Radio Station 2BL in Sydney on 15 June 1999.
 The publication in respect of which the second defendant (David Syme) is sued is an article in "The Age" on 15 June 1999. With respect to this latter publication an "imputations" argument, amongst other things, was heard by
Simpson J on 18 February 2000. On that occasion the moving party was the second defendant (David Syme) though I note from the record sheet of her
Honour's judgment ([2000] NSWSC 840, 29 August 2000) the first defendant was represented by counsel who appeared before me.
 On 29 February 2000 (that is nine days after the matter was argued before
Simpson J) the plaintiffs filed an Amended Statement of Claim. The agreed text of the broadcast is appended hereto and marked "A": the text of The Age article is appended hereto and marked "B".
 I am concerned only with the case the plaintiffs seeks to make against the first defendant in relation to the radio broadcast.
 The plaintiffs allege that that matter complained of carries, in its natural and ordinary meaning, the following imputations: "5(a) The plaintiffs are greedy and avaricious lawyers in that they accept dishonourable legal work in order to get at the considerable financial rewards to be expected from it; 
The plaintiffs lack integrity in that they advertise in the ethnic press for work which a reputable lawyer would not do.
 the plaintiffs breach the lawyers' code of ethics by arranging class actions to enable unlawful people to stay and work in Australia contrary to the spirit of the law of Australia.

The plaintiffs are seeking to undermine the laws of Australia by putting in place and exploiting loopholes.

The plaintiffs are grossly overcharging their clients in that they are seeking through their law firm to extract the excessive sum of $1.5 million from the 3,000 clients in a single class action.

The plaintiffs knowingly seek to abuse the legal process of class actions to enable unlawful people to stay in Australia".
 Alternatively, the plaintiffs say that the same matter, in its natural and ordinary meaning, carries the following imputations: "6(a) The plaintiffs are greedy and avaricious lawyers in that they knowingly acquiesce in the law firm of which they are partners undertaking dishonourable legal work in order that they may share in the considerable financial rewards to be expected from it.

The plaintiffs lack integrity in that they knowingly acquiesce in the law firm or which they are partners advertising in the ethnic press for work which a reputable la firm would not do.

The plaintiffs acquiesce in the law firm of which they are partners breaching the lawyers' code in that to their knowledge their firm arranges class actions to enable unlawful person to stay and work in Australia contrary to the spirit of the laws of Australia.

The plaintiffs acquiesce in the law form of which they are partners seeking to undermine the laws of Australia by putting in place and exploiting loopholes.

The plaintiffs acquiesce in the law firm of which they are partners grossly overcharging their clients in that they were aware that it extracted the excessive sum of $1.5 million from clients in a single class action.

The plaintiffs are party to the abuse of the legal process of class actions in that they are aware that this abuse is being practiced by the law firm of which they are partners" The first defendant has argued that there is really no difference in substance between the two publications (leaving aside that in "The Age" the plaintiffs' firm is named and the difference in the "medium" of publication). I agree with that view and add that I have listened to a sound tape of the broadcast in question (Exhibit A). What I would describe as the "theme" of each publication is really substantially the same.
 The alternative imputations pleaded in paragraph 6 in respect of the first publication are the subject of attack by the defendant. It was argued that the reasoning applied by Simpson J in paragraphs 29 to 32 of her judgment of 29
August is applicable here. Her Honour was dealing with, in respect of The
Age publication, the following imputations pleaded in regard to it: "14.2 The plaintiffs are members of a law firm the ethical conduct of which is under investigation by the Law Council of Australia.
 .3 The plaintiffs assist in abuses of the process of class actions by acquiescing in the law firm of which they are partners running of class actions for the purpose of allowing illegal immigrants to delay or avoid deportation.
 .4 The plaintiffs participated in the overcharging of clients in that they acquiesced in the law firm of which they are members to charge clients involved in a class action run by the firm a total of $1.5 million" With respect to the concept of knowledge, acquiescence and participation, what her Honour said was as follows: "There is nothing in the matter complained of that clearly, or directly, states that the individual partners of the firm knew, acquiesced or participated in the conduct of the firm of which criticism was made. Actual knowledge, acquiescence or participation cannot be derived from the publication. In truth, any available conclusion that individual partners knew of or acquiesced or participated in any unethical behaviour on the part of other partners or the firm as an entity probably depends upon an understanding of the way in which law partnerships operate and the obligations and responsibilities of partners in relation to the conduct of other partners. It is not something that can be discerned in the publication complained of. It is not something that is stated or suggested indirectly, nor is it something that can legitimately be derived by inference from the matter complained of".
 I respectfully agree with these observations: they are applicable to the imputations pleaded in paragraph 6 of the Amended Statement of Claim vis-a-vis the radio broadcast and I hold each to be incapable, as a matter of law, of being conveyed in the natural and ordinary meaning of the matter complained of. There will thus be a verdict for the defendant in relation paragraphs 6(a) to 6(f) of the Further Amended Statement of Claim. I will grant leave to the plaintiffs to re-plead. The pleaded causes of action are not available as arising from the natural and ordinary meaning of the matter complained of. The plaintiffs thus has leave to plead fresh causes of action by way of true innuendos and properly particularised.
 The first defendant objects to each of the imputations pleaded in paragraph of the Amended Statement of Claim.
 With respect to 5(a) it is contended that there is no material in the broadcast which makes any suggestion of "dishonourable legal work". That I understand is the only objection taken to imputation 5(a). No objection was taken to the use in the imputation of the words "they accept" nor to "greedy and avaricious". The latter, of course, could be understood as a phrase arising from the expression "money hungry lawyers," an expression that the listener could understand Mr Ruddock as not adopting.
 The theme of the interview (and it is to be noted that the plaintiffs are suing in respect of everything spoken in the program even though they have not sued the Australian Broadcasting Corporation - this is explicable, I suppose, in terms of providing "context"), could be understood to relate to the following: it is the intention of the law that an unlawful immigrant is entitled to prosecute to the full a legal action with respect to that person's status. Once legal proceedings are instituted, a "bridging visa" and possibly a right to work, will be allocated. The intention of that law is, in effect, abused by the class action that constitutes the institution of legal proceedings that could provide, as-it-were, in "one hit", thousands of otherwise unlawful immigrants with bridging visas. Lawyers associated with such an action could be understood as acting more in their own interests financially by reason of the sum of $1.5 million that could be received and not accounted for by them and as having failed to comply with ethical standards in pursuing an asserted interest on behalf of their clients at the expense of a more broader obligation to uphold the intention of the legislation.
 I am persuaded overall that the tenor of the broadcast, on a reasonable appreciation, is capable of giving rise to imputation 5(a) and not to the exclusion of the notion of "dishonourable:" that could be found to be there.
 I have no difficulty at all with imputation 5(b) for the same reason, at the least implicit is a connotation of disreputability.
 Imputations 5(c), (d) and (f) certainly, to my mind, capture a disparaging sting in the matter complained of relating to the lawyers' conduct in prosecuting an action contrary to the "intention" of the laws of Australia.
Why the word "spirit" is used in imputation 5(c) escapes me given the clear language of the matter complained of. The overall tenor of the matter complained of, in my view, is capable of giving rise to an imputation to the effect of the one pleaded. No question of true innuendo arises by reason of the express reference to the code of ethics and the statement at lines 42 and following. It is argued in relation to imputation 5(c) that there is no suggestion in the broadcast that the purpose of the class actions, as distinct from the use made of them made by some lawyers was to "enable unlawful people to stay and work in Australia". I disagree, it will be a matter for the jury.
The point is taken by the defendant as to the meaning of the "spirit" of the laws of Australia: the point is taken is sufficient, in my view, to eliminate this imputation as being bad in form.
 Imputation 5(c), will therefore be struck out with leave to re-plead.
 As to imputation 5(d); I really do not seeing that saying much more than what should be captured in a properly drawn imputation 5(c) save for the use of the cumbersome language "are seeking to". Oddly enough the defendant objects to imputation 5(d) on the basis that "putting in place and exploiting loopholes" is not an imputation "reasonably capable of bearing a defamatory meaning". Arguably a statement of a lawyer that that lawyer is exploiting loopholes could not be defamatory though it should be, in my view, a matter for the jury. What is important in relation to 5(d) is the concept of "undermining" by the exploitation of loopholes. On consideration the imputation as framed in (d) is certainly capable of being defamatory and is a more general proposition than the particular breach of the code of ethics asserted in (c). It will go to the jury.
 As to imputation 5(e); this is, of course, extravagantly worded. An imputation so worded could go to the jury, all things being equal, at the plaintiffs' peril. Arguably it could be said that the charging of $500 per person might not be viewed as unreasonable. As a matter of mathematics it would be the case that the firm would receive $1.5 million. The sting however clearly arises in the statement by the first defendant that there will be "no accounting and no refund" and the first defendant questions whether that would constitute an abuse of the legal system. I am of the view that the matter complained of is incapable of conveying any notion of "overcharging" by itself. The sting is that to which I have referred and the imputation which
I would characterise as rhetorical will be struck out with leave to re-plead.
 Imputation 5(f) is incapable of arising for the same reasons as applied to the imputations in paragraph 6 of the Amended Statement of Claim. The use of the phrase "knowingly seek to abuse" is, in any event, unduly complex, I would have thought. The matter complained of could be understood, in my view, as asserting that the plaintiffs' conduct constitutes an abuse. In any event there will be a verdict for the defendant in relation to imputation 5(f).
 The final matter for complaint on the part of the defendant is the particulars of identification. It is not in this case appropriate for a separate trial under SCR Pt 31 r 2 to determine whether as a matter of law a person acquainted with the facts and who heard the relevant broadcast could understand the matter complained of to be published "of and concerning" the plaintiffs. The real complaint made here, as I understand it, is that in some way the particulars are embarrassing. I do not consider them to be embarrassing. Whether as a matter of fact the jury will find on the proper presentation of evidence on this issue the matter complained of was published of and concerning the plaintiffs is to be determined in the future. What the plaintiffs have failed to do is to particularise by reference to names and classes of names the identity of those who not only knew the relevant facts but also heard the broadcast: Rogers versus 2UE Sydney Pty Limited (Levine J, unreported, 6 November 1998); see also Nikolopoulos & Ors versus Greek
Herald Pty Limited <case> J 5 July 2000).
 The amended pleadings should accommodate these matters. If the plaintiffs in particulars (a) to (e) have stated the facts which known to a listener arguably could enable that listener to understand the matter complained of to have been published of and concerning the plaintiffs, that is the indication of the plaintiffs' case. It will succeed or it will fail.
 A matter of some concern is the fact that this application by the defendant was not heard at the same time as Simpson J heard the application by the second defendant. The first defendant was present. The imputations now objected to were in place.
 Mr Campbell for the plaintiffs argued that irrespective of the outcome of the first defendant's application the first defendant should pay the plaintiffs costs thrown away by having to come to Court on a second occasion to argue matters that easily could have been argued before Simpson J last year. I think that is a very fair position for the plaintiffs to take.
 Accordingly, the formal orders are:
Verdict for the first defendant respect of the causes of action pleaded as natural and ordinary meaning in paragraphs 5(f) and 6(a) to 6(f) of the
Amended Statement of Claim.
Imputations 5(a), (b) and (d) are capable of being carried, capable of being defamatory and will go to the jury.
Imputations 5(c) and (e) are struck out with leave to re-plead.
The plaintiffs are to provide particulars of the identity of the persons and classes of persons to whom was known the particulars of identification relied upon.
The plaintiffs have leave to file a Second Further Amended Statement of
Claim within 21 days.
The first defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of the hearing on 2
February 2001.
Exhibit A (the tape) will be retained.
The matter is listed for directions on 20 April 2001.

Appendix A 
Transcript of an interview of Philip Ruddock on 2Bl - Sally Loane - 9:44am Tuesday 15 June 1999 
Sally Loane minutes to 10. Got a lot of reports around this morning that
Immigration Minister, Philip Ruddock, is saying that ~~the~~ money hungry lawyers are abusing the immigration system by launching speculative cases on behalf of people trying to gain Australian residency. Now apparently he's passed on information about the actions of one law firm to the Law Society for investigation.
Well, Mr Ruddock, the Minister for Immigration joins me on the line this morning. Good morning Mr Ruddock.

Philip Ruddock:
Good morning Sally.

Sally Loane:
Now, what exactly do you mean by this? 
Philip Ruddock:
Well, I'm not sure about the expression "money hungry". I'm not sure that that emanated from my lips, but I've certainly indicated that when I asked the question as to why lawyers might be doing what they're doing is that they certainly do it for reward, and I mean one would only say in relation to that that its as one would expect, but in relation to what is occurring in the immigration area, what we've seen is that people are advertising in the ethnic press, that is, ~~as~~ in the language papers of particular communities, for people who are unlawful and so the press that I'm speaking of are amongst those communities where there are a high number of unlawful in Australia.

Sally Loane:
These are people who have overstayed their visas? 
Phillip Ruddock:
Principally, overstayers, principally overstayers, I mean they may be people who are unlawful for other reasons, but primarily it would be overstayers and they are then inviting them to pay a fee to join in what is known as a "class action". One of them had as many as 3,000 participants, and ~~in~~ class actions at the moment involve almost 10% of the people that we believe are unlawful in Australia at any time, so we're talking at over 5,000 of the estimate 50,000 unlawfuls are being invited to join class actions, and when they join a class action, because we give people who are pursuing legal rights to remain in Australia the opportunity for a bridging visa, they all then claim a bridging visa and when it had attached to it permission to work they all sought permission to work. That was denied last November, but for many who are here in breach of visa conditions who are desirous of earning money, the opportunity to be able to extend their stay by this ruse ~~arose~~ and that's what it is, it's an advantage but certainly not the way in which the immigration system was intended to work.

Sally Loane:
Surely if the law is there though these people and the lawyers are going to exploit that, surely it's the law that needs to change.

Philip Ruddock:
Well the law may well change, but I also think that the people who practice in this area have some wider obligations. I mean lawyers pride themselves on having an ethical code of behaviour in which they accept that they don't only have an obligation to their client, but they have wider responsibilities and I think one of the wider responsibilities that members of the profession ought to ~~do~~ accept is not to put in place what you call a loophole, that is an arrangement which is clearly designed to undermine the intention of the law and the law is that individuals who have an entitlement might well be able to test them to the limits that are available although I query whether or not judicial review ought to be an appropriate remedy when there are independent merits Review
Tribunals that were set up by the Parliament specifically for this purpose, and I take the view that when I'm confronted with evidence that payments are being made for which there will be no accounting and no refund that you have to seriously question whether this is an abuse of the legal system. When you know that one of the law firms had 3,000 participants and if you assume that they were charging, I don't know the particular charge in relation to the 3,000 that they made, but if you assume that it was the standard charge that's being made by other firms of around $500, potentially they could have received one and a half ~~$1.5~~ million dollars. Now I can't see any case that would be run before our courts that would use that amount of money.

Appendix B 
The Age Newspaper (Melbourne) 1st Edition 
Tuesday 15 June 1999 (Page 4)
The Law Council of Australia will investigate legal firms that are run -ning massive immigration class - action cases.
The Immigration Minister, Mr Philip Ruddock, has attacked lawyers rushing class actions, accusing some of advertising in the ethnic press to solicit clients thereby enabling illegal immigrants who might not have a case to stay in Australia.
He said some immigrations lawyers encouraged people who were here temporarily and possibly unlawfully to join class actions.
"I think that is a very clear abuse of process," he said.
Mr Ruddock has referred a com - plaint against one law firm to the
Law Society of New South Wales but he refused to name the firm because of legal concern.
He has referred to the law society a copy of a letter sent to clients, which asked for $200 on top of $200 already spent to continue the action. He claimed there was no obligations on the firm to account for the money spent and no chance of a refund.
The comments provoked an angry response from the Law Council of
Australia, which accused the minister of trying to divert attention from a Senate inquiry into immigration.
But the Law Council's president, Mr Fabian Dixon, said yesterday that a council committee would look at the allegations.
The two main legal firms involved in large-scale class actions are
Sydney-based firms Adrian Joel and Parish Patience. Parish Patience is running the biggest class action, involving 2954 people. But that case has been deferred pending the outcome of another case, with 704 claimants. That case questions whether the Government breached the
Racial Discrimination Act in allowing certain groups to stay in
Australia.
Mr Ruddock said that in the biggest action, the firm sought $500 from each client, giving it $1.5 million to begin the case.
Also yesterday, Mr Ruddock admitted that 2000 Somalis who were stopped from boarding a boat to Australia could have a legal claim for asylum that could open the floodgates for refugees from Africa.
He blamed the situation on narrow court decisions and the failure of
Labor and the Democrats to support his "judicial review" bill, now before Parliament, which would limit access to the courts. "There will be a political penalty for those who fail to support the legislation" he said.
"I think the community will recognise that the judicial law-making in this area has not been in the proper public interest and those who do not support efforts at constraining it will pay a political price".
 *

LAST UPDATED: 12/02/2001 * * * 
