

New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council versus Perkins Matter No Ca 40589/97 [1998] NSWSC 630 (20 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 December 1998 
NEW SOUTH WALES ABORIGINAL LAND COUNCIL versus NEVILLE GEORGE PERKINS 
CA 40589/97; SC 11262/91 November 1998 
Priestley JA, Meagher JA, Sheppard AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM BADGERY-PARKER 
FILE NO/S: CA 40589/97; SC 11262/91 
DELIVERED: 20 NOVEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 22, 23 JULY 1998 
PARTIES: NEW SOUTH WALES ABORIGINAL LAND COUNCIL versus Neville George PERKINS 
CORAM: PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA, SHEPPARD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: T HALE 
Respondent: J S WHEELHOUSE 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: THE LAW FIRM OF SOLARIS 
Respondent: MINTER ELLISON 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 30 
CATCHWORDS: Defamation - defence of comment - [Defamation Act, 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/), [ss 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s9.html), [32](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s32.html),[33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s33.html),[34](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s34.html); Lloyd versus David Syme & Co. Limited [(1985) 3 NSWLR 728] 
NEW SOUTH WALES ABORIGINAL LAND COUNCIL v Neville George PERKINS 
FACTS 
The plaintiff/respondent was awarded substantial damages in a jury trial against the appellant/defendant which published material found to be defamatory of the plaintiff. The appellant argues the defence of comment is directed not to imputations pleaded but to the material publications giving rise to the imputations; that a jury may believe material to be defamatory which the defendant did honestly believe to be true and to which a different meaning was attached; that certain imputations were incapable of being defamatory and ought not have been led to the jury; that the amount of damages is excessive.

HELD 
By Priestley JA 
The defence of comment is directed to the imputation, and not to the matter making the imputation. Although the contrary argument was said to arise upon the enactment of the [Defamation Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) and in
Petrisis versus Hellenic Herald Pty Limited [(1978) 2 NSWLR 174], the Privy
Council held in Lloyd versus David Syme & Co. Limited [(1985) 3 NSWLR ]
the defence of comment is to those defamatory imputations embodied in the imputations pleaded by the plaintiff and the comment must be conveyed by the defendant as such by the defamatory imputations as the jury find to have been established.

By Meagher JA, Sheppard AJA agreeing
The [Defamation Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) saw a revolutionary change to the laws of defamation in New South Wales. Before that
Act a plaintiff merely stated the publication of which he complained and sought damages for loss of reputation flowing therefrom. The effect of the Act, is that the plaintiff no longer sues on the publication, but on the imputations which allegedly arise therefrom: the imputation is the cause of action and consequently any defence is logically a defence of the imputation, not the publication. To hold otherwise would leave the cause of action unanswered.
If an imputation is in substantially similar form to the actual publication, it clearly does not matter (in the real world) to which of the two the defence of comment is pleaded.
The defence of comment in the traditional form was to the publication and "amounted to comment based on proper material for comment". In the present case, there was "no proper material" because the plaintiff claimed he was not in fact involved in the process about which comment was claimed and this claim was not rebutted.
The submission that certain imputations failed to specify any act or condition causative of a derogatory opinion of the respondent cannot be sustained.
In respect of damages, no submission has been made that his Honour's directions in this regard were mistaken. In these circumstances it is not open to an appellate court to infer that the jury did not perform their task of coming to a verdict in accordance with his Honour's directions.

By Sheppard AJA
The relevant question in determining if the amount of damages is too high is to decide what is outside the range of what may reasonably be regarded as appropriate in the circumstances of the case. In this case the jury were entitled to accept the evidence of the plaintiff/ respondent and give it its full weight.

ORDERS
Appeal dismissed with costs.

NEW SOUTH WALES ABORIGINAL LAND COUNCIL v PERKINS 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I have had the advantage of reading in advance the reasons about to be delivered by Meagher JA in this appeal. His conclusion is that the appeal should be dismissed with costs. I agree with his conclusion and generally with his reasons, subject to explaining one matter on which I think our views differ slightly. 
The matter I wish to explain is my opinion on one of the appellant's arguments on which a good deal of time was spent. This argument was one of the steps in the appellant's submission that the trial judge had erred in his rulings on the defence of comment.

The particular argument took the form that the judge in his rulings on the appellant's comment defences had wrongly considered them on the basis that the defence of comment must be directed to the imputation and not, as the appellant contends, to the "matter" making the imputation.

The argument arises from changes made in the law of defamation in New South
Wales by the [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s9.html) dealt with the causes of action available to a person about whom another person had published anything which made a defamatory imputation. The section was as follows: "9. Causes of action 
Where a person publishes any report, article, letter, note, picture, oral utterance or other thing, by means of which or by means of any part of which, and its publication, the publisher makes an imputation defamatory of another person, whether by innuendo or otherwise, then for the purposes of this section: that report, article, letter, note, picture, oral utterance or thing is a matter, and the imputation is made by means of the publication of that matter.

Where a person publishes any matter to any recipient and by means of that publication makes an imputation defamatory of another person, the person defamed has, in respect of that imputation, a cause of action against the publisher for the publication of that matter to that recipient: in addition to any cause of action which the person defamed may have against the publisher for the publication of that matter to that recipient in respect of any other defamatory imputation made by means of that publication, and in addition to any cause of action which the person defamed may have against that publisher for any publication of that matter to any other recipient.
 ...

Rules of court may prohibit or regulate the reliance by a plaintiff in proceedings for defamation on several imputations alleged to be made by means of the same matter published by the defendant, where the several imputations do not differ in substance.

Notwithstanding subsection (2), where proceedings for defamation in respect of the publication of any matter are tried before a jury, the jury shall, unless the court otherwise directs: give a single verdict in respect of all the causes of action on which the plaintiff relies.
 (Repealed) ...
 ..." (The words printed in bold type are printed that way in the current reprint of the Act. Pursuant to [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s9.html),
SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/index.html#p67) r 11(3) forbids plaintiffs to rely on two or more imputations alleged to be made by the same publication unless the imputations differ in substance.) 
Division 7 of the Act deals with defences of comment. Each of [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s32.html), [33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s33.html) and [34](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s34.html) provides that a comment of the kind described in the section, and subject to the qualifications in the section, "is a defence as to comment".
 [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s9.html) enables anything published which makes a defamatory imputation to be described as a "matter" for the purposes of the section. It also speaks of imputations being "made by means of the publication of [a] matter". As far as possible I will try to use the language of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s9.html) in what follows.

For its submission that a defence of comment should properly be directed to a matter making the imputation and need not direct the defence to the imputation itself the appellant relied on Petritsis versus Hellenic Herald Pty Limited [(1978) 2 NSWLR 174]; Bob Kay Real Estate Pty Limited versus Amalgamated Television [(1985) 1 NSWLR 505] and Radio 2UE Pty Limited versus Parker [(1992) 29 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281992%29%2029%20NSWLR%20448 "View LawCiteRecord" )

If Petritsis stood alone, then the appellant's argument would be sustainable because in that case, although Mahoney JA in the course of dissenting, took a different view on the present point from the majority, both Reynolds JA and
Samuels JA, in separate opinions, came to a conclusion supporting the appellant's submission in the present case. However, they did so by somewhat different paths. The difference in their reasoning may well have led the Court of Appeal to reconsider the particular point in an appropriate case. The question was in fact reconsidered, not, as it happened, directly by this court, but by the Privy Council in Lloyd versus David Syme & Co Limited [(1985) 3 NSWLR 728.] 
The Privy Council decided Lloyd upon appeal from this court's decision in
David Syme & Co Limited versus Lloyd [(1984) 3 NSWLR 346.] The case in this court was the defendant's appeal against judgment entered for the plaintiff following a jury trial. In the appeal the first question was whether the matter published by the defendant was reasonably capable of making the defamatory imputations relied on by the plaintiff. Glass JA with whom Samuels
JA agreed on essential points, was of opinion that the published matter could not be read as being so capable. The appeal was upheld on this ground. As the third judge in that case, my view was that the matter could be read as capable of making the defamatory imputations.

At first instance the defendant had also relied on defences of comment which the trial judge had ruled could not be submitted to the jury. In this court the defendant argued amongst its further grounds of appeal that its defences of comment should have been left to the jury.

Because of his view that the defamatory imputations had not been made by the published matter, it was not necessary for Glass JA to deal with the defendant's comment grounds of appeal. However, at some length, he considered, amongst other questions relating to comment, the question raised in the present appeal, whether the defence of comment should be directed to the imputations relied on by the plaintiff or to the published matter by which they are made. The bare bones of Glass JA's answer to the question were that [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s9.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) made each defamatory imputation made by the published matter and relied on by the plaintiff an independent cause of action, and (b), the defence of comment must be pleaded as a defence to a cause of action, that is, to a defamatory imputation relied on by the plaintiff.

In my reasons, I agreed with Glass JA on this point.

Before the appeal in Lloyd's case reached the Privy Council, an interlocutory application came before Hunt J subsequently reported as Bob Kay
Real Estate Pty Limited versus Amalgamated Television Services Pty Limited [(1985) NSWLR 505.] Hunt J took the opportunity provided by this case to reply to the obiter dicta of Glass JA with some obiter dicta of his own.

Hunt J disagreed in a number of respects with what Glass JA had said in
Lloyd about comment. Most relevantly for present purposes, he appears to have understood Glass JA's approach to have required that before a defence of comment could be made to a defamatory imputation, the defamatory imputation, as pleaded by the plaintiff, must on its face and without reference to the matter which made the imputation, be comment rather than fact. On this assumption some of Hunt J's criticisms of the way in which Glass JA had explained the matter had substance.

Hunt J's reasons in Bob Kay were delivered on 16 May 1985. The Privy
Council's decision in Lloyd was delivered on 11 November 1985. Their
Lordships took the view that the published matter was capable of making the defamatory imputations the plaintiff had relied on. It therefore became necessary for them to consider the defendant's pleaded defences of comment. On the question I am now considering their Lordships held that the comment a defendant relies on in the defence of comment is "that which is embodied in the imputations pleaded by the plaintiff" (see at 735). They also held that the comment alleged by the defendant as a defence must necessarily be one that "conveys such of the defamatory imputations pleaded as the jury find to have been established" (also at 735).

These opinions of their Lordships were part of their reasoning essential to their decision, and hence became binding rules in the jurisdiction from which the appeal had come. Lloyd's case remains good law in New South Wales on this aspect of construction of the [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) (as well as on other matters).

The basis on which counsel for the appellant in the present case sought to argue for a different rule from that stated in Lloyd was a passage in Radio
UE Sydney Pty Limited versus Parker [(1992) 29 NSWLR 448], a decision of this court constituted by Clarke, Handley and Cripps JJA. The leading opinion was delivered by Clarke JA with whom each of the other judges agreed.

The appellants in Radio 2UE made a submission much the same as was made for the appellant in the present appeal, the submission being supported by reference to what had been said in Petritsis. In discussing this submission
Clarke JA referred first to what Glass JA had said in Lloyd and then to the discussion by Hunt JA in Bob Kay of Glass JA's views (at 466). Clarke JA understood Hunt J to have said in Bob Kay that Glass JA's view was that a defendant can plead comment only if the relevant imputation is expressed in terms of a conclusion or expression of opinion. Clarke JA said that if Glass
JA "was expressing the opinion that a defence of comment is only open when the pleaded imputation is expressed as a conclusion, inference or an opinion then, with the greatest respect, I am unable to agree with him". (at 466) 
A little later Clarke JA went on to say that the question whether the defendant was, relevantly, making a comment or making a statement of fact requires the jury to determine whether in the context of the whole of the published matter the relevant statements made or published by the defendant were statements of fact or were comment, and that the resolution of the question could not depend upon the form of the imputation (at 466-467).

It was on this part of Clarke JA's reasons that the appellant relied for saying that it was incorrect in law to say that defences of comment must be pleaded to the imputations comprising the plaintiff's cause of action.

I do not think the submission gives sufficient weight to other passages in
Clarke JA's opinion, which show the full sequence of his reasoning.

He had earlier said that he doubted that Glass JA in Lloyd's case was expressing the opinion that a defence of comment was open only when the imputation pleaded by the plaintiff was expressed as a conclusion, inference or an opinion. Rather he thought that what Glass JA was seeking to emphasise was that in order to make good a comment defence the defendant must establish a comment was congruent with the imputation relied upon by the plaintiff as being made by the matter published (at 466).

Further, he went on to say that a defendant seeking to rely on a defence of comment "is obliged to establish that the imputation which the jury has found that the published matter conveyed was conveyed by the writer or speaker as a comment. In this respect, as I have sought to point out, the actual form of the pleaded imputation is not a relevant consideration. What the jury is required to consider is the published material in order to determine whether the writer or speaker conveyed the defamatory statement which, according to its finding, the published matter conveyed as an expression of opinion or conclusion on the one hand or a statement of fact on the other. I regard this conclusion as consistent with principle and it is, in any event, supported by the decisions in David Syme & Co Ltd versus Lloyd both in this Court and in the Privy Council: Lloyd versus David Syme & Co Ltd [(1985) 3 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281985%29%203%20NSWLR%20728 "View LawCiteRecord" )." (at 468, my underlining) 
I do not think, after considering the full context of this passage, that there can be any doubt that Clarke JA when he used the underlined words "defamatory statement", was referring to the imputation pleaded by the plaintiff. Once that is understood, it seems to me that the meaning of the passage is perfectly clear. However, because it was, in my opinion, misunderstood in the argument put to us for the appellant in the present case, I will try to spell it out in a little more detail. In my view what Clarke JA was saying was: whether or not an imputation pleaded by a plaintiff as a cause of action is an expression of opinion, or conclusion or a statement of fact or some mixture of any two or all three of these will sometimes be impossible to decide simply from the terms of the imputation itself; in the kind of case referred to in (a), where the jury finds the alleged imputation was made by the published matter complained of and was defamatory of the plaintiff and the defendant is relying on the defence of comment, then it will be for the defendant to show, amongst the other requirements of that defence, that the defamatory imputation was a comment and not a statement of fact; to do that the defendant is entitled to require the tribunal of fact to consider the published matter which made the defamatory imputation in order to determine whether that matter made an imputation which was comment (in which case the defendant will have succeeded in establishing one of the matters necessary to the defence) or was not (in which case the defence will have failed).

If I am right in my understanding of Clarke JA's observations, the concluding sentence in the passage in which he refers to the decisions in this court and in the Privy Council in Lloyd's case is quite accurate. If on the other hand the passage and the earlier passage meant something along the lines of what has been submitted for the appellant here, then it would have been wrong for
Clarke JA to say his conclusion was consistent with Lloyd's case.

The foregoing expanded statement of Clarke JA's meaning in the passage reproduced from p 468 of Radio 2UE seems to me to be supported by what he said a little later by way of summary: "... the defence of comment will arise for consideration by the jury only when it has found that the imputations for which the plaintiff contends (or ones substantially similar) were conveyed by the material published and that those imputations were defamatory. Once the defence of comment is raised the jury is required to consider whether the imputation it has found to arise was made by the defendant as an allegation of fact or as an expression of opinion, on facts stated, or sufficiently indicated, in the published matter. For that purpose it is not to the point that the plaintiff has pleaded his imputation as a statement of fact. The question is to be determined upon a consideration of the published material." (at 469) 
A little later again, in discussing the directions actually given in the
Radio 2UE case, Clarke JA referred to one direction which had required that the jury determine whether the material which gave rise to the imputation was comment. He said that this was not right, but that the instruction should have been that if the jury found the particular imputation relied on by the plaintiff, or a substantially similar one, had been conveyed by the published material, the jury should next consider whether the defendant had conveyed that imputation as comment or expression of opinion or as a statement of fact (at 470). He continued that "... the question for the jury's determination was not whether his actual words were comment but whether the defamatory imputation which they would already have found was conveyed by those words, expressly or by implication, was conveyed as a statement of opinion or as a statement of fact." (at -472) 
The result is that, in my opinion, Radio 2UE not only clearly does not support the appellant's submission here that the defence of comment is directed to the matter and not the imputations relied on by the plaintiff, it contradicts it. Radio 2UE was decided on the basis that the defence of comment must be pleaded as an answer to the cause of action consisting of the imputation the plaintiff relies on and that in considering whether the imputation made by the matter was made as a comment or a statement of fact, the matter from which the imputation is derived may be taken into account.

As earlier indicated I agree with Meagher JA that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

MEAGHER JA: The plaintiff, Mr Neville George Perkins, the present respondent, was once a top public servant in the New South Wales Public Service. He is also an aborigine, either full blood or part-blood. He gave evidence that the primary goal of his life was to contribute as much as he could towards the advancement of Aboriginal people. In the course of his life he was awarded an OA for services to Aboriginal Community Welfare. He has also been involved in the establishment of the Federal Council for the Advancement of Aboriginals and Torres Straits Islanders, the Alice Springs Aboriginal Medical Service and the Aboriginal Legal Service of Central Australia. He ended up as senior adviser on Aboriginal affairs to the Premier of New South Wales. 
For reasons which are unclear to me, he fell foul of his fellow aborigines in the appellant Land Council. They started, towards the end of May 1989, to conduct a campaign of vilification against Mr Perkins, and continued that campaign until mid-August 1989.

That campaign consisted of distributing to the media certain documents. One was a "media release" dated 29 May 1989; one was another "media release" dated May 1989; the third (dated (7 July 1989) was, I assume, yet another "media release", although it does not describe itself as such; the fourth (dated 16
August 1989) describes itself as a "memorandum", although it was apparently distributed to the media; and the fifth was a letter to the Premier dated 17
August 1989, likewise presumably distributed to the media. Mr Perkins considered all these documents defamatory, and sued on the imputations which flowed from them. Those documents became Exhibits A,B,C,D, and E respectively.
His action was heard for 17 days before Badgery-Parker J and a jury. The jury found for the plaintiff in respect of the imputations relied on arising out of
Exhibits A,B,C, and D, and awarded him substantial damages: $45,000 in respect of the Exhibit A imputations; $75,000 in respect of the Exhibit B imputations; $185,000 in respect of the Exhibit C imputations; and $155,000 in respect of the Exhibit D imputations.

It is, I think, unnecessary to set out in full either all the publications complained of, or the imputations allegedly arising therefrom. However, by way of an example I shall set out one of those publications in full, Exhibit C, and the imputations which Mr Perkins alleged arose from it.

Exhibit C read as follows: "1. NEW SOUTH WALES ABORIGINAL LAND COUNCIL
Ist Floor, 103 Moore Street, Liverpool, NSW 2170 
Phone: (02) 601 4766 Fax: (02) 601 1936 July 1989
PROTEST AT OFFICE OF ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Representatives of Aboriginal Land Councils in NSW have today occupied the
State Government's Office of Aboriginal Affairs.
This sit-in protest draws attention to the way in which the office has obstructed and delayed legitimate Aboriginal land claims and funding for local
Land Councils.
Since the election of the Greiner Government in March 1988, just 17 land claims have been granted while 956 claims remained unprocessed.
In 1986.87 110 claims were approved (covering 2000 hectares of Crown land) and in 1987/88, 263 were granted (covering 33,000 hectares Crown (sic)land and ,000 hectares by free hold title).
The Chairman of the NSW Aboriginal Land Council, Tiga Bayles, today said that this administrative inefficiency had occurred under the direct control of the Premier, Mr Greiner.
"Obviously Mr Greiner's Havard (sic) MBA and policies for public sector efficiency have not benefited Aboriginal land claims".
"It is disgraceful that nearly 1000 legitimate land claims sit untouched on desks in the office of Aboriginal Affairs in the Premier's own department".
"The Land Councils believe Mr Greiner should dismiss his office head,
Neville Perkins, for administrative inefficiency".
Mr Bayles also said that 18 Local Land Councils in NSW had been waiting for more than four months to have their applications for funding processed.
Their investigator reports are being held by the OAA.
"This exposes the inaccuracy of Mr Greiner's claim that 50 percent of all
Land Council's (117 in total) are unfunded".
"The major problem is not in the Land Council system but in the Premier's own administration".
"That is why Land Councils are protesting today - to force Mr Greiner's bureaucrats into giving them a fair go.
"Until now the Office of Aboriginal Affairs has resembled a customs office in Japan, grinding applications to a halt through its deliberate inefficiency".
"The protest followed today's "March Against Mainstreaming" through the city streets.
 [19. Page 2] of
NSWLC's Media Release of 7th July 1989, PROTEST AT OFFICE OF ABORIGINAL
AFFAIRS.
All media are directed to cover the sit-in which commences at 1pm at the
Office of Aboriginal Affairs, 14th Floor, 47-53 Macquarie Street, Sydney.
Contact: Tiga Bayles 431(h)." 
The imputations allegedly arising out of the documents were as follows: "(a) The plaintiff, a senior public servant in the New South Wales administration, had deliberately obstructed Aboriginal land claims in New
South Wales.

The plaintiff, a senior public servant in the New South Wales administration, deliberately obstructed government funding for Aboriginal Land
Councils in New South Wales.

The plaintiff was incompetent in carrying out his duties in the New South
Wales Premier's Department." 
One defence the defendant pleaded to all the imputations relied on by Mr
Perkins was the defence of comment.

Mr Hale, learned counsel for the appellant, argued four grounds of appeal. The first concerns the defence of "comment" to any of the imputations to which it was pleaded. This may be illustrated by the publication I have set out. After complaining about the delays involved in processing Aboriginal Land claims, the publication said: "The Land Councils believe Mr Greiner should dismiss his office head, Neville
Perkins, for administrative inefficiency." 
These words resulted in the plaintiff pleading an imputation in the following language: "(c) the plaintiff was incompetent in carrying out his duties in the New South
Wales Premier's Department".

In interrogatories answered by the defendant it said that it had no intention of conveying imputation (c). His Honour held that it followed that the defendant never had the opinion represented by imputation (c), or any opinion congruent with that imputation. His Honour held that the defence of "comment" to imputation (c) must therefore fail.

It was submitted that these rulings on the defence of comment constituted error in two respects. The first alleged error is that his Honour confused intention and belief; a jury may attach a defamatory meaning to the publication which the defendant did not intend, and at the same time honestly believe in the truth of his publication, to which he intended a different meaning to be given. Thus, in the present case, it was said that the defendant might have believed that the plaintiff was inefficient but not incompetent.

The second alleged error, not unrelated to the first, is that his Honour failed to realize that the defence of comment is directed not to the imputations pleaded but to the publications which gave rise to the imputations.

The answer to both submissions on error is, in my opinion, the same. It may be answered as a matter of principle. The 1974 [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) was a revolutionary change in the laws of defamation in New South Wales. Before that
Act a plaintiff merely stated the publication of which he complained and sought damages for loss of reputation flowing therefrom. After the 1974 Act a plaintiff no longer sued on the publication, but on the imputations which he alleged arose from it. Each imputation was a cause of action. Consequently, one would have thought, any successful defence must be a defence to the imputation. Otherwise the defendant would be answering a cause of action which the plaintiff does not rely on (viz. the publication), and the cause of action on which he does rely (viz. the imputation) would go unanswered. The submissions may also be answered as a matter of authority. The matter was dealt with by the Privy Council (in an appeal from the New South Wales Court of Appeal) in Lloyd versus David Syme & Co Limited [(1985) 3 NSWLR .]
In that case Lord Keith of Kinkel said (at p.735): "Section 33(2) of the 1974 Act provides that a defence of comment is defeated if it is shown that the servant or agent whose comment it is did not have the opinion represented by the comment. Is the comment referred to that which is embodied in the imputations pleaded by the plaintiff, or is it actual words employed, no defamatory meaning being necessarily attributed to them? The defence of comment can only become a live issue if the comment is found to be defamatory. Therefore it appears to their Lordships that a jury must necessarily approach a defence of comment on the basis that the comment conveys such of the defamatory imputations pleaded as the jury find to have been established. The question they have to consider, where s.33(2) is pleaded, is whether or not the servant or agent of the defendant had the opinion represented by these defamatory imputations. There is no such thing as comment in the air. Comment must have a meaning, and ex hypothesi the jury are proceeding on the footing that its meaning is defamatory in the sense of the pleaded imputations which have been found established." 
That case should be regarded as settling the matter, despite some inconsistent mutterings in subsequent New South Wales cases. It is, of course, consistent with the Privy Council decision that a jury may, in evaluating the defence of comment, have some regard to the publication out of which the imputation arose.

Some of the New South Wales cases should be briefly mentioned. The question arose in Petrisis versus Hellenic Herald Pty Ltd [[1978] 2 NSWLR 174], where
Samuels JA certainly expressed views which support the submissions of the appellant in the present case. However, the authority of those dicta is greatly weakened by the fact that Reynolds JA in that case had a different point of view, and (more importantly) of the fact that it is earlier than the
Privy Council decision in Lloyd versus David Syme & Co Limited (supra). In
David Syme & Co Limited versus Lloyd [[1984] 3 NSWLR 346] in the
Court of Appeal, Glass JA and Priestley JA both expressed views contrary to the submissions of the appellant in the present case; and those views were, of course, accepted by the Privy Council. In Bob Kay Real Estate Pty Ltd v
Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd [(1985) 1 NSWLR 505], Hunt J expressed views contrary to those of Glass JA and Priestley JA, but that attitude was dealt a fatal blow when the Privy Council sided with Glass JA and
Priestley JA. Finally, this Court has added further confusion to the matter in
Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Limited versus Parker [(1992) 29 NSWLR 448] by both paying lip-service to the Privy Council and expressing views which are rather inconsistent with it. In my view, Badgery-Parker J cannot be criticized for following Lloyd versus David Syme & Co. Limited (supra).

In any event, to my mind, the problem does not arise. Indeed, I find it extraordinary that so much time has been spent, both below and here, in debating it. The appellant's practical worry was an alleged delay in processing aboriginal land claims. It blamed Mr Perkins for this. The actual publication mounts a charge of "inefficiency" in the processing of Land
Claims; the imputation refers to a charge of "incompetency". Whilst in some circumstances there may be a sensible difference between the two concepts, in the present case, it seems to me, there is no difference. If an imputation is in substantially similar form to the actual publication, it clearly does not matter (in the real world) to which of the two the defence of comment is pleaded.

What makes the point even more teasing is that the defence of comment had to fail in any event. The defendant's plea, in the traditional form, was that the publication "amounted to comment based on proper material for comment". Such a plea obviously cannot be made good if there is "no proper material" in existence. In the present case there clearly was "no proper material". There was no evidence that the plaintiff had anything to do with the processing of land claims; he claimed he did not, and his claim was not rebutted. As his
Honour said "Further it was open to the jury to conclude, by reasons of the presence of errors of fact and/or demonstrable falsehoods that the defendant had no honest belief in the truth of what it was saying". If, then, the defendant's publications were compounded in equal parts of falsehood and malice, it is not easy to see how any defence of comment could stand up.

Mr Hale's next submission is one which, with respect, I find quite extraordinary. It was to the effect that certain imputations were incapable of being defamatory, and therefore ought not have been allowed to go to the jury.
Those imputations were: 
EXHIBIT B 
Imputation (d) "the plaintiff was prepared to destroy Aboriginal Land
Council's in New South Wales in order to protect his existing power as a public servant" 
Imputation (e) "the plaintiff blocked government funding for Aboriginal Land
Council's in New South Wales in order to destroy them." 
EXHIBIT C 
Imputation (a) "the plaintiff, a senior public servant in New South Wales administration, had deliberately obstructed Aboriginal land claims in New
South Wales"; 
Imputation (b) "the plaintiff, a senior public servant in the New South Wales administration, deliberately obstructed government funding for Aboriginal Land
Councils in New South Wales." 
EXHIBIT D 
Imputation (a) "the plaintiff, a senior public servant in the New South Wales administration, deliberately obstructed government funding for aboriginal Land
Councils in New South Wales." 
None of those imputations, so it was said, specified any "act or condition" which would cause ordinary decent members of the community to think less of the plaintiff. But to say of a senior public servant that he acted to obstruct business whose dispatch he should be furthering is to accuse him of an "act" which would cause most people to hold him in less esteem; and to accuse him of being prepared to do so is to accuse him of an equally derogatory "condition".

The next ground of appeal urged on us was that the damages were excessive. It was pointed out that the publications giving rise to the action were limited to a period of four months, were never published by the media (although issued to them), concerned the same subject matter and the same political controversy, and were alleged to have conveyed similar imputations. Further, it was said that none of the imputations, nor the whole aggregate of them, caused any economic loss. This, however, neglects that the gist of an action in defamation is loss of reputation. There was ample evidence of damage to reputation: he was repeatedly asked by others about the allegations, some members of the Aboriginal community referred to him as an "Uncle Tom", some members of that community made it known to him that they had ceased to trust him. Nor must the necessity to provide vindication be overlooked. Kirby P in
John Fairfax & Sons Limited versus Carson [(1991) 24 NSWLR 259] at 272 pointed out that damages may be needed to ensure that the plaintiff does not suffer injury in the future and that he has a cushion against the "irretrievable effect of the defamation". Further, it must be assumed that the damages included an element of aggravated damages; and well they might, bearing in mind the defendant's admissions that many, if not all, the "facts" relied on by it were false, and bearing further in mind that the publications were couched in inflammatory language. And this leads to a further submission on the question of damages. One of the allegations made by the defendant against the plaintiff was that he was a "Government Jackie" (ie an "Uncle
Tom"). There was some cross-examination on this matter, and considerable reference to it in counsel's addresses. However, it did not give rise to an imputation in the Statement of Claim. The claim of Mr Hale is that part of the largish amount awarded as damages must reflect weight being placed by the jury on a non-imputation. On examination, this claim dissolves. It is true, of course, that no imputation was relied upon by the plaintiff in respect of this allegation; but there is no rule that a plaintiff must plead every possible imputation. Moreover, the fact that a plaintiff does not rely on the allegation so as to frame an imputation does not mean that he cannot rely on the allegation for every purpose. In the present case the plaintiff could - and in fact did - rely on it as furnishing evidence of malice, a quality which can defeat a defence of comment and which can also give rise to aggravated damages. All this was carefully explained to the jury in his
Honour's directions, and no submission has been made that his Honour's directions in this regard were mistaken. How, then, can an appellate court infer that the jury did not perform their task of coming to a verdict in accordance with his Honour's directions? 
The fourth (and final) ground of appeal was that his Honour erred in permitting imputation 10(d) to go to the jury. That imputation was: "(d) The plaintiff a senior public servant in the New South Wales administration had deliberately provided false information to the Premier of
New South Wales." 
This ground of appeal must be rejected. In the first place, granted the ability of the ordinary man to read between the lines, I do think the imputation was justified. It is an imputation which arises out of paragraphs ,11,12,13 and 18 of Exhibit D. Those paragraphs are as follows: "10. For some considerable time, Mr Perkins, as head of the Office of
Aboriginal Affairs, has used delaying tactics to prevent Land Councils from being refunded (sic). Don't believe what I am saying if you like, just ring those Land Councils who have to answer the same question over and over again.
Ask them about the stupid little things that OAA insist upon before OAA approve the release of funds.
 "11. It is interesting that for months Mr Perkins has been advising the
Government that over 50% of Land Councils were not functioning and yet his officers have never produced such evidence. Again, you ask your people in the
Local Land Councils the truth.
 "12. Mr Perkins talks about lies and slander. What about lies and slander about me made under Parliamentary privilege by Mr Greiner.
 "13. Mr Perkins, as the Government Jacki, complains of the continuing social and economic status of many koories. He, of all people, should know that the cause of the poor social and economic status is the result of failed
Government programs over many, many years. Mr Perkins is trying to mislead you people by trying to say that the Land Councils are to blame for our poor living conditions.
 "18. Let us also be clear about his personal motives. He wants to be the big boss of the Government's Commission. He wants another State Government "Big
Brother" who we have to go to begging for money.

In the second place, the point was never taken before the trial judge.

For these reasons I am of the view that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SHEPPARD AJA: In this matter I have had the advantage of reading the judgments to be delivered by Priestley JA and Meagher JA. It may be that there is a degree of unevenness between them in relation to the development of the law concerning the defence of comment especially having regard to the decision of this Court in Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd versus Parker [(1992) 29 NSWLR 448.] Priestley JA has analysed the judgment in that case, particularly the judgment of Clarke JA. I am in respectful agreement with that analysis. 
The matter which has caused me most concern in this appeal is the amounts of the verdicts found by the jury in respect of each of the four causes of action. The total of the amounts awarded to the respondent was $460,000. The matter upon which each of the imputations was based was found in four press releases or media releases dated respectively 29 May, 30 May, 7 July and 16
August 1989. As Meagher JA says, the last of these is described as a memorandum but as he says, it was apparently distributed to the media. It was thus intended that the statements made in the various media releases should be published.

The authorities which I have chiefly considered are the decisions of the High
Court in Coyne versus Citizen Finance Ltd <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 211] and Carson versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 44.] The question is whether the amounts awarded are so high as to be outside the range of what may reasonably be regarded as appropriate to the circumstances of the case. In my consideration of the matter I have had regard to evidence which the respondent gave concerning the deep hurt to his feelings which was caused as a result of the publication of the matter complained of.
The jury were entitled to accept this evidence and give it full weight. The remarks made by Meagher JA in the course of his judgment concerning his being referred to as an "Uncle Tom" or, more accurately, a "Government Jackie" deeply distressed the respondent who has the history in the Aboriginal community which was recounted in his evidence and which, of course, the jury were well entitled to take into account. Having reflected on the matter, I am not convinced that the amounts which were awarded are amounts which call for the interference of this Court.

Subject to what I have said, I am in agreement with the reasons for judgment both of Priestley JA and Meagher JA. I agree also in the orders which are proposed.
 * * * 
