

Cotter versus John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd [2003] NSWSC 503 (22 July 2003) 
Last Updated: 11 August 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Cotter versus John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 20360/97  
HEARING DATE{S): Monday 26 May 2003 - Tuesday 3 June 2003  
JUDGMENT DATE: 22/07/2003  
PARTIES: 
Barry Cotter - Plaintiff 
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd - Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: Simpson J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
T Molomby SC with R Rasmussen - Plaintiff 
TD Blackburn with ATS Dawson - Defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
Joseph G Capogreco & Associates - Plaintiff 
Freehills - Defendant  
CATCHWORDS:  defamation  justification defence  contextual truth defence  failure to comply with legal obligations  publication of imputations that further injure the reputation of the plaintiff  interstate defences  aggravated damages  
ACTS CITED:  [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/), [s7A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html), s[15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s15.html), s[16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s16.html), s[46](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s46.html), s[46A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s46a.html) 
Local Government Act 1919  [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/), [s360](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s360.html), s[373](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s373.html), s[442](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s442.html), s[443](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s443.html), s[448](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s448.html), s[449](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s449.html), s[451](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s451.html), s[457](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s457.html),  [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) [s45](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s45.html), s[140](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s140.html)  [Motor Accidents Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maca1999298/) [s134](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maca1999298/s134.html)  
DECISION: 
Damages of $100,000 awarded to plaintiff  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DEFAMATION LIST  
SIMPSON J  
Tuesday 22 July 2003  /97  
Barry COTTER versus JOHN FAIRFAX PUBLICATIONS PTY LTD  
JUDGMENT  HER HONOUR: By statement of claim filed on 24 April 1997 the plaintiff,
Mr Barry Cotter, claims damages against the defendant, John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd, in respect of defamatory imputations published by it on April 1997.  The matter of which the plaintiff complains appeared in the form of a news item in The Sydney Morning Herald, a daily newspaper circulating principally in Sydney, but also in other states and territories of Australia. It is relatively short, and it is convenient here to set it out in full. The reproduction of the news item which is in evidence shows that it appeared on page 3 of the newspaper and occupied a single column on the far right hand side of the page. At the top of the column was a photograph, identified as a photograph of the plaintiff, and captioned:  "... under fire from Marrickville council opponents."  A headline reads:  "Probe into Mayor's Decade of Deals"  The by-line of the author, Robert Wainwright, described as "Local Government
Writer" followed. The body of the news item reads:  "Business interests and property purchases of the Mayor of Marrickville,
Councillor Barry Cotter, have been referred to the Department of Local
Government for investigation.  
The council's general manager, Mr Colin Mills, has taken the action as a result of questions about Cr Cotter's business affairs, lodged last week by four councillors who are political opponents.  
They have detailed a decade of property and business transactions by Cr Cotter and asked why some had not been noted on his annual pecuniary interest declaration.  
In a matter to be discussed at next Tuesday's council meeting, the opponents also raise questions about Cr Cotter's business relationship with Mr Evan Lee, an architect and ALP member, who prepared the design brief for the council's proposed $28 million Civic Centre development on the site of the old
Marrickville Hospital.  
Cr Cotter and Mr Lee are directors of Evbaca Pty Ltd (formerly Evan Lee
Management Pty Ltd), which owns a block of flats in Dulwich Hill. They also have shares in a house in Newtown.  
They were appointed directors of Evbaca on March 21, 1996, and Cr Cotter informed Mr Mills four days later. On March 28 Cr Cotter attended a meeting of the project team, of which he was not a member, where there were discussions about quotations for the preparation of a design brief. A week later, the project team awarded the contract to Mr Lee's architect firm, Evan Lee Pty
Ltd.  
At a council meeting on June 18, Cr Cotter moved the motion that accepted the design brief prepared by the company. A subsequent 'hospital site probity review' prepared for the council by Fraud Prevention Services Pty Ltd warned that 'attention should be paid in the drafting of the tender brief to ensure that Evan Lee Pty Ltd does not have an advantage over other tenders.'  
It said: 'If the design brief drafted by Evan Lee becomes the basis of the tender brief, any possible concerns of the other tenderers could be increased.'  
Mr Lee's consortium is one of a number of companies which have lodged expressions of interest in tendering for the project if it goes ahead.  
Cr Cotter told a steering committee in February that he would step aside if discussions reached a stage of approving a contract for the project.  
He conceded yesterday that he had misunderstood the requirements of the Act to declare directorships and property interests, and has asked Mr Mills to put his mistake on the public record.  
But Cr Cotter denied there was any impropriety in his association with Mr Lee, insisting he played no part in awarding the contract. Cr Cotter said he attended the March 28 meeting, where he 'made a few comments' and left.  'By law I am not required to declare an interest but it was always my intention to do so when I believed a decision would confer a financial benefit for Mr Lee,' he said.  
Mr Lee said he had tried to discuss the Civic Centre development with Cr
Cotter but the mayor had refused: 'Barry won't even talk to me about it.'  
Of the matters referred to the department, Mr Mills said in a letter to Cr
Sylvia Hale that Cr Cotter had admitted failing to include in his 1995-96 declaration of pecuniary interests that he was a director in three companies:
Jowai Holdings Pty Ltd; Binco Pty Ltd; and Jellyfish Productions Pty Ltd. He also did not include details of two properties he owned in Glebe Point Road,
Glebe, and Hordern Street, Newtown."  On 14 June 2001 a jury, empanelled pursuant to the provisions of [s7A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html) of the [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/), found that the item conveyed three imputations that defamed the plaintiff. They are:  "(b) That he sought, by attending as Mayor of Marrickville a meeting of a project team of which he was not a member, to influence the decision of that team in favour of an architect with whom he had a private business relationship;  that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that as a member of
Marrickville Council he has engaged over a period of ten years in business and property deals which have conflicted with his duties as a member of council;  that as Mayor of Marrickville he had deliberately so conducted himself in relation to the council Civic Centre development as to give a financial benefit to an architect with whom he had a private business relationship."  (The rather odd numbering comes about by reason of the jury verdict. The jury found that only three of six imputations originally pleaded by the plaintiff were in fact conveyed.)  Following the jury determination the defendant filed a defence, which was subsequently amended at least twice. As the matter went to trial, the defendant relied upon only two defences: a defence that each of imputations and (f) is substantially true and relates to a matter of public interest as provided by [s15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s15.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/); and a defence of contextual truth, as provided by [s16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s16.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/). By this defence the defendant pleaded that, by reason of two further imputations, published contextually to the imputations of which the plaintiff complains, each of which it asserts to be substantially true and to relate to a matter of public interest, the publication of the imputations of which the plaintiff complains did not further injure his reputation. For completeness, I here mention that the defendant also "pleaded back" imputations (b) and (f) as pleaded by the plaintiff, signifying its intention to rely on either of those found to be substantially true in support of the [s16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s16.html) defence of contextual truth. There is no defence of justification to imputation (d).  Initially, the defendant pleaded the contextual imputations as follows:  "(1) The plaintiff, as Mayor of Marrickville Council failed over a substantial period of time to comply with his obligations of disclosure as a councillor;  the plaintiff breached his obligations as a councillor by preferring the interests of his business and personal associates over his duties as a councillor."  At the commencement of the trial, senior counsel for the plaintiff sought to have determined as a preliminary issue whether the matter complained of conveyed the contextual imputations pleaded. Having heard argument I ruled that contextual imputation (1) was conveyed, but that contextual imputation was not. The defendant thereupon sought, and was granted, leave to amend.
In its final form, contextual imputation (2), which I then held was conveyed, reads:  "(2) The plaintiff breached his obligations as a councillor."  
Although there is room for an argument that these imputations do not differ in substance, I permitted the defendant to plead both in reliance on the decision of Hunt J (as he then was) in Allen versus John Fairfax and Sons Ltd, unreported, 2 December 1988.  * * *  It is convenient now to recount, briefly, some historical matters.  background facts  The area of factual contention was relatively narrow; the dispute between the parties, which is significant, concerns what inferences should be drawn from the established, and largely non-controversial, facts.  At the time of the publication, the plaintiff held the office of Mayor of the Marrickville Council ("the Council"). He was a member of the Australian
Labor Party. The Marrickville municipality is to be found in the inner west of the city of Sydney. The plaintiff had held the office of Mayor since 1991, and retained it up to, and including, the date of hearing. He was first elected to the Council as an alderman in September 1987.  When he was first elected to the Council, and when he first assumed the office of Mayor, local government and councils were subject to the provisions of the Local Government Act 1919. That Act was repealed and replaced by the [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) ("the Act"), which came into effect on 1 July 1993.  The 1993 Act effected considerable changes in the administration of local government. It introduced formally, for the first time, standards concerning the disclosure of pecuniary interests by members of councils, in circumstances where those interests might be affected by decisions in which councillors participated, and where decisions might (or might be perceived to be) affected by the interests. The interests to which the 1993 Act is addressed are pecuniary interests. Those provisions are of central importance to the defence of contextual truth. By s442(1) a pecuniary interest is defined as:  "... an interest that a person has in the matter because of a reasonable likelihood or expectation of appreciable financial gain or loss to the person or another person with whom the person is associated as provided in section ."  
By s442(2) a person does not have a pecuniary interest in the matter if the interest is so remote or insignificant that it could not reasonably be regarded as likely to influence any decision the person might make in relation to the matter. S448 provides a lengthy list of interests of which the 1993 Act does not require disclosure.  As indicated in the closing words of s442(1), s443 casts additional light upon, and extends the reach of, the concept of "pecuniary interest". By sub-s(2) a person is taken to have a pecuniary interest in a matter if, inter alia, a partner of that person has a pecuniary interest in the matter. By sub-s(3)(a), a partner of a person who has a pecuniary interest in a matter is not taken to have a pecuniary interest in the matter if he or she is unaware of the partner's pecuniary interest.  By s451(1) a councillor or a member of a council committee who has a pecuniary interest in any matter with which the council is concerned and who is present at a meeting of the council or committee at which the matter is being considered must disclose the nature of the interest to the meeting as soon as practicable. By sub-s(2) the councillor or member must not be present at, or in sight of, the meeting of the council or committee at any time during which the matter is being considered or discussed, or at any time during which the council or committee is voting on any question in relation to the matter.  By s457 a person does not, by reason of non-disclosure, breach s451 if he or she did not know and could not reasonably have been expected to have known that a matter under consideration at a meeting was one in which he or she had a pecuniary interest.  The 1993 Act also contains provisions obliging councillors to prepare and submit to the General Manager of the council returns disclosing pecuniary interests, the first within three months of election as a councillor, and thereafter annually. A form for the purpose is prescribed by regulation. The form contains provision for disclosure of interests in real estate; sources of income (with separate provision for identification of income from an occupation, from a trust, and from other sources); gifts; contributions to travel; interests and positions in corporations; positions in trade unions and professional business associations; debts; disposition of property; and discretionary disclosures.  By s440(1) all councils were required to prepare and adopt a code of conduct to be observed by councillors, members of staff, and delegates; and, by sub-s(3), to review its code of conduct and make any appropriate changes within twelve months of each council election. The 1993 Act does not appear to contain any provisions rendering the Code of Conduct enforceable at law.  In each of the years 1993/4, 1994/5, and 1995/6, the plaintiff submitted returns of pecuniary interests in the prescribed form. It will be necessary, at a later point in these reasons, to consider in more detail the content of the information thus provided by him.  In or about May 1994 the Council adopted a Code of Conduct (exhibit 14, tab ). (The cross-examination of the plaintiff, by reference to the document itself, suggested that this was done in March 1994, but this does not appear to be in accordance with an extract of the Council minutes, and there is no significance in the discrepancy.) Part 4 of the Code deals with conflicts of interest. The Part deals briefly with pecuniary interests, merely stating that a person who has a pecuniary interest must comply with the 1993 Act. It deals a little more fully with non-pecuniary interests, identifying a non-pecuniary interest as:  "... any private or personal interest which does not pertain or relate to money (e.g. kinship, friendship, membership of an association, society or trade union or involvement or interest in an activity)."  
The Code states:  "Where the interest in question is a non-pecuniary one, the person with the interest should not do anything which he or she could not justify to the public and should avoid any occasion for reasonable suspicion or the appearance of improper conduct or the partial performance of his or her public or professional duty.  
The onus is on the individual to declare an interest whether perceived or real. Such disclosure should be made promptly and in writing (or in cases of urgency made orally and confirmed in writing) to the council, mayor or general manager as appropriate."  
The Code did not require disqualification from participation in discussion, debate or decision-making where a non-pecuniary interest was declared.  In August 1996 the Council adopted a revised Code of Conduct (exhibit 14, tab 17). The present significance of the new Code of Conduct lies in the expansion of the stated policy on non-pecuniary interests.  On 15 July 1997 the Council adopted a policy entitled "Conflicts of
Interest". This policy restated the statutory definition of "pecuniary interest", and the previously adopted definition of "non-pecuniary interest".  Under the heading of "NON-PECUNIARY INTERESTS", the following appears:  "7.1 Council recognises that it is necessary to address the issue of conflicts of interest both pecuniary and  non-pecuniary in a consistent and accountable manner, and that they are equally important in terms of ensuring that:  a person with a private or personal interest is not prejudicially influenced in the performance of his or her public or professional duties by that interest; or  a reasonable person would not believe that the person could be so influenced.  .2 A councillor, staff member or delegate who has a  non-pecuniary interest is to comply with the new part 7 'non-pecuniary interests' of the Code of Meeting Practice, which requires a person with a non-pecuniary interest to disclose that interest, and advise Council whether or not the extent of the interest is such that they will not be taking part in discussion or consideration of the matter, or voting on any question on the matter."  There followed some detailed guidance on how to decide whether a conflict of interest exists. Unlike disclosure of a pecuniary interest, disclosure of a non-pecuniary interest again did not necessarily disqualify the person concerned from participation in debate or decision-making.  By s360(1) of the 1993 Act, regulations may be made providing for the conduct of meetings of councils and council committees of which all members are councillors. By sub-s(2), a council may adopt a code of meeting practice that incorporates and supplements (consistently with the regulations) those provisions. By sub-s(3) meetings of council and council committees (where all members of the committee are councillors) must be conducted in accordance with a code of meeting practice adopted by the council.  From time to time, in accordance with s360, the Council adopted successive codes of meeting practice. In general terms the Code (for example, exhibit 14, tab 19, dated March 1998) again restated or paraphrased the statutory provisions and the provisions of the Codes of Conduct, relating to conflicts of interest, as to both pecuniary and non-pecuniary interests. Part 7, under the heading "NON-PECUNIARY INTERESTS" states:  "59(1) A Councillor, member of staff or delegate must avoid and appropriately resolve any conflict or incompatibility between his or her private or personal interests and the impartial performance of his or her public or professional duties. [Policy]"  * * *  For some years the plaintiff had known a man called Evan Lee. Mr Lee was an architect. He was, like the plaintiff, a member of the Australian Labor Party.
In 1996 the plaintiff and Mr Lee formed a business association, the principal purpose of which appears to have been the acquisition, renovation, and sale at a profit of property. It is the business association with Mr Lee that provides the foundation for the bulk of the defendant's case that imputations (b) and , and the contextual imputations, are substantially true.  A company called Evan Lee Management Pty Ltd, of which Mr Lee had been a director and shareholder, was renamed Evbaca Pty Ltd ("Evbaca"). On 21 March the plaintiff, Mr Lee, and Ms Catherine Walton were appointed as directors of Evbaca, the plaintiff and Mr Lee each holding 37.5 per cent of the shares. Ms Walton's directorship ceased on 23 June 1997.  Either using Evbaca as a vehicle, or in their own names, the plaintiff and
Mr Lee participated in a number of property transactions. In or about June Evbaca acquired a property at 344 New Canterbury Road Dulwich Hill.
Dulwich Hill is in the Marrickville municipality. The property was a two- storey block of flats. The intention of the plaintiff and Mr Lee was to renovate the flats, convert the building to strata title, and sell the units.
On 11 June 1996 Evbaca lodged with the Council a Development Application which was subsequently approved.  In about April 1998 Evbaca also became the registered proprietor of a property at 16 Georgina Street Newtown. This was outside the Marrickville
Municipality. Property renovation works were undertaken. The property was subsequently sold.  On 8 June 1996, the plaintiff, Mr Lee, and Ms Marjorie Maude Lee (Mr Lee's mother) contracted in their joint names to purchase a property at 78
Chelmsford Street Newtown, also outside the Marrickville municipality. The plaintiff and Mr Lee each held twenty-five per cent of the property and Ms Lee fifty per cent. At the time of purchase that property was in a derelict state.
It was converted to two individual residences, one of which was transferred to
Ms Lee, and the other jointly to the plaintiff and Mr Lee, and thereafter sold.  In July 1997 the plaintiff was appointed a director of and became a fifty per cent shareholder in Irolake Pty Ltd ("Irolake"), a company of which Mr Lee was already a director and shareholder. Prior to the plaintiff's appointment as director, Irolake had contracted to purchase a property at 64 Kingston Road
Camperdown. The plaintiff and Mr Lee guaranteed funds borrowed by Irolake in respect of the purchase. This property, too, was a block of flats which was converted to strata title, and the units sold.  On these facts it is hardly surprising that the plaintiff does not dispute that, at least from 21 March 1996, Mr Lee was his partner within the meaning of s443(2) of the 1993 Act and that, accordingly, he (the plaintiff) would be taken to have a pecuniary interest in any matter in which Mr Lee had a pecuniary interest. The disclosure provisions of the 1993 Act were therefore activated. The plaintiff was obliged, by s451, to disclose those interests at any meeting of the Council or committee at which such a matter was to be considered, and to absent himself from such a meeting at any time during which the Council or committee was considering or discussing or voting upon any question in relation to the matter.  * * *  the justification defence  The defendant has set out to prove the substantial truth of each of imputations (b) and (f), and of contextual imputations (1) and (2). It has not sought to prove that imputation (d) is substantially true. Proof of the truth alone of a defamatory imputation is not sufficient to establish the defence.
It is necessary also that the defendant establish that the imputation relates to a matter of public interest, or was published under qualified privilege (Defamation Act s15). It was not contested that each imputation related to a matter of public interest and, accordingly, those matters can be put to one side. In the circumstances of this case, all the defendant needs to prove is the substantial truth of either or both of the imputations.  [S140](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) provides:  "(1) In a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. 
Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:  the nature of the cause of action or defence, and  the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and  the gravity of the matters alleged."  
In Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd versus Marsden <case>, unreported, 24 December 2002, the Court of Appeal held that the standard of proof to be applied under [s140(2)(c](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) ) is the standard referred to in Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336.] Here the defendant alleges that the plaintiff misused his position as Mayor in order to benefit an associate. Such an allegation is a grave one. The imputations are, in essence, of corruption as Mayor. It is, perhaps, not as grave as the allegations the defendant in Marsden sought to prove, but is, nevertheless, one which calls for due scrutiny in the terms drawn from Briginshaw. That is the standard of proof I propose to apply.  * * *  evidence  It will be necessary to examine in detail the evidence upon which the defendant relies in order to establish the truth of the various imputations.  imputation (b)  This imputation is that, by attending a meeting of a Project Team of the
Council, the plaintiff sought to influence the decision of the Project Team in favour of Mr Lee, with whom the plaintiff had a private business relationship.
The relevant facts may be stated succinctly.  In about the middle of 1995 the Council purchased a property which had formerly been the Marrickville Hospital. It was contemplating the construction of a Civic Centre on the site. It established a Steering Committee to oversee the development of the site, and created a "Project Team", although precisely what the functions of this body were is not apparent from the evidence. All members of the Project Team were Council officers. No councillor was a member.  A joint meeting of the Steering Committee and Project Team, at which the plaintiff was present, took place on 7 December 1995 (exhibit 14, tab 6).
There it was agreed to prepare a "parameter-based design control brief" and to invite expressions of interest in the project from architects. External consultants were engaged and suggested the names of three firms of architects who might be invited to develop the design brief. Mr Lee's firm was not one of the three. The Council's Manager, Property Development (Mr Tony Fazio), added two additional names to the list, one of whom was Evan Lee Architects Pty Ltd,
Mr Lee's firm. A file note (exhibit 14, tab 7) records that each of the firms nominated by Mr Fazio had previously carried out satisfactory work for the
Council. All five firms were invited to lodge a submission and quotation for the development of the design brief. Two of the firms originally named declined to do so, citing excessive workloads as the reason. The remaining three firms accepted the invitation and presented their concepts.  On 28 March 1996 a daytime meeting of the Project Team took place. The minutes of that meeting (exhibit 14, tab 8) record those in attendance. The plaintiff is shown to have been present for a little over one hour, but to have left before the meeting concluded. All other attendees were members of the Council staff. There were no councillors other than the plaintiff present.
The submissions received from three firms of architects, including that of Mr
Lee, were presented to the meeting. The meeting resolved to engage Mr Lee's firm to prepare the design control document. This appears from the minutes to have occurred while the plaintiff was present. He did not vote, and had no entitlement to vote. The minutes record four reasons for the selection of Mr
Lee's firm. The fee to be paid is recorded as $16,000.  The circumstances in which the plaintiff came to attend the meeting were thoroughly explored in evidence. His evidence (the only direct evidence) was as follows. The meeting took place on the third floor of the Council's offices. He happened to alight from the lift at that floor, with the intention of going to his office, and observed that the meeting was in progress. The
Council's General Manager, Mr Colin Mills, called to the plaintiff and asked him to attend the meeting. The plaintiff did so. He had previously had no intention of doing so, and had made no preparation for it. He had not known that the meeting was scheduled and had no reason to be there, and did not know what items were on the agenda for discussion. (T108)  Some attempt was made in cross-examination to establish that the plaintiff had, in fact, been aware that the subject of the allocation of the design brief for the Civic Centre would be discussed at the meeting, but this attempt failed.  The plaintiff's account of the circumstances in which he came to attend the meeting received some support from a document signed by Mr Mills (who has since died). This was a letter written by Mr Mills to the Department of Local
Government on 24 April 1997 (exhibit M). Mr Mills wrote:  "I invited the Mayor to attend the meeting shortly before its commencement to give some guidance on some issues on the agenda including the potential provision of community facilities (eg childcare centre) and a letter from the
Department of Health on a boundary adjustment."  I accept the plaintiff's account of his attendance at the meeting. There is nothing to contradict it, it seems to me to be plausible, it is consistent with what Mr Mills recorded, and I found no basis from the manner in which the plaintiff gave his evidence to doubt his truthfulness.  The plaintiff said that he had little recollection of the meeting because his attendance was unplanned and he had made no preparation for it. He accepted that he almost certainly made some remarks at the meeting but could not recall on what topics. Nor did he recall Mr Mills giving any reason for his invitation to the plaintiff to attend and participate, or delineating the matters in relation to which he sought the plaintiff's contribution.  There was, however, other evidence of what the plaintiff said. Mr Russell
Thompson, who in 1996 was the Council's Coordinator, Community Relations, attended the meeting. He recalled a discussion about the competing tenders and that this discussion was, in respect of each tenderer, "in a fair amount of detail". He recalled that, when the discussion turned to the tender by Mr
Lee's firm, the plaintiff:  "said that Evan Lee was capable of carrying out the design brief." (T401)  
The discussion then moved to whether Mr Lee's firm would be capable of carrying out the next stage of the project. In relation to that Mr Thompson recalled the plaintiff saying words to the effect of:  "'I have no doubt that Evan Lee and Associates will be able to carry out that stage.'" (T401)  He also recalled the plaintiff stating that Mr Lee's firm had recently completed a major project in the Central Business District.  Mr Don Johnston, who in 1996 was the Manager of Finance at the Council, was also a member of the Project Team. He, too, recalled that the subject of the competing tenderers was discussed in some detail, and he recalled that, in response to a question asked about Mr Lee's experience, the plaintiff responded:  "to the effect that Mr Lee has experience in similar projects as he worked on the Sydney Central Plaza project." (T424)  
He could not recall whether the plaintiff had said anything about Mr Lee's abilities. He did recall the discussion moving to the capacity of the tenderers to carry out the post-design brief stage of the development. He recalled the plaintiff saying:  "words to the effect that Mr Lee had substantial experience in preparing design briefs and similar and evidenced it by reference to the Sydney Central
Plaza project." (T424)  
This, he said, was in response to a question concerning Mr Lee's experience in relation to a project such as the Civic Centre. There was no evidence to suggest that the plaintiff made any disclosure of his association with Mr Lee, and I infer that he did not. Proof of the substantial truth of the imputation does not depend upon establishing that the plaintiff was required, by s451, to make such a disclosure. That question arises in relation to the contextual imputations.  I have no difficulty in accepting as a fact that the plaintiff made remarks to the effect of those given in the evidence of these two witnesses. This being so, it is unnecessary to take time in determining a rather complex issue that arose as a result of the cross-examination of Mr Thompson. Counsel for the defendant tendered a statement made by Mr Thompson, invoking [s45](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s45.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Senior counsel for the plaintiff objected to the admission of the statement. Neither counsel was equipped properly to argue the tender and I then deferred ruling upon it. Counsel for the defendant subsequently provided a written submission, but the issue was never finally pressed or resolved. Since I have accepted Mr
Thompson's evidence in full, and since I consider it unlikely that the statement takes the matter any further (I did not at the time read the document), I am of the view that admission of the statement could not advance the defendant's case. I do not propose to resolve the question of admissibility.  Imputation (b) focuses upon the plaintiff's purpose in attending the meeting. For the defendant to succeed in the justification defence in relation to this imputation, it is necessary that it establish that the plaintiff had the necessary intention, or purpose. Counsel for the defendant has submitted, correctly, that it is not necessary that it prove that the plaintiff had a positive consciousness of wrongdoing.  Counsel for the defendant relied upon certain aspects of the evidence concerning the surrounding circumstances. For example, he pointed to the content of Mr Mills' letter of 24 April 1997, in which Mr Mills referred to the issues on which, in inviting him to attend the meeting, he sought the plaintiff's guidance. These were community facilities "(e.g. child care centre)" and a letter from the Department of Health on a boundary adjustment.
No reference was made by Mr Mills to any contribution the plaintiff may have been able to make in relation to the selection of architects to prepare the design brief for the Civic Centre. If this is correct, then, on the defendant's argument, the plaintiff is deprived of any sanitization of his conduct that he might otherwise derive from Mr Mills' invitation.  I accept that the selection of architects is not shown to have been a matter on which Mr Mills considered that the plaintiff might have a contribution to make to the meeting or a reason for his invitation. It was therefore contended on behalf of the defendant that, as a consequence, the plaintiff's participation in the meeting on that subject matter does not gain any protection from Mr Mills' invitation. I do not accept that. The imputation is directed to the plaintiff's attendance at the meeting - not at what he said. If, as I accept, he attended at the invitation or request of Mr Mills, that is relevant to the fundamental question of whether his purpose in doing so was to influence the meeting in favour of his friend and associate. In any event, a conclusion that the plaintiff did not gain protection from Mr Mills' invitation does not prove that the plaintiff's purpose, in speaking as I have found that he did, was to influence the decision of the members of the Project
Team.  Another matter on which the defendant relied concerned the inferences it contended could and should be drawn from the evidence of Messrs Thompson and
Johnston. Each of these witnesses claimed to have a reasonably clear recollection of the statements attributed to the plaintiff of which they gave evidence, but little other recollection of the meeting. From this, counsel for the defendant argued, it could and should be inferred that the plaintiff had made those remarks with a degree of vigour which could be contrasted with anything he (or others) had said in relation to other matters discussed at the meeting. Senior counsel for the plaintiff responded to this argument by pointing out that each of the witnesses had been approached and asked to turn his mind to the events of the meeting only in very recent times - more than six and up to seven years after the event - and that each had been specifically asked to turn his mind to the particular, identified, subject matter: that is, whether the plaintiff said anything at the meeting about the architects then under consideration. This, he suggested, would or could cause an unconscious bias in the recollections of the two witnesses.  I do not think a great deal can be made of the recollections of these witnesses of what the plaintiff said on this subject matter to the exclusion of other subject matters. It is correct, as senior counsel for the plaintiff pointed out, that that subject matter was what they were expressly asked about and gave consideration to. I do not think it says anything about the forcefulness with which the plaintiff made the remarks in question.  Moreover, although ample opportunity was present, both before and during the course of the trial, neither witness was asked in evidence about the manner in which the plaintiff said what was attributed to him.  A final matter referred to by counsel for the defendant concerned  cross-examination of the plaintiff as to the potential impact of his remarks upon the members of the Project Team. Although he was extensively cross- examined on the subject, the plaintiff steadfastly refused, until a very late stage, to accept that his expression of opinion about Mr Lee's capacity as an architect might have influenced members of the Project Team in Mr Lee's favour. Ultimately, he did, in a half-hearted way, answer "well, perhaps" to that question. Reliance upon this evidence appeared to be placed in relation to the assessment of the plaintiff's credibility.  I confess to having initially experienced a certain amount of scepticism about the plaintiff's position on this issue. It seemed to me (and in the absence of evidence to the contrary) probable that, as the Mayor, the plaintiff's views would be likely to influence some members of the Project
Team. But there was no evidence to support this, and, on reflection, it is really no more than an impression based upon assumptions about the manner in which councils, and in particular the Council, operate. It is an impression based upon factual ignorance of the strengths and weaknesses of the Council officers concerned and relationships between them and the plaintiff, and other councillors and officers of the Council. I do not think it appropriate to draw inferences from such scanty and insubstantial information. Moreover, the likelihood of the plaintiff's views affecting members of the Project Team might depend upon the manner, and, in particular, the forcefulness and intensity with which they were expressed, as to which there is no evidence.  As I have indicated above, the focus of the imputation is upon the plaintiff's intention in attending the meeting. I am satisfied that his attendance was, as he said, the result of a chance encounter with, and an invitation by, Mr Mills. It is of some significance that the imputation asserts that he sought to achieve his purpose "by attending" the meeting - not by the detail of his participation in it or what he said. But even if the imputation were to be given a liberal interpretation and to encompass the assertion that he sought to bring about the alleged influence by the content of his participation, I am not satisfied that it has been proved. It seems to me to be most likely that what the plaintiff said represented genuine participation in a discussion, which included a question about Mr Lee's abilities which was almost incidental, and the plaintiff's response thereto. I do not mean to imply by this that it was wise for the plaintiff to speak as he did in the circumstances but I am unable to be satisfied that he "sought" to influence the decision of the Project Team in favour of Mr Lee.  Late in the proceedings an issue arose concerning the application of the principle stated by the High Court in Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298.] This concerned the absence from the proceedings of the
Council officers other than Mr Mills (who has died) and Messrs Thompson and
Johnston, both of whom have since left the Council and taken up employment elsewhere, and were called by the defendant. There was no evidence as to the current positions of the remaining members of the Project Team, numbering four, none of whom was called. Counsel for the defendant signalled his intention of making "a vigorous Jones versus Dunkel submission" in relation to their absence. He tendered two letters from the solicitor for the Council, and it was this which provoked the introduction of the Jones versus Dunkel argument. Senior counsel for the plaintiff made it clear that he did not intend to make a similar submission against the defendant and the tender was accordingly withdrawn. Nevertheless, counsel for the defendant pressed the argument that the defendant was entitled to the benefit of an inference drawn in accordance with the Jones versus Dunkel principle against the plaintiff. In the course of a written submission on that topic, he asserted that senior counsel for the plaintiff conceded that these potential witnesses were "in the plaintiff's camp". Although senior counsel responded to other matters contained in that written submission, he did not contest the assertion that he made such a concession. Accordingly, although the concession does not appear ever to have been expressly made, it is, I think, safe to proceed upon the basis that that represents the plaintiff's position.  Responding to the substance of the defendant's contention, senior counsel for the plaintiff referred to the history of the proceedings. In a written submission he stated that there was no need for the plaintiff to consider calling witnesses on this issue until the amended defence was filed in
November 2002, more than six years after the meeting. Although this is somewhat cryptic, I take it that it was in the amended defence filed on that date that the defendant first particularised the conduct of the plaintiff on which it relies in order to support its defence of justification and therefore first put the plaintiff on notice that factual matters relating to the meeting might be in issue. Further, senior counsel argued, the plaintiff and his legal representatives were unaware of the precise proposition to which a reply might be made until Messrs Thompson and Johnston had in fact given their evidence, and that this was more than seven years after the meeting. He accordingly invited an inference that the absence of the witnesses is explicable by the likely fading of memories.  In my opinion this invites less of an inference, and more of speculation.
It would have been open to the plaintiff's legal representatives to have adduced evidence, for example, that they had made enquiries of the members of the Project Team but their recollections were such as to render any evidence that they might give of little or no value. This was not done.  Notwithstanding this, in my opinion the debate proved to be a sterile one.
The evidence given by Messrs Thompson and Johnston, although explored in cross-examination, was not contested. I have accepted that evidence in full. I have declined to draw the further inference urged upon me by counsel for the defendant concerning the manner in which the plaintiff made his remarks. Even if I were to draw, against the plaintiff, the full Jones versus Dunkel inference, the principles stated in that case would not permit me to plug any gaps in the evidence in that regard.  The most I could draw by way of inference from the failure of the plaintiff to call other members of the Project Team, is, as counsel acknowledges, that any evidence they could give would not assist the plaintiff, and that any inferences to be drawn from the evidence against the plaintiff's case may more confidently be drawn. The Jones versus Dunkel inference does not permit a finding of fact otherwise not open. There is no conclusion or inference to be drawn from the absence of other members of the Project Team. There is simply no evidence, and no evidence from which an inference could properly be drawn, concerning the manner in which the plaintiff spoke.  The defendant has not succeeded in establishing the truth of imputation .  imputation (f)  This imputation is to the effect that, as Mayor of Marrickville, the plaintiff deliberately so conducted himself in relation to the Civic Centre development as to give a financial benefit to Mr Lee. The precise terms of the imputation are of some importance. There is a latent ambiguity in its formulation. On one view, it may be read as focussing upon the plaintiff's conduct and motivation, but not upon any actual results of his conduct. On that view, the imputation accuses the plaintiff of behaving in the manner stated, for the reason stated, whether or not his conduct was effective in achieving the result sought, that is, an actual financial benefit to Mr Lee.
The other interpretation is that the words "so conducted himself as to give a financial benefit" mean that the desired end was in fact achieved. I prefer the second construction. As I interpret the imputation, proof of its substantial truth entails proof that, as a result of the plaintiff's conduct, deliberately engaged in, Mr Lee actually realised a financial benefit. It would not be sufficient to prove that the plaintiff deliberately so conducted himself as to seek that objective.  In order to justify imputation (f) the defendant cited, inter alia, the same matters as it relied upon in order to justify imputation (b); it also relied upon some additional evidence. Besides the meeting of the Project Team of 28 March, there were two additional meetings attended by the plaintiff, to which the defendant pointed. These were a combined meeting of the Steering
Committee and Project Team which was held early in the morning of Tuesday 11
June 1996, and a Council meeting of 18 June 1996 (the minutes of which are, respectively, exhibit 14, tabs 13 and 14).  The minutes of the former record that Mr Lee attended and presented his draft design brief. This was followed by discussion. The minutes do not disclose that any vote was taken at this meeting.  At the Council meeting of 18 June the Steering Committee presented a
Business Paper which concluded with a recommendation that the Council adopt the design brief prepared by Mr Lee's firm and adopt a process for project delivery outlined earlier in the Business Paper. I infer that the recommendation of the Steering Committee was, at least in part, a result of the discussion that had taken place at the meeting of 11 June. Attached to the
Business Paper were three appendices of which the first (according to the note on the Business Paper) consisted of extracts from Mr Lee's design brief; and the second was a report from "Jeff Roorda and Associates". Elsewhere in the exhibits (exhibit 14, tab 17) Jeff Roorda is identified as "from Jeff Roorda and Associates", the firm which suggested the names of the three architectural partnerships originally proposed to the Council as suitable to be invited to develop the design brief. It was accepted during the course of the evidence that Jeff Roorda and Associates was an external and independent consultant and project manager, although its precise expertise is not apparent. Although the
Business Paper to which the report constituted an appendix was in evidence as exhibit 14, tab 14, the report from Jeff Roorda and Associates was not in evidence. The content of the Business Paper is of considerable importance. It bears a notation "G.M. 66" indicating that it was prepared by the Council's
General Manager, Mr Mills.  As indicated above, the second recommendation was that the Council:  "adopt the process for project delivery including community consultations outlined in Chapter 4 of this Report."  A section of the Report is headed "Project Delivery". Included in that part of the Report is the following:  "The objective is to select contractors for the design and construction of the entire site's development by an open and transparent process which will result in an affordable Civic Centre designed and built in accordance with the design brief by experienced and capable contractors.  
In order to achieve this objective the following process is considered to provide maximum control of the outcome, along with appropriate decision points for community input.  
Expressions of Interest will be invited on the basis of the design brief for the proposed development through public advertisement. ... The merit of applications will be measured against defined criteria including their demonstrated technical and financial capabilities for completion of the project, as well as the impact on Council of the financial plan presented by the applicants.  
The most meritorious submissions will be determined by Council, and short-listed for assessment of the affordability of these.  
A precis of the short-listed submissions will be used to consult with the community and determine the mandate for proceeding with the project. This round of community consultation will be a critical decision point for Council, and will determine the future of the project and the site.  
If the decision is to proceed with the project, the short-listed applicants will be invited to tender for the project on a design and construct basis with a Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP)."  The document made it clear that the options for project delivery were presented in greater detail in the report from Jeff Roorda & Associates, which was attached to the Business Paper, but not included in the exhibits. It is not entirely clear to me what was intended by the reference to "contractors for the design and construction" of the project, and this was not the subject of any explanatory evidence. But it seems to me that the reference to "contractors for the design and construction" of the project must have been a reference to architects as well as builders. The significance of this will become apparent.  In considering whether the defendant has established the substantial truth of this imputation it is convenient to break the imputation into its component parts. There are four of these: -  that the plaintiff had a private business relationship with Mr Lee;  that, in his capacity as Mayor of Marrickville, the plaintiff engaged in certain conduct;  that that conduct had the effect of conferring a financial benefit on Mr
Lee;  that the plaintiff's conduct was deliberate in the sense that he intended that it would have the effect of conferring a financial benefit upon Mr Lee.  In order to succeed in the defence, it is necessary that the defendant establish the substantial truth of each component part. The first, that the plaintiff had a private business relationship with Mr Lee, is not in issue.
The plaintiff concedes that he was "in partnership" with Mr Lee. To prove the second, that the plaintiff engaged in certain conduct in his capacity as Mayor of Marrickville, the defendant identified the plaintiff's participation in the three meetings: the Project Team meeting of 28 March; the joint meeting of the
Steering Committee and Project Team of 11 June; and the Council meeting of 18
June. The defendant's reliance upon the meeting of 28 March extends to the remarks, broadly supportive of Mr Lee's candidature, which I have already accepted were made by the plaintiff. Although the minutes of the meeting of 11
June do not record any formal resolution, it is apparent from the Business
Paper subsequently prepared, that at that meeting (or after, and plainly as a consequence of, it) that it was agreed to endorse and recommend to the Council acceptance of Mr Lee's proposal; at the Council meeting of 18 June, chaired by the plaintiff, that recommendation was adopted. Moreover, it was adopted on the motion of the plaintiff. All of the conduct relied upon by the defendant has been established. All was engaged in by the plaintiff in his capacity as
Mayor. The substantial truth of the second component has therefore been established.  The third component, that the plaintiff's conduct had the effect of conferring a financial benefit upon Mr Lee, is more controversial. I am satisfied that the decision taken at the first meeting (28 March) did have the effect of conferring a financial advantage upon Mr Lee. However, that is not precisely the point in issue. The question is whether the plaintiff's conduct (as distinct from the decision taken at the meeting) had that effect. The conclusion that it did is inescapable. It is not to the point that the same decision may have eventuated with or without the plaintiff's participation.
The point is that, at the first meeting, the plaintiff's remarks supported Mr
Lee, and, undoubtedly, helped to allay any uncertainty about Mr Lee's capacity in the minds of the Council's officers, particularly those who raised the issue which prompted the plaintiff's remarks. As a result, Mr Lee's firm was selected and retained to prepare a design for the Civic Centre.  The same does not hold true in relation to the plaintiff's conduct at the joint meeting of the Steering Committee and the Project Team (11 June). There is no evidence of the nature of the plaintiff's participation or of anything that he said at that meeting. More importantly, for present purposes, the most that could be said about what happened at that meeting was that it gave rise to a recommendation to the Council that Mr Lee's design brief be adopted. It did not, and apparently could not, have the effect of directly conferring any financial benefit upon Mr Lee. It was, possibly, a step in the process to the resolution of the Council to adopt his design brief and in that sense, once the recommendation was adopted by the Council, was a contributing factor, in the event that the decision of Council conferred a financial benefit upon him, to that result. Whatever the plaintiff did at the meeting of 11 June, it did not, of itself, have the effect of conferring a financial benefit upon Mr Lee.
The question which then arises is whether the resolution of the Council at the meeting of 18 June conferred such a benefit upon Mr Lee, and if so, whether the plaintiff's conduct contributed to that effect.  Counsel for the defendant argued that the resolution to adopt Mr Lee's design inevitably put him in an advantageous position with respect to the next stage of the Civic Centre and other projects, enhanced his reputation and goodwill, and gave him material on which to promote his talent and achievements, and that this amounted to a financial benefit.  It is because of this argument that I have extracted above, at some length, the process for project delivery, recommended by the Steering Committee, and adopted by the Council. In my opinion what there appears makes it plain that
Mr Lee was in no favoured position in relation to the next stage of the project. If he had wished to tender for the project he would have had to do so in open competition with other tenderers. Neither the decisions of either or both of the meetings after 28 March, nor the conduct of the plaintiff, gave Mr
Lee any financial advantage in this respect. As to the defendant's argument that the decision to adopt his design brief was likely to have enhanced his reputation and goodwill, I consider that this is both speculative and too remote. The only respect in which the defendant has proved that the plaintiff's conduct resulted in a financial benefit for Mr Lee is in relation to the meeting of 28 March. That is sufficient to establish the substantial truth of the third component.  The final question is whether the defendant has proved that the plaintiff engaged in that conduct deliberately, with the purpose of achieving the stated result. For the reasons I have given in relation to imputation (b), I am not so satisfied.  The defendant has not proved the substantial truth of imputation (f).  the contextual truth defence  [S16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s16.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) provides:  "16. Truth: contextual imputations  
Where an imputation complained of is made by the publication of any report, article, letter, note, picture, oral utterance or other thing and another imputation is made by the same publication, the latter imputation is, for the purposes of this section, contextual to the imputation complained of.  
It is a defence to any imputation complained of that:  the imputation relates to a matter of public interest or is published under qualified privilege,  one or more imputations contextual to the imputation complained of:  relate to a matter of public interest or are published under qualified privilege, and  are matters of substantial truth, and  by reason that those contextual imputations are matters of substantial truth, the imputation complained of does not further injure the reputation of the plaintiff."  I have already held that the two contextual imputations were in fact conveyed by the matter complained of. There was no issue that, like the imputations pleaded on behalf of the plaintiff, these imputations relate to a matter of public interest. What remains for the defendant to prove is that either of them is, or both are, substantially true; and that, by reason of the substantial truth of either or both, the publication of imputations (b), (d) and (f) did not further injure the reputation of the plaintiff. In other words, it is for the defendant to establish that the contextual imputations were (or either one of them was) not only true, but also of such significance as to overwhelm the impact of imputations (b), (d) and (f). I will return to this question after considering whether the defendant has established the truth of either or both of these imputations. The defendant also gave notice of its intention to rely on either of the imputations pleaded by the plaintiff that it successfully justified, but having regard to my conclusions in relation to those imputations, that plea is of no further relevance.
[S16(2)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s16.html) is to be applied in accordance with the construction given to it by Spigelman
CJ and Rolfe AJA in John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd versus Blake <case>; [53 NSWLR 451.]  contextual imputation 1  This imputation is that the plaintiff, as Mayor of Marrickville Council, failed over a substantial period of time to comply with his obligations of disclosure as a councillor. The defendant seeks to prove that, in a number of ways, the plaintiff failed to comply with his obligations under the 1993 Act and/or the applicable Code of Conduct and/or the Code of Meeting Practice. It is convenient here to reiterate that s449 required the annual completion and lodgement of a return of disclosure of interests in the prescribed form and s451 required disclosure of any pecuniary interest the plaintiff had in any matter which was before a Council or Council committee meeting, and non- participation in the consideration of any such matter. The plaintiff was at all relevant times obliged to declare any pecuniary interest in any matter coming before a meeting of the Council or meeting of a committee of the
Council, and to refrain from participation in such meetings; by reason of the extended definition of "pecuniary interest", that obligation encompassed disclosure in any matter in which Mr Lee had a pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the meeting. The plaintiff also had obligations in relation to non-pecuniary interests. These obligations were less clearly defined. By the 1994 Code of Conduct, which was in force until August 1996 (and therefore at the time of the various meetings to which I have already referred) the plaintiff was enjoined not to do anything which he could not justify to the public, and to avoid any occasion for reasonable suspicion or the appearance of improper conduct or the partial performance of his public or professional duties. An onus lay upon him to declare any non-pecuniary interest. It is immaterial that the obligations imposed by the Code of Conduct and the Code of
Meeting Practice were not enforceable at law, or that breach of their provisions may attract no legal sanction.  The imputation as framed does not specify whether the "obligations" with which it imputed that the plaintiff failed to comply were those imposed by statute, and legally enforceable, or those imposed by the Code of Conduct. The defendant seeks to justify this imputation by reference to the statutory requirements already mentioned (s449 and s451 of the 1993 Act), the Code of
Conduct, and the Code of Meeting Practice adopted by the Council as applicable from time to time. It relies upon a number of instances of the plaintiff's conduct, which, it argued, constitute non-compliance with one or other of the obligations so imposed. The matters relied upon by the defendant may be categorised into six groups. These are:  inadequacies in the content of the plaintiff's disclosure of interests returns pursuant to s449, which failed to comply with the requirements of the section;  the plaintiff's participation in the meeting of the Project Team of 28
March 1996, and his failure to disclose a pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the meeting, said to be non-compliance with s451 and the 1994 Code of Conduct;  the plaintiff's participation in the combined meeting of the Steering
Committee and Project Team of 11 June 1996, and his failure to disclose a pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the meeting, said to be non-compliance with the requirements of s451;  the plaintiff's participation in the Council meeting of 18 June 1996, and his failure to disclose a pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the meeting, said to be non-compliance with s451;  the plaintiff's participation in Council meetings and decisions involving projects in respect of which Mr Lee was the architect, and his failure to disclose a pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the meetings, said to be non-compliance with the applicable Code of Conduct and
Code of Meeting Practice.  the plaintiff's participation in meetings and decisions concerning developments in which a Mr Larry Hand (said to be a friend of the plaintiff) was involved, and his failure to disclose a non-pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the meeting, said to be non-compliance with the applicable
Code of Conduct, Code of Meeting Practice, and Conflict of Interests Policy.  I will deal with each of these in turn. It will be necessary to make more extensive reference to aspects of evidence including some evidence not yet touched upon.  
Failure adequately to disclose interests in written returns: s449  The plaintiff had inadequately completed the returns required by s449. In
June 1998, acting on a complaint made against the plaintiff by four
Marrickville councillors, the Director-General of the Department of Local
Government referred a report of an investigation into the complaint to the
Local Government Pecuniary Interest Tribunal. Two documents which emanated from that Tribunal as a result were tendered in evidence by consent and may conveniently be used as the source of the factual matters upon which the defendant relies. The first document is entitled "Statement of Prima Facie
Facts and Issues" and is dated 2 July 1998 (exhibit 11). The second is a "Statement of Decision" forwarded to the plaintiff and the Director-General of the Department on 2 December 1998 (exhibit 10).  Contained in exhibit 11, and subsequently acknowledged by the plaintiff to be correct, is a table detailing various instances of non-compliance with the requirements of s449. This shows that in his return filed for the year /1994, the plaintiff identified directorships in five corporations. One of the companies was incorrectly named. The address of none of the companies was given. In his return for the 1994/1995 year, the plaintiff disclosed directorships in five corporations, two of which were incorrectly named and as to none of which was an address given. In his return for the year 1995/1996 the plaintiff failed to disclose directorships in six corporations of which disclosure was required. He declared his directorship in Evbaca but did not provide its address. He failed to disclose his interest in two real estate properties of which he was the registered proprietor, and failed to disclose the source of "rental income" which he did declare.  This evidence thus reveals a number of instances of non-compliance with the statutory obligation over a three-year period. The plaintiff conceded as much.
It will be necessary to return to consider the implications of this circumstance at a later point in these reasons.  A hearing of the Local Government Pecuniary Interest Tribunal took place, at which the plaintiff provided an explanation for his admitted statutory breaches. The Tribunal (constituted by Mr K Holland QC) considered all the material including the plaintiff's explanations. Mr Holland stated that he had given serious consideration to imposing a period of suspension upon the plaintiff but, having accepted his explanation, instead severely reprimanded him. The view taken by the Tribunal of the seriousness of the plaintiff's conduct is not a matter to which I can properly have regard in the outcome of the present proceedings. My task is to determine whether those failures, either taken alone or in conjunction with other matters, constitute failure over a substantial period of time to comply with obligations of disclosure.  failure to disclose pecuniary interests: s451  the meeting of 28 March 1996  Extensive reference has already been made to the meeting of the Project
Team attended by the plaintiff on 28 March 1996 and it is unnecessary to restate the relevant facts (see paras [37] to [50] above). It is not in dispute that the plaintiff did not declare any pecuniary interest at that meeting. For present purposes, the defendant relies upon the plaintiff's participation in that meeting, and his failure to declare a pecuniary interest, as a failure to comply with the requirements of s451 of the 1993
Act. This gave rise to an interesting question.  The competing arguments may be stated with relative simplicity.
Regrettably, the answer is not so clear.  The plaintiff's position (that is the position taken by him personally, in his evidence, and that taken on his behalf through senior counsel) was that the meeting of the Project Team did not come within s451 because it was not a "council committee". S451(1), it will be recalled, is relevantly in the following terms:  "(1) A councillor or a member of a council committee who has a pecuniary interest in any matter with which the council is concerned and who is present at a meeting of the council or committee at which the matter is being considered ..."  On behalf of the plaintiff it was put that the reference to "committee", where it secondly appears, must be taken as a reference to a "council committee" which appears in the opening clause of the sub-section. So far, as a matter of linguistics, I am of the view that the plaintiff is on firm ground. But I am not sure where that takes him.  
The plaintiff's contention is that, if his first proposition is correct (as I think it is), then no obligation was imposed by s451 upon the plaintiff to disclose any interest. That, on the plaintiff's argument, is because the
Project Team was not a "council committee", being made up exclusively of council officers, and not of councillors. If, on the other hand, the Project
Team was a committee within the meaning of s451, then that section obliged him to disclose his interest and absent himself from any discussions.  The plaintiff's position is that "a council committee" must be taken to mean a committee constituted by councillors - that is, elected representatives, and not officers, of the Council. If that interpretation were correct, then s451 would not be applicable.  The 1993 Act contains no definition of "committee". There are, however, certain references in the statute to committees of which two are of particular significance. S355 deals with the manner in which a council exercises its functions. This may be, for instance, by the council by means of the councillors or employees, agents or contractors, partly in conjunction with another person or persons, or with another council or councils, or by delegation - or, pursuant to s355(b), "by a committee of the council". S355 does not identify what is meant by "a committee of the council" - that is, whether that is a committee constituted by councillors, or whether it may extend to a committee constituted exclusively (as was the Project Team) by officers of the Council or even to a committee constituted by a combination of councillors and officers.  By s373:  "A council may resolve itself into a committee to consider any matter before the council",  but this does not advance the present argument.  Ss 360 and 376 are important sections in aid of this question of construction. S360 provides as follows:  "(1) The regulations may make provision with respect to the conduct of meetings of councils and committees of councils of which all the members are councillors. 
A council may adopt a code of meeting practice that incorporates the regulations made for the purposes of this section and supplements those regulations with provisions that are not inconsistent with them. 
A council and a committee of the council of which all the members are councillors must conduct its meetings in accordance with the code of meeting practice adopted by it." (emphasis added)  S376 is in the following terms:  "(1) The general manager is entitled to attend, but not to vote at, a meeting of the council or a meeting of a committee of the council of which all the members are councillors. 
The general manager is entitled to attend a meeting of any other committee of the council and may, if a member of the committee, exercise a vote. 
However, the general manager may be excluded from a meeting of the council or a committee while the council or committee deals with a matter relating to the standard of performance of the general manager or the terms of the employment of the general manager." (emphasis added)  The reason the two sections are important for present purposes is that they demonstrate that the legislature envisaged the creation of council committees of which all members are councillors; but the implication is clear that the legislature also envisaged the creation of council committees of which all members are not councillors. Such a committee may be constituted exclusively by non-councillors such as council officers; or by a mix of councillors and non-councillors. S360(3) is an explicit provision governing the conduct of meetings of committees of which all members are councillors which does not apply to council committees otherwise constituted. Indeed, s451 itself contemplates membership of a council committee by individuals other than councillors. If that were not so there would be no point to the reference to "a member of a council committee" in the opening words of sub-s(1).  There is no reason to construe the reference to "council committee" as narrowly as is contended for on behalf of the plaintiff. I am satisfied that the Project Team was, for the purposes of s451, a council committee.  The plaintiff did have a pecuniary interest, by reason of his partnership with Mr Lee, and Mr Lee's pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the meeting, in the matter being considered at that meeting. It was therefore incumbent upon him, pursuant to s451, to disclose the nature of the interest and to absent himself from the meeting, while the meeting considered and voted upon the selection of the design brief. This instance of non-compliance by the plaintiff with his obligations of disclosure is also made out.  the meeting of 11 June 1996  The argument of the defendant in relation to the meeting of 11 June is also that the plaintiff was under an obligation pursuant to s451 to disclose a pecuniary interest. That, the argument goes, was because Mr Lee stood to gain financially as a result of any decision made at the meeting (see the definition of "pecuniary interest" in s442(1)). The plaintiff does not contest that this was a meeting within s451, nor that, if Mr Lee stood to gain financially from any decision there made, the plaintiff was under an obligation to disclose a pecuniary interest. It is the question of whether Mr
Lee did have a reasonable likelihood or expectation of appreciable financial gain that is here in issue. The plaintiff argued that the meeting did not, and could not, confer any financial benefit upon Mr Lee. No vote was taken and the most that was done at the meeting resulted in a recommendation that his design brief be adopted. Contrary to the argument put on behalf of the defendant, the
Council was already under a liability (incurred on 28 March) to Mr Lee in respect of his fees for the preparation of the design brief, and what occurred at this meeting incurred no further financial obligation to him. But if subsequent acceptance by the Council of the recommendation of the meeting itself entailed the reasonable likelihood or expectation of an appreciable financial benefit for Mr Lee, in the sense, for example, that he could have anticipated preference in the allocation of a contract for the further progress of the Civic Centre, I would have concluded that this meeting was one which required the plaintiff to declare an interest by reason of s451. But, for reasons I have already given, I do not think that is the case (see paras [75] to [77] above). The recommendation was part of a chain of events which led to the Council's adoption of Mr Lee's design. The Business Paper presented to the Council meeting of 18 June made it perfectly plain, as I have previously observed, that Mr Lee, if he wished to tender for the project, would have to do so in equal competition with other tenderers. Of course, I recognise that, at the time of the 11 June meeting, that Business Paper had not come into existence, but it plainly records the standard policy of the
Council. The decision of the meeting of 11 June did not confer any financial benefit on Mr Lee. More accurately, there was no reasonable likelihood or expectation of appreciable financial gain (or loss) to Mr Lee as a result of the matters discussed and decided at the meeting. There was therefore no breach of s451 in the plaintiff's failure to disclose a pecuniary interest at that meeting.  the Council meeting of 18 June 1996  What I have said above also disposes of the contention that the meeting of June was such as to require disclosure by the plaintiff of a pecuniary interest. Again, by reason of the expressed policy in the Business Paper, Mr
Lee could not reasonably anticipate or expect appreciable financial gain as a result of the meeting. It was therefore not necessary for the plaintiff to disclose a pecuniary interest.  development applications  The defendant next identified a number of Development Applications that came before the Council, and in relation to each of which Mr Lee was the architect. I propose only to refer in detail to two. The first of these was a project at 140-152 New Canterbury Road, Petersham. The registered proprietor of the property appears to have been a company, Admak Investments Pty Ltd, of whom Mr Joseph Pinto was a director (exhibit 14, tab 41). In December 1996 Mr
Lee, as architect, applied for development approval. The application excited considerable opposition from residents. In October 1997 the Council's
Development and Environmental Services Committee ("DES Committee") recommended refusal of the application, giving reasons for that recommendation. At a
Council meeting of 7 October 1997 the Council unanimously resolved to defer further consideration of the matter pending inspection by councillors.
Inspection took place, at which the plaintiff and Mr Lee (inter alia) were present. At a Council meeting on 21 October, a motion was passed (by a majority) indicating the Council's support for the development subject to appropriate conditions. At a Council meeting of 18 November a rescission motion was put and defeated. Development approval was finally given, by majority (which included the plaintiff) at a meeting of 9 December 1997. At none of the meetings did the plaintiff disclose any pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest.  A similar matter involved a Building Application, dated March 1997, in relation to a property at 30 Excelsior Parade Marrickville. The owner of the property, a Mr Michael Hassan, was the applicant. Mr Lee was identified as the architect. This application was also controversial, bringing forth residents' objections. It also resulted in a recommendation of partial refusal by the DES
Committee, which gave reasons. At a DES Committee meeting of 3 June 1997 it was resolved by majority that the application be referred for mediation.
Following mediation, at a DES Committee meeting of 1 July 1997, in which the plaintiff participated, the application was approved on conditions. (It is not clear, but it appears that this decision was made by the DES Committee by delegated authority.) At no stage did the plaintiff declare a pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest in the matter.  Some confusion arose in the evidence in relation to this project.
Initially, in his evidence, the plaintiff thought it was possible that Mr Lee was doing the work without fee and therefore could not be said himself to have a pecuniary interest in the matter. He then recalled that another Councillor,
Councillor Tadros, had some involvement and had, in fact, disqualified himself from participating in the discussion. In re-examination, after having had the opportunity to consider the matter overnight, the plaintiff confirmed that he had been told that Mr Lee was not to receive fees for this project, and that
Councillor Tadros was himself meeting some of the Council fees charged.  The defendant's principal argument is that Mr Lee had a pecuniary interest in the decisions made by the Council in relation to these applications; that, by reason of the plaintiff's relationship with Mr Lee, he also had a pecuniary interest; and that, accordingly, by s451 he was obliged to disclose his interest at any meeting at which the applications were being considered and voted upon, and to refrain from any participation in the discussion or voting.
The defendant's alternative position was that the plaintiff had non-pecuniary interests in the matter, by reason of which he should have made disclosure.  What was firstly in dispute was whether Mr Lee had a pecuniary interest in the matters before the Council and the DES Committee. It is necessary to examine further the evidence in relation to this.  At the plaintiff's request, Mr Lee provided him with a letter concerning his interest in the Petersham project (exhibit N). This letter was dated 6
October 1997 (that is, postdating the meetings concerning the Marrickville application) and was in the following terms:  "This letter is to confirm to you advice provided over the weekend.  
This firm has been engaged as Architects to design and submit plans for the project.  
Our fees are payable irrespective of approval or non-approval.  
This firm or its principals or staff have no financial interest in the project nor is there any agreement to receive future fees should the application be approved."  The plaintiff himself said in evidence that, in his experience, an architect who prepared plans for a Development Application could not necessarily expect to be, and often was not, retained for the preparation of a
Building Application or subsequent work. The plaintiff had no reason to believe that Mr Lee had any pecuniary interest in the outcome of either
Development Application. It is not suggested that the plaintiff himself had any pecuniary interest in the projects other than by reason of his association with Mr Lee. Axiomatically, if Mr Lee had no pecuniary interest in the projects, then neither did the plaintiff. The only interest Mr Lee had was as architect.  The existence of a pecuniary interest, as defined in s442, does not depend upon the subjective knowledge or perception of the person whose pecuniary interest is under consideration. However, by s443(3)(a), a person is not taken to have pecuniary interests of the kind here attributed to the plaintiff (that is, a derivative interest coming into existence only by reason of a partner's pecuniary interest) if he/she is unaware of the partner's pecuniary interest.  Here, I accept that the plaintiff took steps to acquaint himself with Mr
Lee's position in relation to the Petersham project and received from Mr Lee information that, he said, satisfied him that Mr Lee had no financial interest contingent upon approval or refusal of the application, because fees due to him did not depend upon approval; putting that together with the plaintiff's own evidence that Mr Lee could not reasonably expect to be retained for further work if the Development Application were granted, it could not be said that Mr Lee had a reasonable likelihood or expectation of appreciable financial gain from the decision; but, even if he did, the plaintiff was unaware of that circumstance.  I have therefore concluded that the circumstances were not such as to call for disclosure of a pecuniary interest by the plaintiff in relation to the
Petersham application. I am able to reach that conclusion in relation to the
Petersham application on the basis of the plaintiff's unawareness of any interest that Mr Lee might have had. That does not apply in relation to the
Marrickville application because the letter from Mr Lee (exhibit N) had not come into existence at the time of the consideration of that application.
Nevertheless, I accept that Mr Lee did not have a reasonable likelihood or expectation of financial gain in relation to that Development Application. He had performed his work, and whatever entitlement to fees he had had already accrued. In that respect, as I have noted above, there was considerable confusion in the evidence concerning whether Mr Lee was to receive any fees, but ultimately, the evidence seemed to establish that he had agreed to undertake this work without fee. I recognise that it may be thought that he had a likelihood or expectation of less tangible benefits, for example prestige, or professional success in presenting to the Council a Development
Application that secured approval (particularly, perhaps, where the
Development Application was attended by local controversy); and that that itself might, eventually, translate into an increase in his professional popularity and therefore his professional success. (Of course, the existence of a controversy about a particular project might equally have the opposite effect upon the professional popularity of the architect associated with the project.) But that is, in my opinion, both speculative and too remote. It is not the kind of appreciable "financial gain" to which s442(1) is directed.
Since Mr Lee could not (reasonably) have held such an expectation, the plaintiff was not, by s443(2), taken to have a pecuniary interest, and was not, by s451, obliged to make any disclosure.  failure to declare non-pecuniary interests  On behalf of the defendant it was also argued that, even if the plaintiff's failure to declare an interest at any of the meetings referred to in paras [103] to [105] above, did not amount to non-compliance with s451, nevertheless, by reference to the Codes of Conduct, Code of Meeting Practice, and Conflict of Interest Policy, the plaintiff was under an obligation in each case to declare a non-pecuniary interest. The question arises whether the plaintiff's association with Mr Lee brought him within the definition of "non- pecuniary interest" contained within the various codes. Those definitions are:  " ... any private or personal interest which does not pertain or relate to money (e.g. kinship, friendship ...)"  These codes are not to be given the strict construction which is given to an Act of Parliament. On a strict construction of the definition, the association between the plaintiff and Mr Lee would be excluded, because that association most certainly pertained and related to money. However, I do not think that a proper approach to conflicts of interest arising out of non- pecuniary interests should allow such a technical construction. Plainly, what the policy is directed to is the exclusion of decision-making based upon improper considerations; and transparency in the process. The policy which was in force at the time of the Civic Centre matters, and the Petersham application, was that contained in the 1994 Code of Conduct (see para [20]).
This required the plaintiff not to do anything which he could not justify to the public and to avoid any occasion for reasonable suspicion or the appearance of improper conduct or the partial performance of public and professional duty, and cast an onus upon him to declare an interest, "whether perceived or real".  By the time of the Marrickville application the Conflicts of Interest
Policy had been adopted and this was considerably more explicit as to what was required.  The difficulty for the defendant on this argument is that the policies are non-specific and un-prescriptive. They give no real definition of what constitutes a non-pecuniary interest, essentially leaving the evaluation to the person involved. The plaintiff could only be said to be in breach of his obligations under the code or the policy if the circumstances were such as to leave no room for the view that they did not call for - i.e. demand - disclosure.  I have concluded that these policies did not, in that sense, call for disclosure by the plaintiff, and that his failure to make the disclosures could not therefore constitute non-compliance with his obligation. That is not to say that views might not differ on the extent of the requirement: this is no more than a conclusion that the plaintiff's position was one which was open to him.  The defendant also relied upon a further instance of non-disclosure of  non-pecuniary interests. These involved proposed developments in which a friend of the plaintiff, Mr Larry Hand, had an interest. Whether it was incumbent upon the plaintiff to disclose a non-pecuniary interest in relation to matters before the Council or a committee thereof in which Mr Hand had a financial interest depends upon the closeness of the association between them.
The answer is not clear-cut. The plaintiff gave extensive evidence in chief on this subject. He said that he had first met Mr Hand in the late 1970s. Both were members of the Australian Labor Party. Between 1991 and 1995 Mr Hand was the Mayor of Leichhardt, a Council adjoining the local government area of
Marrickville. The two had contact from time to time in the course of performing their mayoral functions and they had some social contact. They became more closely associated from the end of 1994 as a result of a campaign in which both were involved concerning opposition to the construction of a third runway at Sydney Airport. For a time Mr Hand was in a relationship with the plaintiff's flatmate and visited his home. The plaintiff did not consider
Mr Hand to be a close friend. He maintained this position in cross- examination.  The plaintiff was extensively cross-examined about developments in which
Mr Hand had an interest. It is unnecessary to deal with the detail of this. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff's association with Mr Hand was so close as to call for disclosure of a non-pecuniary interest in any matter with which Mr
Hand was involved. This is not to deny that it would have been open to the plaintiff to make a disclosure, nor that some might perceive the friendship to have been such that common sense, or even self protection, might have suggested disclosure; but I do not think the circumstances were such as to "oblige" the plaintiff to make disclosure.  That completes the matters put on behalf of the defendant in justification of contextual imputation 1. The defendant has succeeded only in establishing that the plaintiff failed, over a three-year period, to make proper disclosure in his s449 returns. This is sufficient (although barely so), I have concluded, to establish the substantial truth of contextual imputation 1.  contextual imputation 2  This imputation is that the plaintiff breached his obligations as a councillor.  It is unnecessary to consider further matters in support of the substantial truth of this imputation. It is a more general accusation than, but of the same kind as, contextual imputation 1, and, from the proof of the substantial truth of contextual imputation 1, it follows that contextual imputation 2 has been shown to be substantially true.  did the publications of imputations (b), (d) and (f) further injure the reputation of the plaintiff?  [S16(2)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s16.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) requires an exercise in balancing the defamatory content of those imputations that have not been justified against the substantial truth of the contextual imputations the substantial truth of which has been established, and an assessment of whether, by reason of the substantial truth of the contextual imputations, the publication of imputations (b), (d) and (f) did not further injure the plaintiff's reputation (see Blake, [5]). Where the defamatory content of the sum of the proven contextual imputations is equal to or greater than the defamatory content of the imputations not proven, it could fairly be said that the publication of the unproven imputations does not further injure the reputation of the plaintiff.  Although, having regard to Blake, the focus in relation to the contextual imputations must be on their substantial truth, the exercise can, in the first instance, be undertaken by examination of the imputations themselves. I have previously observed that imputations (b) and (f) are, in substance, imputations of corruption; imputation (d) is an imputation that there are reasonable grounds to suspect corruption on the part of the plaintiff.  The contextual imputations shown to be true are of failure to comply with obligations of disclosure. This is of a lesser order than imputations of corruption. I am satisfied that the contextual imputations are not such as to overwhelm imputations (b), (d) and (f) either individually or in their combined effect. This view is reinforced when, applying Blake, I consider what is entailed in the substantial truth of the contextual imputations.
Failure properly to comply with disclosure provisions is serious, and should not be minimised, but is, in my view, vastly less serious that the accusation contained in imputations (b), (d) and (f), but not proven to be true.  I am further of the view that it is proper to have regard to the context in which the imputations were published and this fortifies me in the conclusion I have just reached. The plaintiff's proven non-compliance, while significant, was in relation to disclosure requirements, and, while always serious, was of varying degrees of gravity. Non-disclosure, in my view, is less significant than corruption. The defence of contextual truth must therefore fail. The plaintiff must succeed in his claim. He is entitled to an award of damages. Before moving to the question of damages, it is necessary to deal briefly with one final matter.  interstate defences  The plaintiff having pleaded that the imputations were published, not only in NSW, but also in all other states and territories of Australia, the defendant pleaded interstate defences. On the whole, these can be disposed of quickly.  In relation to the publication in Victoria, South Australia, Western
Australia and the Northern Territory the defendant pleaded that imputations and (f) were true in substance and in fact. Plainly, in the light of my earlier findings, that plea cannot be sustained.  In relation to those same states and the Northern Territory the defendant also pleaded:  "(a) the matter complained of, in its natural and ordinary meaning, conveyed the following imputation of and concerning the plaintiff (the defendant's imputation), which was true in substance and in fact:  "The plaintiff breached his obligations as a councillor."  the defendant's imputation was not separate or distinct from the imputations pleaded in sub-paragraph 4(b), 4(d) and 4(f) of the Statement of
Claim;  the matter complained of, in the meaning of the defendant's imputation, was true in substance and in fact;  further and in the alternative, by virtue of the substantial truth of the contextual imputations and/or the defendant's imputation and/or such of imputations 4(b) and 4(f) as are found to be substantially true, the plaintiff's reputation was not further injured by the imputations pleaded in paragraph 4 of the Statement of Claims as are not proved by the defendant to be substantially true."  As I understand it, the matters pleaded in paragraphs 8 and 9 are intended to raise what has come to be known as a "Polly Peck defence" (a defence arising from Polly Peck (Holdings) plc versus Trelford [[1986] 1 QB ).]
This amounts to no more than a common law version of the defence of contextual truth which is made available by [s16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s16.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/). The defence as pleaded must meet the same fate as the contextual truth defence.  In relation to the Australian Capital Territory, Queensland and Tasmania, the defendant pleaded that imputations (b) and (f) are true in substance and in fact and were published for the public benefit. As with the defence of truth pleaded in relation to Victoria, the other States named, and the
Northern Territory, this defence must also fail. In paragraphs 11 and 12 the defendant again pleaded a "Polly Peck defence" in relation to those states and the ACT. This, too, must fail.  damages  [Ss 46](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s46.html) and [46A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s46a.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) are in the following terms:  "46. General 
In this Part "relevant harm" means, in relation to damages for defamation:  harm suffered by the person defamed, or  ... 
Damages for defamation shall be the damages recoverable in accordance with the common law, but limited to damages for relevant harm. 
In particular, damages for defamation:  shall not include exemplary damages, and  shall not be affected by the malice or other state of mind of the publisher at the time of the publication complained of or at any other time, except so far as that malice or other state of mind affects the relevant harm. 
A. Factors relevant in damages assessment  
In determining the amount of damages to be awarded in any proceedings for defamation, the court is to ensure that there is an appropriate and rational relationship between the relevant harm and the amount of damages awarded. 
In determining the amount of damages for non-economic loss to be awarded in any proceedings for defamation, the court is to take into consideration the general range of damages for non-economic loss in personal injury awards in the State (including awards made under, or in accordance with, any statute regulating the award of any such damages)."  There are three purposes in an award of damages for the publication of defamatory imputations: consolation for personal distress and hurt caused to the plaintiff by the publication; reparation for harm done to the plaintiff's reputation; and vindication of the plaintiff's reputation: Carson versus John
Fairfax & Sons Ltd <case>; <case>. In this case damages to be awarded for reparation for the harm done to the plaintiff's reputation include damages for the harm done to what I might call his professional reputation as Mayor of Leichhardt. The plaintiff also seeks aggravated damages. An award of aggravated damages may be made when the plaintiff establishes that the conduct of the defendant lacks bona fides or is improper or unjustifiable: see Triggell versus Pheeney <case>; [(1951) 82 CLR 497]; and, generally, Tobin and Sexton: Australian Defamation Law and Practice, Butterworths, 1999, at [22.020] et seq. Aggravated damages are, however, a component of compensatory damages.  I turn now to consider the evidence given by and on behalf of the plaintiff in relation to compensatory damages. I will deal separately with that component of the plaintiff's claim which relates to the claim for aggravated damages. The plaintiff said that he knew Mr Wainwright, the journalist who wrote the article, and had known him for some time as a result of the campaign against the construction of the third runway at Sydney
Airport. He gave evidence of conversations with Mr Wainwright prior to the publication. The day before publication of the article, Mr Wainwright telephoned the plaintiff, saying that he had received an allegation from another councillor (Councillor Sylvia Hale) to the effect that he (the plaintiff) had acted to confer a benefit upon his business associate, Mr Lee.
The plaintiff told Mr Wainwright that this was untrue. Mr Wainwright said that he would make further inquiries and call back. Mr Wainwright did in fact call back, saying:  "I have no evidence that you gave, voted on a benefit to Mr Lee." (T52)  He then proceeded to ask the plaintiff a number of questions, including whether the plaintiff had failed to make any declarations, and if he had engaged in any activities to give a benefit to Mr Lee. The plaintiff told Mr
Wainwright that he had made an error in his 1995/1996 declaration under s449 and that this involved a number of omissions but that he had drawn this to the attention of Mr Mills and asked him to place that notification on the record.
The plaintiff added that the omissions had arisen in the context of his very heavy workload and that a number of those matters had not been omitted from earlier declarations. Mr Wainwright asked the plaintiff about the meeting of March and the plaintiff advised him of the circumstances in which he had attended the meeting and denied that he had voted on any decision to confer a benefit on Mr Lee. He told Mr Wainwright that the allegations that had been made were "politically motivated" and were made by his "political opponents".
Mr Wainwright told the plaintiff that he would consider what had been said to him, and whether or not he would write a story for publication.  Subsequently, after reflection, the plaintiff telephoned Mr Wainwright specifically to advise that, on learning of the errors and omissions in his /1995 declaration, he had asked Mr Mills to bring this matter to the attention of the Department of Local Government.  The plaintiff next gave evidence about the circumstances in which he became aware of the article. He had, as was his habit, purchased The Sydney
Morning Herald and read it over coffee. He saw the article and read it. When asked about the impact upon him he said:  "I was very surprised to see it because I had formed a view, given the extensive explanations I had given Mr Wainwright the evening before that he would decide not to run the story ... I was very upset by it. I suppose I was angry about it because I thought it was a very unbalanced article. I was shocked by the headline in particular, because he appeared to have conceded that the only issue in relation to it was my failure to properly fill out a form and that he had conceded that when I had rung him back to make it very clear to him that I had asked the General Manager to write to the Department of Local Government drawing to their attention my failure, and that that hadn't been, I believed, adequately reflected." (T58)  The plaintiff said that he re-read the article and his emotions turned to anger, disbelief and concern. The headline caused him particular distress because of what he perceived as an inference that he had been involved "in a decade of deals". His concern increased as he reflected upon how readers of the article would perceive him. He said:  "To me it was inferring that I had been involved in corrupt conduct for ten years, a decade, that I had acted in a corrupt manner to favour a business associate, Mr Lee. It all but inferred that I had set out to establish a pattern to do that, that I had forced myself into a meeting to be allowed to vote for him and it inferred that I had been caught out." (T48)  
He was concerned about the potential impact on a wide range of acquaintances who would take the content of the article "at face value".  The plaintiff gave evidence of a number of telephone calls he received during the course of the day. These were from acquaintances from various aspects of the plaintiff's life. One caused him particular concern. This was from a Ms Wendy Caird, whom the plaintiff had known for some time and for whom he had a high regard. What concerned him was that Ms Caird asked him if there was any truth in the article. It is not necessary to detail the evidence of other phone calls which the plaintiff gave. The fact of the telephone calls, and their content, establishes that the article had been widely read and had caused significant damage to the plaintiff's reputation. One effect of the telephone calls was to heighten the plaintiff's alarm and concern and to cause him distress and depression. The plaintiff said he had "an overwhelming sense of humiliation".  That evening, in accordance with his usual practice, the plaintiff called in to a local hotel. As soon as he did so the publican approached him and pointed to a copy of The Sydney Morning Herald which was either on the bar or a table and was opened at the page on which the article written by Mr
Wainwright appeared. The publican asked the plaintiff some questions framed in accusing terms. It was obvious to the plaintiff that the clientele of the hotel had been discussing the article.  The following day, Saturday, Ms Caird visited the plaintiff at his home and spent about an hour discussing the article and matters arising therefrom with the plaintiff. I take this to be an indication of the seriousness with which acquaintances of the plaintiff, including personal friends, treated its publication. Later on the same day when the plaintiff was shopping in Newtown he was accosted by a person he did not know who accused him of corruption.  A regular council meeting was scheduled for the following Tuesday evening.
One topic for discussion on the agenda concerned the redevelopment of the
Marrickville Hospital site. This was attended by a very large number of residents and was, the plaintiff said:  "the most unruly meeting I have ever attended at Marrickville Council." (T75)  
On two occasions the plaintiff found it necessary to adjourn the meeting:  "because of almost riotous behaviour by some members of the gallery." (T75)  During the course of the meeting photocopies of the Wainwright article were circulated in the public gallery. The meeting was the subject of a further news report in The Sydney Morning Herald the following day, also written by Mr Wainwright. Under the headline:  "Mayor jeered and taunted",  
Mr Wainwright reported that the meeting had dissolved into "a slanging match" between the plaintiff and "a vocal crowd of more than two hundred residents"; that the plaintiff was "jeered and taunted"; that questions were raised about the plaintiff's business interests; that the plaintiff admitted that he had inadvertently breached pecuniary interest provisions of the 1993 Act; and that the matter had been referred by Mr Mills to the Department of Local Government for investigation. This last matter was immediately followed by the sentence:  "Cr Cotter insists he asked Mr Mills to do so."  
A copy of the item is exhibit G.  The publication of this article added to the plaintiff's concern and distress. He said he thought it was a very unbalanced article and presented the conduct of the meeting in a manner that was prejudicial to him. He took issue with the photograph (the same photograph as had appeared in the previous article) which he considered gave him an appearance "of being angry and wild".
He considered the article was very selective in its content. He referred to a number of matters that had occurred at the meeting which were omitted from the article. He took issue with the use of the word "insists" in the sentence extracted above, concerning the reference of the matters to the Department of
Local Government. The plaintiff considered that the use of the word suggested some cynicism (or scepticism) about the truth of what he had said. He said:  "I think it attempted to show me as a person under siege, someone who the public had correctly turned on. I think it tried to show me as someone who perhaps was trying to hide things, that I was a person under pressure trying to cover up what I might be doing." (T91)  The next day yet another news item appeared in The Sydney Morning
Herald, this time over the by-line of Paola Totaro. This item bore the headline:  "Cotter urged to stand down."  Ms Totaro reported that the State Opposition had called upon the plaintiff to stand down as Mayor until a full inquiry into his financial and business affairs had been conducted. The publication of this article angered the plaintiff, again because he perceived that it lacked balance, and that the headline was so drafted as to attract attention.  Comments and questions from acquaintances of the plaintiff continued. On April, the day of publication, the plaintiff's solicitors wrote to the defendant, indicating some "untruths" contained in the article, and pointing out that the author had omitted (maliciously, it was suggested) to state that it was the plaintiff who had initiated the reference of the matters to the
Director General of the Department of Local Government. The plaintiff's solicitors sought publication of a correction, retraction and apology in terms they set out in the letter.  On 22 April, eleven days later, the defendant wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors, responding to some of the matters raised, and declining to publish an apology. The defendant invited the plaintiff to submit a letter to the editor of suitable length for publication, which, it said, would be favourably considered. The plaintiff considered this to be an unsatisfactory way in which to resolve the issue which had arisen. He said he was very disappointed in the content of the letter and the refusal of the defendant to acknowledge that Mr
Wainwright had been provided with information that contradicted some of what he had written. He did not act upon the invitation to submit a letter to the editor. The plaintiff gave his reasons for this. This was because he took the view that the article was extremely unfavourable and that to submit a letter would merely be seen as self serving and would not result in the defendant's acknowledgment that it had been wrong. It would be seen as a self- justification or might even ignite more debate on the issue. An apology, in the plaintiff's view, would be a clear indication that the defendant accepted that it had been in error. Far from having any attraction to him, the plaintiff thought the proposal by the defendant contained detriment to him.  There were some additional matters on which the plaintiff relied in the overall assessment of damages. One of these concerned the manner in which the defendant had conducted its defence. Initially, he said, the defendant pleaded defences that did not involve any assertion that what it had published was true; at some stage, as is apparent, the defence changed to one of partial justification. The plaintiff said that he found this very distressing, because:  "They had put me through a huge amount, they had been asserting all along that they weren't trying to say anything that, you know, had the effect of damaging me, and here they were now, after all these years after the case had started and after it had been to the jury, changing their defence to a different position." (T131)  The plaintiff said that the pending case had placed him under a great strain, particularly in the context of his political activities. Even quite recently some derogatory remarks about him had been made from the public gallery at a Council meeting and this brought home to him the realisation that the article could continue to damage him. As a consequence, he and Mr Lee had agreed that they could no longer conduct business in Marrickville and had ceased to do so. Even though they continued to engage in business activities outside the Marrickville Municipality, their activities had been quite severely curtailed.  The plaintiff's evidence was that he believed that his reputation, prior to publication, was "exceptional". He thought he was highly regarded in his community in terms of his work and that this enhanced his enjoyment in his work. He perceived the publication of the article as providing a foundation for his political opponents and he considered that some members of the community probably still believed in the truth of the contents of the article.
Others would have retained doubts.  There is no reason not to accept the evidence of the plaintiff in relation to matters going to the quantification of damage, or, indeed, generally. As I have observed above, there was nothing in the way that he gave his evidence and nothing in the objectively ascertainable circumstances that cause me to doubt his veracity or reliability. In reaching this conclusion I have had regard to lengthy submissions put to me by counsel for the defendant in relation to the assessment of the plaintiff's credibility. These involved a certain reluctance to accept the findings of the Pecuniary Interests Tribunal.
As I said during argument, I reject the proposition that any such reluctance bears upon whether or not I accept the plaintiff as a truthful witness.  Also called in the plaintiff's case on the issue of his reputation were a number of witnesses. Their evidence can be dealt with succinctly. Mr Anthony
Albanese is a member of the Federal Parliament for an electorate which encompasses the area of the Marrickville municipality. He has known the plaintiff since about 1979. When asked about the plaintiff's reputation prior to the publication in April 1997, Mr Albanese gave a somewhat expansive answer. He portrayed the plaintiff in the context of the dispute concerning the construction of the third runway at Sydney Airport, which I have already mentioned. He contrasted the plaintiff's reputation amongst members and supporters of the Australian Labor Party with the reputation, or perception, of the party amongst its adherents. In that context he said that the plaintiff's role was as a figurehead and very important politically and for the Australian Labor Party at the time. Much of this went to the plaintiff's character as distinct from his reputation. When pressed in relation to the plaintiff's reputation, Mr Albanese was a little more concise, saying that the plaintiff's reputation was "of someone of great integrity" (T348). The esteem in which Mr Albanese himself held the plaintiff was such that he was heavily involved in Mr Albanese's election campaign in the 1996 Federal election. Mr
Albanese said he would not have agreed to this if the election had occurred after the publication of the article.  Mr Albanese was also aware of discussion in the local community about the article and its contents.  Mr Peter Fitzgerald was, at the time of giving evidence, the General
Manager of the Botany Bay City Council. He had been involved in one way or another in local government for many years, having been an elected alderman in the Drummoyne Council over many years, and Mayor for some of that time. He has known the plaintiff since before 1988 when both were elected to adjoining councils. Mr Fitzgerald said that, up to April 1997, the plaintiff's reputation from his point of view was "absolutely unblemished" and "absolutely pristine". (T393)  The final witness was Mr Shane Lester, the licensee of the Courthouse
Hotel at Newtown, to which the plaintiff went on the evening of the publication. His evidence went to the response, as he perceived it, of the clientele of the hotel to the article. Essentially, he said that many people used the article as the base for "having a go" (T399) at the plaintiff in a light-hearted manner but with cynical overtones. He said that, even at the date he gave evidence, the matter was still being discussed from time to time.  It should not be overlooked that in cross-examination of the plaintiff, it was elicited that, in the local government election that followed the publications, he was re-elected with an increased majority. (T139)  All of these matters are relevant to the assessment of compensatory damages.  aggravated damages  In the Amended Statement of Claim the plaintiff particularised his claim in aggravation of damages in the following way:  "(a) the defendant's failure to apologise though requested to do so by letter of 11 April 1997 from the plaintiff's solicitors,  the prominence and space given to the publication, in particular its position at the top right of page 3, accompanied by a photo of the plaintiff;  the publication of an article headed 'Mayor jeered and taunted' on page 3 of The Sydney Morning Herald on 16 April 1997.  the defendant's publication of an article headed 'Cotter urged to stand down' on page 6 of The Sydney Morning Herald on 17 April 1997.  the defendant's plea of justification to imputations (b) and (f).  the defendant's plea of contextual truth.  the plaintiff's knowledge that the imputations are false.  the maintenance upon the record by the defendant until the day of the trial of pleas of qualified privilege which pleaded the reasonableness, bona fides, and public benefit of the defendant's conduct in publishing the imputations."  At the conclusion of the proceedings, the plaintiff, through his senior counsel, abandoned reliance on particular (b), but maintained reliance on all other particulars.  In Andrews versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd [[1980] 2 NSWLR 225], Glass JA quoted from the speech of Lord Reid in Cassell & Co Ltd versus Broome <case>; [[1972] AC 1027] at 1085, in which his Lordship said:  "It has long been recognised that in determining what sum within that bracket should be awarded, a jury, or other tribunal, is entitled to have regard to the conduct of the defendant. He may have behaved in a high-handed, malicious, insulting or oppressive manner in committing the tort or he or his counsel may at the trial have aggravated the injury by what they there said. That would justify going to the top of the bracket and awarding as damages the largest sum that could fairly be regarded as compensation."  Glass JA added:  "Conduct of the kind there impugned could add to the compensatory damages because it aggravated the injury and increased the harm done to the plaintiff.
Since compensatory damages could, ex hypothesi, only be given for harm done to the plaintiff, the common law regarded such matters of aggravation as falling within the relevant harm proved."  His Honour considered that the effect of any such conduct upon the plaintiff could be demonstrated by inference without the need for direct evidence. Failure to make inquiries and failure to recant prior to trial were two matters which, his Honour considered, were available so to be taken into account.  Hutley JA also regarded the failure of a defendant to retract or apologise as a matter proper to be taken into account in the calculation of damages.
However, he considered that recklessness in the publication must be shown to have affected the plaintiff in order to be relevant harm and thereby to have aggravated the damages.  In Carson versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd <case>; <case>, Mason
CJ, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ wrote:  "... we have difficulty in understanding how the mere absence of an apology can aggravate damages. Whereas publication of an apology may mitigate damage, thereby reducing the harm suffered by a plaintiff in a defamation case, and so reduce the damages awarded, the failure to publish an apology does not increase the plaintiff's hurt or widen the area of publication. No doubt want of an apology may be a relevant factor in establishing that a defendant is motivated by a desire to injure the plaintiff but that does not mean that the want of an apology itself aggravates the plaintiff's injury. Furthermore, it is of the utmost importance that juries should be instructed that any award of aggravated damages must be confined to what is truly compensation for relevant harm and must not include any element of punitive damages. Otherwise an invitation to award aggravated damages by reference to the defendant's conduct before and at the trial may be understood as an invitation to award punitive damages."  This statement of the High Court, however, can no longer be taken at face value. In Clark versus Ainsworth <case>; [(1996) 40 NSWLR 463] Sheller JA and Abadee AJA scrutinised the basis on which the absence of an apology might be used in the assessment of damages, including aggravated damages. Sheller JA noted:  "Only unjustifiable or improper conduct by the defendant can be taken into account in giving aggravated damages."  His Honour rejected a submission there made on behalf of the defendant that a failure to apologise could increase the damages only if it was shown that that was improper or unjustifiable or demonstrated lack of bona fides.
Ultimately, his Honour identified a distinction between a defendant's failure to apologise as a factor in a claim for aggravated damages, which would require a plaintiff to particularise and prove that the failure involved or was part of a course of unjustifiable or improper conduct by the defendant, and the failure to apologise as contributing to the plaintiff's hurt caused by the persistence in and continued spread of the matter published.  It seems to me that what this means is that the failure to apologise may be taken into account in aggravation of damages, but only where the failure is accompanied by, or part of, a course of unjustifiable and improper conduct on the part of the defendant. The failure to apologise is relevant in a more general sense to the assessment of non-aggravated compensatory damages as part of the distress caused to the plaintiff as a result of the persistence of the defendant in maintaining the imputations.  Abadee AJA wrote:  "In my opinion a mere refusal or failure to apologise is relevant to general compensatory damages, and is capable of being included as a component of such damages."  Simos AJA agreed with both Sheller JA and Abadee AJA.  I am plainly bound by the decision in Clark versus Ainsworth and must apply it in the consideration of the plaintiff's claim for aggravated damages, especially in relation to that aspect of the defendant's conduct which forms the basis of the first particular.  In considering all particulars, I bear in mind the observation of Sheller
JA to the effect that only unjustifiable or improper conduct of the defendant can be taken into account in an award of aggravated damages. That means it is necessary individually to consider each of the instances of conduct asserted by the plaintiff as giving rise to aggravation of the damage caused by the publication of the defamatory imputations.  The first question is whether or not the defendant's failure to apologise did amount to unjustifiable or improper conduct. The plaintiff's solicitor wrote to the defendant promptly, on the day of publication (exhibit D). He asserted that the article contained "a number of untruths" of which Mr
Wainwright was clearly aware and had chosen to ignore despite being informed by the plaintiff of the facts. He detailed errors he asserted to be contained in the article, these being the suggestion that the plaintiff's business dealings over a period of ten years were being investigated; the deliberate and (it was suggested) malicious omission to report that it was the plaintiff who had requested Mr Mills to refer his business interests to the Director
General of the Department of Local Government; and the statement that four political opponents of the plaintiff had detailed a decade of property and business transactions.  A reply to this letter was not written until 22 April (exhibit K). A detailed response was then provided to the assertions made on behalf of the plaintiff. One thing that cannot here be overlooked is imputation (d) - the imputation that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that as a member of
Marrickville Council the plaintiff had engaged in business deals which conflicted with his duties as a member of the Council. The defendant made no attempt to justify this imputation. Another relevant matter emerges from the answers to interrogatories administered by the plaintiff to the defendant. The defendant said that it did not intend to convey any of the imputations; it did not believe in the truth of any of the imputations; it had no belief as to whether any of its readers might understand the article to convey any of the imputations; that, relevantly, in relation to imputations (b) and (f), Mr
Wainwright had given consideration to whether any of the readers of The
Sydney Morning Herald might have understood the article to convey those imputations of the plaintiff but that the defendant had given no consideration to that question in relation (relevantly) to imputation (d).  It seems to me that what the defendant recognised it could not justify was the imputation that the misconduct it attributed to the plaintiff had continued over a period of ten years. That this was incorrect was drawn to the attention of the defendant by the plaintiff's solicitor in the letter of 11
April. He advised the defendant that questions raised of the plaintiff's non- disclosures related only to the period between 1 July 1995 and 30 June 1996.
(It is true that subsequent investigations by the Pecuniary Interests Tribunal found non-disclosures over a period of three years, but this was not known at the time of this correspondence.) Counsel for the defendant argued that the absence of any belief in the truth of the imputations evidenced by the answers to interrogatories, could not be used in aggravation of damages because, that being unknown to the plaintiff at the time, it could not have increased his distress. But that is to overlook the effect of the passage from Sheller JA's judgment in Ainsworth. His Honour does not suggest that knowledge by the plaintiff of the impropriety or unjustifiability of the defendant's conduct is a pre-requisite of the award of aggravated damages. It is clear that conduct of the defendant post-dating publication may be found, and this, too, would not necessarily be known to the plaintiff.  I have concluded that the failure to apologise in relation to imputation was unjustifiable. The defendant had the opportunity to make its own inquiries and these would (or should) have brought to its attention the untruth of the imputation. In this respect, at least, the failure of the defendant to accede to the plaintiff's request for an apology was unjustified.
I have concluded that this should be taken into account in aggravation of damages.  The failure to apologise in relation to imputations (b) and (f) is in a different category. It is plain enough that the defendant's position has changed in relation to these imputations during the preparation for trial. At the time the interrogatories were answered (the date of which is not clear from exhibit S which, however, bears a notation with a date of 15 November ) the defendant did not believe that either of those imputations was true.
Some time later, obviously, its investigations gave it cause to believe those imputations were true and, for that reason, it set out to justify them.
Although I have rejected the defence in relation to each of those imputations,
I am not of the view that the defence was plainly untenable nor that the defendant's conduct in attempting to establish their truth was improper or unjustifiable. An apology would have been plainly inconsistent with the position ultimately adopted by the defendant. I do not think that the failure to apologise in relation to those imputations should be treated as a matter aggravating damages.  The next matters on which the plaintiff relied in aggravation of damages was the publication of the successive news items on 16 and 17 April, arising from the Council meeting of 15 April. I have already alluded to the evidence given by the plaintiff as to his perception of the imbalance of each of these items. A principal complaint made on his behalf appears to be that in neither of those news items was it made plain that the questions that had been raised concerning the plaintiff's "business interests" and pecuniary interest disclosures was, at that time, limited to the 1995/1996 year. In written submissions it was suggested that each article exaggerated and overstated the controversy. Senior counsel also pointed to what were said to be some factual inaccuracies in the reports - for example, in the 17 April item, a member of
State Parliament was quoted as saying that the plaintiff had failed to declare his directorship in Evbaca although this was wrong and, so it was said, known to the defendant to be wrong. That reference was contained in the report in a quotation directly attributed to the member of Parliament. I do not think the defendant should be criticised for not correcting a factual inaccuracy in those circumstances.  Even on the plaintiff's own account of the meeting of 15 April, a great deal of hostility and controversy was displayed. So far as I can judge, it could not be said that the news item of 16 April was seriously inaccurate in its description of the meeting: it may have had a slant unfavourable to the plaintiff but it is not such as could be described as distorting the facts, either deliberately or otherwise. Nor, so far as the evidence goes, could the item of 17 April, which was principally a report of proceedings in Parliament, although it also made reference to the meeting of 15 April. I do not perceive the publication of either of these items as being unjustifiable or improper and they are therefore not available to be used in aggravation of damages.  The next matter on which the plaintiff relies in support of his claim for aggravated damages concerns the pleas of justification to imputations (b) and , and of contextual truth. However, in written submissions, it was explicitly stated that it was not asserted that the plea of truth to imputation (b) was improper, nor the plea of truth of contextual imputation 1.
What was put was that the pleas of justification to imputation (f) and contextual imputation 2 were improper because neither carried the defendant's case further than the attempt to justify the earlier imputation. (That is, the attempt to justify imputation (f) went no further than the attempt to justify imputation (b); and the attempt to justify contextual imputation 2 went no further than the attempt to justify contextual imputation 1). This is certainly not so in relation to imputations (b) and (f): the defendant adduced considerably more evidence in its attempt to press the truth of imputation (f) than it did to prove the truth of imputation (b).  I have already indicated that I do not think the attempt to prove the truth of the imputations was unjustifiable or improper and I accordingly do not consider that this basis for aggravated damages is made out.  No further argument was addressed to particulars (g) or (h), that is, the plaintiff's knowledge of the falsity of the imputations, and the maintenance upon the record by the defendant of pleas of qualified privilege. In my opinion they are not sufficient to justify aggravation of damages: the falsity of the imputations is a matter to be taken into account in relation to damages generally but does not, at least in this instance, in my opinion, aggravate the harm done to the plaintiff. Nor, in my opinion, can reliance on a plea of qualified privilege aggravate the damages in the context of a defence which was ultimately conducted on the basis of the asserted truth of the imputation.  I have already mentioned the provisions of [s46A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s46a.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/), directing me to take into consideration "the general range of damages for non- economic loss in personal injury awards in" NSW. Included in that are the provisions of the statutes regulating the award of any such damages. Pursuant to [s134](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maca1999298/s134.html) of the [Motor Accidents Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maca1999298/), the maximum amount that may be awarded in respect of non-economic loss arising from a motor vehicle accident to which that Act applies is $284,000.  I do not find it easy to comply with the directive otherwise contained in s46A(2). I find it impossible to compare the damage done by injury to reputation with the damage done by any physical injury. No material was put before me by either party from which I could gauge "the general range of damages for non-economic loss" in claims for damages for personal injury. The assessment of damages for non-economic loss for personal injury is, within appropriate ranges, a discretionary matter, subject to the evaluation of the determining judge. It depends upon an understanding of the evidence on which the claim is based and which is put before the judge. Notwithstanding this, I have done my best, in what is undoubtedly an inadequate way, to do as I am directed.  What was put before me on behalf of the plaintiff was a schedule containing sums awarded by judges in defamation cases since the introduction of s46A. The information contained in this document included, in each case, the imputation found to have defamed the plaintiff, the nature of the publication, the extent of the audience, and the sum awarded. Given the paucity of the information conveyed in the document (necessarily so) and the discretionary nature of an award of damages, the schedule is of limited assistance.  In the present case, the answers to interrogatories have established that ,533 copies of The Sydney Morning Herald of 11 April 1997 were sold in
NSW, and relatively small numbers in the other States and Territories of
Australia; that the total estimated number of readers of The Sydney Morning
Herald at that date in NSW was approximately 898,000 and in the Australian
Capital Territory approximately 51,000. The newspaper was also available on the internet but there was no information as to the extent of access to that service. It is relevant to the assessment of damages that the item complained of was placed in a relatively prominent position on page 3 of the newspaper and in such a fashion as to attract the eye of even a casual reader. The pithy headline would undoubtedly also have attracted attention (as it was, no doubt, designed to do) of casual as well as more committed readers.  Some of the damages awards to which I was referred were published by way of electronic media, either television or radio. I take into account that a newspaper publication is more enduring than a publication of that kind, and is, unlike an electronic broadcast, susceptible readily of rereading, and of passing on to others.  The case itemised on the schedule most nearly comparable to the present is that of Jarratt versus John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd <case>; unreported, 7 September 2001. In that case, the plaintiff, a former Assistant
Commissioner of Police, sued on three separate publications, contained in three separate editions of The Sydney Morning Herald, conveying, in all, four defamatory imputations. The estimated readership was, in each case, of an order broadly similar to the present. The imputations were also relevantly similar, in that they suggested that the plaintiff acted improperly or corruptly in the performance of his duties as Assistant Police Commissioner.
In respect of the two imputations conveyed by the first publication, McClellan
J awarded the plaintiff a total of $180,000; in respect of the single imputation conveyed by the second publication, $100,000; and in respect of the single imputation conveyed by the third, $104,000. I do not treat the award of damages in Jarratt as a precedent; rather, it helps to solidify a view of the quantification of damages at which I had independently arrived.  Although each imputation constitutes a separate cause of action, and it may sometimes be appropriate to make a separate award of damages in respect of each (as, for example, before the introduction of the 7A procedure, where a defence of qualified privilege, which had to be decided by a judge after jury verdict, was pleaded), that is not the case here. One single award of damages including such aggravation as has been established, will suffice. I have come to the view that the sum proper to compensate the plaintiff for the damage done to his reputation, including aggravated damages to the extent that I have held they may properly be awarded, is $100,000. That is the sum I propose to award.
 
LAST UPDATED: 05/08/2003 * * * 
