

Partridge versus Partridge Matter No 4843/97 [1998] NSWSC 88 (24 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 `

ANITA LYN PARTRIDGE versus AMANDA LYN PARTRIDGE` /97 March 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are unfortunate proceedings between a mother and a daughter. The difference between the positions taken up by the two parties is only some $10,000, but the case has been most bitterly fought. 
In 1995 the mother (for whom Mr Brabazon and Mr Ian Young appeared) was the registered proprietor of two properties in Richmond. The mother had gone guarantor for her brother, Alan Greentree, and a finance company was calling up the money and calling up the guarantee, which appears to have been secured on the property in which the mother's parents were living in Hayman Street,
Richmond. Some of the evidence suggests that the stage had been reached where the Sheriff was at the door.

The daughter (for whom Mr Rogers appeared) had received $15,000 many years ago as a result of her father's death, which money had been held by the Public
Trustee until she obtained her majority. That money plus accrued interest was paid over to her when she was eighteen and she put it into her St George Bank account.

The family was concerned about the activities of the finance company and there was a family conference held. The evidence is rather fuzzy as to exactly what happened and the three parties most affected, who have given evidence, are the mother, the daughter and the mother's then de facto husband, Mr Armstrong.
There is a difference between the parties as to whether it was the mother who suggested that the daughter's money could salvage the situation, or whether it was the daughter who volunteered that she could lend the money.

All of these three witnesses have given evidence before me. The mother did not give very reliable evidence. Her cross-examination showed that she was not particularly accurate on at least four occasions and some of the "explanations" she gave as to her slips just put her in deeper trouble.

The daughter, on the other hand, was not at all affected by vigorous cross- examination, but Mr Armstrong also gave his evidence in a clear, thoughtful and completely credible manner. So, accordingly, although I discount the mother's evidence in favour of the daughter's evidence, there is the problem for the daughter that her evidence is inconsistent with Mr Armstrong's evidence in at least some respects and I cannot find any reason to doubt what
Mr Armstrong is saying.

The probable resolution of the matter is that, as in many family crises, the parties were talking about all sorts of possibilities and the options that were open to them, and it may well have been that in the course of these negotiations the daughter did make the offer that she could lend the money.

However, merely accepting that does not mean that I do not accept the evidence of the daughter. The daughter's evidence in par 12 of her affidavit of 19
January 1998 is that her mother said: "If you help me out by paying your money you will then own half the house" 
The daughter said: "What is that, if we sell the house will I get what I paid in or half the sale price? " 
To which the mother replied: "No you will get half the sale price when we come to sell." 
Three days later the daughter said to her mother "Yes" and she then went to the St George Bank, received $45,748.56 in the form of a bank cheque and went with her mother and Mr Armstrong to the AVCO Finance Company, where the sum of $48,000.01 was paid over. The mother then gave the daughter, either on that day or shortly afterwards, $1,500 saying, "I don't want to see you completely short of money".

Within one to two months of that transaction the daughter, who had been living in a granny flat at the Yvonne Place property owned by her mother, where her younger sisters also resided, moved out of that accommodation and into the property at Hayman Street, Richmond, where her grandparents had previously resided. The grandparents moved into the granny flat at Yvonne Place, where the daughter had previously been residing.

There was an arrangement between the mother and the daughter as to her occupation of the Hayman Street property which is rather bizarre and does not really fit in with either side's version of the January transaction when the money was lent. Although the arrangement was that the daughter would live in the property rent free, anyone else who was living in the property was to pay $70 a week. There is a little inconsistency as to whether the $70 was to be $35 to the mother and $35 for the daughter, or $70 for the mother, but mostly it was the latter.

Initially the daughter was sharing the Hayman Street property with a female friend and the rent was split, but the female friend moved out in March 1996 and Gavan McDowell, the daughter's de facto husband moved in. Mr McDowell was to pay $70 per week. In actual fact the daughter said that she physically took no moneys from Mr McDowell, but from time to time paid her mother $70 a week.
On one occasion a receipt was issued which simply said: "Mandy paid to -11-96". Other receipts were made out to "Gavan" or "Gavin". Not all were for multiples of $70.

Although the daughter and Gavan McDowell were living as husband and wife, and although $70 per week was being paid wholly to the mother in rental, at the same time the daughter was paying half the rates and half the land tax. How the land tax was apportioned between the mother's various properties was something about which I was left completely in the dark. However, the odd thing is that if there was a contract whereby the daughter was to have half the property, why was she not only paying rental for what was essentially her own occupation, for that of her de facto husband, as well as paying half the ordinary costs that are paid by the landlord? 
Again, although the details as to just what repairs were being done is a bit vague, there seems little doubt that the daughter and Mr McDowell were effecting substantial renovations to the property with the full knowledge of the mother, who was paying fifty percent of the cost of material, when she could, but nothing for the labour.

There is also evidence, indeed there is a reflection of this on both sides, that from time to time the daughter asked where were the title deeds, and about putting her name on the deeds. The mother said that the deeds were with
AVCO, but her evidence has the flavour that she was thinking that the daughter was concerned for security for her investment, whereas the daughter was thinking of being a part-owner.

The case only commenced because the daughter put a caveat on the title at a time when her mother was selling the property. The caveat is rather bizarre.
It refers to an agreement of 5 January 1996 and says the caveatable interest is pursuant to that agreement when the caveator paid to the registered proprietor $45,748.56. The caveat does not indicate whether the interest claimed is a moiety as tenant in common or an equitable charge. The mother offered to pay $41,000 in full and final settlement to the daughter, but this offer was refused and on 21 November 1997 the mother issued a summons to have the daughter withdraw the caveat.

The parties came to an agreement, which was recorded by the court, the caveat was lifted, the sale went ahead and the balance of proceeds, or at least half of them, was lodged pending the decision by the court.

The daughter put on a cross-claim on 9 February 1998 seeking a declaration that half the proceeds of sale, which she assessed at $59,000, were held on trust for her. Alternatively, she sought judgment for the $45,748.56, plus interest.

Mr Rogers put the case for the defendant on two bases so far as the claim to proceeds of the sale of the land was concerned, and alternatively a further two bases if the claim was only in debt.

The first submission was that there was a contract for sale of which there were sufficient acts of part performance so that this Court would have enforced it and accordingly, there was a trust over a moiety of the proceeds of sale. Alternatively, it was put that the doctrine of constructive trust led to the same result.

So far as the claim in debt is concerned, it was primarily put that where a person pays money under a misapprehension then the money immediately becomes repayable because of a total failure of consideration, or otherwise as money had and received and, accordingly, interest flows from that date, that date being in this case 5 January 1996. If that fails then the money was repayable on demand: It was demanded in June 1997 and was repayable with interest from then.

I will first deal with the claim in contract. I have already set out the daughter's evidence. From what I have already said, I accept Mr Armstrong's evidence that the daughter offered to lend the money. It would seem to me that the family discussion about the difficulties with AVCO was the prime motivating force for this offer. It may well have been not volunteered in the strict sense, but volunteered out of a sense of duty by the daughter. I think that what the mother said about owning half the house was said, but it was not said with the intention by the mother of creating legal relations. The people concerned were members of the one family who were primarily interested in saving the Hayman Street property.

It is strange that the mother does not actually give any evidence as to what was said when the money was lent. All she does in her affidavits is to deny the daughter's version without putting forward any version of her own. The behaviour of the parties after the money was lent seems to bear out that they did not intend legal relations by anything that was said. This is because what happened really did not fit in with the established pattern of contract that the daughter was to have half the house in return for her making the loan, yet on the other hand, the daughter was given some advantages after the loan was made. However it is bizarre that when the whole arrangement appears to have been to save the grandparents from eviction, that within two months of the loan being made the grandparents were shifted into the granny flat at Yvonne
Place and the daughter took over the house in Hayman Street. On the other hand, when the daughter did take over the house, not only did she pay rent, but she also paid what are normally the landlord's outgoings. The indication is that eventually the daughter was going to benefit from this, but this appears to me to have been in some fuzzy way when the property was sold rather than there being an immediate half interest in the property as a result of the conversation.

Accordingly, I do not consider that there was an enforceable contract between the parties under which the daughter would get half the house.

It follows that I do not need to deal with questions of the Statute of Frauds and part performance. The latter doctrine would have raised particular problems for the plaintiff because of the fuzziness of the arrangement under which she sues in that it would be extremely difficult to say that the acts of lending the money, paying the rates and renovating the house were referable to the contract under which the cross-claimant sues.

The alternative submissions made for the cross-claimant are that there was a common intention that the property would be held as to a moiety for the daughter and it would be unconscionable to deny conferment of that interest.

The question is whether the evidence is sufficient to show that there was any such common intention. As I have already indicated, "fuzzy" is the word that must be applied to the evidence. The parties did seem to act in some sense as if the property was the property of the mother, but for other purposes, as if it were joint property. There does not appear to have been any firm intention of either that the property would be able to be sold by either of them under s
G of the Conveyancing Act or otherwise, or that the daughter would have any input into the fixing of the price at which the property was sold. Indeed, when the mother in mid-1997 put the property in the hands of an estate agent, the daughter at no stage maintained that she was to be involved in directing the estate agent. Furthermore, there was no actual contract that the daughter would only be paid out of the proceeds of sale, or indeed, that she would be paid one-half of the proceeds of sale. It is possible to have such a contract, but as appears from Head versus Kelk [(1961) 63 SR 340], , one must find such an unusual situation only through clear evidence.

The daughter's looking for other property again tells against there being any common intention that the daughter would have a half interest in that property. It would seem that both parties realized that if the loan was to be repaid then it would be repaid out of the sale of Hayman Street. Accordingly,
I do not consider that the evidence is sufficient to allow me to find a common intention that the daughter was to receive half the proceeds of sale or to have a half interest in the property so that equity would intervene by the remedy of a constructive trust.

I then pass on to the claim for money had and received. To take the simple case first, there is no doubt at all that the mother is at least liable to the daughter in debt. It may be that the proper analysis is that there is an indebitatus assumpsit count for money paid by the daughter to AVCO at the request of the mother on the basis that the money was payable on demand. The demand was certainly made in June 1997. This would result in the daughter being entitled to return of the money plus interest under Schedule J to the
Supreme Court Rules from then.

The daughter claims not only $44,248.56 (that is the amount of the bank cheque less the amount of $1,500 the mother refunded) but also that additional $1,500. It will be remembered that the daughter actually had her bank write a bank cheque for $45,748.56 but her mother then refunded $1,500 on the basis that the daughter needed to have some ready money. The daughter's analysis of this situation is that she lent her mother $45,748.56 and her mother then made her a gift of $1,500. This is so unreal as not to worry me further. In my view, the real transaction was one of loan of $44,248.56. Interest under
Schedule J for the nine months since June on my calculations would increase the sum due to the cross-claimant to $47,567.20. Under <case> of the [Supreme
Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), one takes interest from the date the cause of action accrued and this was the date of the demand.

However, Mr Rogers says that the cause of action actually accrued when the money was paid. He says this because the money was only paid on his client's case under the arrangement that the daughter was to get half the house and if this was not the case, there was a total failure of consideration and the money was immediately repayable at that time.

There are some problems with this argument about total failure of consideration because in fact the daughter did receive some benefit of occupying the home for a period of about 20 months. It may be that one could argue from cases such as Dick Bentley Productions Ltd versus Howard Smith
Ltd [[1964] 1 WLR 623], that this was such a collateral matter that it could not affect the question of total failure of consideration. I do not consider that this argument would run because the package of benefits if the daughter was correct would include the occupation. Thus technically I do not consider that there has been a total failure of consideration.

In any event, I do not consider that the evidence would allow me to find that the daughter was induced by the mother to lend the money on the basis that she would have half the house. The daughter never says in her evidence, as is common in this sort of case, that were it not for the statement made by her mother, she would not have lent the money. Furthermore, the evidence of Mr
Armstrong reinforces the view that perhaps under pressure but be that as it may, the daughter volunteered to lend the money. The evidence makes me find on the balance of probabilities that the reason why the daughter lent the money was to assist in the family problems and that the words of the mother were non-contractual and more or less a thank you gesture and nothing more.

Accordingly the case is not made out that the cause of action arose from the date the money was lent.

Mr Rogers faintly argued that there was some restitutionary principle which would lead to the result that interest should run as from the date of the loan. It may be that there is such a restitutionary claim for interest; see for instance Mason & Carter, Restitution Law in Australia (Butterworths 1995) paras [2806] and [2807]. However, assuming without deciding that this is so, the basis of such a claim would be that it is necessary to prevent the mother being unjustly enriched. Although benefits did flow to the mother it would seem, through the renovations done by the daughter and her de facto husband and through the daughter paying half the landlord's outgoings, the evidence is just insufficient to show whether on balance the mother was unjustly enriched or whether the daughter suffered any detriment.
There is no evidence as to the commercial rental of the property, as to whether the renovations improved the sale value of the property, or otherwise.
Accordingly any restitutionary principle would not alter the result of this case.

Accordingly, there should be a verdict for the cross-claimant for $47,567.20.

I should note that I gave the first half of these reasons for judgment in open court on 24 March and announced the result. As by that stage it was 4.05 pm I then dictated the balance in chambers and there has been an amalgamation of the court reporter's transcript and my oral reasons. I indicated that the parties could have a reasonable time from the posting out to their counsel of the final version of the reasons to consider whether they wanted to make further submissions as to costs. Accordingly, the matter will be listed by arrangement with my Associate for short minutes of order on a date to be arranged with counsel but if counsel have not arranged any date with my
Associate prior to Easter I will put the matter in the list for mention on 23
April 1998 at 9.30 am.
 * * * 
