

Dubbelde versus Farrell Brothers Pty Limited Matter No 500071/96 [1998] NSWSC (26 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 31 March 1998 
WILLIAM EDWARD DUBBELDE versus FARRELL BROTHERS PTY LIMITED /96 February 1998 
Smart J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
Pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151a.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) ,
William Dubbelde seeks leave to revoke his election to accept permanent loss compensation under that Act and to commence proceedings against his former employer for damages for negligence in respect of an injury sustained during his employment on 5 November 1993.

On 18 May 1995 Mr Dubbelde was awarded, by consent, a lump sum in respect of that injury by the Compensation Court. That award included an amount for permanent injuries under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the Act in respect of 15% loss of use of the left leg below the knee and an amount for pain and suffering under <case>, totalling $22,387.10 plus legal costs.
 [Section
A(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151a.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) states that a person to whom compensation is payable under the Act is not entitled to both permanent loss compensation for the injury and damages from the employer liable to pay that compensation. The person is required to make an election between damages and permanent loss compensation.

The applicant accepted that pursuant to [s
A(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151a.html) his acceptance of the compensation award amounted to an election and that such an election is irrevocable except in accordance with [s
A(5).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151a.html)
The circumstances in which a revocation can be made are set out in paragraphs and (c) of that sub-section: "(b) after the election is made, the injury causes a further material deterioration in the person's medical condition that, had it existed at the time of the election, would have entitled the person to additional permanent loss compensation, and at the time of the election, there was no reasonable cause to believe that the further deterioration would occur." 
To determine whether there has been a material deterioration in Mr Dubbelde's condition and an absence of reasonable cause to believe that the further deterioration would occur it is necessary to review the evidence.

Mr Dubbelde was employed as an orchard hand at Orange. His injury occurred as a result of falling approximately 2.4 metres from a ladder while conducting repairs to a tennis court owned by Mr Farrell, a director of Mr Dubbelde's employer. Mr Dubbelde says he was attempting to untie wire netting surrounding the tennis court at the time of the fall when the ladder gave way or slipped over and he fell to the ground.

The impact caused a severe inversion sprain to Mr Dubbelde's ankle. He was taken to Orange Base Hospital, x-rayed, provided with an elastic stocking and sent home with crutches. Mr Dubbelde was referred by his general practitioner to Dr David Meachin, an orthopaedic surgeon whom he first saw on 2 December
Upon Dr Meachin's recommendation, Mr Dubbelde undertook a course of physiotherapy; however, the injury did not improve. Mr Dubbelde continued to experience pain on the lateral side of his ankle radiating up the leg. By 12
December 1993 the ankle was still swollen and painful though x-rays and a CT scan performed on 3 December 1993 were normal. Dr Meachin's opinion was that
Mr Dubbelde was suffering a ligamentous injury, exacerbated by his heavy build. He was placed in a plaster walking cast for 5 weeks to rest the ankle and was then referred for further physiotherapy.

By 3 February 1994 Mr Dubbelde had not experienced any improvement. He reported an increase in pain in the ankle. Dr Meachin's report of 20 August stated "I was surprised he had so much pain at this stage and I just wondered whether he was as bad as he made out". A bone scan performed on 8
February 1994 showed some arthritis in several joints in the foot. However, Dr
Meachin thought that the main problem was an increase in blood supply to the foot related to reflex sympathetic dystrophy. Mr Dubbelde was examined by a rheumatologist, Dr Jan Carter on 19 April 1994 who confirmed the diagnosis of reflex sympathetic dystrophy and referred him to Dr Worsley for a nerve block.

On 21 April 1994 Mr Dubbelde complained of colour change, coldness, stiffness and swelling in the region of his right foot and pain in the right knee. On 28
April 1994 an arthrogram conducted by Dr Worsley confirmed Mr Dubbelde was suffering from a tear to cartilage in his right knee.

On 11 May 1994 Dr Meachin performed an arthroscopy on Mr Dubbelde's right knee, trimming out the damaged cartilage. Six weeks later the knee was still aching, clicking and swollen. Mr Dubbelde also reported pain in the left hip and an examination confirmed he was suffering from trochanteric bursitis. This was treated with a course of steroid injections to the joint.

On 17 June Dr Worsley, a Consultant Anaesthetist and Consultant in Pain
Management, determined that the beta blockade had not been successful and it was decided that Mr Dubbelde should undergo a left chemical lumbar sympathectomy.

On 30 June 1994 nerve conduction tests showed left medial plantar latency which suggested a lesion to the nerve. On 11 July a left chemical lumbar sympathectomy was performed and the next day Mr Dubbelde reported that his leg felt normal for the first time in a long while. A feeling of warmth had returned to the limb. Dr Worsley's diagnosis was that of reflex sympathetic dystrophy affecting his left lower limb.

By 8 August Mr Dubbelde reported warmth in his foot but said he was experiencing ongoing cramps, numbness and dysaesthesia in the left thigh and also groin pain. Dr Worsley assured him these symptoms were secondary to the operation and would subside in time.

On 8 August 1994 the doctor wrote "I chose [sic] not to place labels on any particular patient but I do have an impression that Mr Dubbelde exaggerates his symptoms significantly and that his degree of mobility belies his complaints." 
By 12 August Mr Dubbelde's left leg was less blue and warmer and he felt that he was improving. Dr Meachin noted that his ankle was now stable and provided a certificate indicating that Mr Dubbelde could return to work in six weeks.
Dr Meachin reported that Mr Dubbelde was not pleased with this information and the applicant confirmed his disagreement with the doctor's assessment. At this point Dr Meachin noted that the applicant had no further orthopaedic problems and that there would be no point in any further consultations.

In his summary written on 20 August 1994 Dr Meachin, after noting that three months after the original injury the appellant said he had not improved, continued: "I was surprised he had so much pain at this stage and I just wondered whether he was as bad as he made out." "He has progressed very slowly, and almost in spite of himself, he appears to be getting better." 
At that stage it was not possible to assess the applicant's permanent disabilities as he was still recovering. Dr Meachin thought that the applicant should be assessed 12 months post surgery.

Dr Carter's opinion, formed on 19 April 1994, was that reflex sympathetic dystrophy is a temporary state, likely to be completely resolved in time, especially with continued use of the limb. She stated however, that she was unable to make an estimation of permanent loss at that time.

On 11 April 1995 Dr Burgess , an orthopaedic surgeon, examined Mr Dubbelde on behalf of the defendant. After detailing the applicant's history and complaints and observing 2 cm of wasting to the quadriceps of the right leg, amongst other things, he wrote: "This man seems to be in an inordinate amount of trouble following a fall from a ladder. He fell onto the left greater trochanter and this has resulted in left greater trochanteric bursitis which has responded to Depo-Cortisone injections in the past and should do in the future. It is unlikely that he will require decompression of the fascialata. Intermittent discomfort may be his lot and this represents a 10% permanent loss of effective use of the left leg above the knee.

There appears to be a vague history of discomfort in the left knee which seems to be a mild degree of chondromalacia patella which should respond to isometric quadriceps exercises and represents a slight degree in the "wear and tear" factors in his leg with regard to the later appearance of degenerative changes and so could be deemed a 5% permanent loss of use of the left leg at or above the left knee.

With regard to his left ankle, he appears to have a somewhat unusual condition with extreme discomfort and pain over the anterior aspect of the left ankle but the loss of movement and loss of extension varies. There is quite a marked withdrawal reaction. The bone scan suggests that he has reflex sympathetic dystrophy in the ankle and foot. Although it is hard to qualify and quantify his post-traumatic ankle problem, continued walking and exercise and expectant treatment will see a lot of his present discomfort and disability subside as some mineralisation recurs and the effects of the dystrophy subside with use.
No invasive treatment should be embarded [sic] upon. I feel enough of his problem will persist to deem the disability as representing a 15% loss of effective use of whole of the left leg.

On the right side he still has residual medial jointline tenderness and retropatellar tenderness medially and quadriceps wasting. All these things should be addressed by isometric quadriceps exercises which he would have to do for both of his legs. This would improve the comfort and stability of both of his legs.

With regard to his job, it seems reasonable that given his general fitness and overweight and the persistence of his trouble so long, he is unlikely to get back to orchard work. He is fit for light physical work which allows him to rest from time-to time and doesn't involve prolonged standing, climbing up and down ladders or stairs or traversing rough ground.

The right leg problem represents a 10% permanent loss of effective use of the whole of the right leg, measured if convenient as at or above the right knee.
Prognosis generally, given his history and the persistence of his problems, is somewhat guarded." 
On 18 April 1995 Dr Worsley wrote that on reviewing Mr Dubbelde, there seemed to have been some definite trigger in the earlier part of the year which had caused a recurrence of the dystrophic symptoms in his left leg. The doctor organised the admission of Mr Dubbelde to hospital on 1 May and repeated the chemical lumbar sympathectomy on 2 May 1995.

In his affidavit of 10 February 1997 Mr Dubbelde, after annexing the reports of Drs Meachin, Carter and Worsley stated "I therefore thought at the time my compensation case was heard in April/May 1995 that my left ankle would eventually get better and knowing that I accepted the offer which was made."
There were reports of Dr Meachin and Dr Worsley dated or apparently received after 18 May 1995, the date of the consent award. The statement quoted was not challenged in cross examination and there was material in support in the reports of Drs Meachin and Carter.

In a report bearing date 2 May 1995 but which is stamped as received by Mr
Dubbelde's solicitors on 23 May 1995, Dr Meachin wrote that Mr Dubbelde "has a permanent loss of use of his left leg below the knee of 10%. He has a permanent loss of use of his right leg at or above the knee of 10%." He also wrote that a combination of specified factors (severe inversion sprain to his left ankle, torn right medial meniscus, injury to the left knee and trochanteric bursitis, reflex sympathetic dystrophy, his being heavily built and somewhat overweight) rendered Mr Dubbelde unfit to go back to his former occupation as an orchard hand but left him fit for light work.

On 24 May 1995 Dr Worsley again examined Mr Dubbelde. The applicant reported symptomatic relief for 48 hours after the sympathectomy procedure. After that time the pain, swelling, numbness and coldness recurred, with Dr Worsley stating "I am at a loss to explain, at this stage, why he has experienced this second recurrence ... I feel, at this stage, that a full assessment of Mr
Dubbelde's lower limbs and any further neuro-physiological investigations which may be indicated should be undertaken." 
In September 1995 it seems that Dr Gordon, a Consultant Neurologist, recommended that Dr Meachin perform a tarsal tunnel decompression on the applicant but on 21 September Dr Meachin replied that he did not view such procedures as helpful and stated that a referral by Dr Mackey (Mr Dubbelde's general practitioner) to an ankle specialist in Sydney was the better course.
A copy of Dr Gordon's later detailed report was not with the papers.

On 29 August 1995 Mr Dubbelde was examined by that ankle specialist, Dr
Sullivan who observed an antalgic gait, localised swelling and tenderness of the left ankle. His diagnosis was of a synovial impingement lesion which he injected with local anaesthetic resulting in immediate pain relief. On 28
September Dr Sullivan peformed an arthroscopic debridement of the ankle, finding synovitis and synovial hypertrophy in the antero lateral gutter of the left ankle and antero lateral adhesions in the capsule of the left ankle with thickening of the Basset's ligament.

By 17 October 1995 Mr Dubbelde had commenced physiotherapy and his condition was improving. The improvement continued until 14 November 1995; on that date
Dr Sullivan observed symptoms of tarsal tunnel syndrome in the left ankle.
Examination revealed a positive Tinel's sign at the level of the tarsal tunnel.

On 16 February 1996 Mr Dubbelde underwent an open release of the left tarsal tunnel and it was found that he had a large amount of scar tissue around the lateral plantar nerve. This was most likely traumatic. Dr Sullivan prescribed
Doxipin. On 26 March 1996 a large amount of swelling was present though the cramp-like pain existing before the tarsal procedure was performed had ceased.
The dysaesthesia remained. On 21 May 1996 Dr Sullivan noted extreme irritability of the lateral peroneal nerve and prescribed Tegratol in conjunction with the Doxipin. Numbness had again returned to the left knee.

On 23 July 1996 Dr Sullivan again saw the applicant who reported pain from the metatarsal heads on the plantar aspect of the foot. There was a large amount of swelling present in the left lower limb. Mr Dubbelde was sent to the City
Orthotic Centre for total contact inserts and stockings were procured to reduce the lower limb swelling. On 17 September 1996 he reported an inability to tolerate the orthoses or shoes because of the pain in this feet. Dr
Sullivan reported evidence of continued sympathetic dystrophy. He estimated Mr
Dubbelde's disability at or below the knee to be 15%. Dr Sullivan thought that, as to pain and suffering, Mr Dubbelde had evidence of a chronic regional pain syndrome. At 29 September 1997 Mr Dubbelde was still unable to wear shoes or tolerate wearing orthoses. Dr Sullivan referred Mr Dubbelde to the Sydney
Pain Management Centre.

Dr Gronow, the Medical Director of the Sydney Pain Management Centre, in his report of 24 March 1997, noted some psychosocial symptoms of the applicant including sleep disturbance, feelings of depression, hopelessness and irritability and poor concentration. The applicant reported using marijuana and alcohol to relieve pain and reduce anxiety.

The report refers to major personal family losses of a tragic kind suffered in .

The doctor described the severe pains which Mr Dubbelde experienced. His assessment of Mr Dubbelde was as follows: "As a result of his injury and surgery, he developed features of neuropathic pain with evidence of sympathetic nerve involvement, perhaps in the form of a mild sympathetic dystrophy. He was suffering a major depression and had evidence of marihuana dependence." 
Dr Gronow's report concluded: "Management 
He was assessed by our physiotherapist and started on a stretching programme and mobilisation of his ankle. He was started on antidepressant medication to help with his depression and neuropathic pain.

It is anticipated that he will require further intensive pain management both in medication to help his pain control, mobilisation and pain management techniques, most likely in attendance in a residential pain management programme. This is a three week programme, the cost of which would be of $5,000.00 including pre and post consultations.

It is our assessment that he is not fit for his pre-injury work. At the present time he is not fit for any duties, but he may be fit for semi- sedentary type work in the future. This, most likely, would require vocational retraining.

It is assessed that he has a permanent loss of function of the left leg above the knee, but also including that below the knee of 25%.

He continues, and will continue to have ongoing pain which may be modified by treatment as well as his suffering and functional level." 
The consent award was based on partly on the assessment of Dr P R Burgess. He thought that there was a 10% permanent loss of effective use of the left leg above the knee. He thought that the left knee problems resulted in a 5% permanent loss of use of the left leg at or above the left knee. He felt that the left ankle problems which would persist would result in a 15% loss of effective use of the whole of the left leg. The doctor's report was open to the interpretation that the ankle problems caused a loss of use of the left leg below the knee. The award was in respect of "15% loss of use of the applicant's left leg below the knee." The applicant may have preferred to receive 15% of 70% of the maximum amount payable, (70% applying to loss of either leg below the knee) than 10% of 75% of the maximum amount payable, (75% applying to the loss of either leg at or above the knee). On the other hand, as I read Dr Burgess' report, he would, by combining both the disabilities of
Mr Dubbelde at or above the knee, reach a total disability at or above the knee of 15%. Perhaps there was some element of compromise. The evidence does not reveal this.

Dr Sullivan estimated Mr Dubbelde's permanent disability at or below the knee to be 15%. The award related to the loss of use of the left leg below the knee and thus did not include any knee disability.

Paragraph (d2) of the Interpretation of the Table provides that the loss of a leg at or above the knee includes the loss of the leg below the knee and loss of the foot and is to be compensated as a loss, or a proportionate loss of a single item only (namely, the loss of the leg at or above the knee). Paragraph d(4) provides that a loss of the leg below the knee includes the loss of a foot and is to be compensated as a loss, or a proportionate loss, of a single item only (namely, the loss of the leg below the knee).

While Dr Sullivan's report reveals some different problems and different treatment from those in 1994 and early 1995, the injuries and conditions diagnosed by Dr Sullivan are part and parcel of the nerve and ankle problems of Mr Dubbelde.

The significant difference appears from the report of Dr Gronow and his assessment that Mr Dubbelde has a permanent loss of function above the left knee, but also including that below the knee, of 25%. Dr Gronow has dealt with the matter on a basis which accords closely with the provisions of the [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).

Dr Gronow's assessment is the most recent one and I see no reason not to accept it as it appears cogent. In the present case there is a degree of artificiality in separating the loss of use of the left leg above and below the knee.

Dr Gronow's assessment, coupled with the plaintiff's inability to wear shoes and his inability to tolerate orthosis (both of which developed after the awards), leads me to the view that, after 18 May 1995, the injuries received in the accident caused a further material deterioration in Mr Dubbelde's medical condition that, had it existed at the time of the election, would have entitled him to additional permanent loss compensation.

Dr P R Burgess regarded Mr Dubbelde's prognosis generally, given his history and the persistence of his problems, as somewhat guarded. There was certainly doubt as to whether he would get any better. As I understand the general tenor of the reports it was not thought that he would get any worse. I am satisfied that at the time of the election there was no reasonable cause to believe that further deterioration would occur.

If any proceedings were commenced they could cover all of the injuries sustained by the plaintiff and their overall effect. The compensation award did not cover the injuries at or above the left knee and the injuries to the right leg.

The necessary conditions for granting leave exist and discretionary considerations favour the granting of leave.

I grant leave to Mr Dubbelde to revoke his election and commence proceedings in the court for recovery of damages in respect of the injury the subject of the consent award along with the other injuries which he received in the accident. I reserve all questions of costs. Liberty to apply to both parties.
I would be content for the existing statement of claim to suffice if there is no objection from either party. I attach a schedule setting out the materials in evidence.

DUBBELDE v. FARRELL BROTHERS PTY LTD 
Schedule to Judgment * Affidavits of W E Dubbelde of 10 February 1997 and 29 September 1997. * Affidavit of P G Longhurst of 15 April 1997. * Award of 18 May 1995 of Compensation Court. * Reports of Dr D Meachin of 7 January 1994, 28 April 1994, 27 June 1994, 12 August 1994, 20 August 1994, 2 May 1995 and 21 September 1995. * Reports of Dr J Carter of 8 June 1994 and 28 September 1994. * Reports of Dr G S Worsley of 21 June 1994, 12 July 1994, 21 July 1994, 8 August 1994, 18 April 1995, 4 May 1995 and 29 May 1995. * Report of Dr J A Gordon of 30 June 1994. * Report of Dr P R Burgess of 11 April 1995. * Report of Dr M Sullivan of 19 September 1996. * Report of Dr D W Gronow of 24 March 1997. * * * 
