

Regina versus Davies Matter No 60631/97 [1998] NSWSC 60 (27 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 April 1998 
REGINA versus GRANT DAVIES /97 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Smart J, Dowd J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA V Grant DAVIES 
SENTENCING - CROWN APPEAL - dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm - driver intoxicated - no finding of excessive speed - minimal findings of fact by sentencing judge - respondent sentenced to imprisonment for 3 years to be served by way of periodic detention - HELD - on facts as found sentence lenient but not outside range of discretion. 
ORDER 
Appeal dismissed. 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: This is a Crown appeal against what is said to be the leniency of sentences imposed by his Honour Judge O'Reilly QC in the District Court on 31 October 1997. 
The respondent pleaded guilty to two charges. The first was of stealing a motor vehicle. The second was that the respondent, in contravention of [s52A(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , was guilty of dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm. The allegation in the indictment, which was admitted by the respondent, was that a vehicle driven by the respondent was involved in an impact occasioning grievous bodily harm to another person, and the respondent was, at the time of the impact, driving the vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The maximum penalty prescribed for that offence was imprisonment for seven years.

In relation to each offence the respondent was sentenced to concurrent terms of imprisonment for three years, to be served by way of periodic detention.

The Crown submits that, for the second offence, the respondent should have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment involving full-time custody.

The proceedings at first instance appear to have been conducted, both by the
Crown and by counsel for the respondent, as though the offence of stealing was, in the circumstances of the case, relatively technical, and did not materially add to the culpability of the respondent's conduct. The matter received only passing mention in the remarks on sentence of O'Reilly DCJ.
Indeed, when he came to impose sentence, his Honour, until reminded by counsel, omitted to deal with the stealing offence at all. When reminded, he simply imposed a concurrent sentence equivalent to the sentence he had already imposed in relation to the [s52A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) offence.

This exemplifies a feature of this case which has been of concern to the court, and which has made the task of evaluating the merits of this appeal one of unusual difficulty. The essence of the Crown's challenge to the decision at first instance is that undue weight was given to the subjective circumstances of the offender, and inadequate consideration was given to the objective features of the case. However, both at first instance and, at least until the court made critical reference to the matter, on appeal, there was a surprising lack of detail in the manner in which the objective facts were presented to the court. This may account for the brevity of the consideration of the facts in the remarks on sentence of the learned judge.

It is possible that the respondent may have escaped more serious punishment at least partly because the case against him on sentence was presented without sufficient attention to factual detail.

At about 6.15pm on 29 September 1996, a car being driven by the respondent along Noble Avenue, Greenacre left the street, out of control, and crashed into a house situated at 107 Noble Avenue, Greenacre. There were two occupants of the house, Mrs McAndrew, aged 76, and her husband, Mr McAndrew, aged 73.
There was serious damage to the house, and, more importantly, there was physical injury suffered by Mrs McAndrew. She was taken to hospital by ambulance, treated for a laceration to her left hand, and for a painful left leg, and was then allowed home. She was taken back to hospital on the following day and was found to have a fracture in the vicinity of the left knee. She was operated on. The operation appeared to be successful. Mrs
McAndrew remained in hospital for the following six weeks, apparently recovering. However, she died suddenly of a heart attack on 13 November 1996.

The prosecuting authorities did not allege, or attempt to prove, that the death of Mrs McAndrew was occasioned by the conduct of the respondent. If that fact had been established, the maximum penalty would have been imprisonment for ten years.

The respondent had been drinking for a number of hours before the incident. A blood test taken some time after the accident revealed a blood alcohol reading of 0.167. However, the prosecuting authorities did not allege, or seek to prove, that at the time of the incident the respondent had a concentration of .15 or more. If that had been established, the maximum penalty for an offence occasioning grievous bodily harm would have been imprisonment for eleven years, and the maximum penalty for an offence occasioning death would have been imprisonment for fourteen years.

Although it was an element of the Crown case against the respondent in respect of the second charge that, at the relevant time, he was under the influence of intoxicating liquor, it was not alleged that at the relevant time his blood alcohol reading was 0.15 or more, perhaps because such readings can be affected by the lapse of time, and the prosecution did not feel able to prove a blood alcohol content of 0.15 or more.

The formal statement of facts tendered by the Crown at the sentencing proceedings was expressed in the following terms: "About 5pm, on 29 September 1996 the accused, Grant Davies (born 7 July ) was drinking at the Greenacre Hotel with his uncle, Steven Moore. About hour later he left, telling Moore he would be back in a minute. It is apparent the accused took Moore's car keys without permission and for some unexplained reason drove off in Moore's white Ford Fairlane.

About 6.15pm the victim, Julie McAndrew (76 years old) and her husband,
Thomas McAndrew (73) were in the lounge room of their home at 107 Noble
Avenue, Greenacre. The deceased walked to the bedroom to turn on a heater.

At that time, Steven Moore's motor car, then being driven by the accused crashed into the front bedroom of the McAndrew house, injuring the deceased.
An eye-witness, Gwen Sudlow says the vehicle was travelling on Noble Avenue and was ".... really moving ....", it then travelled across the middle of the roundabout at the intersection of Mimosa Road, became airborne, veered to the right, bounced and crashed into the house. A subsequent blood test of the accused revealed a blood alcohol reading of 0.167.

The victim was taken to hospital by ambulance. She was treated for a laceration to her left hand and a painful left leg and allowed home. The next day she complained to her husband of massive pain to her left leg and was again taken by ambulance to hospital. On this occasion, treating doctors diagnosed a fracture in the vicinity of left knee (the neck of the femur). On October 1996 she underwent an operation to repair the injury. The surgery was apparently successful and she remained in hospital for the ensuing 6 weeks, showing slow but steady recovery. Her condition deteriorated suddenly and she died of a heart attack on 13 November 1996." 
The findings of fact made by O'Reilly DCJ in his remarks on sentence were as follows: "The circumstances were that he had been drinking with his uncle apparently in the course of watching on television, one assumes, the rugby league Grand
Final. There had been a considerable quantity consumed. His uncle had left the car keys on the bar. At the conclusion of this sporting event the prisoner decided that he had to immediately go and celebrate the good news with some acquaintance of his and he simply took the car keys and drove off and he was well affected - the reading was .167.

The circumstances of the accident, bearing in mind that he had no memory of the event, were that he was seen to be driving in a way that a witness described as "really moving". He seems to have had an impact with a tree which perhaps caused loss of control and brought him into collision with the front of Mrs McAndrew's home. She by chance had gone into the front room I think to turn on a heater and unfortunately she was struck principally on one hand and on one knee. There was a laceration to the hand. The next day or later that night it was discovered that there was a comminuted fracture of the upper part of the tibia involving the joint.

It seems that although Mrs McAndrew was a very active lady, she had had some health problems including osteoporosis. It may be then that that condition predisposed her to the fracture. She tragically died about six weeks later and it is not suggested that there was a causal connection so far as the criminal law is concerned between the injury and her death. So I deal with it then on the basis of the actual physical injuries sustained by Mrs McAndrew." 
To revert to the matter of the charge of car stealing, there was no attempt at the sentencing proceedings to go behind the bald assertion that the respondent simply borrowed his uncle's car without his knowledge. There was no sworn evidence either from the respondent or from the uncle, Mr Moore, who, incidentally, was aged 39. The formal statement of facts stated that the respondent drove off in Mr Moore's car "for some unexplained reason". The judge's reference to an intention to celebrate a football result with an acquaintance of the respondent appears to have its source in information given by the respondent to the author of a pre-sentence report prepared by the NSW
Probation Service.

The respondent had been drinking in the company of his uncle, both before and after their arrival, at 5pm, at the Greenacre Hotel. The respondent told police that, from early afternoon, he had consumed about one dozen twist tops, and then three or four middies, of full strength beer.

The manner in which the respondent came to borrow his uncle's car could have been of considerable practical significance, to both the respondent and his uncle, in a number of ways. If all that occurred was that the car was borrowed in circumstances where, ordinarily, the uncle would have been willing to lend it, and the relationship between the two men was such that no explicit request for permission was required, then it is not easy to understand why the respondent was charged with stealing in the first place. If, on the other hand, there was something about the circumstances of the borrowing of the vehicle without permission which indicated significant criminality, (and that might have been, or at least included, the amount of beer which the respondent had consumed) then the laying of the stealing charge is understandable.

Beyond what appears in the first of the paragraphs from the remarks on sentence quoted above, O'Reilly DCJ made no findings of fact relevant to the criminality involved in the stealing, and does not appear to have treated it as adding in any material respect to the culpability of the respondent for sentencing purposes.

The Crown, on this appeal, has made no challenge to this aspect of the sentencing process. This is a troubling aspect of the matter, but, having regard to the way the matter was dealt with both by counsel and the judge at first instance, it is not now open to this court to approach the appeal on a significantly different basis as to the importance to be attached to the stealing offence.

The position with respect to the objective facts concerning the driving offence is not much more satisfactory. As was noted, the Crown appeal is advanced upon the ground that O'Reilly DCJ underestimated the seriousness of the facts of the case. In fairness to his Honour, however, it must be said that the facts as presented to him dealt with the respondent's conduct in little detail. His findings of fact were correspondingly brief.

The eyewitness, Ms Sudlow, referred to in the third paragraph of the formal statement of facts, told the police that, when she saw the vehicle being driven by the respondent, it was "really moving". She was apparently not invited to make any estimate of speed. The road surface was wet, but it was not raining at the time. The indictment did not allege that the respondent was travelling at an excessive speed.

Although the statement of facts says that the vehicle travelled across the middle of the roundabout at the intersection of Mimosa Road, became airborne, veered to the right, bounced and crashed into the house, there was evidence in the form of witness statements which showed that there was more to it than that. A police witness said that, at a point about 20 metres west of Noble
Avenue, he observed a tree on the southern kerb of Mimosa Road that appeared to have been struck by a motor vehicle. There were various pieces of motor vehicle debris around the base of that tree including a large portion of a bumper bar and a head light/blinker assembly. These items appeared to have come from the front of the vehicle being driven by the respondent. The police witness also said that he observed oil on the road that started in the vicinity of the tree, and continued east on the incorrect side of the road across a raised concrete median strip on the southern side of the roundabout, and up to the rear of the vehicle being driven by the respondent.

The tree to which reference was made was a tree adjacent to the road, but on the opposite side of the road from the lane in which the respondent's vehicle was, or should have been, travelling.

On the basis of the evidence just referred to, it would appear that what happened was that the respondent, travelling east, veered across the incorrect side of the road, collided with a tree, and then, in some way, drove from the tree on to the raised section of the roundabout, became airborne, bounced, and then crashed into the McAndrew's house.

This happened at 6.15pm. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest, that, apart from the quantity of alcohol he had consumed, there was any reason why the respondent might have fallen asleep, as was suggested at one stage during submissions in this court.

The respondent, who also suffered some injuries of a relatively minor nature, was interviewed by police at Bankstown Hospital. He said, when asked what happened: "I left the Greenacre Hotel. I was travelling down Mimosa Road. I don't think I was going over the speed limit. I came to a roundabout at Noble Avenue and I lost control of the car. The car started to jump around and then I remember going into the front of the house." 
The findings of fact made by O'Reilly DCJ are set out above. The judge noted that the respondent "seems to have had an impact with a tree which perhaps caused lack of control". He made no finding, however, as to how the impact with the tree occurred. He did not mention that the tree was on the other side of the road, and that in order to get to the tree the respondent had to drive across a traffic lane in which any cars would have been travelling in the opposite direction. Nor was there any finding as to what aspect of the respondent's driving might have resulted in the vehicle finding its way from the tree, across the roundabout, becoming airborne, and ending up in the
McAndrew's house.

Dealing with the subjective circumstances, O'Reilly DCJ said: "So far as the prisoner's subjective situation is concerned, he is a man of good character. He is only 26 years of age. His marriage has broken down but he is in constant contact with his daughter. He is working. He was in the
Armed Forces but left at the time that his marriage was breaking down. He is spoken of well by his employer. I am satisfied that he is remorseful as to what has happened to Mrs McAndrew. He has given up alcohol completely. He has a supportive mother. I have read the testimonial tendered as completed by his
Orderly Room Sergeant. I have read documents indicating that he has agreed to repay the insurance companies, that is the insurers of the house and the car." 
The principles which govern the exercise by this court of its jurisdiction to deal with a Crown appeal against sentence were set out in summary form in R v
Allpass [(1994) 72 A Crim R 561.] As was pointed out in that case, a Court of Criminal Appeal which is dealing with an appeal against sentence, whether by the Crown or by an offender, does not simply embark upon the task of sentencing afresh, substituting its own opinion for that of the sentencing judge, and increasing the sentence if it considers it to be inadequate, or decreasing the sentence if it considers it to be excessive. Additional considerations of restraint apply in the cases of Crown appeals.

The principles relating to sentencing for offences of the kind here in question were also discussed in R versus Slattery [(1996) 90 A Crim R 519.] It was emphasised in that case that considerations of general deterrence are of particular importance. Community attitudes towards drink driving, as reflected in legislative amendments, have hardened considerably in recent years. An intoxicated driver at the wheel of a powerful motor vehicle is, as the facts of the present case demonstrate, a frightening menace to the safety and security of law abiding citizens. In such cases, offenders, like the present respondent, are often people of previous good character, and will be able to point to favourable subjective features. However, the objective seriousness of their conduct, which includes the consequence of that conduct, should never be allowed to recede into the background of the sentencing process.

So far as can be assessed from his remarks on sentence, and the findings of fact made in those remarks, O'Reilly DCJ appears to have taken a somewhat benign view of the facts of the case, but this, in turn, appears to be related to the way in which the facts were presented by the Crown for purposes of sentencing. It is difficult, and may well be unjust, for an appellate court to endeavour to make for itself a substantial re-evaluation of the facts.

On the findings of fact made by O'Reilly DCJ, which we do not regard ourselves as being in a position to reverse or alter materially, we consider that the sentences imposed upon the respondent were lenient, but not to such a degree as warrants appellate intervention. On that factual basis, the sentences imposed were right at the bottom of the range, but not outside the range, of the sentencing discretion that was available. In that connection it is instructive to note the outcome of the appeal in the matter of Slattery mentioned above. The offender in that case, who was driving with a blood alcohol reading of 0.138, and was speeding, and who at the time of the offence was on bail in relation to another driving charge, killed two passengers.
Allowing a Crown appeal against sentence, the court re-sentenced the offender and imposed a sentence of imprisonment for three years, consisting of a minimum term of twelve months (back dated for four months), and an additional term of two years. As was noted, the present respondent was not charged with having occasioned the death of Mrs McAndrew. Nor was he charged with driving at an excessive speed, and there was no finding by O'Reilly DCJ to that effect.

The Crown appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
