

Regina versus Cross Matter No Cca 60803/96 [1998] NSWSC 366 (8 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
REGINA versus ROBERT JAMES CROSS 
CCA 60803/96 September 1998 
Beazley JA, Grove J, Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence (Bell AJ) 
FILE NO: 60803/96 
DELIVERED: 8 September 1998 
HEARING DATE: 22 July 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Robert James CROSS 
JUDGMENT OF: BEAZLEY JA, GROVE J, GREG JAMES J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P G Berman 
Respondent: In Person 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: S E O'Connor 
Respondent: In Person 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Dismissal of jury - Evidence of expert extending beyond area of expertise; 
Prejudicial effect of witness accusing defendant of a separate crime - whether jury should have been dismissed.

CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Dismissal of judge - Actual or apparent bias by trial judge. 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - Evidence at committal of a witness who was unable to give evidence at trial - [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) [s 65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Directions of judge - evidence of a television interview - 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - New evidence adduced at trial - not served on defendant - defendant's right to recall witness 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Judicial comment - reasonable doubt as to involvement of witness in the crime - whether imputes reasonable doubt as to defendant's guilt 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 23 
REGINA versus Robert James CROSS 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Dismissal of jury - Evidence of expert extending beyond area of expertise; 
Prejudicial effect of witness accusing defendant of a separate crime - whether jury should have been dismissed.

CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Dismissal of judge - Actual or apparent bias by trial judge.

CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - Evidence at committal of a witness who was unable to give evidence at trial - [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) [s 65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Directions of judge - evidence of a television interview - 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - New evidence adduced at trial - not served on defendant - defendant's right to recall witness 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Judicial comment - reasonable doubt as to involvement of witness in the crime - whether imputes reasonable doubt as to defendant's guilt 
The appellant was convicted of the shooting murder of his niece. The only witnesses to the shooting were the appellant's sister (the victim's mother), who gave evidence at the trial, and John Waller, who gave evidence at the committal but died before the matter was heard. The appellant, who appeared for himself on the appeal, raised 13 separate issues on the appeal: that the jury should have been dismissed because the evidence of one expert witness extended beyond his expertise and was prejudicial to the accused; that the trial judge should have dismissed himself as having been biased or having given a reasonable apprehension of bias; that the jury should have been dismissed when a witness accused the appellant of rape because there were seven women on the jury and the effect of the accusation was prejudicial to the appellant; that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) (1) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/)  was incorrectly applied to certain evidence; that the trial judge should have admitted into evidence a record of interview which was not admitted; that the trial judge should have allowed the appellant, during the judge's summing up, to re-open the case in order to further cross-examine a witness; that the judge misdirected the jury by incorrectly quoting from the transcript; that the judge's directions in relation to a television interview given by the witness John Waller prior to the trial were insufficient; that the motive of the appellant was not proved; that evidence that John Waller, prior to the trial, identified a person other than the appellant as the murderer was not considered; that the media coverage of the trial was prejudicial to the appellant's case; that new evidence adduced by the Crown at trial was not served on the appellant; and that reasonable doubt over the involvement of another witness in the murder should have given rise to the same level of reasonable doubt as to the appellant's guilt.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: 
The expert witness was recalled and acknowledged that the evidence he gave was not within his expertise. This is a powerful statement to a jury and in such circumstances there was no need to discharge the jury nor any prejudice to the appellant. 
The application for the trial judge to dismiss himself as biased was baseless. 
The direction of the judge to the jury to ignore the accusation of rape and that the accusation was not evidence was sufficient to avoid prejudice to the appellant. 
The evidence which the appellant argued should have been accepted under [s 65(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) was taken into account at trial and one witness was cross-examined on that evidence. 
The attempt to tender the evidence was not in order to provide the making of a prior inconsistent statement under [s.43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s43.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), nor were the preconditions to admissibility under this section satisfied. Accordingly, there was no basis for tendering the record of interview. 
The judge exercised his discretion reasonably in declining to recall a witness for further cross-examination during summing-up in the circumstances in which the further cross-examination would have been directed only to the witness' credit and not introduce fresh evidence. 
Although the judge incorrectly quoted a phrase of the transcript, the jury would not have been misled because: (a) the judge correctly quoted the same phrase of the transcript shortly before the jury retired; (b) the jury had a copy of the transcript (including the relevant phrase) in the jury room; and (c) in any case, counsel for the appellant did not object to this at trial and therefore leave is required under [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) to raise the point. 
The judge clearly directed the jury as to assessing the reliability of certain evidence and the meaning of the evidence was clarified in cross-examination of the witness at the committal. 
Motive is not a necessary element to be proved in establishing the crime of murder. 
The trial judge's directions in relation to the reliability of the witness' evidence were sufficient and the jury was entitled to accept or reject this evidence. 
The media coverage was not biased or inaccurate, and the fact of publicity is not, of itself, prejudicial. 
The trial judge dealt properly with the introduction of fresh evidence by noting that fresh evidence had been adduced in the course of cross-examination of a witness and by giving counsel for the appellant the opportunity (of which he did not avail himself) to recall the witness for further cross-examination. 
The issue for the jury was whether they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of the appellant. The trial judge correctly indicated that the jury's verdict does not `speak' to the involvement of the other witness in the crime. 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus ROBERT JAMES CROSS 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: The appellant appeals against his conviction for the murder of his niece Annette Joy Grigson, who had been shot in the head three times at an isolated location on the south coast of New South Wales. The victim was the mother of three children but up to the time of her death her two sons had been in the actual custody of the appellant and the appellant's wife and her daughter had been in the custody of the victim's own mother, the appellant's sister, Lynette Cross. The appellant's case at trial was that he and the victim had been passengers in a four wheel drive vehicle which had been driven to the location by John Waller. On arrival, the deceased alighted first and went to speak to her mother, Lynette Cross, who had arrived at the scene separately. The appellant heard shots and saw the deceased fall. He claimed that Lynette Cross shortly afterwards made remarks to him revealing that she had killed her daughter in order to prevent her retaking custody of her daughter (Lynette Cross's grand-daughter). The appellant further asserted that he was coerced by Lynette Cross into assisting to dispose of the body by her threats that he would not see his wife or the boys (that is the victim's sons) again. It should be noted, however, that the appellant had earlier given notice that he intended to rely upon an alibi defence at trial. The Crown case was that the appellant was the killer. 
The appellant appeared in person on the appeal and argued twelve separate issues. Those issues do not coincide precisely with the grounds in the Notice of Appeal. To the extent that the grounds in the Notice of Appeal are not reflected in the twelve issues argued on the appeal, the appellant informed the Court that he did not rely on the Notice of Appeal.

After the appeal had been heard, the appellant raised a further issue in a written letter to the Court. I also address that issue in these reasons.

The grounds argued on the appeal require separate consideration. I will set out each ground in the terms formulated in the appellant's "Reasons of
Appeal".

Ground One "Mr Buckman made application for the jury be discharged on the evidence given by Dr Verzosa, the evidence and opinions expressed by the witness in relation to ballistics went beyond his expertise the conclusions that the witness drew were very prejudicial to the accused." 
Mr Buckman was the appellant's counsel at trial. The Crown called Dr Vincent
Verzosa, the Government Medical Officer of the Illawarra region and a
Professor of Anatomy. Dr Verzosa conducted the post-mortem examination of the deceased. An x-ray of the deceased's skull taken during the post-mortem examination revealed "two intact bullets lying side by side in the occipital or posterior cranial cavity" as well as an irregularly round hole in the right side of the facial bone. Dr Verzosa's examination of the skull revealed two small round holes on the back of the head, which he considered were "entry holes", that is, holes where the bullets had entered the head. He considered the hole in the facial bone was also an entry hole for a bullet. He said a third bullet similar to the bullets recovered from the skull was recovered from the ground where the body had been. The three bullets were identified as .25 calibre bullets. Dr Verzosa gave the following evidence as to the bullet which entered the face: "Q. And you say its an entry hole, are you able to say from your x-rays or otherwise how far the bullet that entered that hole entered into the head? 
A. I'm not a bullet expert, but in my opinion, being a very thin bone, and the kind of bullet that we have agreed that we seen, it's a 25 calibre bullet,
I know that this bullet is a low velocity type, it could be in my opinion fired very close to the right side of the face so that it will - it does not have the velocity to really give a clean round hole.

Q. Are you able to say how far that bullet that caused that hole, how far it entered into the head - how far in? 
A. It stayed I think just beyond the bone, got caught in the soft tissues underlying the hole.

Q. What makes you form that opinion? 
A. Because - well it really went further inside. If the bullet succeeded in entering far inside the face, it could have remained in that area, but the fact that it was not too far inside, when the composition of the tissues took place, just gravitated in and maybe fell out." 
Dr Verzosa was asked his opinion as to why the bullets which had entered through the back of the head (where the bone density was about three times that of the face bone) had entered the cranial cavity, whereas that which entered through the face bone had not. Dr Verzosa expressed the view that the bullets which had entered the back of the head had acquired some velocity to be able to penetrate the bone. This meant that they must have been fired from further away than the bullet which entered through the face bone.

The appellant's counsel at trial did not object to the question which elicited this opinion. The evidence that the bullet that entered the right cheek bone "may never have gone in and could have fallen out again" was new evidence - that is, it was not evidence given at the committal and was not contained in the doctor's statement. The Crown prosecutor conceded that he did not know the answer to the question he asked until the answer was given. He added: "it is an issue". Counsel for the appellant informed the trial judge he was taken by surprise by the doctor's evidence about the velocity of the bullet.

The day after this evidence was given, the appellant's counsel applied for the jury to be discharged on the basis that this evidence of Dr Verzosa went beyond his expertise and that the evidence was "very prejudicial" to the appellant. The Crown countered this application by informing the Court it proposed to call a ballistics expert who would contradict Dr Verzosa's evidence on this issue. The application for a new trial was refused.

The Crown did call a ballistics expert who contradicted Dr Verzosa on this point. In addition, Dr Verzosa was recalled and in cross-examination conceded that his evidence as to the velocity of the bullet which entered the face was beyond his expertise and that, as he had said when originally giving his evidence, he was only giving his personal opinion.

It is a powerful statement to a jury when the Crown calls evidence contradicting one of its own witnesses and that same witness acknowledges that the evidence he gave was not within his area of expertise. In such circumstances, I do not consider that there was any error in his Honour's refusal to discharge the jury, nor was there any subsequent prejudice to the appellant.

Ground Two "Mr Buckman asked that the Judge dismiss himself, due to the Judges either being biased or that there was a reasonable apprehension of bias." 
The application that the trial judge dismiss himself for bias (actual or apprehended) was made during the course of the evidence of Ms Duckett, the appellant's stepdaughter. Shortly after commencing her evidence, some fifteen questions including introductory questions had been asked, she was asked about the business of her brother, John Waller, as follows: "Q. Do you know whether John Waller had an occupation? 
A. Yes, he was a spray painter.

Q. Whereabouts did he undertake that occupation? 
A. Out Camden and somewhere else when I left. I am not sure where the other one was.

Q. Did he use a nickname when he conducted his business? 
A. No, he didn't.

Q. Whereabouts did he conduct his business from? He had a place at Camden, did he conduct it at any other place? 
A. He took phone calls from home and stuff and did some jobs in the driveway.

Q. Did his business have a name? 
A. Sparkies." 
The appellant's counsel objected. The witness finished her answer: "Sparkies Spray Paint." 
The following exchange then occurred between the appellant's counsel and the trial judge: "Buckman: May I make an application? 
His Honour: If I consider it necessary.

Buckman: I have an application to make at this point of time.

His Honour: Later on.

Buckman: I seek to make an application in the absence of the jury." 
His Honour dealt with the application. Counsel for the appellant alleged his
Honour had made "facial expressions ... throughout the course of this trial which have quite clearly indicated that you have not been in a favourable disposition towards the submissions that I am making"; that his Honour was "frowning, [had] lost [his] temper a few moments ago ... for making what was an objection and for asking to be heard in respect of matters of which I have a right to be heard ... on objections ... facial expressions together with the tone of voice that your Honour used in relation to my last objection would quite clearly show that a reasonable bystander at the back of the court would think that there might be an apprehension ... that your Honour is biased in this case." 
His Honour refused the application although conceding he had at times been impatient with counsel for the appellant "particularly when he has been eliciting the same evidence for the second and third time and if he makes baseless objections", but added, "I think I have a right to be a little impatient".

A reading of the transcript cannot, of course, reveal either facial expressions or tone of voice. There was no evidence before this Court to support the claims made by counsel, other than the judge's concession he had been impatient. The transcript by itself does not reveal any suggestion of bias. Indeed, it is difficult to understand the basis of the objection made by counsel immediately prior to the application that his Honour disqualify himself for bias. This apparently baseless objection was undoubtedly the cause of some of his Honour's irritation. A reading of prior passages of the transcript likewise reveals that there were occasions when his Honour might justifiably have been irritated at counsel's cross-examination. See, for example, transcript page 95. In the absence of any evidence indicating that his Honour's conduct would give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias, this ground of appeal should fail.

Ground Three "Mr Buckman asked that the jury be discharged due to a witness accusing [the appellant] of a rape, this would make the jury bias as there were seven women on the jury and with the accusation already being heard by the jury the prejudicial effect of that would be enormous." 
The witness in question was Ms Duckett, the appellant's step-daughter. During the course of cross-examination it was suggested to Ms Duckett that she "never saw a gun while [the appellant] was present". Ms Duckett reacted heatedly and in part non-responsively to this suggestion. She said: "I suggest to you that you and your defendant are bigger liars, because I did see Robert [the appellant] and I know he raped my brother and you don't.
Robert, you call yourself our father?" 
The trial judge immediately dealt with the situation by stating: "Please, be quiet or I will have to have you taken out of the court. Steady down. Remember, the only thing you are allowed do in here is to answer questions. I can't have any shouting by you to other people. You just have to answer the questions. Those are the rules of the game here. Please, try and control yourself and do just that." 
The appellant's counsel applied for the discharge of the jury. The application was rejected. However, his Honour admonished Ms Duckett a second time and then directed the jury in these terms: "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, just before we go on, I want to remind you of something that I said on the first day, and that is, you have to decide the case on the evidence. Now, the evidence consists, apart from exhibits and things like that, it consists of the sworn answers to questions. When a witness loses control of herself and shouts at somebody, that's not evidence.
I don't remember exactly, in fact, I didn't hear exactly what she said just before we adjourned. But she was engaged, apparently, in some attack on the accused. That is not evidence. So, please, just forget it, if you did hear it.
Put it out of your minds. Just concentrate on what is said in answer to questions." 
His Honour's direction to the jury was sufficient and appropriate. This ground of appeal should be rejected.

Ground Four "[Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s65.html) of the evidence act (1995) applies where the person who made the previous representation is not available to give evidence. John Waller did state that
Lynette Cross did kill her own daughter at the committal, as I understand it this is [section (1)."](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s65.html) 
This ground is not easy to understand. The appellant's complaint appears to be that a correct application of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s65.html) required the jury to accept John Waller's evidence at the committal that
Lynette Cross killed the deceased. John Waller was the appellant's step-son.
Lynette Cross was the deceased's mother and the appellant's sister. John
Waller died prior to the trial.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/)  applies in a criminal trial where a person who made a previous representation is not available to give evidence. [Section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) provides: "The hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a previous representation made in the course of giving evidence in an Australian or overseas proceeding if, in that proceeding, the defendant in the proceeding to which this section is being applied: cross-examined the person who made the representation about it, or had a reasonable opportunity to cross-examine the person who made the representation about it." 
Subsection (3) was satisfied in this case. [Section (6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) provides that evidence admissible under [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) may be adduced by producing a properly authenticated transcript. That is what happened in the trial here, and the appellant's counsel subsequently based cross-examination of Lynette Cross on the transcript of Waller's evidence, including the representation in question. It was then a matter for the jury to accept or reject John Waller's evidence given via [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s65.html), just as it was for the jury to asses Lynette Cross's evidence and accept or reject it. The guilty verdict means, at least, that the jury did not accept
John Waller's evidence on this point.

This ground of appeal therefore fails.

Ground Five "Judgment on proposed tender of interview between Detective Griffin and
Lynette Cross on 16-12-98 the Crown opposed it, the interview was not allowed in. Date 27.11.96." 
One of the investigating police in this matter was Bruce Griffin, who at the time was a Detective Senior Constable of Police. He gave his evidence after
Lynette Cross had given her evidence.

Mr Griffin gave evidence that on 16 December 1993, during the course of his investigation of the murder, he had conducted a record of interview with
Lynette Cross. That evidence came as no surprise. The appellant's counsel had cross-examined Lynette Cross extensively on the contents of the record of interview.

The appellant's counsel then sought to tender the record of interview. It is not clear upon what basis he sought to do so. If it was to prove that she had made a statement in the record of interview inconsistent with her evidence, it was necessary for counsel to have satisfied the preconditions to admissibility of the inconsistent statement in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s43.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). He had not done so. If it was not to prove the making of a prior inconsistent statement, there was no basis for the tender.

The appellant also complained that he should have been allowed to recall
Lynette Cross for further cross-examination. However, the appellant's trial counsel informed the trial judge that he did not wish to put further questions to Lynette Cross. Accordingly, this ground fails.

Ground Six "Exhibit #3 on the voir dire letter from Troy Cross tendered, proving that he did lie in the box, but we could not recall him the Crown opposed it due to the letter being in my possession for a while, could not reopen the case." 
After the summing up had commenced, the appellant sought leave to re-open the case to further cross-examine his stepson, Troy Cross, on a letter Troy Cross wrote to the appellant some time prior to May 1996, some four months prior to the trial.

The trial judge refused the application for two reasons. First, the letter did not constitute fresh evidence. Secondly, his Honour considered that, at most, the contents of the letter would have only provided material for further cross-examination directed to Troy Cross's credit. His Honour stated: "...but that is a matter of emphasis only, really, that had appeared from
Troy Cross' evidence and Troy Cross is, after all, only one of a number of witnesses." 
The question of whether a witness should be recalled for further cross- examination is a matter for the discretion of the trial judge. According to his Honour, and this was not disputed, the letter could only have been used for further cross-examination on credit. There had already been a significant challenge to Troy Cross's evidence in that regard. Given, the fact that the appellant had had the letter for several months and the lateness of the application, his Honour's refusal was an appropriate exercise of the discretion.

I should also point out that, although the letter was not before the Court, the Crown in its written submissions informed the Court that the letter also supported the appellant's alibi defence which he had proposed to run at trial, but which he abandoned. That may explain why the letter was not produced earlier by the appellant.

Ground Seven "The Judge misdirected the jury in his summing up on page 35, date 2.12.96, lines 35-40." 
During the course of his summing up, the trial judge referred to Mr Waller's evidence in the committal proceedings. In doing so, his Honour misread the committal transcript. The evidence being referred to related to Waller's evidence of a conversation between him and Lynette Cross. The committal transcript was that Waller said to Lynette Cross: "You murdered your own daughter." 
In the summing up, however, the trial judge recorded Waller as saying: "He murdered your daughter." 
Later in the summing up, and shortly before its conclusion, the trial judge revisited Waller's evidence at the committal and this time correctly read the transcript.

Counsel for the appellant did not make any application to the trial judge in respect of the original error, or otherwise draw the trial judge's attention to it. Leave is thus required under [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) to raise the point. As the transcript was read correctly to the jury shortly before they retired, and as the jury had a copy of the transcript with them in the jury room (it was an exhibit in the trial) I am of the opinion that the jury would not have been misled by his Honour's error.

This ground of appeal is also rejected.

Ground Eight "John Waller went on Television and said: (We did not commit the murder) this is the Crown witness for the Prosecution." 
The evidence revealed that sometime shortly prior to the committal, John
Waller had participated in a television interview and said "we [that is, he and the appellant] did not commit the murder". Mr Waller was extensively cross-examined about this at the committal. He sought to explain his statement away in the following exchange: "Q. And do you agree that during that television interview you used the words, "We were there but we didn't commit no murder"? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. Now, who were you referring to as "we"? 
A. Me and Bob 
Q. And what do you mean by, "We didn't commit no murder"? 
A. Well, I didn't see him shoot her.

Q. You used the words, "We didn't commit no murder"? 
A. Well, I didn't do it - 
Q. --You used the words, "We didn't commit no murder"? 
A. Yeah, that's correct.

Q. That means, "Me and Bob didn't commit a murder"? 
A. Yeah, most probably, yeah.

Q. That's the only explanation it can give, isn't it? 
A. Yeah 
Q. And why did you say to the reporter, "We didn't commit no murder"? 
A. Well, I could say, you know, whatever.

Q. Was that a lie that you told the reporter? 
A. What I should have said was, "I didn't commit no murder". I didn't see the man shoot her. Okay. I was sitting in the van.
 ...

Q. "We", that is to say you and Robert Cross didn't commit no murder, that's the truth? 
A. I didn't do it and I didn't see him do it.
 ...

Q. --Are you suggesting there was somebody else there? 
A. Can I just clarify what I just said, instead of you jumping down my throat all the time? ...

Q. --Just answer the questions.

A. I'm not trying to pick a fight with you. All right. What I'm trying to say, I didn't see a gun. Right, I didn't see who shot her. That's what I'm trying to say. When I just said I didn't see anything, I seen her fall, right.
I didn't see who shot her. That's what I am trying to say. That's what I meant. Right? 
Q. Are you suggesting there was somebody else there? 
A. I didn't see nobody else there. Why don't your client get up and say who was there. He was the one out of the van, not me.
 ...

Q. --Do you believe there was somebody else there? 
A. I have said there might have been someone there, yes.

Q. And who was that somebody else there you believe was there? 
A. Her sitting up the back.
 ...

FEMALE VOICE: The fact is you murdered my daughter and he's going to gaol for it.

WITNESS: No, excuse me love. You murdered your own daughter, okay? ...

Q. I was asking you if you believed there was somebody else there, Mr
Waller? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you said you believed there was someone there. "Her up the back of the court"? 
A. Yes.

Q. Who's "Her at the back of the court"? 
A. Lynette Cross." 
The trial judge read portions of this cross-examination to the jury during the summing up. His Honour also directed the jury that John Waller's evidence might be unreliable for a number of reasons and further directed them that: "you must therefore be cautious about accepting it." 
His Honour gave further directions as to Waller's evidence and as to the essential differences between that evidence and the defence case. He informed the jury that the Crown asked that they "accept Waller as a basically truthful witness". He explained that they could reject him completely or in part. He concluded his direction in these terms: "Waller's evidence was sworn at the committal. The accused's evidence was sworn to here, so on that crucial point you have one against one, and that is an additional reason why you have got to be very careful and think carefully before you decide if you are going to accept Waller, but if you do, if you find he was telling the truth, then that puts the Crown well on the way." 
His Honour's summing up and directions were fair and sufficient in relation to
Waller's evidence and his reliability as a witness. Just prior to the conclusion of the summing up, the appellant's counsel requested his Honour to read to the jury a more extensive portion of Waller's evidence as to his comments in the television interview.

His Honour acceded to that application, although initially he considered he had read the essential portion to the jury. I agree with his Honour's view, but as his Honour acceded to the application there is no point to be taken.

It seems that the appellant's real complaint is that the jury either rejected
Waller's television comment, or, alternatively, accepted his explanation of it during his cross-examination at the committal. They were entitled to do so, and his Honour gave adequate directions as to his reliability.

This ground of appeal therefore fails.

Ground Nine "The Prosecution said that there was still unanswered questions as to the motive. Line 40." 
This ground of appeal relates to the following statement by the Crown prosecutor on sentence: "There are unanswered questions relating to motive. It was not a spontaneous killing and the objective seriousness is very, very grave. I do not think it calls for a life sentence, but calls for a severe determinate sentence." 
During the course of the sentence hearing, the appellant's counsel also raised the question of motive, or absence of motive having been proved at trial.
However, motive is not a necessary element of a crime: see R versus McKay <case>; [[1957] VR 560]; Williams versus R [(1979) 23 ALR 369] at 377; and generally Gillies Criminal Law 4th Edition at 75-6.

This ground therefore fails. I should add that the appellant acknowledged that he understood that the Crown did not have to prove motive and that: "There was unanswered questions on both sides. So that isn't going to help me there." 
Ground Ten "The evidence given at the committal by John Waller via a section (409) of the Crimes Act, was the nearest approach in the Crown case to direct evidence of the involvement of myself, but John Waller did name Lynnette Cross as the murderer." 
The point the appellant made here is best explained by his submission to this
Court: "Appellant: ...Again, John Waller did name Lynette Cross as the murderer.
They said the jury was appropriately warned about Mr Waller being an accomplice, but again he named someone else as being the murderer.

Greg James J: Are you complaining the Judge directed the jury that Waller's evidence was unreliable when your case was that his evidence was reliable, particularly when he said that Lynette Cross did the murder? 
Appellant: I'm not saying that the Judge misdirected the jury in this aspect of John's evidence being incorrect. I'm not saying that. I'm saying if John's evidence was so reliable why wasn't he believed about who was the murderer?" 
I have already referred to the sufficiency of the trial judge's directions in relation to the reliability or otherwise of John Waller's evidence. This ground focuses narrowly on one aspect of John Waller's evidence - his implication of Lynette Cross in the murder. As the trial judge properly directed the jury, they could accept or reject Waller's evidence in whole or in part. This ground of appeal must also fail.

Ground Eleven "My trial was held in Wollongong where the murder was committed. I was not only tried by a jury but also the Media, as my trial was on the news and in the papers every day." 
The appellant tendered a newspaper report in the Illawarra Mecury dated 28
November 1996 of the previous day's proceedings. The report was a detailed but accurate description of the proceedings on that day and included the appellant's defence. He had no other newspaper articles to tender (apparently having lost some during the course of a transfer within the jail system). He indicated to the Court, however, that his complaint was about the fact of the media coverage and publicity, not that the reports were biased or inaccurate.
In those circumstances, it cannot be said that the appellant was in any way prejudiced or that he did not or could not have a fair trial.

This ground is therefore rejected.

Ground Twelve "There was also some new evidence given at my trial, that was not given at my committal and I was never served with this new evidence before or even at my trial." 
This ground relates to evidence called by the Crown of the ballistics expert,
Sergeant Dickinson. He was asked questions about the variation, if any, in penetrating abilities of bullets fired from the same gun. He responded that such a variation could occur due to differences in velocity and could arise from a variety of factors, such as a difference in the "propellant which goes into the cartridges even in the same batch".

The appellant's trial counsel objected that this evidence was both new and irrelevant. His Honour ruled the evidence was relevant and no point is taken in relation to that ruling. In relation to it being new evidence, his Honour said: "Objection is taken to the evidence of Sergeant Dickinson on the basis that ... it was not the subject of any statement served on the accused. The ...
complaint seems to be well founded. It should have been. Apparently the Crown has only just come into the possession of the evidence, and I infer that nobody had realised its relevance before.
 ...

I will if after [Sergeant Dickinson's] cross-examination has concluded today
Mr Buckman finds that there is some additional matter that he needs to put to the officer, and I think this is not unlikely, then Sergeant Dickinson will simply have to be recalled for further cross-examination." 
The appellant's counsel did not apply for the witness to be recalled for further cross-examination.

His Honour acted properly in granting the appellant's counsel the opportunity to further cross-examine Sergeant Dickinson if he was fit. As counsel did not use that opportunity it must be inferred that he did not need to do so, or alternatively, for reasons associated with the conduct of the defence case, he decided not to.

This ground, therefore, fails.

Following the hearing of the appeal, the appellant wrote a further submission to this Court on the issue of "reasonable doubt". The appellant referred to comments made by the trial judge, during sentencing, that: "It would not be possible to say on the evidence presented at trial that Lyn
Cross was involved in the murder of her daughter, neither would it be possible to negate the scenario beyond reasonable doubt. It was, as I have indicated, left to the jury as a possibility." 
The appellant argued that if there was reasonable doubt that Lynette Cross was involved, there should have been a reasonable doubt that the appellant committed the crime. The appellant then reiterated his argument in Ground Ten of the appeal that the Crown witness (John Waller) had said that Lynette Cross committed the murder. See also Ground Four.

This additional issue does not assist the appellant's case. It must be remembered that the issue for the jury was whether they were satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of the guilt of the appellant. In determining that issue they were required to consider the whole of the evidence, including that which sought to implicate Lynette Cross and thereby exculpate the appellant.
However, the guilty verdict against the appellant does not `speak' in any way in relation to Lynette Cross's involvement in the murder, either directly or as an accessory. The trial judge's comments meant no more than that.

It follows that the appeal must be dismissed.

REGINA versus ROBERT JAMES CROSS 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I agree with Beazley JA. 
REGINA versus ROBERT JAMES CROSS 
JUDGMENT 
GREG JAMES J: I agree with Beazley JA. * * * 
