

Aslan versus Shehadie Matter Nos 13117/93 [1997] NSWSC 635 (11 December 1997) 
Ahmed Aslan versus Michael John Shehadie /93 10723/96 ED 3698/95 December 1997 
Graham A-J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /93 and 10723/96 (ED 3698/95) 
AHMED ASLAN versus MICHAEL JOHN SHEHADIE 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Albert Thomas Cox died on 19 November 1990 aged 93 and Elias Napti died on 14 April 1989 aged, so it would seem, a little younger. 
Phyllis Kopf was the Executrix of the last Will and Testament of the late Mr.
Cox, bearing date 26 April 1989, Probate of which was granted on 15 March
On 1 March 1991 she swore an affidavit of assets and of liabilities in connection with her probate application listing assets having a total value of $735,481.77 and liabilities totalling $3,120.36 leaving a net estate of $732,361.41.

There was no dispute as to the estimated or known value of the assets in question as at the date of death of the testator and, for present purposes, the parties are agreed that no issue arises referable to any change in the value of any of the assets since the date of death.

In the period 1953-1990 Mr. Cox was the registered proprietor of the property known as 70 Redfern Street, Redfern, in the period 1981-1989 he was the registered proprietor of the property known as 40 Baptist Street, Redfern and in the period 1983-1989 he was the registered proprietor of the property known as 108 Great Buckingham Street, Redfern. The Redfern Street property was sold on 7 August 1990 for $206,000 with completion on 30 October 1990, the Baptist
Street property was sold on 2 December 1988 for $190,000 with completion on 28
February 1989 and the Great Buckingham Street property was sold on 14 December for $250,000 with completion on 26 May 1989.

In 1986 Mr. Napti and Mr. Cox were residing at 108 Great Buckingham Street,
Redfern or at least Mr. Cox was residing there with, perhaps, Mr. Napti living at 70 Redfern Street, Redfern.

In about 1968-9 the plaintiff in these proceedings, Ahmed Aslan, who is now 66 years of age, met Mr. Cox.

The plaintiff and Mr. Napti had previously carried on business as Lebanese bread shop proprietors at Merrylands and as I understand it, later, at Glebe.

According to the plaintiff Mr. Cox purchased the 40 Baptist Street property with some financial assistance provided by Mr. Napti and he purchased the 108
Great Buckingham Street property with some financial assistance provided by
Mr. Napti and the plaintiff.

On 14 April 1986 agreements for lease of two of the three properties, using the Real Estate Institute of NSW's standard blue coloured Residential Lease form, were entered into between Mr. Cox and the plaintiff under which Mr. Cox agreed to lease the properties to the plaintiff for a term of 10 years commencing on 14 April 1986 at a rental of $400.00 per property per month on the basis that the plaintiff, as the lessee, would meet all outgoings for rates and taxes (not expressed in the agreements) and electricity and on the further basis that the plaintiff would pay for all repairs and maintenance (expressed in the agreements as "all renovations"). The agreements further required a room to be provided for Mr. Napti, rent free, in 70 Redfern Street and a room to be provided for Mr. Cox, rent free, in 108 Great Buckingham
Street. No rent was payable until 21 June 1986.

On 23 April 1986 a further agreement for lease, in the same form, of the 40
Baptist Street property was entered into between Mr. Cox and the plaintiff under which Mr. Cox agreed to lease the property to the plaintiff for a term of 10 years commencing on 21 April 1986 at a rental of $400.00 per month on the same basis as applied under the other two agreements. Once again provision was made for a room to be provided for Mr. Cox, rent free.

The defendant, Michael John Shehadie, is a solicitor who was involved in the preparation of the Residential Leases which were signed by Mr. Cox and the plaintiff in relation to the leasing of the three properties. A bill for $1,500.00 is said to have been delivered by Mr. Shehadie of Michie, Shehadie & Co. in respect of the work performed by him and it is said that this memorandum was paid by the plaintiff in cash. Mr. Shehadie says that he was paid $1,500 in cash on account of costs on 12 October 1988 when his services were terminated and the plaintiff wished to obtain a release of his files. The amount in question was undoubtedly paid into Michie, Shehadie & Co.'s trust account on that day, the relevant receipt being marked "Aslan re
Tenancy".

Proceedings No.13117 of 1993 were instituted by the plaintiff against the defendant on 16 August 1993 alleging negligence on the part of the defendant in respect of the lease documents. Mr. Bennett of Queen's Counsel, who appears for the plaintiff submits that the defendant was negligent in failing to explain to the plaintiff the consequences of non-registration of leases of land under the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) for a term of 10 years.

The relevant loss said to have been sustained by the plaintiff flowed, according to the plaintiff's case, from the sale by Mr. Cox of the properties in December 1988 and August 1990 but, by then, as the parties have agreed, Mr.
Cox had repudiated the agreements for lease and such repudiations had been accepted by the plaintiff by his institution of three separate actions for damages for breach of contract against Mr. Cox (one in respect of each lease) in the District Court on 28 June 1988. These actions were, at some stage, consolidated and removed into this Court becoming proceedings No.1443/93 in the Equity Division.

Following Mr. Cox's death the proceedings were continued by the plaintiff against Mr. Cox's estate. A cross-claim sought recovery from the plaintiff of moneys paid by Mr. Cox to National Australia Bank Limited under a guarantee of the plaintiff's indebtedness to the Bank.

On or about 14 August 1986 the defendant prepared three forms of Will for execution by Mr. Napti, Mr. Cox and the plaintiff. Each Will was in substantially the same form. The testator in each case appointed the other two parties as his executors and trustees and gave devised and bequeathed the whole of his estate both real and personal of whatsoever nature and wheresoever situate to "such of" the other two parties and, if more than one, then as tenants-in-common in equal shares. Whilst the wills do not expressly so provide, I would incline to the view that they should be construed as if the bequests were to such of the other two parties "as shall survive me" and, if more than one, then as tenants-in-common in equal shares, 
These wills were apparently executed by each of the testators at 108 Great
Buckingham Street in the presence of the defendant and his secretary who duly witnessed their execution.

In about September or October 1986 Mr. Cox gave notice of his intention to revoke his Will benefiting, inter alia, the plaintiff. As it transpires the last Will and Testament of Mr. Cox of 26 April 1989 provided for a distribution of his estate by reference to the assessed net value thereof as follows:- 
Sir Peter Julius Church, Haymarket $ 5,000.00 
Colleen Cavanaugh, grand-niece $ 2,000.00 
Errol Francis Cox, son $362,680.71 
Phyllis Kopf, niece $362,680.70 
In proceedings No.10723/96 (which were originally commenced in the Equity
Division as proceedings 3698/95) the plaintiff alleges that the defendant was negligent in failing to advise the plaintiff of the need for a non-revocation agreement between each of the testators if the risk of repudiation of the mutual Wills was to be avoided and in failing to advise the plaintiff of the need to have a non-revocation agreement in writing to ensure that in the event of an action being brought by the plaintiff against the executor/executrix of a later will of one of the other parties, a court could conclude, with the appropriate degree of comfort, that a non-revocation agreement had, in fact, been made between the parties.

A further action was instituted by the Plaintiff against Mrs. Kopf as the executrix of Mr. Cox's estate in respect of the alleged breach by Mr. Cox of an alleged non-revocation agreement in respect of the August 1986 Wills.

These proceedings, which became No.3625/91 in the Equity Division and which were originally commenced in the Probate Division where, I assume, a grant of probate was unsuccessfully sought in respect of Mr. Cox's 14 August 1986 Will, were heard together with the breach of lease agreement proceedings in the
Equity Division by Mr. Justice Windeyer and decided on 24 February 1993. The plaintiff succeeded on his claim in respect of breaches by Mr. Cox of the lease agreements and was awarded damages totalling $221,275.00 including interest up to judgment. On the cross-claim against the plaintiff for debt arising from the payment by Mr. Cox of moneys due by the plaintiff judgment was awarded against the plaintiff for $109,257.00 including interest up to judgment. In respect of the claim for breach by Mr. Cox of the alleged non- revocation agreement in respect of the August 1986 Wills Mr. Justice Windeyer gave judgment for Mrs. Kopf, as the executrix of Mr. Cox's last Will and
Testament.

An appeal by the plaintiff to the Court of Appeal against the judgment of Mr.
Justice Windeyer and a cross-appeal by Mrs. Kopf were dismissed on 16 May .

Oral evidence in the current proceedings was given by the plaintiff, his current solicitor, Mr. Hinde, an accountant, Mr. Taylor, who offered no relevant evidence, an expert conveyancer with extensive will-making experience, Mr. Neville Moses and the defendant.

Before proceeding further I should record my observations in relation to the demeanour of the plaintiff and the defendant. Firstly, it should be noted that each was trying to recall the detail of conversations which took place over 11 years ago. Mr. Shehadie had no file notes available to him, having surrendered his files to his successor as the plaintiff's solicitor, Mr. Philip Brand of
Messrs. Marshall Marks Dezarnaulds & Jones in 1988, and, not surprisingly, the plaintiff had no contemporaneous documentary records to assist him.

I should also note that the plaintiff was illiterate, in the English language, although this may not have been readily apparent to others and was not apparent to the defendant. However, the plaintiff was plainly numerate. He had no difficulty with numbers and, indeed, at one stage during his evidence, jumped to his feet, said that he knew what $10 was and at the same instant pulled a $10 note out of his pocket (I don't believe this was recorded in the transcript). In the course of his evidence he said "I know all number, 187, , 1 million, 100, I know number, I see the number I know what was inside (referring to a letter) this time." 
By reference to some handwriting on an account directed to the plaintiff by another of his solicitors, Messrs. Maher & Flynn, reading "I spoke to Mr.
Flynn on 8.6.95 at 5.15pm" (which I am satisfied was not written by the plaintiff), the plaintiff said "I read it very well. 8/6/95 and 15, that is really, you can't read the line, just I read it here, 8/6/95 and 5:15. Is number you know, that much I know." 
Notwithstanding my finding that the plaintiff was illiterate in the English language and the handicaps that undoubtedly posed for him over the years, I did not consider him to have any genuine difficulties in communicating orally with others in the English language. His evidence before me was given in
English notwithstanding numerous applications by Mr. Bennett and the plaintiff himself for leave to have the assistance of an interpreter who spoke Arabic, his native tongue. I was satisfied that he could understand and speak the
English language sufficiently to enable him to understand, and to make an adequate reply to, questions that were put to him about facts in the case both by Mr. Bennett, Mr. Davies of Senior Counsel, who appeared for the defendant, and by me.

I had a strong conviction that, at times, the plaintiff adroitly used his somewhat unusual manner of expressing himself to camouflage his clear understanding of matters that were being put to him and his applications for the intervention of an interpreter, who was present in Court and available if truly necessary, were designed to escape the intensity of Mr. Davies' cross- examination, which I should add, was courteously, carefully and considerately directed to the plaintiff. The spontaneity of some of the plaintiff's answers to some questions belied the difficulty which he professed in relation to others.

Once I got used to the plaintiff's use of expressions such as "Mr. Shehadie signed behind my sign it" meaning "Mr. Shehadie witnessed my signature" his evidence was not all that difficult to follow. What did put both Counsel and myself at a disadvantage was that the plaintiff would not, despite repeated requests to do so, speak in an audible tone of voice. Those court reporters using stenographic machines who were able to look at his lips as he spoke had much greater success in transcribing his evidence than those taking it down in shorthand who were relying exclusively on what they could hear.

After observing the plaintiff in the witness box very carefully over the course of three days I should say that I had less than full confidence in his willingness to provide truthful answers.

It may be noted that all the conversations which were critical in this case were conversations between the plaintiff and others which took place in the
English language. The plaintiff consistently retained non-Arabic speaking solicitors and, relevantly, he did not take interpreters with him or use interpreters when giving instructions to or taking advice from his solicitors.

Mr. Bennett's Junior, Mr. Abdul-Karim, who is bi-lingual, has apparently assisted the plaintiff in understanding some documents in more recent times such as a Witness Statement which he apparently made in English in this case, but the critical conversations with the defendant and with Mr. Cox were in
English. Insofar as the plaintiff asserts that Mr. Napti translated any relevant conversations between himself and Mr. Cox in the English language, into Arabic, I do not accept his evidence.

The defendant, by way of contrast, was refreshingly frank with his evidence of the events of 1986. Whilst I believe the defendant to be mistaken in his recollection that, for instance, all three Residential Leases were prepared by him or under his direction at the same time on or about 14 April 1986, I must say that I have a strong preference for his account of what transpired where the important conversations between the parties were concerned.

The Leases Case.

The plaintiff says that the defendant's instructions in respect of the preparation of the leases came firstly from Mr. Cox to whom he gave the defendant's telephone number. The plaintiff says that he overheard the initial conversation between Mr. Cox and the defendant. His account of it was as follows:- "... Mr. Cox said for Mr. Shehadie, same agreement for me and Mr. Napti for leases, 10 years all expenses I pay it for three property, anything that happen mistake for property, window broke or something, I fix it. Two property this one first time ... and register for 10 years." 
The plaintiff says that a couple of days later he went to the defendant's office whereupon he signed the first two leases which had then been prepared and the defendant witnessed his signature. The defendant gave him the leases to take back to Mr. Cox who proceeded to take them to the Redfern Local Court where he signed them in the presence of a Chamber Magistrate. The plaintiff says that the third lease was prepared a week or so later. This one was completed in the handwriting of the defendant's former secretary, Kathy
Mullane. It would appear to have been executed by both Mr. Cox and the plaintiff before the Chamber Magistrate at the Redfern Local Court.

When the plaintiff signed and collected the first two leases from the defendant's offices he says that he had the following conversation with the defendant:- "I first asking Mr. Shehadie `is lease finish?' he tell me `yes is lease ready here'. He show me stop. `Better Mr. Aslan you sign it'. I sign it straight away behind Mr. Shehadie in the office with him. Mr. Shehadie sign behind my sign it. He tell me `best way I date the lease for Mr. Cox. You sign it'. I giving, I take lease for Mr. Shehadie give to me ..." "... I asking Mr. Shehadie `this one better register'. He tell me `yes, after
Mr. Cox you sign it, give me lease. Be here for my office, I straight away go and register it." 
The plaintiff then repeated his conversation which he says he had with the defendant concerning registration of the leases. He said:- "Now I tell him, `Mr. Shehadie, best you register that'. He tell me `yes no worry at all'." 
As I understood the plaintiff's evidence after the third lease was signed he says that he took it back to the defendant's office whereupon he says that the defendant said "All right Mr. Aslan, no problem at all. After a couple of day register, my girl." 
In cross-examination by Mr. Davies of senior counsel for the defendant the plaintiff claimed to know of the need for registration of leases that were of years duration. His evidence was as follows:- "Q. Did you know that if a lease is 10 years long it had to be registered? 
A. Yes.

Q. You knew that, did you? 
A. Yes, sure.

Q. How did you know that? 
A. Me in Australia now maybe 28 years, 29 years. I make three bakeries in Australia. Mr. Shehadie is this way, I make a lease, I no understand why he make a lease. Other bakery too, other bakery later. Three bakery in Ashfield is four, Ashfield bakery is four. He make four leases 10, 20 years, something like that, and the business for me myself for a bakery. First time me and my partner Mr. Napti for 
Merrylands, in Merrylands Road, Lebanese bakery. He make the lease between me and my partner Mr. Napti 70, 71, 72, 73 this time I make it for maybe in for business me myself. I know exactly that register or no register but not understand why solicitor make the register me understand is a register will be all right all my solicitor make it for any, my solicitor give me, he can't put him." 
The defendant denied that his original instructions came from Mr. Cox by telephone.

The defendant says, and I accept, that he understood in 1986 that a lease that either of its own term or with an option went beyond three years was one which required to be registered if it was to operate other than as a mere agreement for lease.

The defendant says that the plaintiff came into his office without an appointment and consulted him regarding the leases which were written out contemporaneously with the plaintiff telling the defendant and his secretary what was to go into them. The defendant says that the plaintiff said something like "I want you to do leases of three properties in Redfern for me" to which he replied "what are the details about the properties and what sort of leases, what are the terms of the leases?".

The plaintiff said that the leases were to be for 10 years and that he was to have the right as tenant to sublet the properties. He had to pay the owner $400.00 rent per property (per month) and had to pay for all renovations. The plaintiff identified Mr. Cox as the owner of the properties and said that he had the right to have possession of one room free of rent for the whole of the term and that Mr. Napti had a right to have possession of one room in one of the properties for the whole of the term free of rent.

The defendant's evidence continued as follows:- "I said to Mr. Aslan words to the effect of, `I can't do leases like this'. I said, `If you want a ten-year lease they have to be done in a proper form so that they can be registered'. I said that normally the landlord prepares the lease, not the tenant. I said that I would - the documents, I would need title particulars and it would take some time because they would have to be done in a proper form. Mr. Aslan said, `It doesn't matter. That doesn't matter. I need them straight away. The owner will sign them. Just do the blue lease forms.' ... I took from a file - a drawer in my office, three old residential 5A lease forms, which were blue. I said to Mr. Aslan words to the effect of, `Well, I can fill out these forms, but you must understand they will not create a lease because they cannot be registered. They can only ever be an agreement to lease.' He said that - something like, `Well that's okay. That will do. The owner will sign them.'".

When asked whether or nor the plaintiff returned to the office with the leases requesting him to register them, the defendant said "Certainly not".

When asked by Mr. Bennett whether he thought that the plaintiff was capable of understanding the distinction between a registered lease conferring a legal state and an agreement for lease the defendant said:- "Well, I would say that he was capable of understanding, I would say, yes, because, I was aware that he had previously owned a number of businesses that had leases. I mean, that is a difficult question for me to answer, but my answer would be, yes, he would be capable of understanding that." 
The plaintiff certainly claimed that he had ample experience with long term leases such that he was able to know that they needed to be registered.

This aspect of the case falls to be determined by an assessment of the credibility of the witnesses. I must say that I have a strong preference for the defendant's account. I am satisfied that he knew of the need for registration for leases of the duration proposed, that he explained the need for leases to be done in proper form so that they could be registered and that he informed the plaintiff that it was the landlord or his solicitor who normally prepared the necessary documents not the tenant. I am satisfied that the plaintiff made known to the defendant that he required documents urgently and that he specified the need for the defendant to prepare the documents using the blue Residential Lease forms. I am satisfied that the defendant explained to the plaintiff that by using the forms leases could not be created because they could not be registered. He indicated that they could only ever be an agreement to lease.

In these circumstances the plaintiff's case of negligence in respect of the leases fails.

In any event, no evidence has been presented before me which could justify any award of damages even if the defendant had been negligent in failing to explain to the plaintiff the consequences of non-registration of the leases.
No evidence was given as to the state of the premises at any time. No evidence was given as to the necessary expenditure for renovation of the properties. No evidence was presented as to rates, taxes and other outgoings for which the plaintiff was or might have been responsible. No evidence was presented as to the likely occupancy rates of the premises between June 1988 and April 1996 and no evidence was presented as to the likely rental value of the premises in that period of time.

The agreements for lease were terminated by the plaintiff at the time of the institution of the District Court proceedings brought by him against Mr. Cox.
This preceded the sale by Mr. Cox of any of the properties.

It does not seem to me that Mr. Cox would have been less likely to repudiate the agreements for lease if they had been registered rather than simply agreements operating in personam. Not only has the plaintiff failed to offer any relevant evidence of damage, nothing has been advanced which would establish any greater entitlement to damages, in the events which have transpired, than was awarded by Mr. Justice Windeyer.

His Honour said (Judgment pages23-4):- "There is ... no reason why the documents should not evidence an agreement to lease; ... nor I think is there anything to show that in such circumstances the agreement would not have been specifically enforced and an order made for a lease in registrable form to be settled although the lack of such a lease must make the value of the agreement to the plaintiff less. It follows from this that on breach of a fundamental term by the landlord, amounting to repudiation, and acceptance by the lessee, damages should generally be assessed on the basis of loss of a right to a lease in terms of the agreement.
 ...
 ... If the lease were by deed the notice given would in my view amount to a breach of a covenant for quiet enjoyment; ... and that would be a breach of a fundamental term. In the case of an agreement the position is in my view no different. ..." 
Later at pages 28-30 His Honour said:- "Without anything to help me I would have thought that with properties such as these, two of them let out in rooms, substantial repairs might be required from time to time over the term of the lease even accepting that the plaintiff did spend considerable moneys on them after he obtained the leases which would presumably mean less outlay on repairs during the earlier period than later.
They are big old properties. In addition I would have thought that there would be considerable outgoings for gas, electricity, garbage charges, and perhaps for excess water. I have no way of calculating these figures nor have I any assistance in calculating the value of the term remaining at acceptance of repudiation. (I interpolate that I believe that I have even less assistance than His Honour had.) ... I do not imagine that the cost of outgoings including repairs and renovations would be more than 30% for the first period and 40% for the second period of the rent received but I do not see any basis on which I should find that such cost would necessarily be less. In addition one must take into account the fact the rights were personal to Aslan as any lease ordered could not be assigned and there was clearly some cost involved in obtaining valid leases.

In my view the loss to the plaintiff in the second period is probably determined by calculating 60% of the expected amounts which would be received from the sub-tenants per week and deducting from that the rent payable each week to the deceased. ... I should say that assumption takes into account other matters such as possible vacancy rates and the lesser security of the tenant by reason of not having a leasehold estate." (the words in parenthesis are mine).

As I see it the methodology employed by Mr. Justice Windeyer did not in fact make any monetary allowance for the cost involved in obtaining valid leases or the lesser security of the plaintiff by reason of not having a leasehold estate. In the manner in which His Honour approached the assessment of damages, which I believe to have been correct, there was no occasion for making any allowance for these matters as His Honour proceeded on the basis that the entitlement to damages was the same whether there had been a breach of a covenant for quiet enjoyment or a breach of a like provision in an agreement for lease.

Accordingly, the plaintiff's case in respect of the leases fails firstly because the defendant was not negligent, secondly because the plaintiff has failed to offer any evidence whatsoever on the question of damages and thirdly because the award of damages made by Mr. Justice Windeyer against the executrix of Mr. Cox's estate fully compensated the plaintiff for any loss which he might have sustained if, contrary to my opinion, the defendant had been negligent.

The Non-revocation Case.

The plaintiff's case before Mr. Justice Windeyer had been that a non- revocation agreement had been reached orally between Mr. Cox, Mr. Napti and himself. Mr. Justice Windeyer concluded that there was no agreement not to revoke. At page 17 he said:- "I have come to the conclusion that the plaintiff's evidence as to a contract being made not to revoke the wills should not be accepted." 
His Honour also found that notice of revocation or intended revocation had been given by Mr. Cox to each of the plaintiff and Mr. Napti in relation to his will.

In so far as the plaintiff seeks in the present case to make a collateral attack on the earlier decision of Mr. Justice Windeyer that there was no non- revocation agreement reached between Mr. Cox, Mr. Napti and the plaintiff i.e.
to ground a submission that the defendant should have advised the plaintiff of the need to have such agreement in writing, I believe that the case falls within the extended doctrine of res judicata to which Mr. Justice Handley referred in The Doctrine of Res Judicata (3rd edition, 1996 by Spencer Bower,
Turner and Handley) paragraph 451 at page 263.

In relation to this doctrine David Hunt C.J. at C.L. said in Haines v.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (unreported, 21 July 1995) at page 15:- "The issue determined in the earlier case which is sought to be litigated in the later case must be one which the party propounding it in the latter lost in the former. The principle does not work in reverse to enable the party who won the issue in the earlier case to prevent it being litigated in the later proceedings by someone who was not a party to the former. It must be an issue that was necessarily determined in the earlier case, and one of importance to the final result. It must have been properly argued - by which I mean that it is readily apparent from whatever records there are of the earlier case that the tribunal which decided it was an appropriate one to do so, that the parties were appropriate contradictors and that the issue was regarded by them as one of importance in that case. In normal circumstances, the decision disposing of the issue must have been a final one - by which I mean that it is not subject to appeal. There may also be circumstances in which, notwithstanding the absence of an appeal, it is clear that the earlier decision has overlooked some binding authority, or that it has caused the unsuccessful party a manifest injustice. As most of the cases have emphasised, all the circumstances of the determination in the earlier case may be considered, and there can be no definitive statement of the circumstances which will inevitably lead to a finding of abuse of process." 
The decision of Mr. Justice Windeyer was of course confirmed on appeal in a unanimous judgment of the Court of Appeal (unreported 9 May 1995).

Even if it were necessary for me to do so, I would reach the same conclusion as Mr. Justice Windeyer.

Before me, the plaintiff's evidence was that Mr. Cox expressed concern about the plaintiff making a trip to China and the possibility that some ill may befall him. Mr. Cox is said to have proposed that wills be made by each of Mr.
Napti, the plaintiff and himself. The plaintiff's evidence was "He said to me: `I make it will between me and Mr. Napti, Mr. Cox', meet not one time, maybe couple of time before left to China, before month, maybe one months, two weeks or three weeks time before we left in China, is tell me in will, never ever anybody between me and Mr. Napti and you is change it." 
Later the plaintiff said:- "Mr. Cox this time he tell me please best make it, this will for nobody, I and you and Mr. Napti agreement never ever change ..." 
The plaintiff gave evidence that he overheard Mr. Cox telephone Mr. Shehadie.
He said "Mr. Cox asking Shehadie agreement between me and Mr. Napti and Mr.
Aslan, and it will never ever change it. And we understand very well." 
The plaintiff says that Mr. Cox in effect then handed the telephone to Mr.
Napti and "Mr. Napti give order for Mr. Shehadie again same time. By telephone asking Mr. Shehadie for will, he agreed for Mr. Cox and Mr. Shehadie make will between three people, never ever change it." 
The plaintiff says that he then spoke to Mr. Shehadie on the telephone. His evidence was:- "I ask him, `Mr. Shehadie please, I need to go to China for operation and hospital see before you die.' Tell me: `Okay Mr. Aslan.' `Please, can make it this will', not long way before I left. He tell me: `Yes, give me couple of days time. I rang up to you this number with the will, you ready, ask him come back, me come back to you for you sign it.'" 
The plaintiff says that the defendant proceeded to prepare three reciprocal wills one for each of Mr. Cox, Mr. Napti and himself. He says that he then telephoned the defendant to ascertain whether or not the wills were ready and upon being advised that they were he drove into the city and arranged to meet the defendant and his secretary in the street outside his office so that they could then accompany him back to 108 Great Buckingham Street where each of the wills could be executed.

The defendant agrees that he was asked to prepare the wills, that he did so and that he was driven out to 108 Great Buckingham Street along with his secretary to enable the wills to be signed. The defendant says, and I accept, that he spoke with each of the intending testators separately and after satisfying himself that they knew and approved the contents of the wills proceeded along with his secretary to witness the due execution thereof.

The defendant was asked what his first contact was with anybody in relation to the wills and his answer was:- "Mr. Aslan telephoned me at my office and said - told me something like, `I want to do a will leaving everything to Mr. Cox and Mr. Napti. Mr. Napti and
Mr. Cox are going to do similar wills leaving everything to each of us'. I said something like, `Well, I would need to speak to Mr. Cox and Mr. Napti about that'. Mr. Aslan said, `Well, they are here now' and I think he then put someone on the phone who said, `This is Albert Cox. Can you do a will leaving everything I have to Ahmed and Mr. Napti?' I said, `Yes' and I think I said `
Is Mr. Napti there?' and he said `Yes' and he put another man on who said, `This is Elias Napti. Can you - I would like you to do a will for me leaving everything I have to Mr. Cox and Mr. Aslan'. I think each of them also said that the others would be the executors as well of their wills." 
The defendant says that he was sure that there was some urgency about doing the wills.

In cross-examination by Mr. Bennett the defendant gave the following evidence:- "Q. ... was it your understanding of the law in 1986, that if people simply made wills leaving their property to each other, they could revoke them at any time on notice? 
A. It was my understanding that they could revoke them at any time without notice.

Q. Was it your understanding that if people agreed to make wills leaving property to each other, without more, that they could revoke them at any time on notice? 
A. It was my understanding that they could revoke them at any time without notice.

Q. Was it your understanding, in 1986, that if there was an actual agreement not to revoke, that such an agreement was enforceable in the normal way? 
A. It was my understanding that if the circumstances gave rise to either an implied agreement not to revoke, or an agreement in specific terms not to revoke, there was a requirement to give notice to the other party before you changed the will.
 ...

Q. Would you agree with me, in 1986, if a client were to come to you asking you to draw wills between two or three people, leaving their property to each other, that the first thing that a competent solicitor should do is ascertain which of the categories that I have just put to you, the case fell into? 
A. I don't agree with that, no.

Q. In any event, you made no effort to ascertain whether there was an agreement not to revoke? 
A. If I made - well, I agree I made no effort to ascertain that. I was not told there was any agreement not to revoke and I didn't see it as my role to inquiry into that aspect of the matter.

Q. Nor to advise your client that if there was an agreement not to revoke, the wills could not be revoked, but if there wasn't, they could be? 
A. Well, I think that follows. I was given no indication, Mr. Bennett, that there was no case to not revoke.

Q. I put it to you, Mr. Shehadie, that in fact you were told by Mr. Aslan that the three of them had agreed that they would not change their wills? 
A. I was not told by as Aslan, or anyone, that.

Q. I also put to you that the other two told you the same thing? 
A. No, they did not." 
I do not accept the plaintiff's evidence that an agreement was reached between
Mr. Cox, Mr. Napti and himself that the three wills would be "never ever changed". Even if such an agreement had been reached, I do not accept that the plaintiff or Mr. Napti or Mr. Cox instructed the defendant that such an agreement had been reached.

Plainly, the defendant did not inquire as to whether there was any such non- revocation arrangement.

Mr. Moses' opinion in respect of the will making issues is contained in paragraphs 10-12 inclusive of a witness statement made by him as follows:- "10. In regard to the question of the Wills it is standard practice when receiving instructions to prepare a Will on behalf of any client that the client is informed that the Will may be revoked and a new Will made at any time thereafter. This applies whether or not Wills are intended to be `mutual'.
Accordingly in any situation in which Wills are made by two or more persons benefiting each other then it is standard practice to point out to all parties that the Wills may be revoked by any of the parties at a later time. In most cases of `mutual wills' which concern related parties (such as husband and wife) a contract not to revoke the Wills is not required by the parties who are almost invariably happy to rely on mutual trust in that regard.
However, if unrelated parties propose `mutual wills' it would be usual practice not merely to point out the situation in regard to revocation but also to indicate that if the parties wished it, it would be possible to enter into a contract whereby each of the parties agrees not to revoke the will (or at least those provisions of the will which favoured the other party or parties)." 
Mr. Moses was unwilling to say that a solicitor who failed to act in accordance with paragraph 10 would be guilty of negligence. He said:- "I don't know that I can give a complete answer to that question because it depends on the circumstances of the case." 
In this case no loss is said to have been suffered as a result of one of the testators failing to alter his will because the defendant failed to advise him that he could do so. No question of negligence relevantly arises in that regard.

When asked whether in his view it would be negligent for a solicitor to fail to point out the matters referred to in paragraph 12 Mr. Moses said:- "Well, in the circumstances there I think it would be most unusual if the solicitor confronted by unrelated parties proposing mutual wills not to ascertain the reason why the wills were being entered into in this fashion. I think it would be usual to explain all wills may be revoked and I think it would naturally follow from that if the solicitor was told that the parties didn't wish to be able to revoke the wills they be given the advice there would need to be a deed or contract in relation to the ongoing wills so they couldn't be revoked. ..." 
The defendant informed me that in relation to the plaintiff's will he considered the plaintiff to be his client, in relation to Mr. Cox's will he considered Mr. Cox to be his client and in relation to Mr. Napti's will he considered Mr. Napti to be his client. He also gave the following evidence:- "Q. Did you form the view that anybody was taking advantage of anyone else in relation to this arrangement? 
A. Well, whether I formed the view, I suppose I had a suspicion what was happening, but that was the reason I wanted to speak to each of them individually away from the other two, particularly Cox, because from what I knew, he was the only one that had any property. I spoke to him individually and he seemed to be, I mean, it was his will. He understood what was being done and was happy to sign it." 
In the circumstances, I do not consider that the defendant owed a duty of care to the plaintiff to advise him of the need for a non-revocation agreement between each of the testators if the risk of repudiation of the mutual wills was to be avoided. If, contrary to my view, the defendant was negligent in this regard I am unable to see how the plaintiff could have suffered any relevant loss. For the plaintiff to be able to make good his case he would need to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities that if the advice had been given a binding non-revocation agreement would have been entered into between himself, Mr. Cox and Mr. Napti which would not permit revocation of any of the wills on notice to the other parties.

In this regard, the general standard of proof in civil actions ordinarily governs the issue of causation and the issue of whether or not a plaintiff has sustained some damage.

Whilst I am happy to draw the inference that each of Mr. Cox, Mr. Napti and the plaintiff were well disposed towards one another the nature of the relationship has not been sufficiently established to enable me to infer that the other parties and, in particular, Mr. Cox would have been willing to agree to such an arrangement especially if he was properly advised, as one would expect him to be, by the defendant or whomsoever may be acting for him in relation to the matter. Whilst it is clear that Mr. Cox was anxious to have the plaintiff make a will divesting himself of his interest in Mr. Cox's properties should some misfortune befall him whilst on his visit to China, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that Mr. Cox sought to have such an arrangement survive after the plaintiff's return to Australia some five weeks later.

Applying common sense and experience, I could not be satisfied that the defendant's negligence, if any, caused the plaintiff to suffer any damage, nor could I be satisfied that the plaintiff did suffer some damage. This case is not one of a lost opportunity to exploit a commercial opportunity where some damage and causation have already been established.

The last head of negligence relied upon by the plaintiff is that the defendant allegedly failed to advise the plaintiff of the need to have a non-revocation agreement in writing to ensure that in the event of an action being brought by the plaintiff against the executor/executrix of a later will of one of the other parties, a court could conclude, with the appropriate degree of comfort, that a non-revocation agreement had in fact been made between the parties.

In cross-examination the defendant gave the following evidence:- "Q. Were you aware, in 1986, that there was a slightly stricter rule in relation to proving a claim, an uncorroborated verbal claim, against a deceased estate? 
A. Well the only way I can answer that, Mr. Bennett, is to say that I have practiced fairly extensively in litigation and I would accept what you say as being, in a sense, a common sense rule, but I can't really tell you whether I was specifically aware of that in relation to proving a claim against a deceased estate. I don't know, your Honour I suppose is the answer, whether I knew that in 1986." 
No expert evidence was offered to the effect that no reasonably competent solicitor bringing to bear reasonable skill and care could fail to advise a party to a non-revocation agreement of the need to have such agreement in writing to ensure that in the event of an action being brought by one of the parties against the executor/executrix of a later will of one of the other parties, a court could conclude, with the appropriate degree of comfort, that a non-revocation agreement had, in fact, been made between the parties. Apart from this deficiency, it seems to me that the claim of negligence fails for the reason that no non-revocation agreement has been established in this case and I have found that no instructions were given to the defendant as to the existence or claimed existence of any such agreement.

In all the circumstances, the plaintiff's claims of negligence in respect of the non-revocation of the wills fail.

In the light of the substantive findings which I have made it is unnecessary for me to address the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) defences which have been raised.

The orders which I propose to make are as follows:-
In matter No.13117/93, judgment for the defendant with costs.
In matter No.10723/96 (ED 3698/95), judgment for the defendant with costs.
 * * * 
