

Regina versus Luigi Gino Masella [1997] NSWSC 195 (14 May 1997) 
REGINA versus LUIGI GINO MASELLA /96 
Wednesday 14 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STEIN JA, STUDDERT J, LEVINE J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: This is an application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence. The applicant Luigi Gino Masella pleaded guilty in the District Court to two offences under <case> of the Crimes Act. The first of these was an offence under sub-s (1) of dangerous driving occasioning death whilst under the influence of a drug. The second offence was under sub-s (3) and related to the occasioning of grievous bodily harm.

The applicant was sentenced on the first count to four years imprisonment with a minimum term of three years and an additional term of one year. The sentence imposed on the second charge was a fixed term of two years to be served concurrently with the minimum term fixed in relation to the first count.

Section 52A in its present form was introduced into the Crimes Act by Act
No. 78 of 1994. In the section as it is now framed, penalties for the types of offences for which the applicant was sentenced were significantly increased and in relation to the charge under <case> the maximum penalty provided for that category of offence is imprisonment for ten years. For offences under s
A(3) the maximum penalty is imprisonment for seven years.

A very comprehensive statement of facts was prepared by Senior Constable
Kimber of the Crash Investigation Unit attached to Newcastle police station revealing the relevant circumstances of these offences. That report was placed before the sentencing judge and drawn on by him in his remarks on sentence. I draw on it also for a short review of the objective features of this case.

The accident giving rise to the offences charged occurred on 16 September
On that date the applicant was driving his Holden station sedan north on the New England Highway at Wingham. Somewhere about 3.50 am his vehicle was seen to move out from behind a semi-trailer travelling in the same direction.
Unhappily, there was another semi-trailer proceeding in the opposite direction and a collision occurred. Christine Fenwick, who was seated beside the applicant, sustained injuries that caused her death. Eloise Bell, who was the daughter of the deceased and then aged eight years, sustained grievous bodily harm, from which it appears, happily, she made a substantial recovery.

It appears that the applicant and the deceased, then his girlfriend, had left
Wollongong the previous evening, taking the deceased's daughter with them. The couple were intending to start a new life in Queensland. The decision to change States was made on the day of departure and the vehicle in which they were travelling was unregistered and uninsured. The applicant was unlicensed.
These three features of the events were the subject of charges which the judge was asked to take into account pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Procedure
Act.

The applicant himself was injured in the collision. He sustained injury to a shoulder and had facial lacerations that required some fifty stitches.

A blood sample was taken from the applicant which on analysis revealed, significantly for present purposes, .10 mg per litre of amphetamine. There was also morphine in the sample, but that was explained by reason of medication given to the applicant after the accident. There was methadone present too, but at the time the applicant was on a methadone programme because of an addiction to heroin.

The pharmacological evidence was that at the time of the accident the applicant would have been under the influence of amphetamine to the extent that his driving ability would have been impaired.

The applicant told police that the deceased drove from Wollongong but that he took over the driving from somewhere near Maitland approximately one hour and twenty minutes prior to the accident. He said that whilst he had no recollection of the accident, he felt well and alert whilst driving and he gave evidence before the judge. His evidence was he must have fallen asleep at the wheel.

It is unnecessary to review the objective facts in any closer detail, since Mr
Green of Queen's Counsel, who appears for the applicant, does not seek to argue that the sentence imposed on the more serious charge was excessive in length. The application turns on one issue, and that is the structure of the term of four years.

As I understand it, Mr Green does not challenge the fixed term imposed for the offence under <case>. It is submitted the learned sentencing judge ought to have found special circumstances in this case, resulting in a lengthier additional term and a shorter minimum term than those which were fixed.

The applicant was forty-one years of age at the time of being sentenced. He had a number of convictions, the most recent of which were in 1988 when he was dealt with in the Local Court at Wollongong for drug offences. He was punished by way of fine and the judge concluded that it was appropriate to regard the applicant for present purposes as being a person of good character. Although he had the problem with heroin addiction, the evidence was that the applicant had been in regular employment.

In giving evidence before the sentencing judge, the applicant referred to his remorse. He told the judge he thought about the accident every day and that he had nightmares and flashbacks about it. The judge summarised this as reflecting "unspeakable remorse" on the part of the applicant. Plainly, the judge accepted this to be present in the applicant's case.

There was tendered in the applicant's case a report from Dr Anita Duffy, psychologist. Dr Duffy saw the applicant on 5 August 1996 and her conclusions were recorded in the following passage from her report: "Gino's presentation at our interview and the results of objective personality assessment show him to be highly anxious, severely depressed, suffering symptoms of post traumatic stress disorder in relation to the motor vehicle accident in which his girlfriend was killed and her daughter severely injured.
Gino experiences intense feelings of guilt, both because he was the driver and the major cause of the accident, and because he was the one who survived, instead of his girlfriend.

Gino's personality construct entails depressive features, a rather passive aggressive or negativistic outlook on life, and a tendency to be withdrawn and reclusive. These characteristics have been heightened by the traumatic event of the car accident, such that Gino is now experiencing symptoms of major depression with accompanying feelings of very low self-esteem, suicidal ideation and a strong sense of hopelessness and resignation. He is also troubled by intrusive recollections of the event, particularly where he was trapped in the burning car, and nightmares surrounding this incident.

Gino was strongly encouraged to seek psychiatric treatment and Dr Kaplan in
Wollongong was suggested. It is imperative that Gino seek such assistance, being apart from his girlfriend, Sandra, he has no one to whom he can really turn. His feelings continue to fester inside him and he constitutes a serious suicide risk. Should he be incarcerated as a result of his offences, it is important that he be monitored closely regarding any suicide attempt. He needs appropriate counselling whether within the prison system or outside in the community." 
Although Dr Duffy had encouraged the applicant to seek psychiatric treatment, the applicant's evidence before the judge was that he had not sought any treatment and that he had his own ways of grieving. He said he confided in his girlfriend, with whom he had had a longstanding relationship.

It has been submitted that, having regard to the opinions expressed by Dr
Duffy, the learned judge ought to have found special circumstances for the purposes of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).
The references in the report to the applicant being a suicide risk and his need for psychiatric treatment, it was submitted, called for an extended period of monitoring following his release from prison. It was further relevant, Mr Green submitted, that the applicant had not been in prison before.

The learned judge made no reference to the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) in his remarks on sentence. There have been many cases in this Court in which the desirability for a sentencing judge to refer to the section, and sub-s (2) in particular, has been emphasised. What makes it desirable is that if the judge indicates in his remarks that he has considered the section, this will avoid the possibility that this Court, should the sentence be challenged, might draw an incorrect inference that the availability of the section has been overlooked in the sentencing process: see Brindley [(1993) 66 A Crim R ] at 207; Bo Too (unreported, CCA, 16 July 1992) and Fuller (unreported, CCA, 7 November 1994).

However, in the present case I would not draw the inference that this experienced judge overlooked the existence of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) or that he failed to consider the possibility of an increased additional term.

There was evidence that the applicant had set about addressing his problems and the judge remarked about the fact that the applicant had given up alcohol and drugs. He also expressed the conclusion that it was hard to imagine that the applicant would ever offend again by the commission of crimes such as those with which the judge was concerned. There was nothing in the evidence to suggest that the problems referred to by Dr Duffy could not be dealt with in the prison system and there was nothing in the psychologist's report to indicate that the applicant was going to require an extended period of assistance after he left prison. In short, it seems to me that the evidence did not warrant a conclusion such as that for which Mr Green here contends.

The judge considered that it was probable that the period in custody would be approached by the applicant as a means of expiating his guilt and thus addressing the problems detected by the psychologist. I am not persuaded that there was any error in the approach that the judge here took and it does not seem to me that this Court should disturb the structure of the sentences imposed.

Accordingly, I would grant leave to appeal but I consider that the appeal should be dismissed. I propose orders to that effect.

LEVINE J: I agree with the orders proposed and with the reasons therefor.

STEIN JA: I agree with the orders proposed by Studdert J and with his reasons. Accordingly, the order of the Court will be leave to appeal is granted but the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
