

Regina versus Barghachoun Matter No 60522/95 [1998] NSWSC 12 (12 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 April 1998 
REGINA versus BARGHACHOUN /95 March 1998 
Wood J, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against Conviction.

Application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence (Nield DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60522/95 
DELIVERED: 12 March 1998 
HEARING DATE: 27 February 1998 
PARTIES: Regina versus Imad BARGHACHOUN 
JUDGMENT OF: Wood J, Smart J, Sperling J 
COUNSEL: * APPELLANT - S Odgers * RESPONDENT - R D Cogswell SC 
SOLICITORS: * APPELLANT - Ford Gaitanis * RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - points not taken at trial - whether leave should be given under Rule 4 Criminal Appeal Rules 1986 - whether miscarriage of justice. 
Coombe (CCA , 24 April 1997, unreported) 
McCarthy [(1993) 71 A Crim R 395] 
Tripovina and Moravito [(1988) 35 A Crim R 183] 
Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] 
Jeffery (CCA , 16 December 1993, unreported) 
BRS <case>; <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 365] 
No. of pages: 33 
REGINA versus Imad BARGHACHOUN 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: On 8 August 1995, the appellant was indicted before Nield DCJ at the Liverpool District Court on two charges of armed robbery alleged to have been committed on 6 January 1994. Each charge carried a maximum penalty of penal servitude for twenty years. 
The appellant was indicted in the name of "Bargachoun". However, the notice of appeal (and the appellant's criminal record) are in the name "Barghachoun". In this judgment, I have used the appellant's name as spelt in the notice of appeal.

The appellant pleaded not guilty to each count. He was convicted on both counts by the jury.

The appellant filed a notice of appeal against the conviction and an application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence. The latter was not pressed.

The Crown case 
The Crown case was that a Mr D Hickey, a store manager, and a Mr R Green, a security guard, went to the night safe of a bank in Bankstown on the night of January 1994. Mr Hickey was carrying a night safe wallet containing the day's takings. They were accosted by two young men. One of them approached Mr
Hickey and the other Mr Green. It is the appellant who was alleged to have approached Mr Hickey. The appellant allegedly pointed a revolver at Mr Hickey, demanding that he hand over the night safe wallet which Mr Hickey did. That was the basis of the first count.

Meanwhile, Mr Green had been knocked to the ground by the other assailant who attempted to gain hold of Mr Green's revolver. The appellant pointed his own revolver at Mr Green and told Mr Green to hand over his weapon, which he did.
That was the basis of the second count.

The two assailants then ran across the road in front of a car in which Mrs L
Petrou was travelling. The police were called.

On 21 January 1994, in the course of an investigation into another matter, the police found Mr Green's revolver in the appellant's Daihatsu van which was parked in the backyard of the appellant's home. The appellant denied knowledge of the revolver having been there.

The appellant thus became a suspect. The police made an identification video tape, showing the appellant's face as photograph No. 9. There were pictures of eleven other faces on the tape. On 26 April 1994, the tape was shown to Mr
Hickey, and between that date and 3 May 1994 to Mr Green. Mr Hickey made a positive identification. He said, when shown the pictures that he was "absolutely sure" that picture No. 9 was that of the man who had robbed him.
Mr Green was unable to identify the appellant from the video pictures.

On 3 May 1994, the appellant was interviewed by the police. He denied knowledge of the episode and declined to be further interviewed. He was charged at this stage with the two offences.

On 2 June 1995, Mrs Petrou viewed the video tape. In her evidence in court she said she had made a positive identification. Her words were that she had specified photograph No. 9 "as the gentleman that I saw". Detective Platteel, on the other hand, who was present at that time, gave evidence that she had said the photograph "looks like him". That was evidence of resemblance only, not a positive identification.

In these circumstances, the Crown conceded at the trial that its case depended upon the identification of the appellant from the video tape pictures by Mr
Hickey and (such as it was) by Mrs Petrou, in conjunction with the finding of
Mr Green's revolver in the appellant's motor vehicle. The trial judge's summing-up also proceeded on that basis.

The appellant's case 
The appellant made an unsworn statement denying any involvement in or knowledge of the robberies as charged.

A Mr Yasbeck was called for the defence. He said he thought he had bought Mr
Green's revolver in a snooker room in Granville for around $400. However, he was unable to give a clear description of the revolver. He said he garaged his
Torana at the appellant's place. The appellant and he each drove a Torana. The implication was that the Daihatsu van was not much driven, if at all. He said he did not keep the revolver with him when he was driving his Torana because he did not want to be pulled up with a gun in his car. He left the gun in his
Torana when it was parked on the appellant's premises or in the appellant's
Daihatsu van when he (Mr Yasbeck) was out in his own vehicle.

Grounds of appeal 
There were initially two grounds of appeal. Counsel who appeared for the appellant on the appeal and who had recently come into the case indicated that those grounds of appeal were abandoned. Leave was given to add two further grounds of appeal, as follows: 
The trial judge erred in admitting evidence of the appellant's dealings with Mark Harris on 18 April 1994.

The trial judge erred in failing properly to direct the jury regarding conduct of the appellant in respect of which adverse inferences might be drawn by the jury.

I will deal with grounds 3 and 4 in turn.

Ground 3: The trial judge erred in admitting evidence of the appellant's dealings with Mark Harris on 18 April 1994.

On the morning of Friday 21 January 1994, Detective De Kauwe, then stationed with the National Crime Authority, attended at the premises where the appellant was living, 20 Winston Avenue, Guildford, in company with officers from the Australian Federal Police, including Detective McMahon.

On that occasion, Detective McMahon located the revolver (which came to be identified as Mr Green's revolver) under the front seat of the appellant's
Daihatsu van. Detective McMahon gave evidence that the appellant said the vehicle was not his, that he had sold it to a friend.

According to the evidence, the appellant gave further and inconsistent information to the police about ownership and possession of the vehicle. He told Detective De Kauwe later in the day that he did own the vehicle, but at a recorded interview still later in the day he again said he did not. He said it had been sold and had been brought back to be fixed but was not his anymore.
He elaborated on that. He said the vehicle had been returned nine or ten days ago to be fixed and that the purchaser had the vehicle for about a week. He declined to name the purchaser, but later pointed out the house where the purchaser lived.

The interview being on 21 January, the week referred to by the appellant would have been approximately 4 to 11 January. The robbery was on 6 January. The point of this account by the appellant was that the Daihatsu van would have been out of the appellant's possession at the time of the robbery. The implication was that Mr Green's revolver could have been placed in the vehicle at the time of the robbery by someone other than the appellant while the vehicle was out of the appellant's possession.

Detective De Kauwe gave evidence that he identified the person to whom the appellant said he had sold the vehicle as Mark Harris. He was interviewed. He was about sixteen, according to Detective De Kauwe. (He turned out to have been much younger.) 
Further evidence was then led from Detective De Kauwe, without objection, concerning a subsequent interview with Mark Harris on 19 April 1994, following contact with the police by Mark Harris' mother. Evidence was led, without objection, that the further interview involved an allegation of an approach to
Mark Harris by the appellant around that time, and that it was as a result of that allegation that Detective De Kauwe had again spoken to the appellant on April 1994.

Objection was then taken to evidence being led as to the content of the further interview with the appellant. The evidence was allowed by the trial judge.

Detective De Kauwe's account of the interview was that he told the appellant that he wished to speak to him about the appellant allegedly fronting a young witness (Mark Harris) the day before at the shops. Detective De Kauwe said that Sergeant Smith, who was also present, put it to the appellant that he and his friends had fronted Mark Harris at the shops the day before, grabbed him and abused him. In response, the appellant denied speaking to Mark Harris. He said that he (the appellant) was in a car at the time and had remained there.

Mark Harris was called as a witness by the Crown. He was sixteen years of age at the time of the trial and was, therefore, no older than fourteen years of age in April 1994. He said he had agreed to purchase the Daihatsu van from the appellant in December 1993 for $700, which he had paid, and that on 2 January the vehicle had been delivered to him. The engine would not start. The appellant said to bring it back. He and a helper pushed the van back to the appellant's place. That was about four days after he had bought the car. He and the appellant agreed that he (Mark Harris) would take an inflatable boat, instead of the vehicle, for the money he had paid. So, according to Mark
Harris, the vehicle was again the appellant's, as the appellant would have known.

The main point of this evidence was, however, the dates. Mark Harris' evidence placed the vehicle in the appellant's possession at the time of the robbery.
The evidence contradicted the appellant's account to Detective De Kauwe that the Daihatsu van was out of the appellant's possession at that time.

Mark Harris was then asked whether he had seen the appellant on 18 April 1994.
Counsel for the appellant objected to further evidence being given of any such encounter. The line of questioning was allowed by the trial judge.

Mark Harris said that he had gone to the shop to make some purchases for his mother. The appellant was in a car with some people who got out and started hassling him. The appellant remained in the car. He called Mark Harris over to the car, and "started asking me about dates ... He called me a fucking dog and said I was a dog for saying the wrong dates or something like that". Asked whether the appellant or anyone else had touched or struck him, Mark Harris answered that the appellant's companions just grabbed him a little bit and pulled him over (presumably, over to the car).

Under Ground 3, counsel for the appellant submitted that evidence concerning the appellant's alleged encounter with Mark Harris should have been disallowed because it was not relevant or, alternatively, should have been disallowed in the exercise of the judge's discretion.

I do not agree that the evidence was irrelevant. It was open to be found on that evidence that the appellant had lied to Detective De Kauwe and Sergeant
Smith on 19 April 1994 when he told them he had not spoken to Mark Harris the day before and that the lie, in conjunction with other evidence (to which I will later refer), amounted to a course of conduct which implied a consciousness of guilt.

It was also open to be found on that evidence that, contrary to the appellant's denial of having spoken to Mark Harris on 18 April 1994, he had said to Mark Harris the words Mark Harris attributed to him.

There were then two possible constructions which could be put on the words attributed to the appellant. In one way, this was evidence that favoured the appellant. The appellant had told the police, in effect, that the vehicle was out of his possession at the time of the robbery. Mark Harris had given dates or approximate dates to the police which were to the effect that the vehicle had been returned to the appellant by then. For the appellant to take Mark
Harris to task about the dates he had given the police was consistent with a belief by the appellant that what the appellant had told the police was correct.

But that was not the only way to look at the episode. The reference to "dog" (an informant) suggested that the appellant was complaining about Mark Harris having told the police what had truly occurred. The implications of that construction were that the dates or approximate dates given by Mark Harris to the police as to when the vehicle was out of the appellant's possession were true and, therefore, what the appellant had said to the police in that regard was false. That would give rise a question of fact as to whether giving the police such false information was also part of a course of conduct which implied a consciousness of guilt.

The appellant had a strong argument at the trial that the evidence in relation to his encounter with Mark Harris on 18 April 1994 should be excluded in the exercise of the judge's discretion, as being prejudicial to the appellant and of low probative value. However, the appellant carries a heavy burden in challenging a discretionary ruling: Coombe (CCA , 24 April 1997, unreported). I am not persuaded that the decision to admit the evidence insofar as it was a discretionary decision was so manifestly wrong as to make good the challenge.

As events turned out, the evidence of the encounter with Mark Harris was not left to the jury as potentially implying a consciousness of guilt. That came about in the following way. During a break in the summing-up, the following discussion took place between the trial judge and the Crown Prosecutor.
 "In the absence of the jury 
HIS HONOUR: Have Mr Bargachoun brought to court and whilst that is happening there are two matters I wish to raise with counsel. Primarily directed towards the Crown Prosecutor. Mr Crown there is two things that really you didn't mention to the Jury that I thought you might have mentioned to the Jury, the first was (1) the lies if that's what you say they were of the Accused concerning the ownership of the Daihatsu, do you rely upon that? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Your Honour I don't really, I think the Accused back tracked a bit in all of that and - 
HIS HONOUR: All right well you don't rely on it. Secondly, the confrontation with Mark Harris on 18 April is indicating a consciousness of guilt, do you rely on that? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: I do rely on that your Honour for what it's worth, although
I agree that it's fairly border line and your Honour I'm happy to abandon it.
I appreciate that sometimes those actions are equally consistent with the actions of innocent man as opposed to those of a guilty man.

HIS HONOUR: So I'll tell the jury that in relation to what he said about the ownership of the vehicle and what he did to Mark Harris, it doesn't amount to anything that they can take into account.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: I'm content with that your Honour because it really does boil down doesn't it to the identification principally by Hickey to a certain extent by Petrou and to the finding of a gun.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: I agree your Honour." 
Counsel for the appellant remained silent. He is to be taken to have acquiesced in the course his Honour proposed.

The exchange related to the appellant's denial of ownership of the Daihatsu van and to the episode involving Mark Harris on 18 April 1994. I am presently concerned with the latter topic, but it is important to note, for later purposes that both were mentioned.

The trial judge then resumed his summing up. He made some observations about what had passed between the appellant and Detective De Kauwe concerning the sale of the vehicle to Mark Harris and its return. He then went on to deal with the episode that had occurred on 18 April 1994. His Honour said: "You heard also the learned Crown Prosecutor questioned Constable De Kauwe about his speaking with the Accused on 19 April 1994 concerning the incident between the Accused and two of his friends and Mr Mark Harris on 18 April 1994 and you might remember that before I sent you to the jury room, the learned
Crown Prosecutor put to me that he would argue that that evidence showed a consciousness of guilt on the part of the Accused. As it turned out it seemed that there was a confrontation between the Accused and two of his friends and
Mr Harris, there was some pushing and shoving and some talking but you might think at the end of the day that an innocent person who had been spoken to about something by the police and who had learnt that somebody had spoken to the police about something that that person had done or not done, may be annoyed by it and may confront that person and indeed now the evidence is all before you, as I understand the learned Crown Prosecutor simply because he did not mention it again in his address to you concedes or accepts that nothing comes from that evidence. So where as the evidence exists and you have heard it and you know what it is about, it does not help you to decide whether or not the identification of the Accused by Mr Hickey and Mrs Petrou and such conclusions as you may draw from the finding of the gun in the Accused's car at his home. It will not assist you to resolve and determine those issues. So members of the Jury, you can see from what I have said that this really leaves the question, are you satisfied beyond reasonable doubt and I am going to come to this in a moment by the evidence of Mr Hickey alone or by his evidence supported by Mrs Petrou or by his evidence, whether or not it is supported by
Mrs Petrou but supported by the finding of the gun, that the Accused was the man, one of the two men who robbed him, that is Mr Hickey and Mr Green. Now I will come back to that in a moment." (emphasis added).

By the words I have emphasised, the trial judge, intended to convey to the jury that the appellant's conduct on 18 April 1994 was consistent with the actions of an innocent person and, accordingly, did not imply consciousness of guilt. That this was his intention is apparent from the prior recorded discussion with the Crown Prosecutor which I have quoted.

It may be doubted that the words I have emphasised in the quotation from the trial judge's summing up were sufficiently clear to bring home to the jury that the evidence of the encounter should not be used as evidence that the appellant was conscious of his own guilt, as the trial judge intended to convey.

No further or other direction was sought. But the appellant's point is not deficiency in the summing-up. It is the admission (over objection) of the evidence of the confrontation with Mark Harris, which the appellant says was not rectified by a clear direction in the summing-up to disregard the evidence as potentially indicative of a consciousness of guilt.

As I have said, I am not persuaded that the admission of the evidence was wrong. The deficiencies in the summing up in relation to the episode are therefore not immediately in point. I have gone on to cover what occurred in relation to the summing-up in this connection and what was said in the summing up because of its relevance to Ground 4..

Ground 4: The trial judge erred in failing properly to direct the jury regarding conduct of the appellant in respect of which adverse inferences might be drawn by the jury.

Under this ground the appellant specifies four instances in which it was open to the jury to find that the appellant had conducted himself in a way which could have given rise to adverse inferences being drawn against the appellant without proper and necessary directions by the trial judge.

Lie to police in relation to ownership of the motor vehicle 
On 21 January 1994, when the revolver was found in the vehicle, the appellant at first told the police that the car was not his and that it belonged to a friend.

The truth appeared to emerge slowly in the course of further questioning of the appellant and when Mark Harris was interviewed. The car had been sold to
Mark Harris, but by 21 January 1994 (the date of the appellant's interview with Detective De Kauwe) it had, according to Mark Harris been returned to the appellant in exchange for a boat. On that evidence, the vehicle was unquestionably owned by the appellant as at 21 January 1994 and, on Mark
Harris' evidence, at the time of the robbery for that matter. So, if one accepted Mark Harris' evidence, the statements by the appellant to the police that the vehicle belonged to a friend were lies.

It is apparent from the recorded discussion with the Crown Prosecutor, to which I referred earlier, that his Honour intended to direct the jury that they could not rely on the appellant's lies about ownership of the Daihatsu van (if that is what they were) as implying a consciousness of guilt. I think that was a generous approach by his Honour.. But, be that as it may, the summing-up fell short of his Honour's intent. His Honour said: "In the Crown Prosecutor's case, he presented evidence that the Accused when spoken to about the silver Daihatsu van, denied that it was his, he denied that to Constable Sheralee McMahon and he denied it later but as he went on in his interview, it seemed apparent you might think, the learned Crown
Prosecutor does not dispute this that he got to a position of conceding that the car was his and indeed when you consider the evidence of Mr Mark Harris, that he had purchased the car from the Accused on 2 January and then returned it to the Accused on 3 or 4 January, it would be hard you might think to dispute that the person who was able to sell it was the person who owned it.
But you might think really it does not matter whether he said initially that he did not own that particular vehicle. I mean it was there in his place and he had purported to sell it and he told the police that he had sold it and he then subsequently, you will remember that he did not disclose the name of the purchaser when first spoken to by Constable De Kauwe but when Constable De
Kauwe was taking him to the Australian Federal Police Headquarters in Sydney, he pointed out the address of the person to whom he had sold it and that address happened to be 42 Fairfield Road, Guildford which was the address of
Mr Mark Harris." (Emphasis added).

In this passage, the trial judge told the jury, in effect, that they might think the lies about ownership of the vehicle did not matter, and that was all.

I assume in favour of the appellant without deciding that the trial judge was obliged to tell the jury unequivocally that they should not use the evidence as implying a consciousness of guilt - as he intended to do - or to give them directions as to how to weigh the evidence insofar as it was capable of being used in that way.

He did neither. But no request was made for any further or other direction.
Rule 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules 1986 therefore has to be considered. I will return to that at the end of my treatment of Ground 4 because it also arises in relation to other points advanced under this ground and the points need to be examined collectively.

Lie to police regarding conversation with Mark Harris 
The appellant told Detective De Kauwe that he did not speak to Mark Harris on April 1994. Mark Harris said he did. The jury, it was submitted, might have preferred Mark Harris' evidence on this point, and concluded that the appellant was lying in what he said to the police in that regard.

Again, I assume in favour of the appellant that, having admitted the evidence of the encounter with Mark Harris over objection, the trial judge should have anticipated that the jury might find the appellant had lied about not speaking to Mark Harris on that occasion, and that it was therefore necessary either to direct the jury to disregard that evidence or, alternatively, instruct the jury as to how to weigh the evidence insofar as such a lie was capable of implying a consciousness of guilt.

But no such direction was sought. Rule 4 again arises for consideration.

Lie to police regarding knowledge of George Yasbeck 
Evidence was adduced that the appellant told the police on 19 April 1994 that he did not know anyone by the name of George Yasbeck. In his unsworn statement at the trial, the appellant denied that he said that to the police. Mr Yasbeck gave evidence that he had been a good friend of the appellant for two or three years.

It is said that the trial judge reminded the jury of this evidence in his summing-up. That puts the point somewhat too high. In the relevant part of the summing-up, the trial judge was saying that counsel for the appellant had concentrated on the evidence of identification. The trial judge then mentioned that there were some exceptions to that. Among these he included reference to it having been put to Detective De Kauwe that the appellant had denied knowing
Mr Yasbeck.

It is, however, the fact that the trial judge did not mention the appellant's apparent lie to the police on 19 April 1994 that he did not know Mr Yasbeck.

Again, I assume in favour of the appellant that the jury could have taken this to be a further dishonest attempt by the appellant to disassociate himself from the crime in every possible way, thereby implying a consciousness of guilt. I am further prepared to assume that a direction as to how to weigh this evidence in that regard was required.

But none was sought. Rule 4 again arises for consideration.

Refusal to participate in line up.

The appellant's written submissions refer to it having been put in cross- examination of the police that there had been no such refusal, and that the appellant had himself sought a line up. But a question is not evidence. So, in this instance, there was no evidence of a lie.

However, Counsel for the appellant also submitted that a direction was necessary concerning the evidence of refusal to participate in a line up. I would uphold that submission. The following is an extract from the judgment of
Hunter CJ at CL in McCarthy [(1993) 71 A Crim R 395] at :
 "The next complaint in relation to evidence was the admission of the fact that
McCarthy had declined to participate in an identification parade. The evidence was clearly admissible, to enable the Crown to explain why evidence which the jury may well have expected to be led was not being led: cf Regina versus James
Nigel Claridge (CCA, 15 May 1992, unreported at 12-13. The practice of holding identification parades is well known within the community, and the
Crown was not obliged to wait for McCarthy to raise some issue about such a parade before it was entitled to explain its absence. Otherwise, if an accused remains silent and nothing is said about it, the jury may well draw an inference adverse to the Crown: cf Regina versus Reeves [(1992) 29 NSWLR ]
at 115.

When such evidence is given, however, the judge should give a direction - as soon as the evidence is given and, if necessary, again in the summing-up - to make it clear to the jury that the accused had a fundamental right to decline to participate in an identification parade and that his exercise of that right must not lead to any conclusion by them that he is guilty: Regina versus Reeves (at 115). No such direction was given." 
The absence of a direction by the trial judge, if not at the time when the evidence was given, then certainly in the course of the summing-up was a serious omission. I do not doubt that if the trial judge had been reminded of the need for such a direction, it would have been given. However, no request for the direction was made either when the evidence was given or in relation to the summing-up.

Accordingly, r 4 again arises for consideration.

Rule 4 
In relation to each of points (a),(b),(c) and (d) above, I have held or assumed for the purposes of this judgment that in each instance the trial judge erred in failing to direct the jury - in some respects, at all; in others, adequately - that the evidence could not be used as implying a consciousness of guilt or, alternatively, to direct the jury as to how deal with the evidence from that perspective.

In none of these instances was a further or other direction sought. Rule 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules 1986 provides as follows: "No direction, omission to direct, or decision as to the admission or rejection of evidence given by the Judge presiding at the trial, shall, without the leave of the Court, be allowed as a ground for appeal or an application for leave to appeal unless objection was taken at the trial to the direction, omission or decision by the party appealing or applying for leave to appeal." 
The early authorities were examined by Yeldham J in Tripovina and Moravito [(1988) 35 A Crim R 183.]
His Honour concluded (at 195): "Generally speaking such leave will only be granted where an irregularity has occurred which is such a departure from the essential requirements of the law that it goes to the root of the proceedings." 
In Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] Hunt J (as he then was) said: "The requirements of r 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules do not constitute some mere technicality which may simply be brushed aside. One purpose of the requirement that no misdirection or non-direction may, without leave, be allowed as a ground of appeal unless objection was taken at the trial is to ensure that the trial judge receives the assistance from counsel to which he or she is entitled in the task of giving appropriate directions to the jury.
If a summing-up contains some error which could easily have been cured once the judge's attention had been drawn to it, and if counsel for the accused to whose detriment the error operates fails to comply with his or her duty to draw the judge's attention to that error (R versus Knight (Court of Criminal
Appeal, 18 December 1990, unreported at 46), any suggestion that such detriment automatically entitled the accused to a new trial does not strike a sympathetic chord in the hearts of those who see the right to a fair trial as operating in favour not only of the accused but also of the Crown, which prosecutes on behalf of the whole community. The [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) does not exist to enable an accused who has been convicted under one set of issues to have a new trial under a new set of issues which he could and should have raised at the first trial.

There are, of course, cases in which the error made is of such a nature that, notwithstanding the failure of counsel for the accused to comply with that duty, leave will be granted to avoid a miscarriage of justice." 
In Jeffery (CCA , 16 December 1993, unreported) Mahoney JA said: "Errors will occur and r 4 provides for them. But unless there be a convincing reason why the matter was not raised at the trial and unless the possibility of real injustice appears, an accused should be held to what was done by or for him at trial level. Not infrequently this Court is asked to act under r 4 when the reason why the defect was not dealt with at the trial has not been established and where it is at least possible that there were tactical reasons why it was not. It is not easy for the court on appeal to satisfy itself that the reason why the matter was not raised was error rather than choice. In such circumstances, the court should be slow to act under r 4. In the end, the court must exercise the power given to it by r 4 according to the merits of the individual case. However, in my opinion, in exercising that power, the court should keep steadily in mind the function which r 4 performs in the criminal process." 
More recently, statements have been made in BRS <case>; [(1997) 148 ALR 101], emphasising that [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s4.html) does not operate to defeat an appeal if there has been a substantial miscarriage of justice. As was stated in Wilde <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 365], 372, there may be a miscarriage of justice in either of two ways: first, where conviction would not have been inevitable absent the error in question; and, secondly, where, irrespective of that consideration, the error is a fundamental irregularity in the conduct of a criminal trial.

The trial judge obviously took the view that, rather than become involved in peripheral matters, it would be fairer to the appellant to concentrate on the evidence directly relevant to the central issue. That was the identification evidence in conjunction with the finding of Mr Green's revolver in the appellant's motor vehicle.

I agree with the trial judge's assessment of the position in that regard. It was not to the appellant's advantage to have the jury reminded of the peripheral matters which are the subject of this ground of appeal. The evidence was capable of supported a view that the appellant had, from the start, tried - in a dishonest way - to disassociate himself from the hold-up gun having been found in his vehicle. That course of conduct could have been found to include lies about ownership of the vehicle (point (a)), a lie about the vehicle being out of his possession at the time of the robbery, a lie about not having spoken to Mark Harris on 18 April 1994 point (b)), and a lie about not knowing Mr Yasbeck (point (c)).

Point (d) - refusal of a line up - is in a different category. The appellant was within his rights in refusing a line up, particularly after he had been identified by photograph. That could not be used against him. If the judge was to say anything about such refusal it had to be that. But there was an unavoidable risk that, despite such a direction, a jury would see the refusal of a line up as part of a consistent course of conduct - some, at least, dishonest - by which the appellant strove to avoid involvement.

The trial judge considered that it was fairer to the appellant to put to one side those peripheral aspects of the evidence that came to his mind. These were points (a) and (b). The appellant's counsel acquiesced in that approach.
One could not question the wisdom of that course.

It is at least strongly arguable - and in some instances correct - that the trial judge did not deal with points (a) to (d) satisfactorily in the course of his summing-up, nor indeed with the evidence relating to the encounter with
Mark Harris which is the subject of Ground 3. It was, however, unquestionably the right decision on the part of the appellant's counsel at the end of the trial to allow these sleeping dogs to lie. The alternative was to bring into focus a body of evidence which was potentially very damaging to the appellant in the way I have mentioned.

There has been no miscarriage of justice in this case arising from any asserted deficiency in the summing-up. The Crown case that the appellant was one of the assailants was very strong. The chance of the positive identification by Mr Hickey and the finding of the gun in the appellant's motor vehicle being a mere coincidence was slight in the extreme. That was recognised in the decision made on the appellant's behalf to fix the appellant's flag to the mast of Mr Yasbeck's improbable story that the had bought the gun (which he could not describe clearly) in a hotel (he thought), and had kept it in the appellant's defunct motor vehicle rather than be caught with it in his possession. On the appellant's case, that was without the appellant's knowledge and notwithstanding that the vehicle was likely to be worked on by the appellant.

The respects in which the summing-up is impugned were not directly relevant to the central issues in the case, which were the reliability of the identification and the chance of the gun in the appellant's motor vehicle being a mere coincidence. The trial judge brought the jury's mind to those issues several times in the summing-up and, insofar as the matters which are the subject of complaint were mentioned, the tenor of the summing-up was that such matters were peripheral and need not be considered.

I am satisfied that there was no miscarriage of justice in the relevant sense in this case.

Of the asserted deficiencies in the summing up, the only one that has given me pause has been point (d), which relates to the evidence of refusal of a line up by the appellant. In some circumstances, the absence of a McCarthy direction might give rise to a miscarriage of justice. But in this case it is otherwise. One should first recognise that evidence of refusal of a line up is customarily led by the Crown to rebut any suggestion that might otherwise be made that the investigating police have acted unfairly in that regard. It is not necessarily evidence of any moment. In this instance, the evidence was led without objection, and there was no suggestion in the summing up that the evidence was adverse to the appellant. Then, as I have said, it would not have been to the appellant's advantage to have attention drawn to that evidence.
When one has regard to the strength of the Crown case and to these considerations, there is no serious prospect, in my view, that the appellant may have lost a chance of acquittal for lack of a McCarthy direction.

In these circumstances, I would not give leave pursuant to [Rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s4.html)
Ground 4, accordingly, fails.

Orders 
I propose the following orders: 
Appeal against conviction dismissed.

Application for leave to appeal against sentence (not argued) dismissed.

REGINA versus Imad BARGHACHOUN 
JUDGMENT 
WOOD J: I agree with the reasons and orders proposed by Sperling J. 
REGINA versus Imad BARGHACHOUN 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: The facts are set out in the judgment of Sperling J. At pp 12 & 13 of his judgment he has reproduced the exchange which took place at the start of 10 August 1995 between the judge and counsel (see p 1 of that day). He has drawn the conclusion that counsel for the accused remained silent and acquiesced in the course being taken. Given the terms of the exchange it is probable that the last words attributed to the Crown Prosecutor, namely, "I agree your Honour" were spoken by counsel for the accused. Otherwise the last part of the discussion does not make sense. I think that there has been a transcription error. There is a notation that the transcript was "released unrevised to CCA." 
I conclude that there was an express agreement by counsel for the accused that it would be appropriate to tell the jury that as to what the accused said about the ownership of the vehicle and what he did to Mark Harris did not amount to anything that they could take into account.

At SU 5 of 10 August 1995 the judge, after explaining why the evidence of Mark
Harris as to the incident of 18 April 1994 could bear an innocent connotation, told the jury that the Crown accepted or conceded that nothing came from that evidence and that it did not help them decide whether the accused was the robber. The judge focused the attention of the jury on the identification issue and the inferences which could and should be drawn from finding the gun in the van.

The directions of the judge amounted to a direction to put aside the evidence in question and concentrate on the issues which he had isolated for them as the central ones. In the circumstances that sufficed although the matter could have been put more clearly.

As to the evidence about what the accused said about the ownership of the
Daihatsu van the judge was less explicit. He told the jury that they might think it did not matter whether the appellant said initially that he did not own that vehicle. The judge then gave the jury some reasons for taking that view. The effect of the judge's remarks was to place that issue on the sidelines. The directions should have been clearer.

Again no objection was taken. The appellant would have preferred these matters to be placed to one side quickly and with little comment and the focus to be on the identification evidence.

The appellant would also have preferred the course taken by the judge of not mentioning the appellant's apparent lie to the police on 19 April 1994 of not knowing Mr Yasbeck. From the appellant's point of view the least said about that matter the better. Thus no re-direction was sought.

I agree with what Sperling J has written as to the point about the identification parade. I also agree that leave should not be granted under
Rule 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules. There has been no miscarriage of justice for the reasons given by Sperling J.

The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.
 * * * 
