

Waters versus John Fairfax Publications [2002] NSWSC 1243 (20 December 2002) 
Last Updated: 7 January 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: WATERS versus JOHN FAIRFAX PUBLICATIONS <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 20432 OF 2002  
HEARING DATE{S): 17 December 2002  
JUDGMENT DATE: 20/12/2002  
PARTIES: 
KEVIN WATERS  v  
JOHN FAIRFAX PUBLICATIONS PTY LTD 
ACN 003 357 720  
JUDGMENT OF: Levine J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
S Wheelhouse  
R Glasson  
SOLICITORS: 
Blessington Judd  
Freehills  
CATCHWORDS: 
Imputations - form - capacity  
ACTS CITED:  [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/)  
DECISION: 
See paragraph 20  
JUDGMENT:  - 16 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DEFAMATION LIST  
JUSTICE DAVID LEVINE  
FRIDAY 20 December 2002  OF 2002  
KEVIN WATERS  v  
JOHN FAIRFAX PUBLICATIONS PTY LTD 
ACN 003 357 720  
JUDGMENT (Imputations - form - capacity)  The plaintiff sues the defendant for damages for defamation in relation to two articles published in The Sydney Morning Herald on 29 and 30 August The text of each article is appended to these reasons.  The plaintiff pleads that the first article carries the following imputations defamatory of him:  (a) The Plaintiff is corrupt in that, when a member of the Tow Truck
Industry Advisory Council, a body set up by the government to reform the tow truck industry, the Plaintiff employed the criminal Ian Clissold, to work in the tow truck industry.  
The Plaintiff is corrupt in that when a member of the Tow Truck Industry
Advisory Council, a body set up by the government he made a collusive deal with the NRMA.  The second article is said to carry the following imputations defamatory of the plaintiff:  (a) The Plaintiff is corrupt in that, when a member of the Tow Truck
Industry Advisory Council, a body set up by the government to reform the tow truck industry, the Plaintiff employed the criminal Ian Clissold, to work in the tow truck industry.  
The Plaintiff is corrupt in that when a member of the Tow Truck Industry
Advisory Council, a body set up by the government he made a collusive deal with the NRMA.  
The plaintiff is guilty of serious misconduct while an advisor to the Tow
Truck Industry Advisory Council in that he employed as licensed tow truck drivers criminals including Ian Raymond Clissold who was found guilty of the manslaughter of a bikie gang member.  The defendant has objected to the imputations as pleaded on the basis of form and capacity.  
First matter complained of   The objection to form is founded upon the decision of Hunt J in Mayfield-
Smith versus Mirror Newspapers Ltd [[1982] 2 NSWLR 419] at 421: by way of example the words "when a member of the Tow Truck Industry Advisory
Council, a body set up by the government to reform the tow truck industry" are objected to on the basis that they add nothing to, nor qualify in any way, the sting of the imputation and should be deleted.  For the plaintiff it is conceded that the principle as enunciated by Hunt J is correct but that it has no application in the present case. I accept the submission of the plaintiff in regard to this question of form as it relates to both imputations said to arise from the first matter complained of. In my view it certainly adds to the sting to identify the plaintiff as a member of the body referred to in the context of the whole of this article.  It is further contended that the imputations suffer the traditionally asserted defect in not identifying "corrupt" or, to put it another way, the balance of the imputation does not explain the concept vis-a-vis the plaintiff. With this I must disagree. Whilst I acknowledge that if the complained of clause was omitted, merely to say that the plaintiff employed the criminal and was thus corrupt would not, as such, be proper in form in that it would fail to disclose the nature of the corruption or any suggestion of knowledge. As a whole, however, the imputation is adequately clear.  The same considerations relate to the second imputation founded in the first matter complained of.  In the light of the matter complained of and viewed discretely as an imputation I do not consider the plaintiff to have offended what was enunciated by the Chief Justice in Drummoyne Municipal Council versus Australian
Broadcasting Corporation [(1990) 21 NSWLR 135] especially at 138, or what was said by Hunt J in Whelan versus John Fairfax and
Sons Ltd [(1988) 12 NSWLR 148] at 152 (see also Hall & Ors versus Gould <case>,
Levine J, at paragraph [13]).  A further question of form, especially in relation to the second imputation, is argued to the effect that the word "collusive" is ambiguous and imprecise. Reference is made to the Oxford English Dictionary's definition involving "fraud" and "trickery". I am of the view that there are parts of the matter complained of as well as the overall theme which support the proposition of "collusion" and a deal being done between the plaintiff and the NRMA in secret. By way of example, the plaintiff is referred to as the "favoured operator" for the NRMA, those parts of the matter which refer to the absence of information being passed to the general manager of the
Tow Truck Authority and the notion of "surprise" in relation to the announcement of the deal.  As to the question of capacity of the matter complained of to carry these imputations the defendant is confronted by an article to which the attributes of the ordinary reasonable reader, as a person who engages in "loose thinking" and reads between the lines, will be particularly relevant. The prominence given to the plaintiff in the opening parts of the matter complained of set a theme: the article proceeds to deal with the plaintiff's employment of the convicted criminal and, to use as neutral a word as possible, "an arrangement" being made with the NRMA. Everything, the ordinary reasonable reader would understand, has been referred to the
Independent Commission Against Corruption. That is the thrust of the whole matter complained of. Refined distinctions between the Tow Truck Authority and the Advisory Council could play no part, arguably, in the ordinary reasonable reader's conclusions as to what the defendant has published in the context of the two imputations pleaded.  The defendant's complaints in relation to both form and capacity with respect to the first matter complained of fail.  
Second matter complained of   First it is to be noted that from imputation 6(a) the words "a body set up by the government to reform the tow truck industry" are to be deleted and the imputation grammatically reconstructed. The same applies to imputation 6(b) by the omission of "a body set up by the government".  Taking into account those amendments, the objections as to form on the
Mayfield-Smith basis and in my view "corrupt", are not available generally for the reasons adverted to in connection with the first matter complained of.  The concept of referring "everything" to ICAC exists in the second matter complained of. There is also express use of the word "collusion".  There is some confusion within the text as to the Tow Truck Authority and the Tow Truck Industry Advisory Council, however the article does make clear that the plaintiff was "one of Mr Scully's council advisers and a preferred towing operator for NRMA". I am satisfied as to the issues of form and capacity.  It was also argued for the defendant that imputations 6(a) and (c) do not differ in substance. A fair reading of the imputations indicates that they clearly do. The act in the second imputation identifies a serious misconduct in the employment of criminals generally and Clissold in particular; the act in the first imputation is specifically corruption in relation to Clissold.  The defendants application thus fails.  The orders are: 
I find the first matter complained of capable as a matter of law of carrying imputations 5(a) and (b). 
I find the second matter complained of capable as a matter of law of carrying imputations 6(a), (b) and (c). 
I direct the defendant to file a defence to those issues to be determined by the jury pursuant to [s7A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html) of the [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) by 17
January 2003. 
Pursuant to SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/index.html#p31) r 2 I order that there be a separate trial of the issues of fact joined between the parties pursuant to [s7A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html) of the [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/). 
I place the matter in the list for call up for the purpose of fixing a date for hearing of the trial by jury. 
The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.  
The Sydney Morning Herald, Thursday August 29, 2002  
THE TOW TRUCKS THAT ATE SYDNEY 
A The Carr Government promised to reform the perennially volatile tow truck game. Four years later  
B the industry is about to explode amid allegations of favouritism and corruption.  
C Darren Goodsir reports.  
D TOW TRUCK INDUSTRY ADVISORY COUNCIL  
E Picture of the members of Council  
F PETER ANDERSON:  
G The only chairman of the 
H Tow Truck Authority. 
I He was informed by 
J NRMA Insurance of its 
K intentions for the preferred 
L towing scheme five 
M months before it was 
N announced - but never 
O raised the matter with his 
P general manager who 
Q looked after all operators.  
R CARL SCULLY: 
S Appointed Waters and 
T Willis as industry 
U experts on cleaning up 
V the industry. Has just 
W referred serious 
X allegations of 
Y misconduct to ICAC, 18 
Z months after first being 
AA alerted to misconduct.  
BB Picture of Steve Willis: 
CC STEVE WILLIS: Former 
DD member of Tow Truck 
EE Industry Advisory Council. 
FF He has secured a lucrative 
GG deal with NRMA 
HH Insurance.  
II KEVIN WATERS: One of 
JJ the city's biggest towing 
KK operators. Has won the 
LL blessing of NRMA 
MM Insurance for preferred 
OO towing  
PP FRANCES MARSHALL:  
QQ The inaugural general 
RR manager of the Tow Truck 
SS Authority. She secured a 
TT 25 per cent performance 
UU bonus.  
VV Picture of the back of a 
WW Tow Truck.  Kevin Waters is a big player  in Sydney's notorious  towing scene. He is also  arguably its most contro-  versial, a top operator  with a formidable reputation, a man of  extraordinary influence whose reach  goes all the way to the top.  The Transport Minister, Carl Scully,  thought so highly of Water's expertise  that he appointed him as a govern-  ment adviser to overhaul towing, get  rid of criminal elements and boost the  profession's horrendous reputation.  Since 1999, along with Steve Willis,  another operator, Waters has been  Scully's expert on the Tow Truck  Industry Advisory Council.  Today, their reform efforts are in  tatters.  The industry is to be examined by  the Independent Commission Against  Corruption. Such an investigation  also reflects poorly on Peter  Anderson, the ebullient chairman of  the Tow Truck Authority and the  former Labor police and health  minister entrusted by Scully to over-  see massive changes. Until now,  Scully has claimed some success in  reforming the industry, citing occu-  pational health and safety reforms,  with drivers no longer wearing  "stubbies and thongs" at accidents.  But last week, almost out of the blue,  Scully announced he had referred the  industry's difficulties to ICAC.  Only six weeks earlier, Scully was  praising Anderson for doing a "fine  job" and ridiculing Opposition  concerns of maladministration.  Today, Anderson is effectively  sidelined - with Scully "suspending"  indefinitely all authority and board  meetings.  Why the sudden change of heart?  For the past six months, the Herald   has assembled hundreds of docu-  ments, emails, correspondence and  cabinet papers detailing the towing  industry's truly rotten predicament,  and the employment by Scully's  industry adviser, Waters, of at least  one member of the Comanchero's, the  bikie gang involved in the so-called  Milperra massacre.  In its inquiries, the ICAC will find that  the Tow Truck Authority's computer  system - set up to keep track of licences  and keep out criminals - was ineffec-  tive. For three years, the computer  failed to perform - with an audit in May  last year determining 80 per cent of all  files were either incorrect or corrupt.  During that period, rapists, armed  robbers and other criminals were  routinely given fresh licences.  This was despite the law making it  mandatory for criminals to be  excluded.  "Any person or organisation that was  refused a driver's certificate or an oper-  ator's licence was not being entered onto  the database," one officer told the investi-  gators, "and therefore we had no check  of anyone who had been refused either a  licence or an operator's certificate.  "In other words, any operator or  driver who was refused a licence or  certificate could return to the TTA  some time later, speak to a different  person at the counter and subsequently  be issued with a licence or a certificate,  depending on who served them.  "I am aware that this did actually  occur on some occasions."  Despite such failings, the auth-  ority's inaugural general manager,  Frances Marshall, was granted a 25  per cent bonus. The deal, approved by  Anderson, was also ratified by offic-  ials from the Premier's Department.  Marshall took leave in 2000 and  has never returned to work. But the  day after taking leave, she turned up  at Water's office to perform unpaid  work.  [98 For 12] years,
Waters, the NRMA's  favoured operator, based in  Blacktown, employed the sergeant at  arms of the Comancheros outlaw  motorcycle gang. The bikie, Ian  Raymond Clissold, was sentenced to  jail for killing a fellow bikie last April  (see separate story).  Of course, Clissold is not the only  bikie to be working in the towing  industry. But his employment of  Clissold by Waters was problematic -  not least as Waters held the position  of a trusted ministerial adviser.  Waters and Wills say they went to  the NRMA out of "frustration" at the  Government's failure to have an  "orderly rosters scheme" trial  implemented. The two men, who  were meant to be advising the  Government on how to introduce a  fair job allocation scheme, spent five  months in painstaking negotiations  with the NRMA to secure a deal that  favoured their companies.  When the deal was announced in  February, NRMA Insurance's claims  and assessing manager, Paul  Pemberton, said the arrangements  had "been discussed with the Tow  Truck Authority and complement its  operation. If the objectives of these  initial arrangements are reached,  preferred towing within the Job Allo-  cation Scheme will be considered for  introduction across NSW."  No-one had bothered to inform the  authority's general manager, Terry  Hickey, of this important new indus-  try development.  On the day the deal was revealed,  shortly after midday, Hickey faxed  Anderson, his chairman, to alert him  to the industry uproar over the  Waters-Willis deal and concern that  "the TTA has been involved in nego-  tiations and endorsed this  agreement".  "They feel that Kevin Waters and  Steve Willis have undercut rates, will  be towing in their areas and feath-  ered their own nests when they are  supposed to be spokepersons for the  industry ..."  He went on to report to Anderson  that irate operators were suggesting  that "if the TTA was in talks with  these parties, why was nothing  mentioned in the recent newsletter?"  After faxing Anderson, Hickey  started telling towing operators the  authority had been caught by  complete surprise by the NRMA  announcement.  Later, Hickey wrote to the chief  executive of NRMA Insurance,  Michael Hawker, to complain in most  vigorous terms.  "I only became aware of the  NRMA's intentions when I received a  facsimile from a third party ..." he  wrote.  "I was disappointed that the NRMA  did not have the courtesy to provide  the TTA with the letter despite  mentioning the authority in the text.  "The lack of information supplied  by NRMA Insurance concerning the  scheme does not assist the TTA in its  dealings with the tow truck industry."  But the NRMA had a surprise of its  own. On March 4, Rick Jackson,  NRMA's chief operating officer,  replied. Not only did he reject  Hickey's assertion that the authority  had been ignored on the Waters-  Willis deal, he outlined in detail  regular meetings, emails and select  exchanges of correspondence the  insurer had with Anderson, his chair-  man, for the five months before the  deal was announced.  According to Jackson, the meetings  with Anderson started on October 17  last year, where "NRMA Insurance's  plans to develop expanded arrange-  ments ... [were explained]...  following an approach to NRMA  Insurance by Kevin Waters Towing and  Combined Towing."  Later in October, NRMA executives  met Anderson to "discuss how to struc-  ture arrangements..."  There was a further meeting in early  November, again in December and  follow-up emails in December.  Among other briefings, Anderson  was consulted by an NRMA spin doctor  about how to handle ensuing media  inquiries.  Indeed, in a letter to Anderson on  January 21 - only weeks before the  scheme was to be launched -  Pemberton thanked the former police  minister for his help with the preferred  towing scheme and declared he was  pursuing Anderson's "suggestion to  provide operators with whom we have  agreements with digital cameras to  record the accident scene and the  damage to vehicles involved".  Anderson agrees there were  meetings with the NRMA, but  strenuously denies being a party to a  commercial deal.  He says he in no way gave his  imprimatur to the scheme. "I did tell  them that if they were going to do  this, they better make sure it  complied with the law. It did then ...  and I believe it still does."  Meanwhile, with NRMA Insurance  soon expected to put the preferred  towing scheme to tender, the majority  of operators are still in the jungle -  fighting for the scraps.  
The Sydney Morning Herald, Friday August 30, 2002  
A Standover men keep on trucking  
B Darren Goodsir, Transport Editor  Threats of murder and other  methods of "extreme pressure"  are still being directed at officers  at the Tow Truck Authority, four  years after the Carr government  vowed to "kick out the cowboys"  and clean up standover tactics.  The Director-General of Trans-  port, Michael Deegan, said yester-  day that officials in charge of  reforming the industry were  regularly under armed guard, and  many staff received death threats  from operators daily.  Mr Deegan said he expected  the outbursts of "frustration"  would increase when the trial of  the job allocation scheme began  later this year. The roster-based  system was supposed to be  operating three years ago.  "Dealing with a lot of tow  truck drivers is a pleasure," Mr  Deegan said in response to a  Herald report detailing serious  industry failings.  "But there are still significant  issues for the tow-truck industry  to face, and I think we will be in  for a difficult period.  "Our staff are being  threatened each and every day."  Last week the Transport Min-  ister, Carl Scully, referred to the  Independent Commission  Against Corruption "serious"  claims of collusion and the use by  one of his advisors of outlaw  motorcycle gang members to  intimidate rivals.  Mr Scully also suspended  indefinitely the authority,  chaired by the former Labor  police minister Peter Anderson  and the Tow Truck Industry  Advisory Council.  The Herald revealed yesterday  that Mr Scully and Mr Deegan  had been notified of serious mis-  conduct at the authority-includ-  ing armed robbers and rapists  receiving tow truck licences - in  April last year in a critical report  by Paul McKinnon, the former  Olympic security chief.  The article also detailed how  Kevin Waters, one of Mr Scully's  council advisors and a preferred  towing operator for NRMA In-  surance, had employed for 12  years a member of the Coman-  cheros motorcycle club.  The biker, Ian Raymond  Clissold, the club's sergeant-at-  arms, is now serving 16 years  in jail for manslaughter over  the bashing death of  another gang member.  NRMA Insurance stressed its  preferential dealings with Mr  Waters - and Combined Towing,  operated by Steve Willis, another  council member - were part of a  "trial" in parts of Sydney. There  would be a tender for a statewide  selective towing program.  Since the preferred scheme  started in February, NRMA In-  surance has added Active Towing  to the program. The scheme  applies only to accidents.  Mr Deegan said he was con-  vinced ICAC would act "fiercely"  in detecting whether the industry  was still bedevilled by corruption.  Rejecting charges he failed to  act promptly when first advised  of misconduct 18 months ago, he  said he immediately told ICAC  about the McKinnon report.  Mr Deegan released a letter he  sent at the time to the ICAC head,  Irene Moss, in which he advised  her of "corrective measures" he  was undertaking. But at that stage  there was no formal ICAC inquiry.  The Opposition transport  spokesman, Peter Debnam,  yesterday called for Mr Scully to  stand aside pending the outcome  of ICAC's investigation. He said  Mr Scully had clearly misled  parliament in claiming seven  weeks ago that the industry was  in fine shape.  The Australian Competition  and Consumer Commission said  it would be looking into some of  the industry's selective deals.  
LAST UPDATED: 20/12/2002 * * * 
