

Doyle versus Phillips (No 2) Matter No 2562/97 [1997] NSWSC 238 (11 June 1997) 
Doyle versus Phillips (No 2) /97  June 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - DOYLE versus PHILLIPS (NO 2) 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I heard argument on two separate questions on 28 May last. I gave reasons for the decision on the first question but reserved my decision on the second. The second question is really unnecessary to the decision because the answer to the first question means that the suit must be dismissed with costs. However, as requested I supply my reasons on the second question. 
The question is whether on the true construction of cl 54(1A) of the Gosford
Planning Scheme Ordinance, as introduced through Gosford Local Environmental
Plan No 314 of 20 October, 1995, the operation of sub-para (b) of the covenant contained in registered dealing No J645378 is not to apply to the erection of any building and the carrying out of any building works in accordance with building approval No 2591/97 granted 16 April, 1997 by Gosford City Council.

Section 28 of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) (the
EP & A Act) provides by sub-section 2 as follows: "For the purpose of enabling development to be carried out in accordance with an environmental planning instrument or in accordance with a consent granted under this Act, an environmental planning instrument may provide that, to the extent necessary to serve that purpose, a regulatory instrument specified in that environmental planning instrument shall not apply to any such development..." 
By Local Environmental Plan No 314 a new cl 54 (1A) was inserted into the
Gosford Planning Scheme Ordinance. So far as is relevant that clause provided as follows: "(1A) For the purpose of enabling development within Zone No 2...to be carried out in accordance with this plan (as in force at the time the development is carried out) or in accordance with a consent... the operation of any covenant...prohibiting or imposing restrictions on the erection or use of buildings for certain purposes or on the use of land, to the extent necessary to serve that purpose, is not to apply to the development." 
I have already set out in my earlier judgment the covenant in question in this case but for completeness I will repeat it. By transfer J645378 of 1964 the transferees covenanted to the transferor "(b) that no building shall be erected on the land hereby transferred or any part thereof until the design and location of such building or erection shall have been approved in writing by the Transferor its successors or assigns".

There is now no doubt that in the appropriate case a provision in a planning scheme ordinance or a local environmental plan may prevail over a restrictive covenant and render the latter pro tanto inapplicable, Ludwig versus Coshott [(1994) 83 LGERA 22], confirmed by the Court of Appeal as Coshott versus Ludwig, February 1997 as yet unreported. The question in the instant case is whether on the proper construction of cl 54 (1A) an environmental planning instrument has specified that a covenant shall not apply to the relevant development.

As I understand the submission, Mr Wilson for the defendants, puts that the words "this plan" must mean "this planning scheme ordinance". This is because
LEP 314 inserted a new subclause into the planning scheme ordinance and ordinarily when this occurs, the word "this" is held to refer to the original legislation into which the new clause is inserted, not the amending legislation. In Ocean Road Motel Pty Ltd versus Pacific Acceptance Corporation
Ltd <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 276], 280,
Taylor J said: "It is not open to question that where by amendment a new provision is inserted into a principal Act and that provision speaks of `this Act' it speaks of the whole 
Act of which from the time of amendment it forms part..." 
A more bizarre illustration of this rule is provided by the High Court's decision in Trustees Executors and Agency Co Ltd versus Gleeson <case>; [(1959) 102 CLR 334] which, following the decision of the Full Court of Victoria in Byrne versus Gray <case>; [[1956] VLR 520], held that where a 1951 amending Act inserted into the Victorian Licensing Act the words that something would happen after "the commencement of this Act" it meant from the commencement of the 1928 Act.
The High Court at the time indicated it had a fair idea that that was not necessarily the intention of the legislature but thought that the rule of construction was too clear to avoid that result. It may be that the High Court today would not come to the same conclusion and it is noteworthy that
Gleeson's case has never once been referred to until now in any other decision of a superior court over the last almost forty years, but it is a decision of the High Court and it shows the strength of the rule of construction.

However, it is just a rule of construction and in the appropriate case the
Court might well construe a "this Act" provision as referring to an amending
Act, cf Myer Queenstown Garden Plaza Pty Ltd versus City of Port Adelaide [(1975) 33 LGRA 70] at 125. That case raised a slightly different question, that is, whether the South Australia [Interpretation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia191/) provision that whenever in legislation one saw the words "this Act", one should read it as including regulations, rules and by-laws made under the Act, applied in a situation where the legislature used the expression "the provisions of this
Part do not limit the application of, or derogate from, any other provisions of this Act." Wells J held that it could not.

It seems to me that in the case of the words "this plan, the strong, but artificial, rule of construction used in the Ocean Road Motel case does not apply. Whilst it is not the best drafting to use the words "this plan" in an amending Regulation which becomes part of a planning scheme, the words are in contrast to the words "this Ordinance" which are used from time to time in the planning scheme, for instance in cl 30(2). It is true that from time to time LEP 314 is actually referred to as such and indeed cl 54(1B) uses the words "before the plan inserting that subclause (Gosford Local Environmental
Plan No 314) was made", " that subclause" being subclause (1A).

However, the presence of subclause (1B) really shows that the intention of is that "this plan" means LEP 314.

Even if there were not the clear indications in the ordinance itself, it would seem to me that this result would be reached by ordinary canons of construction.

An interest held by a person whose land is entitled to the benefit of a restrictive covenant is an equitable interest in land. The effect of planning schemes which abolish or suspend a citizen's interest in land must be construed fairly strictly because the legislature is presumed not to take people's property away from them at least without just compensation. As
McLelland CJ in Eq said in Re Thompson, 25 October 1993 unreported, that as the EP & A Act together with the relevant planning scheme has the effect of derogating "from vested proprietary interests (of which the benefit of a restrictive covenant is one form) it should not be construed in such a manner as to extend its operation in that regard further that its words clearly require..." This is of course in accordance with ordinary principles of statutory construction. Barwick CJ said in Wade versus New South Wales Rutile
Mining Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1969) 121 CLR 177] at 181, "If Parliament intends to derogate from the common law right of the citizen it should make its law in that respect plain.... The courts are not entitled, and ought not, to eke out a derogation of such private rights by implications not rendered necessary by the words used by
Parliament but merely considered to be consistent with the policy which the courts conclude or suppose the Parliament to have intended to implement." 
I should note in passing that it is unclear whether compensation is payable to a person whose land rights are extinguished by virtue of a planning scheme.
Although the policy of the Parliament clearly is that people's property should not be acquired without just terms, see the [Land Acquisition (Just Terms
Compensation) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/latca1991442/), the extinguishment of a person's title by government action does not appear to be an acquisition. As claims for extinguishment of title will doubtless be dealt with by courts in the near future, as the Gosford City Council may well wish to be heard on the question , and as in the instant case, for the reasons given in my earlier judgment, the plaintiffs do not have an enforceable covenant, the question should merely be flagged and not decided.

It follows from what I have said that the only extinguishment of covenants is where it is necessary to serve the purpose of LEP 314, that is, the purpose of allowing dual occupancy. As in the instant case there is merely the erection of a single dwelling on a legally subdivided piece of land, LEP 314 has nothing to do with the situation. Accordingly, the answer to question two is "No" though to avoid ambiguity perhaps it should be better answered by saying that "cl 54 (1A) of the Gosford Planning Scheme Ordinance has no effect on the continued operation of the restriction contained in sub para (b) of the covenant in transfer J645378".
 * * * 
