

MacDonald versus Puplick and Ors Matter No 30090/97 [1998] NSWSC 428 (12 June )

Last Updated: 12 October 1998 
GRANT MacDONALD versus CHRIS PUPLICK, PRESIDENT, 
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION BOARD OF NSW & 2 ORS /97 June 1998 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: By summons dated 9 September 1997 the plaintiff, Mr Grant MacDonald, seeks orders and declarations relating to three decisions made by the President of the Anti-Discrimination Board, on 22 November 1995, 24 February 1997 and 16 July 1997, and one decision of the Equal Opportunity Tribunal, dated 29 October 1996. 
The declarations sought are to the effect that the making of each of the decisions was "attended with procedural unfairness and lack of statutory basis and [is] void". Alternatively the plaintiff seeks orders in the nature of certiorari quashing each decision, in the nature of prohibition restraining the defendants from acting or relying on any of the decisions, and in the nature of mandamus directing the first and second defendants to reconsider the four decisions according to law.

The proceedings were heard on 6 April 1998 and concluded on that day with the plaintiff, who was not legally represented and appeared for himself, being granted leave to file written submissions in response to the oral submissions made by counsel for the Home Care Service of NSW ("H.C.S."). They were to be provided within one week of his receiving the transcript of the hearing before me. His written submissions were in fact received on 8 May, and were accompanied by a letter advising that the plaintiff would be out of Australia from 11 May to 11 June.

The plaintiff was the complainant in proceedings in the Anti Discrimination
Board ("the Board"), and before the Equal Opportunity Tribunal ("the
Tribunal") both established under the Anti Discrimination Act 1977 ("the
Act"). The first defendant is the President of the Board; the second defendant is the Judicial Member of the Tribunal who conducted an inquiry into the plaintiff's complaint; and the third defendant, H.C.S., was the respondent to the complaints to the Board and the proceedings in the Tribunal. The first and second defendants have filed appearances submitting to the orders of the court save as to costs.

It is convenient to set out a short history of the events up to the present time.

Early in January 1995 H.C.S. advertised a position of field worker in its
Northern Beaches Branch. The plaintiff applied and was one of seven applicants who were interviewed. He was the only male in the group. He was unsuccessful in his application but an employee of H.C.S. inquired if he would be interested in undertaking casual work. During the course of his discussions with that employee he was told that the position had been given to a younger person who was considered to be fitter, and that some clients of H.C.S.
preferred female attendants. These remarks afford evidence which if accepted and not otherwise explained could provide the basis of a finding that the selection process was contrary to the Act and that the plaintiff had been discriminated against within the meaning of the Act.

At some time shortly thereafter H.C.S. declared the recruitment process null and void for reasons unconnected with the apparently discriminatory conduct of the interview. The position was re-advertised on 25 February 1995 and all previous applicants were invited to re-apply. The plaintiff did so and was interviewed on 24 March but was again unsuccessful. This is hardly surprising in view of the fact that the selection criteria stipulated "ability to work any week day if required" and the plaintiff indicated at the interview that he was unavailable for immediate work as he had commitments caring for his mother and his aunt. He sought to be assessed for eligibility only, and, if successful, to be placed on an eligibility list for the following six months.
In addition he was considered to have had limited exposure to or experience with a broad range of customers and in undertaking housekeeping tasks. These were the reasons given for the failure of his application.

On 21 February 1995 the plaintiff wrote to the Board, referring specifically to the conversation he had had with the employee of H.C.S. following the
January interview and alleging unlawful discrimination on the grounds of sex and physical disability in the initial selection process. He advised that the interview and selection process had been aborted and that H.C.S. was preparing to re-advertise.

The plaintiff's letter was dealt with in the office of the President as a complaint under <case> of the Act. S88(1) relevantly provides as follows: "(1) except as provided by this section, a complaint in writing in respect of any contravention of this Act or the regulations which is alleged to have been committed by a person (other than a contravention in respect of which a specific penalty is imposed) may be lodged with the President by: a person on the person's own behalf, ..." 
The plaintiff's letter was referred to Mr David Hillard, then an investigation officer with the Board. Mr Hillard gave evidence in this court. He said that, following receipt of the letter, he met the plaintiff and received from him additional information.

On 9 August 1995 the President wrote to the General Manager of H.C.S. This letter was in a standard form, adapted to the circumstances of the case, and advised H.C.S. of the complaint, of the role of the Board, of the plaintiff's allegations, and of the legal basis on which the President then perceived the complaint. The President attached to the letter an outline of the plaintiff's allegations and asked for certain information from H.C.S. These appeared in eight separately numbered paragraphs. Paragraph 7 was as follows: "The complainant [ie the plaintiff] re-applied for a field worker position on March 1995. He was unsuccessful in that application, and alleges that he has not been placed on an eligibility list by Home Care Service of NSW. The complainant alleges that he should be placed on an eligibility list, given
Home Care Service of New South Wales' preparedness to offer him casual employment following the January application." 
At the time of hearing the plaintiff was aware of the contents of this letter, although the evidence does not disclose when he became so aware.

On a date which does not appear Mr Hillard prepared a complaint summary in which, under the general heading "Facts", appears a sub heading "Allegations".
Paragraph 7 of the Allegations is in essentially identically terms to paragraph 7 and the attachment to the letter sent to H.C.S. Mr Hillard summarised the reply provided by the H.C.S. and under the heading "Recommendation", stated that the plaintiff's complaint was two-fold, and broke it into the complaint about his failure to obtain a permanent position in January 1995, and the failure to declare him eligible for the permanent position in March 1995. In doing so he included reference to events that post dated the plaintiff's letter of complaint.

Mr Hillard stated that, even though the plaintiff was unable to accept a permanent position in March, he wished to be placed on an eligibility list for future positions. In saying this he was drawing, not from anything stated in writing by the plaintiff in his letter of complaint, but on information provided to him by the plaintiff during the course of their discussions.

Mr Hillard recommended that the complaint be declined in accordance with s (1) of the Act. He gave an explanation for this recommendation. The fact that the selection procedure had been aborted was important in his reasoning, since he considered that this showed the plaintiff had suffered no detriment as a result of the allegedly discriminatory interview. He then went on to deal with the March application, and stated his opinion that the plaintiff failed to meet H.S.C.'s eligibility criterion concerning availability. He noted that the plaintiff's complaint centred around his not being declared eligible for any future position, but, as he accepted that no eligibility list was prepared, considered that there was no discriminatory treatment shown. Mr
Hillard's recommendation went to a senior conciliation officer, a senior legal officer, and to the President, all of whom agreed with the recommendation that the complaint be declined in accordance with <case>, and this is the course the President took. S 90 of the Act provides: "(1) Where, at any stage of the President's investigation of a complaint, the
President is satisfied that the complaint is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance, or that for any other reason the complaint should not be entertained, the President may, by notification in writing addressed to the complainant, decline to entertain the complaint.

The President shall, in a notification under sub section (1), advise the complainant of: the reason for declining to entertain the complaint, and where section 91(1) applies to the notification - the rights of the complainant under that sub section." 
S 91 provides as follows: "(1) Where the President has given a complainant a notification under section
B(4) or 90(1), the complainant may, within twenty-one days after the date of that notification, by notice in writing served on the President, require the
President to refer the complaint to the Tribunal.

Sub section (1) does not apply to a notification in which the President has given, as a reason for declining to entertain a complaint, that what has been alleged in the complaint does not disclose any contravention of this Act.

On receipt of a notice under sub section(1), the President shall refer the complaint to the Tribunal together with a report relating to any inquiries made by the President into the complaint." 
On 22 November 1995 the President, being satisfied that the plaintiff's complaint was lacking in substance, so advised the plaintiff.

The plaintiff exercised his rights under <case> and required the President to refer the complaint to the Tribunal, which conducted an inquiry on 28 and 29
October 1996. Prior to the commencement of the inquiry the Tribunal directed the plaintiff and H.C.S. to file Points of Claim and Points of Defence respectively. This was done, and subsequently the plaintiff filed and served
Points of Reply, and a statement of his evidence in chief in writing. It will be necessary in due course to refer to some of the contents of these documents. By letter dated 25 October the plaintiff gave notice that he intended to apply to the Tribunal to amend his Points of Claim as set out in the letter.

Having heard the evidence on 28 and 29 October, the Tribunal delivered judgment on the latter date. It dismissed the complaint. In its judgment it set out a short statement of agreed facts, which included a reference to the interview of the plaintiff in March 1995. As to the January 1995 interview, the Tribunal noted that the employee responsible for the apparently discriminatory remarks to the plaintiff was not responsible for the selection of the successful candidate and rejected a submission by the plaintiff that the remarks were illustrative of "attitudes" in H.C.S.

The Tribunal then dealt with the circumstances of the interview of 24 March
It noted that the plaintiff was not ready to start work at the time but wanted H.C.S. to place him on an eligibility list until he was ready and able to commence work. The Tribunal considered that H.C.S. was entitled not to select him as a result of his unavailability at the required times.

There are four decisions the subject of the present application. In chronological order they are the decisions of the President dated 22 November , of the Tribunal dated 29 October 1996, and of the President dated 24
February 1997 and 16 July 1997.

The first is that of the President to adopt the recommendations of Mr Hillard, and decline the complaint under <case> as lacking in substance (22 November ). He adopted as his reasons those set out by Mr Hillard in the document entitled "Summary of Complaint" already referred to. The second is the decision of the Tribunal of 29 October 1996 to dismiss the plaintiff's complaint, to which reference has just been made. These can be conveniently dealt with together.

In each case the attack that is now made by the plaintiff concerns the inclusion in the decision making process of a reference to the March 1995 interview. The plaintiff's contention is that his complaints of discrimination in the January interviews and selection should have been examined and assessed in isolation from the later events of March. His argument raises the question of what is a "complaint". On the one hand it is a written document. However, the notion of "complaint" can be rather more abstract than that. It can include the substance of what is contained in a letter of complaint. There is much to be said for the view that it would be a mistake to place too strict a construction on this aspect of the terminology used in the Act. While due attention must be paid to the language used by the Act in proscribing identified forms of discrimination, those sections of the Act dealing with the procedures relating to the making of a complaint and its determination must be construed in the context of the Act as a whole. There is clearly to be found in the Act an intention on the part of the legislature to eliminate undue formality. For example, by <case> the President is required, where of the view that a complaint may be resolved by conciliation, to endeavour to do so. By s the Tribunal is required to take all steps as to it seem reasonable to effect an amicable settlement of a complaint, and may endeavour, by all such means as to it seem reasonable, to resolve a complaint by conciliation. By s the Tribunal is permitted, in its discretion, to receive in evidence transcripts of evidence in proceedings before courts or tribunals, and draw any conclusions of fact therefrom that it considers proper, and adopt any findings, decision or judgment of a court or tribunal that may be relevant, and receive in evidence any report of the President of the Board that may be relevant if a copy has been made available to every other party. By <case> the
Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself on any matter it thinks fit, is required to act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case without regard to technicalities and legal forms, and may give directions relating to procedure that, in its opinion, will enable costs or delay to be reduced and will help to achieve a prompt hearing of the matters at issue between the parties.

There are, of course, provisions ensuring procedural fairness, but these do not affect the overall intention that flexibility, and, so far as it can be achieved consistently with procedural fairness, informality, attend the proceedings. These considerations point towards a less restrictive interpretation.

The plaintiff's argument was this. Proceedings under the Act are commenced by a complaint under <case>. S 88 specifically requires a complaint to be in writing. The functions of the President and of the Tribunal are triggered by a complaint made under <case>. For example, by <case> the President is required to investigate each complaint lodged under <case>; by <case> where the
President has given certain statutory notifications to a complainant the complainant may require the President to refer the complaint to the Tribunal; by <case> conciliation procedures operate in some circumstances with respect to a complaint; and, by <case>, where those procedures are exhausted, the President may refer a complaint to the Tribunal. By <case> the Tribunal is required to hold an enquiry into each complaint or matter referred to it under ss 91(2), (1) or (95). Neither the President nor the Tribunal has any relevant power or function other than in relation to "a complaint". All of these powers and functions are to be found in Division 1 of Part 9 of the Act, for the purposes of which, in <case>, " complaint" is defined as: "(a) a complaint, not being a representative complaint, lodged under <case>, and a matter referred to the Tribunal for enquiry as a complaint pursuant to s ,
 and includes a representative complaint." [S 95 has no present relevance, and neither does the reference to representative complaint.] 
Accordingly, the President's function in investigating a complaint and the
Tribunal's function in conducting an enquiry into a complaint are limited to the exercise of those functions in relation to a complaint which is a complaint lodged under <case>.

The complaint that initiated the proceedings was made on 21 February 1995. It was concerned solely with the events of January 1995. Plainly, since it pre- dated them, it could not have concerned the events of March. But both the
President and the Tribunal included reference to and consideration of the
March events in their decision making processes. The plaintiff does not deny that, in the consultations he had with Mr Hillard, and possibly with other employees of the Board, he referred to the March events; his argument simply was that, as the Act requires the complaint to be in writing, and as the only complaint in writing was that of 21 February, there was no complaint concerning the events of March, and neither the President nor the Tribunal had jurisdiction to consider those matters.

Notwithstanding those features of the legislation that promote a flexible approach to this question, to which I have already referred, I have come to the view that there is substance in the argument advanced by the plaintiff.

As can be seen from the provisions earlier extracted, once a complaint is made, it follows a path. The initiating process is the complaint made in writing under <case>. Thereafter, the procedures required by the Act to be implemented all depend upon the existence of "a complaint". The inquiry required to be held by the Tribunal by <case>, which is at the end of the process, is an inquiry into "each complaint..." referred to it.

The complaint made by the plaintiff was a complaint about a contravention of the Act which he alleged was committed by H.C.S. in January 1995. It was not a complaint about events which had not then occurred but which occurred subsequently, in March 1995. The complaint alleging contravention of the Act in January was the only complaint properly so described which found its way to the Tribunal in 1996. The definition of "complaint" contained in <case> is, in my opinion, conclusive that the procedural steps prescribed by the Act are all intended to operate in relation to a complaint made under <case>. In this case, that complaint was the complaint made about the H.C.S.'s procedures and decisions in January. It had nothing to do with what occurred in March.

I am therefore of the view that the plaintiff has made good his submission that both the decision of the President and that of the Tribunal were procedurally flawed.

However, the remedies sought by the plaintiff are entirely discretionary. Mr
Barton, who appeared for H.C.S., referred to a wealth of material relevant to the exercise of the discretion, all adverse to the plaintiff's claim.

It is convenient to deal with these matters chronologically.

The first was the letter from the President to H.C.S., at the conclusion of Mr
Hillard's interviews and discussions with the plaintiff, dated 9 August 1995 and containing the attachment setting out Mr Hillard's summary of the plaintiff's complaints as Mr Hillard perceived them, including paragraph 7 which has been extracted above. The summary included reference to the March selection process. In oral evidence the plaintiff accepted that he was the source of the information on which this paragraph was based.

On 28 February 1996 a copy of the President's report was released to both parties. On the first page of text the report asserted that: "Details of the alleged discrimination are laid out in Mr MacDonald's original letter to the Board (TAB 1) and in the President's letter to the Home Care
Service of NSW (TAB 2)." 
TAB 2 was, of course, the letter of 9 August 1995, with its attachment. There was no evidence of any response by the plaintiff suggesting that his allegations about what occurred in March were not properly part of the complaint being dealt with by the President.

On 12 March 1996 a mediation conference pursuant to <case> of the Act took place at the Tribunal's offices. Hand written notes of the conference were annexed to an affidavit sworn by Mr Robert Watkins, an Employee Services
Officer of H.C.S. When Mr Barton referred to this document, the plaintiff initially objected, on the ground that the contents of mediation conferences are confidential and not to be disclosed. However, before it was necessary to rule on the objection, he voluntarily withdrew it.

In the notes it is asserted that the mediation was unsuccessful as agreement could not be reached as to what the issue was. The views of the Judicial
Member of the Tribunal are then set out as follows: "*He was offered casual employment after the 1st round of interviews - the conclusion being that it was based on merit.
 *He was dissatisfied with HC's response to his queries (job advertised the 2nd time the same as the 1st. *The initial discrimination that he came up against carried over to the second round of interviews - that's why he missed out on the eligibility list." 
On 22 November 1995 the President wrote the letter to the plaintiff advising that he had formed the view that the complaint was lacking in substance and that he therefore declined to entertain it further. He gave his reasons for this decision and these were stated in two clearly defined paragraphs. The first was stated to concern the alleged discrimination in the application in
January 1995. The second commenced with the words: "As for the March application..." and expressed the view that since no eligibility list was prepared, the plaintiff could not have been declared eligible and was not treated unfairly.
There was no response from the plaintiff challenging this manner of dealing with the allegations concerning the events of March.

On 23 April 1996 the plaintiff filed, pursuant to the direction of the
Tribunal, Points of Claim setting out his allegations of contraventions of the
Act. Some paragraphs bear reproducing. They are: "9. The position was re-advertised and the Complainant was interviewed in
March 1995 by a panel, with the Branch Manager, Ms Helen Robinson as Convenor.
The Complainant had stated clearly in separate letters to the Convenor and panel that he wished to be assessed for eligibility only and if successful, placed on an eligibility list for the next six months.
The Complainant was advised he was unsuccessful. No eligibility list was drawn up, even though the Home Care Service has an expressed policy of creating such eligibility lists.
 ...
The Complainant claims that the declaration of the original interview/selection process as "null and void" without a full investigation into the Complainant's concern, was a further discrimination by the employer.
The Complainant claims the non preparation of an eligibility list after the interview for the re-advertised position in March was a further discrimination against him.
The Complainant claims: 
Damages ...

Particulars of Damage: ...

Hurt, distress and frustration at the Home Care Services Head Offices' declaration of the original interview/selection process "null and void" without addressing the personal concerns raised by the complainant directly with that Office.

Hurt, distress and disappointment that no eligibility list was prepared after the re-interviews of March 1995, when the Home Care Service's stated policy is to create such eligibility lists." 
On the same date the plaintiff filed and served a statement of the evidence on which he proposed to rely. In paragraphs 97 and 98 he said: "I was invited to apply for a re-advertised position in March 1995 and submitted a new application with a covering letter to the Convenor, Ms
Robinson, asking for consideration, if successful at interview, to be placed on an eligibility list for the next six months (see attachment "O" and "P").
No eligibility list was prepared, despite the Home Care Service's expressed policy to create such eligibility lists and I was told my application was unsuccessful." 
A series of documents were attached to the statement. These documents were not before me, but the list of attachments was. There were seventeen such attachments, lettered A-Q. Of these, attachments G-P inclusive appear to relate specifically to the March events.

H.C.S. filed and served Points of Defence responding to the matters raised by the plaintiff in his Points of Claim. These, naturally, included responses to his allegations concerning the March 1995 events.

On 15 July 1996 the plaintiff filed and served Points of Reply. Again, he dealt with the selection processes of March.

These documents were followed by amended Points of Defence, and H.C.S.'s response to the plaintiff's Points of Reply, and these documents too were concerned with the March events.

On 25 October 1996, immediately preceding the commencement of the Tribunal's inquiry, the plaintiff gave notice to the solicitors then acting for H.C.S.
that he intended to apply to the Tribunal to amend paragraph 14 of his Points of Claim as follows: "Point 14 
The complainant claims the non preparation of an eligibility list after the interview in March and the failure of the respondent to include him or consider him for inclusion on that list was discrimination on the grounds of sex age and presumed disability and disability and association with a relative with a disability under <case>(b)(i)(a) and or (b); unlawful victimisation in breach of <case>(i)(c) in that I was subjected to the detriment of not being placed on an eligibility list because I had in the circumstances described in point 7 above and further conversations with employees of the respondent alleged that the respondent had committed an act which would amount to a contravention of the [Anti-Discrimination
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/)." (underlining in original).

Objection was taken to the proposed amendment. In the course of argument concerning the amendment, the plaintiff said: "Because what I have here, I believe, is an argument linking what happened in
January with what happened later in March." 
The inquiry then proceeded. The plaintiff gave evidence, and was cross- examined about the March application. He made no objection to this cross- examination. This is hardly surprising, in the light of his own statement, which was, effectively, his evidence in chief. When it came to the plaintiff's turn to cross-examine witnesses for H.C.S., he, too, asked questions about the
March selection process.

All of this shows that far from opposing the inclusion of his allegations concerning the March interview process in the conduct of the inquiry, the plaintiff actively promoted and encouraged it. In my opinion the material as a whole provides the strongest possible basis for refusing to exercise in his favour the discretion of which he seeks to avail himself. I propose to refuse the relief sought.

That disposes of the plaintiff's claims in relation to the decision of the
President dated 22 November 1995 and the decision of the Tribunal dated 29
October 1996.

The next decision attacked by the plaintiff is that of the President dated 24
February1997. It is necessary to state some further facts.

On 31 December 1996 the plaintiff wrote again to the President. He commenced by writing: "I wish to make a further formal complaint against the Home Care Service of
NSW - one of victimisation under <case>(c) of the Act." (underlining in original).

This was the plaintiff's response to the result of his application to amend in the Tribunal. Although it is not entirely clear from the material before me, it appears that the Tribunal permitted the amendment other than so far as it alleged victimisation. Accordingly, the plaintiff set out his allegations in the letter of 31 December 1996. He asserted that he was one of five people interviewed for three permanent part time positions, that a facsimile of which he had a copy suggested that three of those applicants had already been singled out for appointment, and were in fact appointed, and that the fourth applicant was also favoured over him, although she and he had both been rejected by the panel in January because of their unavailability for work at the required times. He then asserted that H.C.S. had a stated policy of creating eligibility lists and was often in need of casual workers, but that no eligibility list was created in this instance despite his appeal in a letter to the panel for consideration for eligibility for future work on the change of his circumstances. He wrote: "I believe the non preparation of an eligibility list and the failure of the
Home Care Service to consider me for casual work (when offering it to Ms
Quinlan) was a detriment, and I was subjected to that because I had previously alleged remarks and actions within the Northern Beaches Branch which amounted to a contravention of the [Anti-Discrimination
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/)." 
As is usual and necessary because of the informality that attends the making of complaints, the officers of the Board analysed the essence of the complaint made by the plaintiff in this letter in an attempt to determine its essential features. They perceived it as falling into two distinct parts. The first they saw as a complaint of victimisation arising out of the failure of H.C.S. to prepare an eligibility list following the March interviews. The second they saw as a complaint of victimisation arising from the preferential treatment the plaintiff alleged had been given to the other applicant in that she was offered casual work that he was not.

On 24 February 1997 Mr Hillard wrote to the plaintiff. He advised that the
President had decided that what the plaintiff alleged as victimisation in respect of the non preparation of an eligibility list did not disclose a contravention of the Act and was not unlawful. He gave as the President's reason the following: "The Equal Opportunity Tribunal has already made a legal finding on the reasons why you were unsuccessful in your application, and why you were not placed on an eligibility list. The Tribunal's finding makes it clear that you were not treated unfairly, and the [Anti-Discrimination
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/) was not breached by Home Care Services in its rejection of your application. The Board will not re-examine this issue." 
The effect of this letter was to notify the plaintiff that the President had, pursuant to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/s90.html), declined to entertain the complaint characterised as a victimisation complaint concerning non-preparation of an eligibility list.

Mr Hillard asked for further information about what he categorised as a second victimisation allegation, that is that the other unsuccessful candidate was offered casual work whereas the plaintiff was not.

The decision to decline to entertain the complaint of victimisation in relation to the eligibility list was made under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/s90.html) on the ground that what was alleged in the complaint did not disclose a contravention of the Act and that the conduct of which complaint was made was not unlawful.
By <case>(1A) the right a complainant otherwise has under <case> to require that a declined complaint be referred to the Tribunal does not apply where the
President has decided that what has been alleged does not disclose any contravention of the Act.

The plaintiff attacks this decision on two bases. Firstly, he argues that it was wrong in principle to split his complaint into two parts, and that his complaint should have been accepted as a single discrete unit. Secondly, he asserts that there is no basis for the rejection of the first part of the complaint on the ground that the Tribunal had already made a finding of fact which in some sense bound the President.

That part of the Tribunal's decision which is relevant is as follows: "We have heard each member of the Selection Committee which interviewed applicants on 24 March 1995 and read all the accompanying documentation. Mr
MacDonald was not ready to start work at that time but wanted the Service to place him on an eligibility list until he was ready and able to commence work.
We are satisfied on the evidence that the Committee was entitled not to select
Mr MacDonald for the reasons given, and as set out in the judgment.

The Home Care Service of NSW, in the manner in which they dealt with the application of Mr MacDonald did not breach the [Anti-Discrimination
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/).

In fact from a close examination of file of documents (marked exhibit `10') it is clear from many `file notes' made at the time; copies of letters written, and other material therein, that H.C.S. dealt with Mr MacDonald's applications in a proper and careful manner. There is no suggestion of any discrimination on the basis of age, sex or presumed disability, in the evidence.
 ...

The complainant requested the addition of a further ground as follows: [The Tribunal then set out the plaintiff's proposed amended para 14(e)] 
As indicated earlier, the Home Care Service dealt with Mr MacDonald's complaint meticulously, the comments of Ms Bowen did not effect (sic) his application for employment once the general manager of the Home Care Service of NSW had declared the original Northern Beaches Branch's selection null and void. As the Selection Committee found he did not meet the selection criteria for the position, it follows he could not be placed on any eligibility list (if there was to be one) for this reason." 
In my opinion this was not a finding on which the President could rely in order to decline further to entertain the plaintiff's complaint of victimisation. That complaint was clearly stated as this: the decision of
H.C.S. not to create an eligibility list arising out of the March interviews was made, contrary to its usual policy, in order to reject the plaintiff's application, as a result of his earlier complaint of discrimination. The
Tribunal in no way dealt with this allegation , and, clearly, specifically rejected the plaintiff's application that it do so when it rejected, in part, his application to amend his Points of Claim. The most the Tribunal found was that, as the plaintiff did not meet the selection criteria for the position, he could not have been placed on any eligibility list that was created. As a matter of fact, this appears to be correct. At the time of the interviews, it was common ground, the plaintiff was not available for work at the required times. He sought to be placed on an eligibility list for a time when he might have been available to meet the requirements of H.C.S. The conclusions of the
Tribunal in no way dealt with the argument that the decision not to create an eligibility list was itself discriminatory.

Although I have concluded that the finding of the Tribunal did not preclude the President from proceeding to consider and deal with the December complaint, again, for discretionary reasons, I propose to refuse to make the orders sought. The facts are quite plain; at the time the plaintiff did not meet the eligibility criteria. He could not have been placed on an eligibility list even if one had been created. Although I am of the view that the
President was in error in his decision, to require him further to consider the matter would be futile, since he must, for different reasons, come to the same conclusion.

The plaintiff further complains that the complaint of December 1996 should not have been divided into two as it was. On any reading of the complaint, it divides logically into two and raises two quite separate and discrete issues.
Only one of these was found against the plaintiff. The second is the basis of the final decision of which he complains. His second attack on the decision of February 1997 fails.

The final decision attacked by the plaintiff was made by the President on 16
July 1997. This decision concerned what remained of the plaintiff's December complaint. On that date the President wrote to the plaintiff, referred to the complaint and the Board's division of the complaint into two parts, acknowledged that the plaintiff did not agree that the complaint had parts, and referred to the decision of January 1997 to decline the first part of the complaint.

The President went on: "As you are also aware, the Board has advised you that we will continue to deal with Part B of this complaint. In an effort to do so, you have been asked on a number of occasions to respond to questions which are relevant to this matter. As you have continually failed to provide the information we have requested I have decided to decline your complaint `for any other reason' under [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/s90.html) of the [Anti-Discrimination
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/). A copy of [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/aa204/s90.html) is attached to this letter.

The specific reasons for my decision are: "1. You have been given ample opportunities to provide the answers to the questions asked in the Board's letter of 3 April 1997 to you. The Board cannot proceed to investigate your complaint without this information.
You have every right to appeal the Board's decision and that of the Equal
Opportunity Tribunal. However, that process should not hamper the Board's being able to continue with your complaint here. I appreciate that your view is that you do not want to provide the answers to the questions asked because you do not want the matter divided into parts because you do not consider that the matter has `parts'. As it appears that the Board will not be able to overcome this impasse, I have decided to decline the matter in the manner stated above." 
The plaintiff did not challenge the factual assertions contained in this letter. In my view they provide ample justification for the President taking the course that he did. Accordingly, I refuse the orders sought in respect of this decision as well.

The result is that the summons must be dismissed. The parties may relist the matter in the event that there is to be an application for costs.
 * * * 
