

Regina versus Stephen George Dowd [1996] NSWSC 644 (20 December 1996) 
REGINA versus STEPHEN GEORGE DOWD /95 
Friday 20 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Grove J, McInerney J, Hulme J 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SEXUAL ASSAULT - TRIAL BY JUDGE ALONE - ERROR IN
FINDING CORROBORATION BUT EXPRESS ALTERNATIVE BASIS FOR ACCEPTING CROWN
EVIDENCE SUSTAINED - HELD: CONVICTION SHOULD BE CONFIRMED.

RESULT: Appeal dismissed (by majority) 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of Hulme J in which are set out the essential background evidence and extracts from the judgment given by Freeman DCJ in compliance with <case> of the Criminal Procedure Act. There is no need for me to repeat them.

I agree with Hulme J that the learned trial judge erred in concluding that the circumstances surrounding the bruise on the complainant's thigh and the response of the appellant to it provided corroboration of the complaint. The evidence was not capable of amounting to corroboration and, had the trial been before judge and jury, leaving that issue for determination by the tribunal of fact would have potentially provoked the intervention of this Court. By consent of the accused and the prosecution the trial was, of course, conducted in the absence of a jury. His Honour recognized the possibility of error in his conclusion concerning corroboration and, as noted in the extract set out in Hulme J's judgment, the learned trial judge went on to express his acceptance of the complainant's evidence for a number of other alternative reasons. Those reasons are contained in what is described as a sketch of facts either agreed or "proved in my view beyond reasonable doubt". In dealing with the asserted facts in the judgment the categories are not specified.

It is convenient to adopt the analysis of the topics discussed in the five aspects identified by Hulme J.

The first was the existence of a relationship of some sort including sexual activity between the parties. The evidence of the complainant and the appellant was contradictory in this respect only in that they asserted respectively that the relationship had "heated up" or "cooled" at the relevant time but the existence of this dispute between them does not provide a reason for the preference of the evidence of either. It does not seem to me that the acknowledged existence of a relationship between the parties provided any reason for accepting the evidence of the complainant.

The next topic related to the non acceptance by the trial judge of testimony by a witness called on behalf of the appellant, Mrs Caspar. It was within his
Honour's jurisdiction to reject her evidence totally but, assuming that he did, again it provided no logical basis for giving preference to the testimony of the complainant.

I am also unpersuaded that the third topic adverted to by his Honour was of relevance in resolving a contest of credibility between the complainant and the appellant. The unwelcomeness of his unannounced arrivals at her home was itself a matter dependent upon her credibility (as opposed to his) being accepted. Likewise, the acceptance by his Honour of the complainant's explanation for not immediately reporting her allegation to police is no more than expression of preference which I cannot qualify as "a reason" for it.

The fourth topic concerned the letter which the appellant delivered (with a bottle of champagne) a few days after the alleged offence. As Hulme J has pointed out the words "atrocious" and "rage" do appear in that letter and it is curious that the appellant was not cross examined beyond being asked whether the atrocious behaviour which he intended to refer to was the sexual assault. He denied that he was referring to the sexual assault and his evidence therefore does not provide a basis for preference of the version of the complainant. The expressions in the letter need to be read in context. On the face of it, the appellant is bemoaning not only a (by then accepted) rejection on the part of the complainant but woven into the letter are expressions of distress about his rejection by his mother and some apparent, or at least perceived alliance between those two women against him. The letter does not in its terms confirm the evidence of the complainant and I am unable to see that it could have been used as the basis for preference of her testimony. Freeman DCJ described the content of the letter as not unequivocal and, bearing in mind the rejection of the suggestion of admission of culpability being conveyed by it when the appellant was cross-examined, that content needs to be viewed against some known aspects of the relationship between the two people concerned. Each of them was involved with what was described as a twelve step programme with an organization operating out of the
Kings Cross Community Aid Centre known as Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous . There was dispute about whether they attended together but they agreed that they attended meetings which the complainant described as "for people who think they might be having trouble maintaining relationships". The detail of the counselling or therapy was not explored but I would be hesitant to place a confident construction on words written by someone seeking influence from a possibly unconventional resource.

A fifth aspect is the unelaborated finding that the appellant "gave conflicting versions of the events of the relevant day". At the hearing of the appeal suggestions were made as to what his Honour was making reference. I acknowledge the analysis of evidence which Hulme J has undertaken and recognize the force in the view which he has adopted.

As I have indicated, in my view the first four matters adverted to by the trial judge are not matters which would give rise to a preference for the evidence of the complainant. As to the fifth aspect, whilst an appellant seeking to demonstrate a miscarriage at trial must take the Crown case at its strongest against him, I do not believe that when reasons have been given by a judge sitting without a jury that principle can be extended to in effect supplying supplementary reasons. That view does not qualify the function of this Court as a court of error particularly when dealing with an appeal from a conviction after a trial conducted pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Procedure
Act: see R versus Kurtic, CCA Unreported 26 February 1996.

Had this fifth aspect related to one of two or more sustainable reasons why the trial judge preferred the complainant's version I would not then consider it critical to identify some particular inconsistency to which reference was intended to be made but as the other four aspects in this instance are in my view insufficient for that purpose, it is effectively left standing alone and does not provide the necessary support. My final conclusion can be summarized.
Freeman DCJ expressed a primary finding that the Crown case - effectively the evidence of the complainant - was accepted in the light of the corroborative strength of the appellant's "method of dealing" with the circumstances of the bruise on the thigh. That approach was flawed. He expressed himself alternatively minded to find the case proved because he accepted the complainant's testimony for a number of reasons. It is unfortunate that his remarks have intermingled within them reference to agreed or "proved" facts.
The agreed facts did not inculpate the appellant. I am unable to derive from the other "facts" or "reasons" an acceptable basis for preference for one version of conflicting evidence. The matter is of greater concern when it relates to the alternative to an already demonstrable erroneous approach. In the whole of the circumstances I am of opinion that the conviction is unsafe, not in the sense that the tribunal of fact ought to have had a doubt about the guilt of the then accused, but in the sense that the exposed process by which the evidence of the complainant was preferred and exclusively accepted to prove the prosecution case was flawed.

I am conscious that to the present the appellant has served a significant portion of the minimum term component of his sentence but it is not a case in my view in which it would be appropriate to direct a judgment of acquittal be entered and the orders that I would favour are that the appeal be allowed, the conviction and sentence quashed and a new trial ordered.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the order proposed by Hulme J, for the reasons he has expressed.
 
HULME J: On 9 November 1995 Judge Freeman sitting without a Jury found the Appellant guilty of a charge of having sexual intercourse with Deborah Wilson without her consent and knowing that she was not consenting. On 24 November 1995 the Appellant was sentenced to penal servitude for a minimum term of 21/2 years from the date upon which he was taken into custody namely 1 May 1994 and an additional term of 11/2 years. The notice of appeal included an appeal against the severity of the sentence also although no submissions were made in support of this aspect.

According to the complainant the offence occurred on 26 April 1994 when she was alone in her residence. She said that the Appellant appeared in the frame of her back door and over her objection barged into the premises. He pushed her down on her son's bed which was in a bedroom nearby and said "I'm going to fuck you", jumped on top of her, pinning her down holding her arms above her head. She said the Appellant was ranting and raving but eventually released her enabling the complainant to move to a sitting position. A little time later she made a run for it heading towards the front of the house, but the
Appellant caught her and dragged her into her own bedroom, threw her onto her own bed and again jumped or sat on top of her and pinned her down. According to her there was more verbal abuse by him and threats by her to inform the police. He pulled her top up, contacted her nipples with his mouth and pulled her jeans and panties down.

While still with his weight upon he her penetrated her vagina with his finger, then announced he had lost his erection and slapped her across the face, making her see stars. Again he released her and after he had walked out of the bedroom towards the kitchen the complainant ran out of the house after which there was some argument between the Appellant and the complainant in the yard of the house. For some time during 1993 there had been a friendship and sexual relationship between them although the complainant took out domestic violence orders in June and also in November 1993. Some type of relationship appears to have also existed probably in breach of the November 1993 restraining order during the months of January to April 1994.

On 27 April the complainant visited her usual, and female, general practitioner to whom I shall refer as Dr Loku and complained of having been assaulted. The complainant told the doctor she had been pinned down and slapped and that her neck, body and legs were sore. The complainant did not tell Dr Loku about the vaginal penetration because, in her words, "I was quite embarrassed". Dr Loku was called and generally confirmed the complainant's evidence in this regard. Dr Loku said that, inter alia, the complainant complained of pain about her legs and that the assailant had sat on her thighs and that accordingly these areas were examined but there was no injury or bruise visible or palpable.

The complainant gave evidence that the Appellant also contacted her over the next few days calling at her premises on at least one of these days leaving a note and a bottle of champagne. During the evening of 30 April she observed the Appellant in his motor vehicle following her own car. She confronted him, they separated but later in the evening he appeared at her home. Eventually he left and then she rang the police, an event leading to the Appellant's arrest on the following day. On that day the complainant was examined by another doctor at the sexual assault unit at the Royal North Shore Hospital who, inter alia, observed a 4cm x 2cm bruise on the outside of the complainant's right thigh.

In essence that was the Crown case. The Appellant gave evidence. He said his relationship with the complainant was somewhat more extensive than she had been willing to concede, although he admitted that, particularly towards the end of the period, there had often been arguments, that he had had sex with her on 24 April when he had observed a bruise on her thigh which the complainant then stated had been derived from contact with the stove. He said that on 26 April at about 11.00 a.m. he arrived at the complainant's premises, went in and said he needed to talk. The complainant replied that she did not want to talk, said she didn't want him there, blamed him for all the problems in the relationship and started swinging her arms around and pushed him towards the door threatening to call the police. The Appellant grabbed her by the wrists and tried to quieten her down. They landed on the spare bed in the back room with the Appellant on top. In a manner not explained the Appellant came to be squatting over her hips and had the complainant's hands held by her sides.

The complainant seemed to calm down for a period while some talking occurred but then started to kick, twist her hips and throw her arms around. It becoming obvious that the complainant wasn't going to talk, the Appellant got off her and prepared to leave. After this the complainant attempted to call the police until the Appellant stopped her by interfering with the telephone after which the complainant ran outside to her car and threatened to go to them.

The Appellant denied at any stage slapping the complainant, dragging her into another bedroom or sexually assaulting her. He agreed that he had attended the complainant's premises on 28 April although there are differences in detail between his account and hers. He denied the complainant's account of the events of 30 April.

It will be necessary to return to some of the evidence of the complainant and the Appellant but in order to appreciate its significance it is convenient to firstly turn to some of the remarks of Judge Freeman in delivering his
Reasons. The hearing concluded on 7 November 1995. Late on the afternoon of 8
November copies of the tapes of the evidence were provided to His Honour and he delivered his Reasons on the following day. His Honour observed that the circumstances of the case required particular vigilance in consideration of the evidence and went on:- "I believe that there is a matter which is both capable of being corroborative and which is properly used for that purpose, that is, the bruise detected by
Dr Edwards on 1 May and not observed by Dr Loku on 21 (sic) April, at least when taken with the way in which the accused dealt with the subject.
 ...I accept (Dr Loku's) evidence ... that there was no bruise on her right thigh. Dr Edwards ... thought that it extremely probable that the injury was inflicted on 26 April, although she of course conceded that medically speaking she could not be dogmatic on this point. The accused on the other hand, claims that he saw the bruise on Monday 24 April, that is 2 days before the alleged assault. Ms Wilson claims that she had no bruise prior to 26 April.

I regard the accused's evidence on this aspect as unacceptable in the light of the medical evidence and the complainant's testimony. The existence of the bruise is established independently of the complainant. It is a fact which is not intractably neutral, although it derived is probative thrust from the accused's evidence in attempting to deal with it. There was after all no need for the accused to seek to explain this bruise as he did since it could have quite easily come from that degree of physical contact which, on his own case, did occur on 26 April.

I identify this element as capable of and proper to use as corroboration and to me the accused's method of dealing with it speaks of a consciousness of guilt but even if I be wrong in this respect I accept the complainant's evidence for a number of other reasons.

I should perhaps briefly sketch the facts which are either agreed or proved in my view beyond reasonable doubt.

Firstly, it is agreed that there has been a relationship between Ms Wilson and the accused including sexual relations.... Ms Wilson said this relationship cooled; indeed she denied that it was properly called a relationship prior to
April whereas the accused says it had heated up.

Ms Caspar called by the accused identifies an occasion in January and more particularly a second occasion in mid February, when she had seen the parties together at a meeting and had been told that they were going to dinner after that meeting, that is the one in February. Despite some fencing on the part on the complainant to the effect that the relationship was still on foot but she was not fostering it, I do not regard Ms Caspar's testimony as being destructive of the complainant's evidence.

Secondly, it was the practice of the accused to call unannounced at the complainant's home and this continued after the alleged assault on 26 April despite his acceptance of the fact that Ms Wilson was clearly manifesting a desire that his attentions should cease. Indeed, it was only because of the repeated visits of the accused including .... that finally forced Ms Wilson to complain to the police. That is the reason she advances for her actions in contacting the police at that time and I accept it.

Likewise I accept that she had a variety of reasons for not approaching the police either immediately after the assault or at any other time prior to 30
April.

Thirdly, the letter delivered by the accused earlier in the evening of Friday April and the course of his actions shows that he had, if not an obsession, at least a guilty passion for Ms Wilson. That letter speaks of the accused's rage and his atrocious behaviour. Whilst not unequivocal these elements are nonetheless capable of supporting the complainant's versions of the events of April.

The accused gave two conflicting versions of the events of the relevant day.
Because of that inconsistency I regard his evidence as unsatisfactory and providing itself no reason for raising a reasonable doubt as to the complainant's testimony.

I should, however, deal with Mr Hobart's argument that the behaviour of the complainant was markedly inconsistent with her allegations. He says that one would have expected her to complain immediately given the nature of the offence, and particularly so because of the subsisting apprehended violence order. Not only do I remind myself of the cautionary note struck by S.405B but
I accept that Ms Wilson was embarrassed, unwilling at that stage to have the matter come to light... and also perhaps lacking in certainty about the nature of a crime committed against her. I am fortified in this view on the exchange of the following day between the complainant and Dr Loku.

On that occasion she told the doctor of the accused throwing her on the bed threatening to rape her but not actually attempting it, citing his loss of an erection. Mr Hobart seeks to derive from that material the proposition that this was not only inconsistent behaviour but an outright denial of misbehaviour on the part of the accused. To me it speaks more of the confusion in Ms Wilson's mind of the nature of the accused's crime.

She demonstrated a concentration, as frequently occurs, on what is sometimes referred to as "classic rape", that is penile penetration of the vagina by a stranger and this had blinded her to the full ramifications of "sexual assault" as the law defines it. I am satisfied that what occurred on 26 April this year was ....." 
His Honour then in effect summarised the complainant's evidence as to the events on 26 April.

The first ground of complaint concerns His Honour's remarks about the bruise and his use of the evidence on the topic. In my view His Honour did err in saying that Dr Edwards "thought it extremely probable that the injury was inflicted on 26 April, although of course she conceded that medically speaking she could not be dogmatic on this point.". The "question" - it was not really a question at all - and answer His Honour no doubt had in mind when making the above statement was:- 
Q. Tell me this, the bruise on her right thigh, I want you to assume this, that she was pushed onto a bed and with a part of his body, the accused leant heavily on her legs. Now, would you assume that there was - that occurred on the Wednesday before you saw her, on 26 April; that on the Thursday that bruise was not to be seen? 
A. I think that would be an extremely probable thing. Bruises quite commonly take one to two days to appear on the surface." 
In context it does not seem to me possible to infer more from this answer than that the doctor was saying that it was extremely probable that if the bruise had been inflicted on Wednesday 26 April, it would not have been visible on the following day. Indeed even this interpretation may be unduly favourable to the Crown because of the very significant difference between "extremely probable" and "quite commonly". However I do not need to pursue this aspect further.

Furthermore, in cross-examination Dr Edwards retreated very fully from the position the judge eventually attributed to her. The following series of questions and answers demonstrate this:- 
Q. The bruise itself, doctor, would have been caused as early as the 24th, that is the Monday 24 April, could it not? 
A. It would be possible. I would have expected it to be a little less definite in its size and shape if it was that old.

Q. You don't know, doctor, whether it was on the 24th or the 26th? 
A. No, I - - 
Q. You've got no - - 
A. No, I have no idea.

Q. You've got no possible idea, have you? 
A. No, that's correct.

Q. Medically you couldn't possibly have any idea as to whether it was caused on the 24th or the 26th, could you? 
A. No that is absolutely correct." 
I am also of the view that His Honour erred in saying that the bruise itself was a fact which was not intractably neutral. The bruise was on the lateral side of the right thigh which is a position where it could easily have been incurred by knocking in a myriad of circumstances. In this situation, while one could no doubt say that the bruise was consistent with the complaint, it does not seem to me possible to say that it provided any support for the complainant's story.

His Honour of course went on to say that the bruise "derived its probative thrust from the accused's evidence in attempting to deal with it". No doubt
His Honour here had in mind the Applicant's evidence given, I might point out, for the first time in cross-examination, that he had seen the bruise on 24
April and that there had been conversation as to its cause, whereas His Honour had accepted Dr Loku's evidence to the effect that there was no bruise to be seen on Thursday 27 April.

I must confess that I do not find necessarily inconsistent this evidence as to the presence, and then absence, of the bruise three days later. However even accepting that there is inconsistency and that the Applicant's evidence that he had seen the bruise was deliberately false, in the circumstances in which the accused was placed I do not think it possible to infer a consciousness of guilt from his evidence. The lie, if that is what it was, is perfectly explicable on the basis that an innocent man was trying to explain away evidence he perceived as against him.

Thus I would not be prepared to uphold the Applicant's conviction if His
Honour's conclusion was dependent upon his findings concerning the bruise and the evidence relating to it. But His Honour also said that "even if I be wrong in this respect I accept the complainant's evidence for a number of other reasons" and it becomes necessary to consider these. The Appellant's attack in this area was mounted under a number of overlapping grounds which it is not necessary that I record. Some displayed a failure to recognise the limits of this Court's role in a case such as this. An appeal against a conviction in a trial by judge alone pursuant to section 33 of the Criminal Appeal Act is not an appeal by way of rehearing - see R versus Simmons [(1995) 79 A Crim R ] at 35. Error and a miscarriage of justice in the context of
Section 6 of the Criminal Appeal Act must be shown. See also R versus Kurtic (Unreported, CCA, 26 February 1996). What I say hereafter addresses the balance of the grounds.

In the lengthy passage I have cited His Honour said "I accept the complainant's evidence for a number of reasons" and immediately thereafter that he "should perhaps briefly sketch the facts which are either agreed or proved ... beyond reasonable doubt". Unfortunately His Honour did not then make clear what matters fell into the category of "reasons" and what were the "facts which are either agreed or proved". I think I should accordingly address all of the specific matters to which His Honour then referred and which preceded His Honour saying that he was satisfied as to what had occurred.

The first matter mentioned was the existence of a relationship between the complainant and the Applicant prior to April. It was common ground that there was a relationship of some sort, including sexual activity, during this period and the existence of the relationship was a matter proper for His Honour to take into account in his assessment of the likelihood of events occurring as the complainant alleged. I did at one stage wonder whether His Honour's reference to the Accused saying that the relationship had "heated up" showed some misapprehension of evidence from the accused contained in the following questions and answers:- 
Q. In March, April the relationship had cooled off? 
A. I wouldn't say cooled off, I'd say heated up actually.

Q. Heated up in terms of arguments? 
A. Yeah.

Q. Every time you saw her there was an argument? 
A. No.

Q. Every time - - 
A. Not every time, no." 
However having re-read the totality of the evidence, it is apparent that the accused sought to assert that the relationship which had previously existed and which, as the apprehended violence orders evidence, had deteriorated or cooled in 1993, had during the period of January to April 1994 improved and he and the complainant had been seeing a deal more of each other. The complainant was maintaining that, although there was some contact, the relationship was still, at least on her part, slight and reluctant. Thus I do not see any error in His Honour's remarks on this matter.

As those remarks followed immediately the reference to the "facts ... agreed or proved" and were introduced by the statement "it is agreed", it seems more likely they related to a "fact", rather than a "reason".

The second topic concerned the evidence of a witness Mrs Caspar to the effect that she had seen the accused and the complainant together. Although His
Honour referred to the complainant as having been "fencing", his conclusion concerning Mrs Caspar's evidence was that it was not destructive of the complainant's evidence. In strict logic this conclusion is not a reason for accepting the Plaintiff's evidence as distinct from a reason for not rejecting it, but in the overall context, I would not regard the matter as demonstrating error in His Honour's decision to accept the Plaintiff. Except insofar as the subject may itself provide guidance, it is not apparent whether His Honour regarded this topic as a "fact" or "reason".

The third matter mentioned - His Honour introduced it by use of the word "secondly" - encompassed a practice of the accused to call at the complainant's home unannounced and his persistence in giving her attention despite her desire to the contrary. His Honour indicated an acceptance of the complainant's evidence that it was this unwelcome attention which caused the complainant to go to the police and that there were reasons for the absence of complaint to the police prior to 30 April. His Honour did not identify the reasons he had in mind but they could have easily been the complainant's embarrassment which His Honour mentioned elsewhere or some reluctance to place the accused in the trouble which would be a likely consequence of any complaint.

The next matter mentioned is a conclusion that the Applicant had either an obsession or guilty passion for the complainant and the letter in which the
Applicant talks of his rage and atrocious behaviour. His Honour recorded that "while not unequivocal, these elements are nevertheless capable of supporting the complainant's version of the events.".

There is a degree of overlap between the matters referred to in the two preceding paragraphs. "Guilty passion" may not have been the appropriate description of the Appellant's feelings but the degree of attention which the
Appellant gave the complainant was clearly a matter to which it was appropriate for His Honour to have regard in weighing up the complainant's allegation of rape. Of course the evidence as to this attention came primarily from the complainant but it derived a significant degree of support from evidence of the accused of incidents in their relationship and to the effect that the complainant "always wanted to keep the ball in her court ...and every time I tried to get the ball over the net she'd be on the phone ringing the police".

I also agree with His Honour that the terms of the letter are capable of providing some support for the complainant's story, particularly if the
Appellant provided no acceptable explanation for the strong terms he had used.
In fact he did not and, somewhat surprisingly, apart from one question in which it was suggested that the atrocious behaviour was the sexual assault the
Appellant was not cross-examined concerning what he had meant by that expression which he had used.

Again it is not clear whether His Honour regarded these third and fourth matters as severally a "fact" or a "reason" (or both). In my view they are capable of constituting reasons for accepting the complainant's evidence.

Deferring for a moment the fifth, the final matter adverted to was a suggested inconsistency between the complainant's behaviour and her allegation of sexual assault. However the complainant gave evidence which explained this and His
Honour was entitled to accept this evidence. Again strictly His Honour's conclusion on this matter is not a reason for accepting the Plaintiff's evidence as distinct from a reason for not rejecting it but again I would not regard this as invalidating His Honour's conclusion.

Thus I do not see in any other than possibly the fifth matter to which reference was made by Judge Freeman any basis for concluding that there was error by His Honour in his reasons for accepting the complainant's evidence.
The fifth matter was a conclusion that there was inconsistency in the
Appellant's own evidence - inconsistency which led His Honour to conclude that the evidence provided no reason for raising a reasonable doubt as to the complainant's testimony. His Honour did not identify the inconsistency which he had in mind but the Crown pointed to two areas of the Appellant's evidence as those to which His Honour may have been referring. The first was contained in the following passage:- "Q. Yes, just tell me what happened will you.

A. Yeah when she was saying she was going to call the police and she was pushing me and swinging her arms around.. I grabbed her by the wrists to try and quieten her down. And the bed was right next to us, you know, sticking out in the hallway in a feet (sic) and I turned around and landed on top of her on the floor because she was threatening to call the police she was kicking out with her legs and everything...

Q. Now where was this? 
A. This was on the spare bed in the back room." 
Albeit there is reference in one answer to landing on the floor and in the next to being on the floor, in context it does not seem to me likely that this difference could have been the inconsistency His Honour had in mind. The immediacy of the change argues against any deliberate inconsistency and although (at T74) there was one question "Did you fall on the floor, or did you fall on the bed", the matter was not the subject of any challenge in cross-examination or of any later questions by the judge.

The second topic suggested by the Crown as one on which the Appellant had given conflicting versions was his anger. I doubt whether this comes within the terms used by Judge Freeman, "two conflicting versions of the events of the relevant day". However, the evidence relevant to this topic is as follows.
The accused said (at T59) that at about the time they landed on the bed he, "did get a bit angry, yeah. You know, her abuse, her blaming me falsely, her trying to say she is going to ring the police when all I wanted to do was sit and talk. And also her kicking and pushing and sort of hitting me in the arms and stuff, you know, yeah it made me angry." 
During cross examination (at T73-4) there were the following questions and answers:- "Q. And was the aspect which enraged you or irritated you the fact that she threatened to call the police? 
A. That was a part of it, it was only a small part of it actually. It was more, do you want to know what it was that got me angry? 
Q. ...

Q. And when she picked the telephone up did that make you particularly angry? 
A. No I wouldn't say angry, no.

Q. Were you angry when you disconnected the telephone from the floor? 
A. No I'd say maybe frustrated not angry.

Q.....

Q. Now just tell me this. Her picking up the telephone to ring the police, did that make you angry or not, I know I've asked that question before but I want to get it absolutely clear? 
A. No it did not. No I wouldn't say angry.

Q. Did you not say in evidence to us just a little while ago when answering questions by you Barrister that you got angry at you (sic) falsely blaming you by ringing the police. Did you say that? 
A. No that was part of the reason. It was two separate things It's falsely blaming me for the problems of the relationship, ringing the police whenever I want to talk about something that she obviously doesn't want to and also, you know, the abuse and what made me angry was also the kicking and the pushing and the punching." 
Considered in totality, I do not regard this evidence as revealing significant inconsistency.

However it seems to me that there was a further aspect of the events of the day in respect of which there was a degree of inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence. Because this was not adverted to by the Crown, this evidence was not the subject of debate during the hearing of the appeal and hence it is incumbent on the Court to exercise more than usual care when considering it.
However, there was an onus on the Appellant to show that the trial judge erred and, in this area, that there was no inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence.

The topic in respect of which I see inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence is the complainant's attempts to contact the police. Unfortunately the evidence was not as clear as it might have been and it is necessary to quote at length from the transcript.

In evidence in chief (at T58) at a time when the Appellant was describing events shortly after his entry into the house he said that the complainant was threatening to call the police. He was then taken by his counsel, without reference to time, to the topic of whether the complainant had in fact made any attempt to ring the police. The evidence was:- "Q. Was there any attempt made by her to ring up? 
A. Yeah, yes, she you know, tried to call the police again. And I said "There's no need for that" and I stopped her.

Q. And how did you do that? 
A. Just by taking the receiver or pushing the button down on the phone I think and then I might have disconnected it from the floor.

Q. What happened then? 
A. Then she said - well actually before that I missed something. Do you want me to mention that? 
Q. Yes, just tell me what happened will you?" (The term "again" in the first answer quoted has no relevance to the present topic. It is explicable by reference to evidence that on other occasions the complainant had threatened to ring the police.) 
The Appellant then gave evidence of events culminating in he and the complainant falling on the bed in the back room and him sitting on her and endeavouring to calm her down. He said (at T60) that as soon as he got up and went to leave, the complainant "ran down the corridor and said ....she's going to the police" and while running, picked up her car keys and went straight to her car.

The topic of efforts on the part of the complainant to call the police was raised again in cross-examination. The Appellant was asked (at T73) at what stage the complainant had gone to the telephone - whether it was before or after both had fallen on the bed - and he said "afterwards, straight after I got up to leave. A little later the following questions and answers are recorded:- 
Q. And when she picked the telephone up did that make you particularly angry? 
A. No, I wouldn't say angry, no.

Q. Were you angry when you disconnected the telephone from the floor.

A. No, I'd say maybe frustrated, no angry.

Q. Did you grab the telephone from her? 
A. Um, I don't think so, I believe I just, you know pressed the button down on the phone.

Later (at T75) the following is recorded: "Q. When she left the bed in the spare room - -.

A. Um.

Q. Did she run down the corridor saying that she was going to the police and did you run after her? 
A. No first she said she was going to ring the police.

Q. So if you said - - 
A. And then she left the phone and said she was going to the police or I'm not sure that she said that she was going to the police she just grabbed her keys and went running out in fact so I just assumed.

Q. To say that she ran down the corridor saying that she was going to the police would be totally inaccurate, is that right? 
A. No I couldn't make that answer, no. I don't know she said she was going to ring the police when she got off the bed, right, she went to the phone to ring the police, I stopped her using the phone, stopped the phone working, then she grabbed her keys and left. I assumed that she was going to the police. I - to tell you I can't honestly remember if she actually said, I'm going to the police at that stage or not. I know she did out the front, she said, I'm going to the police whether she said it inside, I'm going to the police, I'm not sure." 
Clearly there are inconsistencies in this evidence. Further they seem to me to be of a nature that they provide justification, if attempts to contact the police is the topic His Honour had in mind, for his conclusion that the
Appellant's evidence did not raise a reasonable doubt as to the complainant's testimony. (I may perhaps add that the evidence of the complainant on the topic was that she had made no attempt to ring the police on the relevant day but that she had, after being assaulted in the back room and her own bedroom, run outside the house after which there had been a discussion with the
Appellant about calling the police.) 
It follows that error on the part of His Honour in his expressed reasons for accepting the complainant's evidence has not been demonstrated and the Appeal fails. The order I propose is that the Appeal should be dismissed.

In what I have said above, I have sought to address in their substance rather than their terms most the complaints, a number overlapping, raised on behalf of the Appellant in support of the ground of appeal that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. To the extent that the complaints go further than the matters dealt with above, they exhibit a failure to recognise the limits on this Court's role.
 * * * 
