

B W Keeling versus Regina [1996] NSWSC 405 (5 September 1996) 
BRADLEY WILLIAM KEELING versus REGINA /96 
THURSDAY 5 SEPTEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
COLE JA, SMART J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: This is an application by Bradley William Keeling pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act 1900 for leave to appeal from what is said to be an interlocutory order made by a Local Court Magistrate, Ms Sweeney, on 11 June 1996 in committal proceedings in relation to criminal charges against Mr Keeling. The alleged interlocutory order concerned subpoenas for the production of documents issued on behalf of Mr Keeling to Telstra and to a firm of solicitors, Messrs Malleson, Stephen Jaques (Mallesons) which was acting for Telstra.

It is necessary to refer to some of the background facts. Between 1991 and Mr Keeling had been a director of a company called Strathfield Car Radios
Pty Limited. ("SCR"). In 1992 he became the managing director of SCR. The business of SCR included the selling of mobile telephones and there was an arrangement between SCR and Telstra that customers of SCR could be connected to the Telstra communications network. At all relevant times Mallesons have been Telstra's solicitors.

In February 1995 Mr Keeling resigned as a director and as an employee of SCR.
Soon afterwards he and others formed a company known as One-tel Pty Limited ("One-tel"). The business which has been carried out by One-tel has included the selling of mobile telephones. One-tel entered into an agreement with
Optus, whereby customers of One-tel would be connected with the Optus communications network.

In April 1995 Mr Keeling filed an application in the Federal Court against a number of respondents including SCR, in which he claimed various kinds of relief, including that he was entitled to be issued with a substantial number of shares in SCR.

On 18 April 1995 there was a meeting attended by representatives of SCR,
Telstra and Mallesons and on the following day, 19 April 1995, a complaint was made to the police that Mr Keeling, as managing director of SCR, had misappropriated about $200,000.

On 25 May 1995 a cross-claim was filed by the respondents in the Federal Court proceedings. In the cross-claim it was alleged, inter alia, that in breach of his obligations as a director of SCR, both under the general law and also under the Corporations Law, Mr Keeling had procured the making to himself of a large number of payments at the expense of SCR.

On 16 November 1995 three charges under <case> of the New South Wales Crimes
Act were preferred against Mr Keeling, alleging that he had cheated and defrauded SCR by obtaining certain bank cheques. The three payments which were the subject of the criminal charges were three of the payments referred to in the cross-claim in the Federal Court proceedings. Committal proceedings for the three criminal charges were fixed for 13 to 17 May 1996. The Federal Court proceedings were stood over for a lengthy period, to a date when it was anticipated that the committal proceedings would have been concluded.

On 15 May 1996 Mr Keeling's solicitors issued out of the Local Court and served two subpoenas for the production of documents, addressed to Telstra and
Mallesons respectively. The schedules to the two subpoenas which set out the documents required to be produced were identical and required production of all documents relating to:- "1. The making of a complaint by Telstra Corporation to the New South Wales
Police Service in or about March or April 1995 in respect of any alleged criminal or fraudulent conduct of Bradley Keeling.
The provision of an Avis motor vehicle by Telstra Corporation for use by the New South Wales Police Service or by any officer, division, squad, unit or branch of such police service during its investigation of alleged criminal or fraudulent conduct by Bradley Keeling.
Any corporate sponsorship plan offered by Telstra Corporation to the New
South Wales Police Service or any of its officers, divisions, squads, units or branches.
Any other financial benefit or any assistance provided by Telstra
Corporation to the New South Wales Police Service in connection with the police investigation into the conduct of Bradley Keeling in or about 1995 or at the time of such investigation.
The termination of Bradley Keeling's employment in or about February 1995 as Managing Director of Strathfield Car Radios Pty Limited".

On 17 May 1996, the return date of the subpoenas in the Local Court, counsel appeared for Telstra and Mallesons and objected to producing certain documents falling within the terms of the subpoenas, on the ground of legal professional privilege. I interpolate that both in the proceedings in the Local Court and on the application for leave to appeal to this Court all parties, that is Mr
Keeling, Telstra and Mallesons, have proceeded on the basis that the law to be applied in relation to the claim for privilege is the common law of legal professional privilege and not the provisions relating to client legal privilege under the 1995 [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), which have been treated as applying only to the actual adducing of evidence in court.

On 17 May an affidavit by Ms Tiver, a solicitor employed by Mallesons, and an affidavit by Mr Brookes, an employee of Telstra, were filed. Both these affidavits were read in support of the claim for privilege. There was some argument on 17 May and then the proceedings were stood over to 11 June. On 11
June Mr Emmett of counsel appeared for Telstra and Mallesons and Mr Palmer of counsel appeared for Mr Keeling. Mr Emmett maintained the objection to producing a number of the documents. A further affidavit by Ms Tiver was read, in which she described with some particularity the documents in respect of which privilege was being claimed.

Mr Palmer on behalf of Mr Keeling did not contend that the documents in respect of which privilege was being claimed were not, prima facie, protected by legal professional privilege. However, he contended that the privilege which prima facie attached to the documents was displaced, because the documents had been brought into existence in furtherance of an improper purpose or purposes of Telstra, including encouraging the bringing of criminal proceedings against Mr Keeling which were known to be groundless, putting pressure on Mr Keeling to abandon his proceedings in the Federal Court and damaging Mr Keeling's commercial reputation. Mr Palmer referred to the decision of the High Court in Attorney General for the Northern Territory of
Australia versus Kearney <case>; [(1985) 158 CLR 500.] 
So far as is relevant to the present application for leave to appeal, the magistrate decided that prima facie the documents were protected by legal professional privilege (as I have stated, Mr Palmer had not contended to the contrary) and that the privilege which prima facie applied had not been displaced. The magistrate concluded that legal professional privilege had been established and that Mr Keeling should not be permitted to have access to the documents in respect of which privilege had been claimed and established. It was against some of these rulings that Mr Keeling has sought leave to appeal.

On this application there was no dispute that the committal proceedings in relation to the criminal charges against Mr Keeling were proceedings to which s 5F of the Criminal Appeal Act applies. However, an appeal under <case> lies only against "an interlocutory judgment or order" given or made in proceedings to which the section applies. On this application for leave to appeal counsel for the respondents submitted in written submissions that the application for leave to appeal was incompetent because no "interlocutory judgment or order" had been made or given by Ms Sweeney. It was not submitted by counsel for the applicant, Mr Keeling, that Ms Sweeney had given any interlocutory judgment; however, it was submitted that she had made an interlocutory order.

Since the institution of the application there has been some shifting in the applicant's position as to what was said by the applicant to have been the interlocutory order made by Ms Sweeney which was sought to be appealed from.
In the Notice of Application for leave to appeal and again in oral submissions to this Court, the order sought to be appealed from was identified as being an order made by Ms Sweeney refusing Mr Keeling access to documents produced to the Court by Mallesons and Telstra. In written submissions counsel for the applicant identified the order sought to be appealed from as being an order implicitly made by the magistrate relieving Mallesons and Telstra from the obligation imposed by the issue and service of the subpoenas to comply with the subpoenas.

Counsel for the respondents in written submissions submitted that the relevant rulings the magistrate had made were simply a ruling that the claim for legal professional privilege had not been displaced and a ruling that the applicant was not entitled to access to documents in respect of which the claim for legal professional privilege had been prima facie established and not then displaced. Such rulings, it was submitted, were not orders.

In written submissions counsel for both parties referred the Court to the decision of this Court in Attorney General versus Stuart [(1994) 34 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%2034%20NSWLR%20667 "View LawCiteRecord" ) In that case a defendant in committal proceedings had issued a subpoena for production of documents to the Commissioner of Police. The magistrate rejected a claim of public interest immunity made by the Commissioner of Police and the
Attorney General appealed from the magistrate's decision. The rulings appealed from were rulings made by the magistrate in the course of rejecting the claim of public interest immunity. The principal judgment in Attorney General v
Stuart was given by Hunt CJ at CL, with whom Studdert J agreed. Smart J gave a separate judgment generally agreeing with the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL but adding reasons of his own. At pp 672-3, the Chief Judge at Common Law said: "A subpoena to produce documents, once it has been duly served and conduct money has been provided, obliges the person to whom it is directed to bring to the court issuing it the documents identified in it unless he has successfully moved to have it set aside as oppressive; he must bring the documents to the court and then formally produce them to the court unless he is able to satisfy the court that there is good reason why he should not so produce them: Re
Smith; Williams versus Frere [[1891] 1 Ch 323] at 332;
Commissioner for Railways versus Small <case>; [(1938) 38 SR 564]
AT 573-574. In Waind versus Hill and National Employers' Mutual General
Association [[1978] 1 NSWLR 372], it was made clear (at 381-383) that any objection to the production of the documents - such as privilege - is to be determined before their formal production to the court. Moffitt P refers there only to 'privilege', a term apt to include public interest immunity (or Crown privilege, as it was then known) as well as legal professional privilege. In some circumstances, it is necessary for the judge to inspect the documents in order to decide the claim of public interest immunity, but they are merely handed to the judge privately for that purpose and they are not formally produced to the Court: Conway versus Rimmer [1968]
AC910 at 971,979,995.

If the claim of public interest immunity is upheld, the person to whom the subpoena is directed is thereby excused from the obligation formally to produce the documents to the court (and even from stating whether any documents within the description stated in the subpoena are within his possession): Alister versus The Queen 154 CLR 404 at 452. If the claim is rejected, that person is ordered to produce them to the court, when the separate issue of access or inspection falls to be determined.

The cases invariably speak of a claim of public interest immunity as being an objection to the production of the documents rather than to their inspection: eg, Conway versus Rimmer (at 957,958,971); Rogers versus Home Secretary [[1973]
AC 388] at ; and to an 'order' being made (or declined) that the documents be produced rather than inspected: eg, Hennessy versus Wright [(1888) 21 QBD 509] at 521;
Re Joseph Hargreaves Ltd [[1900] 1 Ch 347] at 352;
Glasgow Corporation versus Central Land Board <case>; [1956 SC (HL) 1] at 18; Conway versus Rimmer (at 963-964,980,983); Sankey v
Whitlam (at 38,84); Burmah Oil Co Ltd versus Governor and Company of the Bank of England <case>; [[1980] AC 1090] at 1113; Alister versus The Queen (at 452);
Commonwealth versus Northern Land Council <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 604] at 620. Indeed, in Sankey versus Shitlam (at 84), it is only because it is an 'order' compelling or refusing the production of documents that Mason J suggested that statutory prohibition may be available pursuant to s 112 of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/) 1901 - that is, because the applicant would be aggrieved by an 'order' of a justice.

Such an order to a stranger to the proceedings (as the person to whom the subpoena is directed) that the documents be produced to the court, as a consequence of the rejection of the claim of public interest immunity, is necessarily not one which (so far as the stranger is concerned) is amenable to correction in any appeal from a subsequent conviction. Most of the cases refer to the importance of the right to appeal against a rejection of a claim of public interest immunity before the documents are formally produced to the court: eg, Conway versus Rimmer (at 953); Sankey versus Whitlam (at 43);
Burmah Oil Co Ltd versus Governor and Company of the Bank of England (at ,1147); Alister versus The Queen (at 415). In many (if not most) situations, the claim of public interest immunity arises in relation to the production of documents from a stranger to the proceedings. Those statements in the cases to which I have referred do not themselves control the interpretation of <case>, but they do assist in identifying the mischief at which the insertion of <case> (in 1987) was aimed.

An order to a stranger to the proceedings that documents be produced to the court following the rejection of a claim of public interest immunity is one which commands the stranger to do something. It may be entered in the court record, and action may be taken upon it in the event that it is disobeyed. For myself, I have no doubt that is an interlocutory order within the meaning of s
F. The fact that it is or may also amount to a ruling upon evidence does not exclude such an order from the terms of <case>: cf R versus Steffan (at 640-641).
The appeal brought by the Attorney-General therefore lies within the jurisdiction of this Court. I should add that it remains an issue for further determination in some other case as to whether that ruling would apply to a similar order made in relation to a subpoena directed to a party to the proceedings, or to any other order (such as arose in R versus Yooyen that a question be answered where public interest immunity is claimed in relation to the answer." 
At p 689 Smart J said: "When a judge determines a claim for Crown privilege he makes an order for production (or disclosure) or an order excusing the recipient of the subpoena from producing the documents. It is an interlocutory order and an interlocutory order within [s
F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/)." 
In Attorney General versus Stuart this Court held that a ruling by a magistrate rejecting a claim for public interest immunity by a person served with a subpoena for production of documents was an interlocutory order within the meaning of that expression in [s
F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). I do not consider that any relevant distinction can be drawn between a claim for public interest immunity and a claim for legal professional privilege and this was the view expressed obiter by Hunt CJ at CL in Attorney General versus Stuart.
Nor, in my opinion, is it the position that, although a judicial officer who rejects a claim for public interest immunity or legal professional privilege is to be regarded as making an order, a judicial officer who upholds a claim for public interest immunity or legal professional privilege is to be regarded as not making an order. In my opinion a judicial officer who upholds a claim for legal professional privilege made by a person who has been subpoenaed to produce documents, with the consequence that that person is not obliged to comply with the subpoena, should be regarded as making a ruling which is or involves an order to the effect that the subpoena, the service of which would otherwise impose an obligation to produce the documents, need not be complied with.

I am accordingly of the opinion that Ms Sweeney made an "order" and that the present application is competent.

Even if an interlocutory judgment or order has been made in proceedings to which [s
F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) applies, an appeal as of right under [s
F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) can be brought only by the Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions and an appeal by any other party, in the absence of a certificate from the court of trial, can be brought only with the leave of the Court of Criminal
Appeal. In the present case no certificate was given by Ms Sweeney and hence
Mr Keeling has to obtain the leave of this Court to bring an appeal. It was submitted on behalf of Mr Keeling that leave should be granted because the magistrate had erred in principle in holding that in order for Mr Keeling to displace the prima facie entitlement to legal professional privilege it was necessary for him to satisfy the magistrate, at least on a prima facie basis, that the solicitors Mallesons had been involved in or had been a party to or had been aware of an improper purpose or purposes of the client Telstra.

In support of this submission counsel for Mr Keeling referred the Court to a number of things said by the magistrate in the course of argument on 11 June
The appeal papers contain a transcript of the argument on that occasion. It is apparent from the transcript that the proceedings to a certain extent took the form of a dialogue between counsel and the Bench, rather than discrete addresses by counsel and then a judgment by the magistrate, although towards the end of the proceedings on 11 June there were more formal addresses by counsel and the magistrate did give a kind of judgment.

There is no doubt that in a number of places during the argument the magistrate said words to the effect that in order for privilege to be displaced it would be necessary for the applicant, Mr Keeling, to show, on at least a prima facie basis, that Mallesons had had knowledge of, or had been involved in, an improper purpose or purposes of Telstra. For example, at p 36 of the transcript of 11 June 1996, the magistrate said to counsel for the applicant, "You have to point me to some evidence of Mallesons' knowledge or involvement in (the improper purposes)." 
During the argument counsel for Mr Keeling repeatedly submitted to the magistrate that what mattered was the purpose or purposes of the client,
Telstra, and not any purpose of Mallesons or any knowledge by Mallesons of a purpose of Telstra.

I am satisfied that counsel for Mr Keeling eventually succeeding in persuading the magistrate of the soundness of his submissions. At p 38 of the transcript of 11 June the following exchange is reported: "BENCH: You're saying that the communications lose their privilege if they will establish that the client was pursuing an improper purpose. I'm saying they only lose their privilege if the communications had that purpose of helping the client pursue its improper purpose.

PALMER: And that is the relevant purpose, is the purpose of the client, not the solicitor and the purpose of the client may not be divulged to the solicitor. That is nowhere part of the test. If one reads it, one's got to see whose purpose is being revealed.

BENCH: No I appreciate it's the client's purpose. But the communications must relate to the furtherance of that purpose not just of themselves be some evidence that would otherwise establish that there was that purpose being revealed." 
On the following page of the transcript Mr Palmer submitted on behalf of Mr
Keeling: "If the relationship is assisting the client to achieve that purpose, that is sufficient to destroy the privilege. All you've got to show is the relationship is being used, wittingly or unwittingly on the solicitor's part, in order to achieve the improper purpose of the client." 
Mr Palmer then said: "So the purpose is - the inquiry is, is the relationship of solicitor/client being used to further the improper purpose?" 
On pp 42 and 43 of the transcript Ms Sweeney gave what is in effect a short judgment, the relevant parts of which are as follows: "Documents have been produced by Telstra and Mallesons in response to subpoenas issued on behalf of Bradley Keeling....

In respect of the claim for privilege the evidence on which the claim is sought to be established is contained in affidavits by Simon Brooks and Ms
Lisa Tiver of Mallesons. In my view that evidence, particularly the affidavit of Ms Tiver of 5 June 1996 establishes that the documents were brought into existence for purposes which establish legal professional privilege. In my view that claim is made out and I do not understand Mr Palmer to argue otherwise.

Mr Palmer on behalf of Mr Keeling has argued that the privilege ought be displaced because the communications between Telstra and Mallesons were made for the purpose of furthering the improper purpose of Telstra in having a criminal investigation instigated against Brad Keeling for the purposes of putting pressure on him to discontinue his civil proceedings taken in the
Federal Court and to damage his commercial reputation so that his ability to compete with Telstra as a partner of Optus would be damaged.

The test which Mr Keeling's representatives must meet is that set out in the decision of the High Court in the Attorney General for the Northern Territory and Kearney which is some prima facie evidence that the communications between the client, Telstra and the lawyers have that purpose. In my view having regard to the evidence which has emerged in the committal and even taking into account that a solicitor from Mallesons was present at the meeting on 19 April at which Strathfield Car Radios staff and others briefed the police on the actions of Mr Keeling which thereafter gave rise to the police investigation do not constitute the prima facie evidence required and therefore the documents being privileged are not required to be.(sic) Mr Keeling's representatives cannot have access to them".

In that judgment the magistrate correctly recorded the submission by Mr Palmer that the privilege should be held to have been displaced because the communications between Telstra and Mallesons were made for the purpose of furthering an improper purpose or purposes of Telstra (my emphasis). The magistrate then referred to Attorney General for the Northern Territory of
Australia versus Kearney and said that, applying Kearney's case, the test was whether the communications between Telstra and Mallesons had that purpose (my emphasis), that is the purpose of furthering an improper purpose or purposes of Telstra.

In my opinion that statement by the magistrate in her judgment of the test to be applied was in accordance with the judgment of Gibbs CJ in Kearney, with which Mason J agreed, and also in accordance with the submissions which had been made to the magistrate by Mr Palmer. I do not consider that there is any suggestion in the reasons given by the magistrate in her judgment at the time she made her actual decision, that she thought it was necessary, in order for Mr Keeling to displace the prima facie entitlement to legal professional privilege, that he satisfy her, at least on a prima facie basis, that the solicitors, Mallesons, had been involved in or had been a party to or had been aware of an improper purpose or improper purposes of the client.

A submission was made by counsel for Mr Keeling that the use by the magistrate of the word "communications" and especially the use of the word in the plural, necessarily implied knowledge by Mallesons of any improper purpose of the client which was being furthered by the communications and that in her judgment the magistrate could be seen to be still applying a test which would require knowledge by Mallesons of an improper purpose of its client. In my opinion the use of the word "communications" did not carry that implication. A communication between Mallesons and its client which, unbeknown to Mallesons, was in furtherance of a particular purpose of the client, would still accurately and naturally be described as a communication.

I am accordingly of the opinion that the submission that the magistrate erred in principle by applying a wrong test in deciding whether the privilege was displaced should be rejected. I am also of the opinion that the magistrate's factual conclusion that there was not prima facie evidence that the communications were in furtherance of an improper purpose of Telstra was at least open to her.

In these circumstances, no error of principle having been demonstrated, I would propose that leave to appeal under [s
F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) be refused. In R versus Matovski [(1989) 15 NSWLR 720], a bench of this Court which included the Chief Justice and the then Chief Judge at
Common Law refused an applicant leave to appeal under [s
F.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) In his judgment the Chief Justice said that there was a clear distinction between applications for leave to appeal and appeals as of right and the Chief Justice stressed the importance of the discretion that this Court has in deciding whether to grant leave to appeal under [s
F.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) In this case no error of law or mistake of principle having been shown and no other reason why leave should be given having been established, I would propose that leave to appeal be refused.

COLE JA: Bradley William Keeling has been charged with three breaches of s.176A [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), namely that he, being a director of a body corporate, Strathfield Car Radios Pty Limited, did cheat or defraud that company by obtaining three cheques totalling $150,000 with intent to cheat or defraud. Committal proceedings are part heard before Magistrate Ms Sweeney. In those committal proceedings Mr Keeling issued two subpoenas, the first directed to Telstra Corporation ("Telstra") and the second directed to Telstra's solicitors, Messrs Malleson Stephen Jacques. The subpoenas required the production of documents. The documents fell into two categories. The first were documents produced by Telstra in respect of which no claim against production based on legal professional privilege or confidentiality was made, but Telstra contended that the should not be made available for inspection as Mr Keeling had no legitimate forensic purpose in seeing the documents. The second were documents produced by both Telstra and Mallesons in respect of which Telstra claimed legal professional privilege. After receiving evidence and hearing argument the learned magistrate found in respect of the first category that Mr Keeling had a legitimate forensic purpose in seeing the documents and they were made available to him. No endeavour to challenge that finding has been made. 
Regarding the second category of document in the subpoena directed to Telstra and Malleson Stephen Jacques, the Magistrate noted that Mr Keeling accepted that the documents were subject to legal professional privilege. Mr Keeling argued, however, that that privilege ought to be displaced "because the communications between Telstra and Mallesons were made for the purpose of furthering the improper purpose of Telstra in having a criminal prosecution instigated against Brad Keeling for the purpose of putting pressure on him to discontinue his civil proceedings taken in the Federal Court and to damage his commercial reputation so that his ability to compete with Telstra as a partner of Optus would be damaged." 
That claim was rejected by the learned magistrate grounding her decision upon
Attorney General for the Northern Territory of Australia versus Kearney[1]. The magistrate said: "In my view having regard to the evidence which has emerged in the committal and even taking into account that (a) solicitor from Mallesons was present at the meeting on 19 April at which Strathfield Car Radios staff and others briefed the police on the action of Mr Keeling which thereafter gave rise to the police investigation do not constitute the prima facie evidence required and therefore the documents being privileged are not required to be . Mr Keeling's representatives cannot have access to them".

From that decision Mr Keeling has sought leave to appeal pursuant to s.5F [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). That section provides: "(1) This section applies to: 
Proceedings (including committal proceedings) for the prosecution of offenders on indictment in the Supreme Court or in the District Court; and 
Proceedings under [s.51A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s51a.html) of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/).

The Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions may appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal against an interlocutory judgment or order given or made in proceedings to which this section applies.

Any other party to proceedings to which this section applies may appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal against an interlocutory judgment or order given or made in the proceedings: 
If the Court of Criminal Appeal gives leave to appeal; or 
If the judge, justices, or magistrate of the court of trial certifies that the judgment or order is a proper one for determination on appeal ....

If leave to appeal under this section is refused by the Court of Criminal
Appeal, the refusal does not preclude any other appeal following a conviction on the matter to which the refused application for leave to appeal related." 
On the application for leave to appeal Malleson Stephen Jacques appeared as a party interested. The court granted them leave to appear.

Mr Keeling acknowledged in submissions that leave to appeal was necessary, but
Telstra argued that the court had no jurisdiction to grant leave as the ruling of the magistrate did not constitute a "judgment or order". It was contended, as Gleeson CJ made clear in R versus Saunders[2], that not every ruling or direction in a committal proceeding constituted a judgment or order.

In my opinion the submission that the magistrate's ruling that production of the documents by Telstra and Mallesons was not required, as they were the subject of legal professional privilege which had not been set aside, did not constitute an order within the meaning of s.5F should be rejected. This Court in Attorney General for New South Wales versus Stuart[3] held that an order to a stranger to proceedings that documents be produced to the Court, following the rejection of a claim of public interest immunity, is an interlocutory order within the meaning of [s.5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). The circumstance that the claim here is for legal professional privilege not public interest immunity does not distinguish the reasoning in that case.
Indeed Hunt CJ at CL made clear that, for the purposes of considering whether such a ruling constituted an order, there was no distinction between a claim of privilege based on public interest immunity and legal professional privilege[4]. There is nothing in the decision of R versus Lethlean[5] which casts doubt on the authority of Stuart.

Telstra sought to distinguish Stuart by noting that, as Telstra was not a "party to the proceedings" within the meaning of [s.5F(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html), in consequence of that provision and [subsection ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s2.html), only the Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions or a party to the proceedings could appeal. That may be anomalous although any anomaly would be likely to be removed in an appropriate case by the Attorney General at the relation of an affected person or corporation without a right to seek leave to appeal seeking that leave. Further, it was contended that, whilst Stuart held that a ruling rejecting a claim of privilege, and thus resulting in an order for production may constitute an order within [s.5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html), a ruling upholding a claim for privilege and thus not requiring production of the documents does not constitute such an order. That was because in the former case non-compliance with the ruling could ground action against the third party not producing the documents, whereas in the latter case no question of action could arise from Telstra acting inconsistently with the magistrate's ruling, for instance, by voluntarily waiving the privilege and producing the documents to Mr Keeling.

That submission was contrary to the view of Smart J in Stuart[6].

In my view this submission should be rejected. A ruling constitutes an order whether it requires or does not require a third party to produce documents because it regulates or determines the rights and obligations as between two parties who are contesting an obligation of production.

It follows that this Court has jurisdiction to grant leave to appeal.

There remains the question whether leave to appeal should be granted, and if so, whether the appeal should be upheld.

In Kearney's case, as Gibbs CJ made clear[7], privilege is not displaced "by making a mere charge of crime or fraud or, as in the present case, a charge that powers have been exercised for an ulterior purpose". Not only must the allegation be clear and definite but, to quote Viscount Finlay in O'Rourke v
Derbyshire[8], "there must further be some prima facie evidence that it has some foundation in fact".

The learned magistrate assessed the factual material before her, including that called in the committal proceedings, and held that such prima facie evidence to "give colour to the charge of crime, or fraud, or ulterior purpose", was not present.

That constitutes a weighing of evidence, including the evidence of witnesses.
The circumstances in which an appellant court may interfere with such an assessment of factual material are limited[9]. No sufficient reason has been advanced for this Court to interfere with the learned magistrate's finding.

It follows, in my opinion, that even if leave to appeal be granted, the appeal must be dismissed. In those circumstances I am prepared to assume that it is appropriate for this Court to grant leave to appeal, and thereupon to dismiss the appeal.

In my opinion the arguments advanced on behalf of Mr Keeling on this appeal were based upon a misconception. They assumed that because the magistrate held that, in respect of documents produced by Telstra in respect of which no claim for privilege was made, she was satisfied that Mr Keeling had a legitimate forensic purpose in seeking access to the documents, it followed that she was satisfied that on the evidence before her in the committal proceedings "an abuse of process" had been established. The submissions then contended that assuming that satisfaction of an established "abuse of process", that should have resulted in satisfaction sufficient to give colour to the alleged "abuse of process" and thus the claim for legal professional privilege in respect of a group of documents produced by both Telstra and Mallesons should have been set aside. However, a finding that where no privilege is claimed it is appropriate to require production and permit inspection of documents because the applicant has a legitimate forensic purpose in seeing those documents does not mean that it has been established that there is any "abuse of process", or colour of such sufficient to support the allegation of such "abuse of power".

In my opinion leave to appeal should be granted and the appeal should be dismissed.

SMART J: I am in agreement with the judgments that have been delivered and with the order proposed.
 [1]` <case>; [(1985) 158 CLR 500.]` [2]` [(1994) 72 A Crim R 347] at .` [3]` [(1994) 34 NSWLR 667.]` [4]` [(1994) 34 NSWLR 667] at 672, see Hunt CJ at CL at 670-673; Smart J 688-690.` [5]` (Unreported) Court of Criminal Appeal, 19 September 1995.` [6]` [(1994) 34 NSWLR 667] at 689.` [7]` (19) 158 CLR at 516.` [8]` [[1920] AC 581] at 604.` [9]` Devries & Anor versus Australian National Railways Commission & Anor <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 472] at 479.
 * * * 
