

Sherlock versus Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd and Ors; Vagrand P/L (In Liq) v
Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd and Anor [1996] NSWSC 507 (18 October 1996) 
Sherlock v. Permanent Trustee Australia Limited & Ors 
Vagrand Pty. Limited (In Liqn) v. Permanent Trustee Australia Limited &
Anor /95; ED 1308/90 /95; ED 1623/94 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Mahoney P, Meagher JA, Powell JA 
CATCHWORDS: Companies - Winding up - Conduct and incidents of liquidation - Examination of persons having information - To obtain information for purposes of litigation - Litigation already commenced - Possible forensic advantage - Whether an abuse of process - Application to set aside summonses for examination and/or to restrain, or to limit, examination pursuant to summonses.

Ex Tempore/Reserved: Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Allowed 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: The facts have been detailed at length by Powell JA. His Honour's judgment has now the agreement of Meagher JA. In these circumstances I shall state my conclusions briefly.

I agree that what was here sought to be done should not be seen as an abuse of process. I agree in general with the views expressed by Powell JA on the substance of the matter. I do not need to express any opinion as to the conduct of the proceedings at first instance.

Provisions for examinations of this kind should not be narrowly construed. I am conscious of the interests of the individuals whose examination may be in question and what has been said in this regard in cases such as Hamilton v
Oades <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 486.] I am conscious in particular of the need to ensure that, if criminal proceedings be undertaken, the trial of the person in question must be as fair as the circumstances admit of. And I adhere to the duty of this Court to follow, in principle and in form, the views which have been expressed by the High Court upon matters such as this: cf Attorney General for the United Kingdom v
Heinemann Publishers Pty Ltd [(1987) 10 NSWLR 86] at 189.

However, the purpose of powers such as those here in question is plain. There is a strong public interest in ensuring that the facts relating to public companies which are in the position the legislation deals with be able to be made clear. If it be relevant, the prescience of the legislature in making such provision has been confirmed by the experience of public companies in recent times and by the great losses of public moneys which have occurred.

If there be a wrongful intent established, then the position of those on whom the powers are to be exercised can be safeguarded by the courts by appropriate orders. But I see no abuse of process in the present case in the attempt which has been made to draw out the facts and, perhaps, prevent wasteful litigation.

I agree with the orders proposed by Powell JA.
 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Powell JA.
 
POWELL JA: The question for determination on the present appeal is whether Santow J erred in law when he held that, if, in the circumstances to which I will later refer, examinations were to be conducted pursuant to the provisions of ss. 596A and 596B of the Corporations Law, the conduct of those examinations would constitute an abuse of the Court's process. 
For the most part, the difficulties which attend the determination of that question are not due to any great complexity in the law but are the product of the following: - such material as is before the Court - incomplete, for the most part uninformative, and confusing as it is - would suggest, either, that the legal advisers for the parties are ignorant of, or, that they have proceeded with wholesale disregard for, the Rules of Court and of good litigious practice.
Thus, that material would suggest that, in the first of the proceedings - ED
No. 1308 of 1990 - out of which this appeal arises, application was made for orders that at least three - and in all probability more - companies be wound- up pursuant to the provisions of the Companies (New South Wales) Code - an application which, one would have thought, contravened the provisions of Part - Division 4 of the Rules of Court (see now Part 80A Division 7) - and that, as the result of some procedural aberration which I find completely incomprehensible, orders were, from time to time, made for the appointment of a provisional liquidator of, or for the winding up of, one or more of the companies the subject of the proceedings. Thus, it seems to be suggested that, on 7 February 1990, in those proceedings, the Appellant, Mr. Sherlock, was appointed the Provisional Liquidator of at least three companies, Westmex
Limited ("Westmex"), Westmex Operations Pty. Limited ("Operations") and
Vagrand Pty. Limited ("Vagrand"), but that, although orders were made on 6
April 1990 for the winding-up pursuant to the provisions of the Code of both
Westmex and Operations, no order was made for the winding-up of Vagrand until February 1992, by which time the provisions of the Corporations Law had come into operation; the inevitable result of this having been done is confusion - indeed, one is tempted to echo Macduff's exclamation (Macbeth II iii 72) "confusion now has made his masterpiece!". Thus, as best as one can judge it, the summonses under s.596B of the Corporations Law of which complaint is made in the present proceedings, while bearing the proceeding number 1308 of 1990 are entitled "in the matter of Vagrand Pty. Limited (In Liquidation) and In the Matter of the
Corporations Law (ss. 596A, 596B and 597(9)); the Application of Anthony
Gardiner Sherlock in his capacity as Official Liquidator of Vagrand Pty.
Limited (In Liquidation)" (see Appeal Book 162) while the various orders for production of documents under s.597(9) of the Corporations Law - some 15 in number - of which complaint is made are entitled variously "In the Matter of
Westmex Limited (In Liquidation)" (Appeal Book pp. 259-299), "In the Matter of
Westmex Operations Pty. Limited (In Liquidation)" (Appeal Book pp. 239-258) and "In the Matter of Vagrand Pty. Limited (In Liquidation)" (Appeal Book pp.
-339), despite which fact, and despite the fact that the orders in each group of five were addressed to Permanent Trustee Australia Limited ("PTA") and the same four of its officers, the documents in the group of five entitled "In the Matter of Westmex Limited (In Liquidation)" were virtually identical with the documents the subject of the orders in the group entitled "In the
Matter of Vagrand Pty. Limited (In Liquidation)." One adds, that, since, in each case, the addressees other than PTA were its employees, the orders addressed to them would appear to have been otiose (see, for example,
Rochfort v. Trade Practices Commission 1); one of the consequences of this state of confusion, in the present case, would be that, if it be the fact - it is not possible to know since the appeal papers do not contain copies of any relevant Summonses - Summonses were issued for the examination of the former officers of Westmex, Operations and Vagrand, then, even if it be open to this Court to restrain the conduct of the examination of the officers of Vagrand, it would not seem open to this Court to restrain the examination of the officers of Westmex or Operations, for those examinations would not seem to have any relevance to the second of the proceedings - ED No. 1623 of 1994 - out of which these proceedings are said to arise. I have said "even if it be open to this Court on the application of PTA to set aside the Summonses" since it seems to me, first, that while it may be that PTA has a sufficient locus standi to make an application to set aside summonses directed to its own employees (but see, Hong Kong Bank of
Australia Limited v. Murphy 2; Re BPTC Limited (In Liq.) 3) it would not seem to have any sufficient locus to make any such application in relation to persons who were not its employees; and, second, that, in any event, in a case such as this would appear to have been, where the applicant for the issue of
Summonses, being a liquidator, was an "eligible applicant", and the persons proposed to be examined were former officers and, thus, "examinable officers", the Court would appear to be bound to issue the Summonses (Corporations Law s.596A); yet another consequence of this state of confusion is that it might - as I suggest that it has in this case done - have led to a failure on the part of those advising PTA and its employees, not only to distinguish between PTA and each of its employees, but also to distinguish between those matters which might justify PTA seeking to have the conduct of the examinations insofar as it affected its employees enjoined and those matters which would justify its employees making a similar application. Thus, the fact that proceedings ED No.
 of 1994 between Vagrand and PTA were pending - upon which fact Santow J relied to justify his finding that the conduct of the examinations would constitute an abuse of process - would hardly seem to give any of PTA's employees any ground for seeking in his or her own right to have a summons for examination set aside (cf. Hamilton v. Oades 4; Corporate Affairs
Commission of New South Wales v. Yuill 5); despite the fact that, as the moving parties on the applications which were dealt with by Santow J, PTA and its employees bore the onus of establishing that the conduct of the proposed examinations would constitute an abuse of process of the Court, and despite the fact that a considerable amount of documentary material - most of which was not to the point and a great deal of which was uninformative or confusing - was tendered on the hearing before
Santow J, no attempt appears to have been made on behalf of PTA and its employees to lead direct evidence as to what was the intention of Mr. Sherlock in procuring the issue of the various Summonses for examination, despite the fact that there would have been on the Court file an Affidavit or Affidavits setting out Mr. Sherlock's reasons for seeking the issue of those Summonses (Corporations Law ss. 596B(1)(b), 596C(1)) and despite the fact that, contrary to what was once the practice (see Re Allebart Pty. Limited and the
Companies Act 6; Re Allebart Pty. Limited (In Liq.) and the Companies
Act 7; Re Stirling Henry Limited (In Liq.) and the Companies Act 8) it would have been open to those representing PTA and its employees to seek to inspect that Affidavit, or those Affidavits, and, if appropriate, to tender it, or them, on the hearing (Corporations Law s.596C(2); Part 80A r.36 of the
Rules). As, in the Affidavit which was tendered on the hearing before Santow J on behalf of Mr. Sherlock - the Deponent of which Affidavit was not cross- examined - and in material which was exhibited to that Affidavit, assertions were made as to Mr. Sherlock's purpose in seeking to have the Summonses issued (see Appeal Book pp.217, 237) it is unlikely that, if any application for access to the Affidavit, or Affidavits, sworn in support of the application for the issue of the Summonses had been made, that access would have been refused (see, for example, Worthy v. England 9).

With that preface, which, although long - perhaps unduly so - I have, nonetheless, thought necessary, I turn to record what - so far as the evidence which is before the Court permits me to do so - appear to be the relevant facts.

At all relevant times, Westmex was a listed public company, its directors being Messrs. O'Neill, Brown, Foreman, Batchelor and Goward and its secretary being Mr. Green.

At all relevant times, Westmex had a number of subsidiaries and sub- subsidiaries - it seems to be suggested that there were some 35, or thereabouts, in all - of which, for present purposes, one need note only
Operations, Vagrand and Australian Petroleum Management Limited ("APML"). At all relevant times, the directors of Operations were Messrs. O'Neill, Brown,
Foreman and Batchelor, its secretary being Mr. Green. At all relevant times the directors of Vagrand were Messrs. O'Neill, Brown and Foreman, it secretary being Mr. Green. At all relevant times the directors of APML were Messrs.
O'Neill, Brown, Batchelor and Goward, its secretary being Mr. O'Neill.

At all relevant times: - the assets of Westmex - included among which assets were its rights under the Class Order Deeds to which I refer below - were subject to a fixed and floating charge in favour of Westpac Banking Corporation ("Westpac"); and
Westmex and most of its subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries - including
Vagrand - were the subject of Deeds which they had entered into pursuant to a
National Companies and Securities Commission Class Order ("the Class Order") which permitted those subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries to avoid having to file audited accounts if Westmex and those subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries entered into the Class Order Deeds, which Deeds provided, in effect, for mutual guarantees between Westmex and those subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries, in the event of the winding-up of any one or more of them.

At the date of the appointment of Mr. Sherlock as Provisional Liquidator of
Westmex, Operations and Vagrand, the various subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries of Westmex carried on various businesses, which businesses have been described compendiously as "interests in goldmining, car manufacturing, printing, publishing, shoe wholesaling and retailing, security and oil and gas".
Included among the oil and gas interests were the interests of Vagrand in what appears to have been a Unit Trust known as the Australian Petroleum Fund ("the
Trust"), the object of the Trust being the derivation of income by unit holders from the production of petroleum and petroleum products. The Trust is said to have been created by a Trust Deed made 1st November 1984 ("the Trust
Deed"), the manager of the Trust business being said at all material times to have been APML - at the time of the creation of the Trust known as BA Oil & Gas Management Limited - and the Trustee of the Trust being said at all material times to have been PTA, the fulfilment by which of its obligations under the Trust Deed having been guaranteed by Permanent Trustee Company
Limited ("PTC").

Vagrand appears to have been incorporated in August 1987 - one assumes, at the behest of Westmex - its principal activity at the date of its incorporation being said to be "investment company". Whether or not it was incorporated for the purpose, it would seem that - perhaps having earlier acquired some of the units in the Trust - at some time thereafter, Vagrand launched a take-over bid for the units in the Trust.

It is suggested that, by no later than early August 1989, Vagrand had acquired sufficient of the units in the Trust to enable it to acquire the outstanding units compulsorily, and had notified the unit holders accordingly.

On 26 September 1989, Mr. Green, writing as a director of Westmex, wrote to
PTA, for the attention of a Mr. Loth, who appears to have been the General
Manager - Trusts of PTA, and a Mr. Newby confirming that it was the intention of the Westmex Group compulsorily to acquire the units of all dissenting offerees and advising that the solicitors for the Westmex Group were in the process of having prepared documents for the appointment of a Westmex subsidiary as the new Trustee of the Trust and the retirement of PTA,
Permanent Custodians Limited - whose role in the scheme of things is not clear - and PTC. In the same letter Mr. Green wrote: - "Pending completion of documentation, we request that you direct the manager to deposit all moneys held by you in relation to the trust with Westmex Limited." 
On 28 September 1989, Mr. O'Neill, writing as the Finance Director of APML, wrote to Mr. Loth: - "Further to our conversation today I confirm that we will transfer all of the Australian Petroleum Funds deposits, including those of the Explorers to Westmex Operations Pty. Limited.
 
The funds will be transferred to Westmex Operations Pty. Limited Money Market Account, Westpac Plaza, (Account No. 96 2873)." 
It is said that, as at 28 September 1989, APML maintained on behalf of the Trust with Westpac a bank account - apparently known as the Auspet Money Market Account - which, as at that date, stood in credit to the sum of $3,192,000.00, which sum was either on, or after, 28 September 1989 then - PTA asserts, without its approval - transferred to the Operations Money Market Account with Westpac. It is Vagrand's case that the transfer of the funds from the Auspet Money Market Account to the Operations Money Market Account was not a transaction authorised by the Trust Deed, and that, by acquiescing in, or at least not preventing, the transfer of those funds, PTA was guilty of a breach of trust. 
Although it is not clear that this was so, the probability is that, as at 28
September 1989, Operations, in addition to maintaining the Money Market
Account with Westpac, also maintained a general current account with Westpac, which general account was, at the time, in overdraft.

As I have previously recorded, on 7 February 1990, this Court ordered that Mr.
Sherlock be appointed provisionally liquidator of at least Westmex, Operations and Vagrand - given the procedural aberrations which have attended these proceedings, the probability is that, in these proceedings, orders for the appointment of Mr. Sherlock as Provisional Liquidator of others of the subsidiaries or sub-subsidiaries of Westmex were then, or have since been, also made.

In a Statement of Affairs of Vagrand as at 7 February 1990 sworn by Mr.
O'Neill on 23 April 1990, the assets of Vagrand were shown as its investment in the Fund - the cost of which was said to have been $28,582,159.00 - the value of which, if sold in the ordinary course of business, was estimated at $17,500,000.00, but the estimated realisable value of which was said to be $10,000,000.00. In the same Statement of Affairs, Operations was shown as an unsecured creditor in the sum of $26,316,046.81, the estimated deficiency thus being $16,316,047.00.

On 9 February 1990, Westpac applied the moneys then standing to the credit of
Operations Money Market Account - which moneys included the amount of $3,192,000.00 which had been transferred from the Trust Account in September - in partial discharge of Operations' then overdraft account with
Westpac.

On 6 April 1990, this Court ordered that Westmex and Operations - and, in all probability, others of the subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries of Westmex - but not Vagrand, be wound-up pursuant to the provisions of the Companies 
Code, and that Mr. Sherlock be appointed Liquidator for the purposes of the winding-up. It should be noted that not only was there no order for the winding-up of Vagrand made at this time, but that no steps directed toward having APML wound-up were taken for more than 2 years.

Although it is not clear that this was so, the delay in having orders for the winding-up of Vagrand and APML made appears as if it may well have been due to the complexity of the affairs of what might compendiously be called the
Westmex Group. Part of that complexity appears to have due to the Class Order
Deeds and the need to determine what were the liabilities of each of Westmex and its subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries and the need, in each case, to determine what, if any, assets might be available to the liquidator to apply in or toward the discharge of those liabilities. Those difficulties gave rise to proceedings in both this Court and in the Federal Court of Australia to which I shall shortly refer.

Although, again, it is not clear that this was so, it seems at least likely that, at a fairly early stage, Mr. Sherlock, or members of his staff, had raised with officers of PTA the question of the recovery of the moneys which had been transferred from the Auspet Money Market Account to the Operations
Money Market Account in September 1989. Whether that be so or not, it seems clear that, between September 1989 and August 1991, officers of PTA had sought to recover the funds in question. That this is so is made clear from a letter written on 28 August 1991 by a Ms. Raju, the Manager - Unit Trusts of PTA, to
Mr. Sherlock's firm on 28 August 1991, which letter (Appeal Book p.102) omitting formal parts was as follows: - "Re Australian Petroleum Fund ("Auspet") - Australian Petroleum Fund Trust Account, Australian Petroleum Explorers Account 
We refer to the above and our telephone conversations regarding moneys placed on deposit with Westmex Operations. 
On 26 September 1989 the Trust Manager informed the Trustee that based on the assumption that the Take-over of Auspet by Vagrand Pty. Limited was complete, monies deposited with Westpac Account and be transferred to Westmex Limited (sic). 
Subsequently, on 28 September 1989, the Trust Manager transferred all funds from the Westpac Money Market Account to the Westmex Money Market Account without Trustee's approval.
 
No further actions were taken at that time as Vagrand was viewed as the sole ostensible unitholder of the Trust. 
We have been pursuing the matter with Westpac to recover the funds.
 
Enclosed are (sic) correspondence relating with (sic) the above matter." 
Despite the terms of this letter, no proceedings had been taken by PTA directed towards recovering from Westpac the amount which had been transferred to the Operations Money Market Account prior to 11 May 1992, the relevance of which date will shortly appear.

Meantime, on 7 February 1992, this Court ordered that Vagrand be wound-up and that Mr. Sherlock be appointed Liquidator for the purposes of the winding-up.

It is said that, on or about 11 May 1992, Mr. Sherlock had a meeting with Mr.
Carson, then the General Manager of PTA, in the course of which meeting Mr.
Sherlock advised Mr. Carson that, as Liquidator of Vagrand, he was considering taking legal action against PTA for the recovery of the moneys which had been transferred to the Operations Money Market Account.

It would appear that, by this time, doubts had arisen as to the extent of the respective liabilities of Westmex and its subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries under the Class Order Deeds and that proceedings (Westmex Operations Pty.
Limited (In Liq) v. Westmex Limited (In Liq) 10) were commenced in the
Equity Division of the Court with a view to resolving those doubts. Those proceedings came at first instance before McLlelland J (as his Honour then was), who, on 13 July 1992, held that, in the event of demand being made upon them by Mr. Sherlock in his capacity as Liquidator of Westmex, the various subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries were liable to make payment to Westmex, and further, that any such payment formed a part of the general assets of Westmex and was caught by Westpac's charge. The result of the construction placed by
McLelland J on the Class Order Deeds was that Mr. Sherlock, in his capacity as
Liquidator of the subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries, was faced with claims by himself, in his capacity as Liquidator of Westmex, in a sum in excess of $200 million - Westmex having virtually no assets of any significance - which demands would reduce the dividends able to be paid to the separate creditors of the subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries to vanishing point. That prospect appears to have had a significant bearing on what occurred in relation to the moneys which had been transferred to the Operations Money Market Account in the course of the following 18 months or so.

Meantime, there had occurred certain events which should be recorded.

It would seem that, at some time prior to 17 June 1992, all the directors of
APML had resigned.

On 17 June 1992, Mr. Sherlock met with Ms. Raju and with a Mr. Stern, formerly a solicitor in private practice, but then, as it would seem, a legal officer on the staff of PTC or PTA or both. Although it would appear that a number of matters were discussed at that meeting, it is sufficient to note, first, that
Mr. Sherlock advised Ms. Raju and Mr. Stern that he felt obliged to take proceedings against PTA in respect of the moneys which had been transferred to the Operations Money Market Account, and, second, that Mr. Sherlock advised
Ms. Raju and Mr. Stern of negotiations which he was then having with a Mr.
Fielding - a disgruntled former holder of units in the Trust - seemingly with a view to achieving some satisfaction of Mr. Fielding's complaints.

Thereafter, on 25 June 1992, Ms. Raju wrote to Mr. Sherlock advising him that
PTA, as Trustee of the Trust, had decided to commence legal action against "Wespac Money Market Operation" - semble "Westpac" - in respect of the funds transferred to the Operations Money Market Account, at the same time advising that PTA intended to seek to recover all legal costs from the Trust.

When, on 29 June 1992, Mr. Sherlock expressed the view that PTA was not entitled to recover the costs from the assets of the Trust, Ms. Raju, on 30
June 1992, wrote again to Mr. Sherlock a letter which, after referring to clause 36.1 of the Trust Deed, continued: - "The transfer of the funds was not authorised by the Trustee but was in fact authorised by the Fund Manager, Australian Petroleum Management Limited. 
The Trustee is entitled to take legal proceedings for the recovery of the money wrongly paid out, and in fact has a duty to do so. In the circumstances, the Trustee as a right to recover legal costs properly incurred from the Trust." 
After further discussion and correspondence between Mr. Sherlock and Ms. Raju, it was agreed that the question of the costs of any proceedings against Westpac might be left for later discussion.

Although it would appear that there had earlier been some attempt to have APML proceed to a members' voluntary winding-up, it would seem that, on 30 June , application was made to the Court for the appointment of Mr. Sherlock as
Provisional Liquidator of APML, which application was successful. The material which is before the Court does not disclose when, if at all, this Court ordered that APML be wound up.

It would seem that, at some time which is not known to me, but which appears to have been before 28 October 1992, a company known as Pendal Nominees Pty.
Limited ("Pendal"), which had owned 7,600,000 units in the Trust, commenced proceedings in this Court against Vagrand seeking, pursuant to the provisions of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), orders, either, declaring void ab initio the contract for the acquisition by
Vagrand of Pendal's units in the Trust, together with an appropriate orders for restitution, or, in the alternative, damages, or, further alternatively, compensation pursuant to the provisions of s.1005 of the Corporations Law (see, Fielding v. Vagrand Pty. Limited & Anor. 11). The fate of those proceedings, if they have, by now, been disposed of, is not known to me.

On 8 July 1992, Ms. Raju wrote to a Mr. Painter, the Manager, Legal AFMG, of
Westpac a letter which was, in part, as follows (Appeal Book p.109): "We have been advised by the major unit holder of the Trust, Vagrand Pty. Limited that they intend to take action against Permanent with respect to the unauthorised transfer of moneys to the Westmex Money Market Account (sic).
 
We now call upon Westpac to make good the amounts transferred within seven (7) days of this date failing which instructions shall be given to our solicitors for the recovery of the amount.
 
We would prefer to avoid legal action and the costs thereof but we have to resort to action if a settlement cannot be arranged with the Bank." to which letter Mr. Painter replied, on 27 July 1992, in part as follows (Appeal Book 110):- "As stated in previous correspondence, we are aware of no reason why the Bank should pay any money to your Company in connection with this matter whether pursuant to legal action or what you describe as `a settlement' or otherwise. The Bank denies that it is liable to make any such payment.
 
The Bank further denies that any unauthorised transfer of moneys took place as alleged and we can perceive no basis for your use of the words `make good'. The Bank will vigorously defend any proceedings which may be instituted by your company against it." 
Thereafter, on 27 October 1992, Mr. Sherlock wrote to a Mr. Davis, the Managing Director of PTC, a letter which, omitting formal parts, was as follows (Appeal Book p.111); - "It is some time since I met with you to discuss the position of the funds which we believe have been incorrectly paid to APML into a bank account maintained by Westpac. I understand that you have already made contact with Westpac in an attempt to seek recovery of these monies, to the benefit of creditors generally.
 
As I indicated at the time of my meeting, I am seeking to avoid litigation in this matter, however, I understand that Westpac has denied liability and I must therefore, ask that you either acknowledge liability for the repayment of these monies to APML for the benefit of the Trust, or commence proceedings against Westpac if you consider that it is Westpac that has a liability to disgorge the funds received as a consequence of the incorrect payment made.
 
APML is presently renegotiating its credit facilities with the State Bank of New South Wales and the repayments of the $3.6 million will have a material bearing on the Facility Agreement which we are now seeking to put into place with the bank.
 
Would you please advise me of the current position with Westpac and the timing for the repayment of the monies to the management company." 
Meantime, there had been filed in the Federal Court of Australia an Application in which Mr. Fielding, to whom I have earlier referred, and John Fielding CPA Management Services Pty. Limited, sought leave to proceed with an action which they had earlier commenced against Vagrand and the partners of a firm of accountants, Thompson Douglass & Co, seeking, as against Vagrand, relief similar to that sought in the proceedings which had been brought in this Court by Pendal and, as against the partners in Thompson Douglass & Co, damages for what was alleged to have been the supply of false information. That application came before Morling J on 28 October 1992, (Fielding v. Vagrand Pty. Limited 12) and was disposed of by his Honour on 11 December 1992 when his Honour granted the leave which had been sought - an appeal against his Honour's Judgment and Orders was dismissed on 5 April 1993 [13].

The material which is before the Court (Appeal Book p.211) would indicate that, in addition to the proceedings to which I have just referred, two other proceedings have been commenced in the Federal Court of Australia, and that both the proceedings in which Morling J made his Orders and those other proceedings were, in May 1995, continuing and were set down for hearing later in 1995 - I have been unable to ascertain whether those proceedings have in fact been brought on for hearing and, if so, what has been their fate.

Despite what was said and written by PTA's officers on its behalf, it would seem that, prior to 18 May 1993, no proceedings had been commenced by PTA seeking to recover from Westpac the moneys which had been transferred to the
Operations Money Market Account - indeed, so far as the material before the
Court permits one to judge, no such proceedings have ever been commenced.

On 6 April 1993, PTA's then solicitors, Messrs. Church & Grace, wrote to
Mr. Sherlock in connection with the demand which had earlier been made upon
PTA. In that letter (Appeal Book pp. 225-226) Messrs. Church & Grace wrote (inter alia): - "In order to assist us advising our clients, we should be please if you would let us have particulars of the grounds on which you make such claim. 
In particular, would you confirm that you are making such claim in your capacity as Liquidator of Vagrand Pty. Limited which is beneficial owner of the vast majority of the units issued by the Fund.
 
If you are making the claim in that capacity, it seems to us from the information that we have obtained that Vagrand Pty. Limited by its Director and the Westmex group financial controller, Mr. John O'Neill, arranged for the bank to make the transfer.
 
In these circumstances Vagrand Pty. Limited is precluded from now claiming repayment." 
The material before the Court does not disclose what, if any, reply was made to this letter. 
On 18 May 1993, Vagrand's solicitors, Messrs. Baker & McKenzie, wrote to a
Mr. Coenraads, said to be the Assistant Manager - Unit Trusts of PTC, a letter which, omitting formal parts, was as follows (Appeal Book pp. 114-117): - "We act for Vagrand Pty. Limited (in liquidation) (`Vagrand'). As you are aware: 
Vagrand is entitled to all of the units issued by the Auspet Trust (`the Trust'); 
Permanent Trustee Nominees (Canberra) Ltd. (`the Trustee') is the trustee of the Trust; 
The Trustee's performance is guaranteed by Permanent Trustee Co. Limited (`Permanent'); and 
Australian Petroleum Management Limited (`APML') is the manager of the Trust.
 
Vagrand's liquidator and the writer have previously met with representatives of Permanent regarding the claim made by Vagrand that in September 1989 the Trustee, in breach of contract and of Trust and/or negligently permitted or failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the transfer of trust moneys to Westmex Operations Pty. Ltd (now in liquidation) (`Operations'), a company associated with APML.
 
In that meeting Permanent's representative indicated that Permanent would both seek advice and continue to press and, if necessary, take action against Westpac Banking Corporation (`Westpac'), being the bank which conducted the account to which the trust moneys were transferred, for a refund of those moneys.
 
As our client indicated to you in his letter of March 18, 1993 a very substantial period has now passed since that meeting without Vagrand receiving any satisfactory response from or on behalf of either Permanent or the Trustee.
 
Accordingly, we have been instructed to clearly state to you Vagrand's position and to demand of the Trustee (and if the Trustee fails to comply with the demand, of Permanent as guarantor) the repayment to the Trust of the Sum of $3,192,000 transferred on September 28, 1989 to Operations together with interest which, by reference to the New South Wales Supreme Court scale from time to time, we calculate to be presently $1,895,763.96 as at the date of this letter (total $5,087,763.96). Needless to say, if proceedings are necessary to recover this sum the Trust's claim would also include substantial legal costs.
 
In light of the fact that the basis for Vagrand's complaint has already been discussed at some length in prior meetings and that it is clear from Permanent's correspondence with Westpac (where Permanent itself refers to the transfer of funds as being `unauthorised') that Permanent is well aware of the basis for the claim, repeating it at length seems to have little utility. By way of summary, however, Vagrand's claim is essential that: - the Trustee owed duties to, inter alia, Vagrand under both the trust deed which established the Auspet Unit Trust (`the Trust Deed') and at law; the Trustee's obligations were guaranteed by Permanent as aforesaid; at all material times APML operated accounts with Westpac on behalf of the trust; by in or about mid to late September 1989 Vagrand had acquired in excess of 99% of the units issued by the Trust and was confident of moving towards the compulsory acquisition of the balance shortly thereafter; on September 26, 1989 James Green, a director of Westmex Limited (`Westmex') (the ultimate parent of each of, inter alia, Vagrand, Operations and APML), advised the Trustee in writing that documents were currently being prepared to replace the Trustee as trustee of the Trust; on September 28, 1989 John O'Neill (`O'Neill') a director and the principle (sic) operating employee of APML, in those capacities and no other, verbally requested the Trustee to permit APML to transfer all of the Trust's deposits to Operations, which was a wholly-owned subsidiary of Westmex; such a transfer was not capable of being properly authorised, should not have been authorised and/or should have been prevented by the Trustee for a number of reasons including, inter alia, that such a transfer, constituted an unsecured loan to a company associated with APML; the Trustee, either by its action or its inaction permitted or further and, in the alternative, failed to take steps to prevent the unauthorised transfer of funds and, on September 28, 1989 APML did transfer $3,192,000 of trust moneys to an Operations money market account maintained with Westpac; 
Westpac either subsequently transferred those moneys to an overdraft maintained by Operations with Westpac or combined the money market account with the overdraft account; the Trustee took no immediate action in respect of the unauthorised transfer it appears, in part at least, because it saw its (what was said to be) imminent replacement as trustee, Vagrand's ownership of most of the units in the Trust and, in turn, Vagrand's ownership by Westmex, as somehow justifying its inaction; the Trustee did eventually write to Westpac on October 17, 1989 advising Westpac that the transaction was unauthorised; knowing full-well that the transaction was unauthorised and having stated it to be so in writing the Trustee again failed to take any real action to remedy the situation; on February 7, 1990 a provisional liquidator was appointed to Operations, which is now hopelessly insolvent; it appears nothing further was done by the Trustee until October 26, 1990 when it wrote to Westpac requesting documentation relating to the transaction and November 7, 1990 when the Trustee again requested a refund of the money transferred; on November 16, 1990 Westpac wrote to the Trustee denying that the transaction was done without the Trustee's authority and refusing to provide a refund; notwithstanding an exchange of correspondence between the Trustee and Westpac from November 22, 1990 to March 26, 1991 (and possibly subsequently), which may generally be summarised as involving further assertions by the Trustee that the transfer was unauthorised and further denials by Westpac, the money has not been recovered by the Trustee from Westpac or otherwise paid by the Trustee to the Trust; in all of the circumstances the Trustee is liable to the Trust for its breach of contract, negligence and its breach of trust.
 
Accordingly, Vagrand hereby demands that the Trustee pay to APML within 14 days of the date hereof the amount of $3,192,000 together with interest of $1,895,96 (total $5,087,763.96) failing which proceedings will be commenced against the Trustee and Permanent without further notice. Interest continues to accrue at $983.84 per day." (The terms of this letter suggest that PTA was formerly known as Permanent Trustee Nominees (Canberra) Pty. Limited).

Although PTA's present solicitors, Messrs. Ebsworth & Ebsworth, were later to request that Vagrand delay commencing proceedings so as to allow the matter to be considered and advice to be given to, and instructions sought from,
PTA's insurers, and although at least one inquiry was made of PTA as to its intentions in relation to the letter of demand, (Appeal Book p.119) nothing further appears to have occurred until 1 November 1993, when Messrs. Ebsworth & Ebsworth advised Baker & McKenzie that they had instructions to accept service on behalf of PTA.

Meantime, an appeal to the Court of Appeal from the Judgment and Orders made by McLelland J in July 1992 had been dismissed (Westmex Operations Pty.
Limited (In Liq.) & Ors. v. Westmex Limited (In Liq.) 14.

It would seem that, either following the decision of McLelland J, or following the decision of the Court of Appeal, or both, various creditors of Operations withdrew the Proofs of Debt which they had earlier lodged with Mr. Sherlock in his capacity as Liquidator of Westmex. The effect of that withdrawal is said to have been a substantial reduction in Westmex's claim against Vagrand under the Class Order Deeds. It is further said that unless, and until, Westmex's claim had been reduced in this way Westmex - and consequently Westpac as
Westmex's secured creditor - would have been entitled to the vast majority of
Vagrand's assets in the winding-up, a fact which made it commercially inappropriate for Vagrand to commence proceedings against Permanent - this, so it seems, since any moneys which might have been recovered from Westpac would ultimately have proceeded in a circular way back to Westpac.

Proceedings ED No. 1623 of 1994 were commenced on February 8 1994, when there was filed a Summons, then given proceeding No. CD 50029 of 1994, in which
Vagrand sought (inter alia) against each of PTA and PTC an order that it pay to Vagrand the sum of $3,192,000 together with interest pursuant to s.94 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), that
Summons being returnable the first instance on 25 February 1994, on which day
Cole J. (as he then was) ordered that the proceedings be transferred from the
Commercial Division to the Equity Division of the Court.

Such little material as is before the Court on this aspect of the matter would indicate that, at some time between 25 February 1994 and 23 March 1994, the transferred proceedings ("the Equity proceedings") were listed before the
Registrar and that directions as to the further conduct of the proceedings - which directions appear to have called for the filing of a Defence and any
Cross-Claim within a time which was limited - were given (see Appeal Book p.124), the date for filing such Defence and any Cross-Claim being prior to 23
March 1994.

On 18 March 1994, Ebsworth & Ebsworth wrote to Baker and McKenzie seeking further and better particulars of the Summary of Plaintiff's Contentions - in the letter described as "the claim" - set out in the Summons which commenced the proceedings. Albeit that Baker & McKenzie appear to have adopted the usual refrain that no particulars were necessary as PTA and PTC knew what the claim was all about (see, for example, Spedding v. Fitzpatrick 15;
Philliponi v. Leithead 16; Lawson v. Perpetual Trustee Company ) and although complaint was made of the failure of PTA and PTC to comply with procedural directions which had been consented to - a complaint which, in the circumstances of this case, invites a wry smile - the particulars sought were supplied by letter dated 23 March 1994.

On 23 March 1994, Ebsworth & Ebsworth wrote to Baker & McKenzie a letter which, omitting formal parts was as follows (Appeal Book p. 128): - "Could you please advise whether any former director, secretary or executive officer of Vagrand Pty. Limited, Australian Petroleum Management Limited, Westmex Operations Limited or Westmex Limited has been examined by your client in his capacity as Liquidator or by any other eligible applicant within the meaning of the Corporations Law, including the Australian Securities Commission, a provisional liquidator, an administrator or any other person authorised in writing by the Commission relating to any of the matters the subject of these proceedings.
 
If any such examinations have taken place, we request that you provide us with copies of any written records or transcripts in relation to the examinations." a letter in similar terms being forwarded on 7 April 1994.

On 12 April 1994 Baker & McKenzie wrote to Ebsworth & Ebsworth a letter which contained (inter alia) the following (Appeal Book p.131): "We further advise that Mr. Sherlock has not conducted examinations of any of the persons referred to in your letter on matters relating to the subject matter of the proceedings. Further, as far as Mr. Sherlock is personally aware, no examination conducted by the Australian Securities Commission has touched upon any of the matters the subject of the proceedings although he cannot exclude the possibility that they did so." 
It is said (Appeal Book p.57) that on 6 May 1994 "Registrar Berecry ordered that Practice Note 63 shall apply to the proceedings". This is an assertion which I regret to say I find incomprehensible, and, as Santow J (Appeal Book p.392) appears to rely upon what is alleged to have been the failure of Vagrand to comply with Practice Note 63 as evidencing some improper purpose on the part of Mr. Sherlock in seeking to conduct the examinations, it is as well that I indicate why it is that I find the assertion "incomprehensible". 
Practice Note 63, which was published a little over 6 years ago at the behest of the then judges in the Equity Division of the Court, was, as paragraph 1 in the Introduction makes clear, directed towards avoiding unnecessary appearances before the Court in proceedings commenced by Summons in the Equity
Division - those being proceedings which, in the past, had often been attended by many totally unnecessary appearances in the Registrar's daily Directions
List - providing for a more efficient method of conducting such proceedings, and, if it be possible, saving costs. As will also be apparent upon even a cursory reading of Practice Note 63, the principal means by which it was sought to achieve those ends were two, they being: - a direction that unless the circumstances of the case required an early appointment for hearing, proceedings commenced by Summons were to take the form provided for in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p5) r.4B of the Rules of Court - that is, a Summons without a return day; and the provision of a standard timetable which, in the absence of any direction to the contrary, was to be followed by the parties in any proceedings commenced by summons without a return day.

In the present case, the Equity proceedings, as I have earlier indicated, were commenced by Summons filed, not in the Equity Division, but in the Commercial
Division, which Summons was in the form provided for by [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p5) r.4A of the Rules of Court, that is, stating an appointment for hearing.
Further, it is to be observed that, by 6 May 1994, when it is said that
Registrar Berecry ordered that Practice Note 63 apply to the Equity proceedings, the times provided by paragraph 4 of Practice Note No. 63 for the service of any affidavits in chief of a plaintiff, of any affidavits in chief for a defendant, and any affidavits in reply or in defence of any Cross-Claim, would already have expired without any affidavit having been served by any party and without any Defence or Cross-Claim having been filed on behalf of
PTA or PTC. Further still it should be noted that, by the time when Registrar
Berecry is said to have made the Order, the time provided for by paragraph 6 of Practice Note No. 63 for the making of arrangements for discovery had already expired.

Quite apart from the matters to which I have just referred, the making of such an Order would, in the circumstances, have been quite inappropriate. Even in
May 1994 it would have been plain to those concerned that the Equity proceedings would involve substantial disputes of fact and, thus, were not of a type where the evidence might conveniently be given on affidavit (see, for example, Transcript on appeal p.5A). That the proceedings involved substantial disputes of fact, even if not clear at the time when Registrar Berecry is said to have made the Order, was made so when there was filed on behalf of PTA and
PTC a Defence and Cross-Claim, which Defence (Appeal Book pp. 20-29) and a
Cross-Claim (Appeal Book pp. 30-32), were filed on or about 18 May 1994 - by that time, if the programme provided for in Practice Note No. 63 were binding on the parties, all affidavits to be relied on by either party whether in chief or in reply should have been filed, informal discovery had and an appointment for hearing taken out.

In the Defence which was filed on their behalf, PTA and PTC, after putting in issue material allegations, alleged (Appeal Book pp. 28-29) that the transfer of funds from the Auspet Money Market Account to the Operations Money Market
Account was made with the assent, authorisation, concurrence, consent, participation, acquiescence or adoption by Vagrand, by reason of which facts
Vagrand was estopped from asserting that PTA had been guilty of a breach of trust or, alternatively, was precluded from asserting that PTA had been guilty of a breach of trust without remitting to the Trust an amount equal to the funds which had been transferred together with interest.

In the Cross-Claim which was filed on their behalf, PTA and PTC asserted (Appeal Book p.91) (inter alia) that if PTA had been guilty of a breach of trust, it acted honestly and reasonably and ought fairly to be excused, and, further, that any such breach of trust was committed at the instigation or request or with the written request of Vagrand, by reason of which facts they sought orders (Appeal Book p.32) (inter alia): - pursuant to the provisions of [s.85(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s85.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) relieving
PTA either wholly or partly from liability for any such breach of trust; pursuant to the provisions of [s.86(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s86.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) impounding all or any part of the interest of Vagrand in the Trust by way of indemnity to
PTA and PTC in respect of liability for any such breach of trust committed by
PTA at the instigation or request, or with the written request, of Vagrand.

The Defence and Cross-Claim were forwarded under cover of a letter from
Ebsworth & Ebsworth to Baker & McKenzie which letter (Appeal Book p.141) was, in part, as follows: "We enclose by way of service a Defence and a Cross-Claim in this matter. The Supreme Court have refused to accept the Defence for filing. They have informed us that the proceedings are to proceed pursuant to Practice Note 63, a copy of which we enclose. You will see that under Practice Note 63, the next step in the proceedings will be for your client to serve Affidavits in Chief within 28 days. When we are next before the Court, we will attempt to file the Defence in Court. We are proceeding to file the Cross-Claim in Court and will serve a filed copy on you in due course." 
On 8 June 1994, Ebsworth & Ebsworth wrote again to Baker & McKenzie a letter (Appeal Book p.142) which was in part as follows: - "We also refer to our letter of 17 May 1994 in which we enclosed a copy of Practice Note 63 in accordance with which the matter has now been ordered to proceed. As stated in Practice Note 63, affidavits in chief on behalf of your client are now required to be served. Please let us know when you expect to serve these upon us.
 
Practice Note 63 also provides for the arrangements for informal discovery to be made. As soon as affidavits have been exchanged, it is our view that informal discovery is appropriate in this case. Will you please inform us whether your client will consent to informal discovery taking place." 
On 1 July 1994, Baker & McKenzie wrote to Ebsworth & Ebsworth seeking particulars of the Defence which had been filed on behalf of PTA and PTC. In the light of the complaints of delay on the part of Vagrand which have since been made on behalf of PTA and PTC it is not without point to note, in the particulars which were supplied, that it was not until 1 September 1994 when particulars - which, in my view, are in any event unsatisfactory - were supplied. For present purposes, however, it is sufficient to note that it was asserted on behalf of PTA and PTC, that the representations and instructions which, in the Defence, were said to have been made by or on behalf of Vagrand to PTA and/or PTC and which representations and instructions were, in part, relied upon to found the defence of estoppel, were said to have been made by Mr. Green and Mr. O'Neill on behalf of Vagrand to Mr. Loth and a Mr. Blancato on behalf of PTA and/or PTC. 
On 13 October 1994, Ebsworth & Ebsworth wrote to Baker & McKenzie a letter (Appeal Book pp. 144-145) which, omitting formal parts, was as follows: -
 "We refer to our letter of 1 September 1994 in which we supplied you with answers to your request for particulars of our client's defence. 
As previously discussed, in accordance with Practice Note 63, Affidavit's (sic) in Chief to be relied upon by your clients in establishing its case were to be served within 28 days of the service of our client's appearance. Clearly, this time frame has long since expired. Furthermore, a period of 28 days has also clearly expired from the date of service of our client's answers to your client's request for particulars of the Defence. 
We request that you serve upon us affidavits in chief on or before 28 October 1994, failing which we will bring the matter to the attention of the court. In the event that your client does not intend to rely upon any affidavits in chief, we would be grateful if you would inform us of this. We also anticipate informal discovery taking place in accordance with sub-rule (6) once all affidavits have been served. 
We look forward to hearing from you." 
Despite the terms of this letter, the material before the Court does not disclose any attempt by Ebsworth & Ebsworth on behalf of PTA and PTC to "bring the matter to the attention of the Court" notwithstanding that priior to May 1995, no affidavits had been filed on behalf of Vagrand. 
On 23 February 1995, Ebsworth & Ebsworth wrote to Baker & McKenzie a letter (Appeal Book pp. 147-154) which, after the usual salutations, commenced: - "We believe it is now appropriate for the parties to engage in informal discovery. In light of our client's Defence and Cross-Claim in which it is alleged that your client was aware and in fact consented to the alleged transfer of funds in September 1989, we believe that the following categories of documents should be discovered by your client:" 
Two matters should be noted in respect of this letter, they being: - the "categories of documents" which it was asserted "should be discovered" - which categories of documents extended far beyond those of Vagrand, and included documents which clearly belonged to Westmex, Operations, APML and other subsidiaries or sub-subsidiaries of Westmex - were so extensive in number and content as to make the complaint, later made by PTA and PTC, as to the oppressive nature of the orders for production seem rather hypocritical; and the letter makes no complaint as to the alleged failure of Vagrand to comply with the provisions of Practice Note 63 by not filing any affidavits.

On 13 march 1995, Ms. Crammond, a solicitor/clerk in the employ of Ebsworth & Ebsworth had a telephone conversation with Mr. Chapple the solicitor on the record for Vagrand, the substance of which telephone conversation is recorded in the diary note (Appeal Book p. 155) which I set out below: - "I telephoned Mark Chapple to see what his clients response was to our letter of 23 February 1995 seeking informal discovery.
 
Chapple said that his clients would have no problem with informal discovery but was not sure of the timing yet. He said that there was some delay because they were seeking orders to examine various people in relation to the liquidation, including various ex-Westmex officers and various Permanent Trustee officers. They would be examining them on a range of topics including the transfer. The reasons for the examination were currently being examined by the liquidator and would be forwarded to the AC/Court? in due course. He did not expand on the basis for the examination.
 
He said that informal discovery was also being delayed because of proceedings commenced by various greenmailers in relation to the takeover of the trust, the hearing of which was scheduled to be in July of this year.
 
Chapple also said that they would probably be asking for the Court to be closed during the examinations, however he added that copies of the transcripts of the examinations would be freely available. Chapple would not explain why they wanted a closed Court. In response, I stated that we would be applying to be present at the examinations, as otherwise they would have the advantage of seeing how these witnesses would perform in the witness box. He did not comment on this." 
Thereafter, on 15 March, 1995 Ebsworth & Ebsworth wrote to Baker & McKenzie a letter (Appeal Book pp. 156-157) which, omitting formal parts, was as follows: - "PERMANENT TRUSTEE COMPANY LIMITED & ANOR ats VAGRAND PTY LIMITED (IN LIQUIDATION) . We refer to the telephone conversation between your Mr. Chapple and our Ms Alex Crammond on 13 March 1995.
 . We are extremely concerned that the examinations that your client proposes to conduct may be vexatious or oppressive and an abuse of the Court's process, given that the Westmex companies went into liquidation over five years ago and that your client commenced proceedings against our client over one year ago. Accordingly, we would be grateful if you would confirm by 5.00 pm on Friday, 17 March 1995 that any examinations that your client may undertake will not involve questions asked to the various examinees relating to any matter that reflects upon matters the subject of these proceedings.
 . Furthermore, our client is keen to ensure that the proceedings do not remain in abeyance any further. Accordingly, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the documents that are in your client's possession, custody or control that are relevant to the proceedings including those documents referred to in our letter of 23 February 1995, now as opposed to waiting until the outcome of any examinations that may or may not take place. In this regard, we would be grateful if you would confirm by 5.00 p.m. on Friday, 17 March 1995 that you will provide us with informal access to our client's discoverable material which it currently has in its possession custody or control to be inspected at our convenience.
 . Alternatively, if your client is not prepared to provide us with these confirmations, please provide us with an explanation.
 . Unless we receive a satisfactory response to this letter by 5.00 pm Friday, 17 March 1995, our client will take whatever steps it may be advised to take, including bringing an application to the Court in respect of the abovementioned matters, without further notice.
 . We look forward to hearing from you." which letter produced a reply (Appeal Book pp. 158-159) dated the same day, which reply was as follows; - "VAGRAND PTY. LTD. (IN LIQUIDATION) v. PERMANENT TRUSTEE COMPANY LIMITED 
We refer to your letter of March 5, 1995. (sic) 
We respond to it as follows (using your numbering): - 
You need not be concerned that the liquidator of our client would conduct examinations which were vexatious or oppressive and an abuse of the Court's process. He would not.
 
The difficulty we have with your entire letter, however, is that it suggests that an examination conducted now would be vexatious, oppressive and/or an abuse of the court process simply because the Westmex liquidation commenced over five years ago and proceedings have been instituted against your client. With respect, such a suggestion would be misconceived.
 
Recent and, indeed, not so recent company law is littered with failed cases brought by processed examinees who have sought to avoid examination on the grounds that adversarial proceedings already exist. It is well established that the examination process remains available in these circumstances. Indeed, there are even some suggestions that a liquidator might not be acting appropriately if the liquidator does not take advantage of the information gathering opportunity that the examination process provides.
 
It may be different, of course, if examinations were being conducted solely for the purpose of attacking the credit of your client's potential witnesses. This is not the intent here.
 
In those circumstances, we need not and cannot provide the undertaking sought in paragraph 2 of your letter.
 
We take the view that there is considerable sense in giving discovery once all of the documents our client will have at its disposal are available. You obviously (now) take a different view. That may be affected by a doubt as to whether the examinations will take place. You need not be in any doubt on this issue.
 
Nevertheless, we see little point in arguing unnecessarily only on this point. We have asked our client to gather together such of the documents detailed in your recent letter as are discoverable and we will let you know when they are available." 
On 5 May 1995, the Summonses for examination and the Orders for production which are the subject of these proceedings were issued and made. On the same day, so it would seem, a Ms. Cox, a solicitor/clerk in the employ of Baker & McKenzie spoke to Ms. Crammond advising her of that fact, and, having done so, wrote to Ebsworth & Ebsworth, for the attention of Ms. Crammond, a letter (Appeal Book pp. 160-161) enclosing, for information, copies of the Summonses and Orders for production addressed to Mr. Loth and copies of the Orders for production addressed to PTA so that Ms. Crammond might seek instructions as to accepting service on behalf of PTA Ms. Raju and Messrs. Loth, Blancato and Newby. Although those instructions were later received by Ebsworth & Ebsworth, it appears that they were not received until about 15 May 1995, on which day service was effected. 
As I have previously recorded, the Notices of Motion seeking (inter alia) to restrain the conduct of the examinations of both the officers of Westmex,
Operations and Vagrand and the officers of PTA were filed on 16 May 1995 - the
Notices of Motion seeking to set aside the Orders for production, although foreshadowed prior to 22 May 1995, appear as if they may not have been filed until 22 May 1995, when the original Motions came before Santow J.

Meantime, on 19 May 1995, Baker & McKenzie had written to Ebsworth &
Ebsworth a letter (Appeal Book pp. 235-238) which, omitting formal parts, was as follows: - "VAGRAND PTY. LTD. (IN LIQUIDATION) versus PERMANENT TRUSTEE AUSTRALIA LIMITED & ANOR.

WESTMEX PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS 
We refer to the Notices of Motion filed by your client and our recent correspondence and telephone conversations.
 
Examination Summonses 
Ms. Crammond has advised us that your client is seeking to have the Examination Summonses set aside on the basis that they constitute an abuse of process. We understand from Ms. Crammond that this argument is solely based on allegations that the Liquidator has: - been appointed to each of the companies since 1990; has commenced proceedings against your client in relation to matters which are now sought to be the subject of examination by the Liquidator; those proceedings were commenced in February 8, 1994; the Liquidator has not yet given discovery or any evidence in those proceedings; and in the circumstances, there has been an unreasonable delay in seeking to conduct examinations under the Corporations Law.
 
Orders for Production 
In relation to the Orders for Production, Ms. Crammond has indicated that your client seeks to have the Orders set aside on the basis that they are: - an abuse of process (for the same reasons outlined above): and oppressive, for the reasons contained in your facsimile dated May 18, 1995.
 
Please advise us in writing, as a matter of urgency, if: - we have misunderstood or have misstated the basis for the arguments which will be put on behalf of your clients on Monday; and/or there are additional or different grounds that your clients would intend to rely upon on Monday.
 
Abuse of Process/Delay 
As we understand the current state of the law and the relevant facts: - our client is empowered to use the examination procedure to obtain information including, in particular, information not otherwise available to him, to assist in the winding up of the companies. We are not aware of anything which would suggest that those powers can only be exercised within a particular period after the commencement of the liquidation. There is certainly nothing in the Corporations Law (where you might reasonably expect to find it). Moreover, even if there was a principle that a liquidator could only avail himself of these powers within a reasonable period it is not at all clear to us why this is said to be an issue here. We will provide you late today with the evidence we will lead on this point; those powers are not only available to him in cases where no proceedings are contemplated or have been brought but also where proceedings have already been brought; examinations to obtain information which may assist the Liquidator in prosecuting presently pleaded causes of action, to determine whether any of those causes of action should be abandoned and to determine whether any other causes of action should be added are legitimate purposes which are neither an abuse of process, vexatious or oppressive; and in the vast majority of cases, the Court will leave it to the person conducting the enquiry to decide whether it is appropriate to give prior notice of the topics to be covered and that will particularly include cases such as that with which we are both concerned here, where, by reason of the existence of pleadings in the substantive proceedings, the topics to be covered are already more than reasonably evident.
 
Further, as far as we are aware, no case has ever accepted that any standing a proposed examinee might have to challenge the order that they be examined extends to standing to challenge the right of a liquidator to examine others, including, in particular, those persons who are covered by the mandatory examination provisions in Section 596A of the Corporations Law.
 
Oppression 
Insofar as you allege that the Orders for Production are oppressive, we are, as we indicated in our letter to you of May 18, 1995, perfectly willing to co-operate both in attempting to limit and/or explain to you the scope of the Orders for Production and to minimise any inconvenience your clients may suffer (of course on the basis that in doing so the Liquidator is not to be taken to be waiving his right to call for further documents from your clients).
 
To that end, we enclose draft copies of the Orders for Production which have been amended so as to further confine the scope of the documents sought. Our client would be prepared to accept production of these documents at this stage. Indeed, we would be happy to meet with you this afternoon to discuss production issues if that would assist you.
 
Future of Your Clients' Motions 
With respect, we cannot, in all of the circumstances, see where or how your clients could be entitled to orders setting aside the Examination Summonses and Orders for Production. Indeed, the position at law is now so clear in our view that our client would be entitled to an order for indemnity costs if you (sic) clients proceed with the hearing of these Notices of Motion and fail.
 
We would hope that we can both avoid unnecessary argument, delay and cost. We would, therefore, appreciate your urgent response to the matters raised in this letter.
 
Please note that if you still intend to proceed with your application Ms. Crammond should be available for cross-examination on here affidavits.
 
The Equity Division Proceedings 
As far as the substantive proceedings are concerned, the only affidavit which we anticipate filing will be a short and relatively formal affidavit by the Liquidator. This is not to say that this will necessarily be the only evidence we expect to lead but, rather, reflects our belief that we may need to compel co-operation from other potential witnesses by use of subpoena. This, in part, explains our client's use of the examination procedure in respect of those persons. Examination of those persons will allow us to provide you with an outline of the evidence we might expect them to give if subpoenaed.
 
As far as discovery is concerned, we have previously indicated to you that, in our view, discovery is best delayed until after the production of documents associated with the examinations. We remain of that view.
 
We also note that your clients have not yet given discovery.
 
In those circumstances, we suggest that it be agreed that each party give informal discovery by June 16, 1995 (being 21 days after the date for production of documents). We would also file and serve the Liquidator's affidavit by that date. Please let us have your instructions on this suggestion." 
As far as the material before the Court permits one to determine, Ebsworth & Ebsworth did not, prior to the Notices of Motion coming before Santow J on 22 May 1995, allege that the bases upon which it was sought to have the Summonses for Examination and the Orders for Production set aside, were other than those recorded in the letter.

Despite the fact that counsel for PTA and its employees did not - although being in a position to do so - seek to tender express evidence as to the purpose for which the examinations were to be conducted, and despite the fact that counsel for PTA and its employees did not seek to cross-examine Ms. Cox on her affidavit, in which affidavit Ms. Cox deposed to the purposes intended, counsel for PTA and its employees apparently felt no compunction about asserting it to be the fact that the examinations were intended to achieve an improper purpose. That this was so is made clear by the following passages (Appeal Book pp. 355-356) in the transcript of the proceedings before Santow
J: - "These examinations are not to ascertain whether the equity proceedings should be maintained or continued. They are, in truth, and the sole and dominant purpose of them is, to effectively pull together evidence for the purpose of the equity proceedings. They may want to ask about other matters - we are not interested in that - I am restricting myself to the subject matter of the equity proceedings - at two levels, one is that they are going to speak to the Westmex officers and effectively cross-examine them.
 
In respect to that they say: the only evidence we want to put in the equity proceedings is a short formal affidavit from the liquidator. One wonders why that was not put on early last year. We are probably going to have to subpoena some people to give evidence. One of the benefits we will get out of these examinations is: we will be able to give you an outline of the evidence they will give in the box, having been subpoenaed.
 
That is telling us: we are going to use those examinations to get the evidence out of the witnesses who will be favourable to us. We may not tender their transcript into evidence. We may be able to get around the hurdle of a motion that has been put forward, but we are going to ask them questions to which we know the answers, or if we do not get those answers we will call them hostile or we will put the transcript to them as a prior inconsistent statement if we declare them to be hostile.
 
We are also going to get a free go at your people. That is what is going to happen.
 
This is one of those cases where one can look at what has happened since 1989 and truly understand what is going on. The evidence discloses Vagrand has at all times had at least $10 million in assets. There has been ample money to have done anything a long time ago. It is not as if we are talking about a cash depleted company or people who do not know how to achieve these things.
 
They now say: look, Vagrand is one of a number of companies in the Westmex group which meant that if everyone filed cross-guarantees you only had to sort out accounts.
 
That does not seem to make sense of the history of correspondence and communications Mr. Sherlock was having. This reason now put forward does not bear a real relationship to the way Mr. Sherlock was putting the position of Permanent at the time. That was never expressed. This explanation is given as a hearsay explanation by a more junior solicitors at Bakers.
 
This is not a case where one of the purposes or a side purpose or legitimate investigation of the strength of the case is being undertaken by examination, but its sole or dominant purpose is this. Once you get to the sole or dominant purpose, we say it becomes an improper purpose." 
Although the material which is before the Court does not disclose what were the interlocutory orders in question, it would appear (Appeal Book p.400L-O) that, on 26 May 1995, certain interlocutory orders were made by Santow J. 
On 19 June 1995 - that is, before he published his Judgment - Santow J made a number of orders, those orders, in substance, being: - orders restraining the conduct of any examination of PTA's employees insofar as such examination would cover the subject matter of the Equity proceedings; orders that Mr. Sherlock not be permitted, on the examination of any of the officers of Westmex, its subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries, to inquire into the subject matter of the Equity proceedings; orders setting aside the orders for production insofar as they required the production of documents relating to the subject matter of the Equity.

In the Judgment which he was to deliver on 26 June 1995, Santow J, having discussed what he perceived to be the principles applicable to the applications then before him, and examples of the application of those principles, continued (Appeal Book pp. 391-392): - "Against that background of principle and examples of its particular application, I turn to the examinations under consideration and their implications for the equity proceedings.
 
I consider the significance of the Liquidator's delay to be twofold. First it throws some light on his purposes, though not of itself a ground to restrain the examinations. Second it is material in the context of the present stage of the equity proceedings. It bears on the tactical and forensic advantages afforded the liquidator in those proceedings, if examination be allowed without restraint. It must be remembered that these are proceedings not against former officers of the company concerned, but against a third party whose connection with the Westmex Group and its affairs is simply as manager of a trust of which Vagrand is sole or principal beneficiary. 
In the present stage of the equity proceedings, allowing the examinations to proceed without restraint would bring about the following tactical and forensic advantages for the liquidator.
 .........." 
The forensic advantages Santow J perceived were, put shortly (Appeal Book pp. 392-393): - that Mr. Sherlock would thereby avoid the need, in the Equity proceedings, to file any substantive affidavit evidence, the consequence of which - as his
Honour perceived it - was that: - "In effect the Defendant is .... required to file and serve the evidence for its own case first, reversing the usual order. This procedure is only made effective by the fact that the liquidator will know what the subpoenaed witnesses are going to say as a result of the examination procedure." a conclusion which, I regret to say, I do not share with his Honour, and which does not appear to me to be supported by the matters upon which his Honour relies; that Mr. Sherlock would thereby gain access to coercive pre-trial procedures, a situation which his Honour appears - despite the fact that the authorities demonstrate that the fact the proceedings have been commenced does not, without more, constitute the examination of witnesses, in such cases, an abuse of process - unfair "in a situation where the Defendant does not have a similar coercive remedy against the Liquidator's witnesses".
that Mr. Sherlock would thereby pre-empt discovery by the orders for production.

Having done so, his Honour then concluded, on that aspect of the matter (Appeal Book p.393): - "There is thus no question but that the Liquidator will obtain a number of forensic advantages `not available from ordinary pre-trial procedures'. These include but are not limited to, the advantage of avoiding court sanctions from late filing of affidavits through the simple production of the record of examination, if permitted." 
His Honour then proceeded to consider what inferences could be drawn from "this fact of forensic advantage". In so doing, his Honour, although seeming to accept that it may be a consequence of such examinations that a particular liquidator might gain forensic advantages which would not be available from ordinary pre-trial procedures, and that an abuse of process will only arise if it is the predominant purpose of the liquidator to gain such advantages, proceeded (Appeal Book p.394) as follows: - "The examinations here are sought to be conducted in the context of well advanced litigation, where there is no claimed legitimate purpose of needing information to determine whether to abandon the litigation or to add causes of action (being the two purposes treated as legitimate in Hong Kong Bank of Australia Limited). The mere seeking of information `regarding the subject matter of the Equity Division Proceedings', acknowledge by the Liquidator as `an important purpose in conducting the proposed examination', could not in the present case be a legitimate purpose. This is particularly where this is done in circumstances where the litigation is well advanced under ordinary pre-trial procedures accepted by the parties and where the Liquidator now seeks to elicit information, not by those procedures, but by examinations, doing so to achieve tactical advantage in litigation against a third party.
 
Thus for the reasons outlined above, I am satisfied that if the Liquidator were to conduct such examinations in relation to the subject matter of the equity proceedings, substantial forensic advantage would be conferred on the Liquidator in the equity proceedings which are not available from ordinary pre-trial procedures. It is true the question of abuse of process depends upon the purpose, not the result, of examinations but inference can be drawn as to that purpose where this is its natural consequence. Certainly the Court is entitled to infer that at least one of the purposes of conducting an examination is to attain the advantages clearly achieved by that course of conduct. The question is whether that purpose is the sole or predominant purpose for conducting the examinations. The Liquidator has not provided evidence of any other purpose for the examinations into the subject matter of the equity proceedings. The Liquidator is the person in the best position to provide evidence of such other purpose (see my earlier comments on `onus and inference'), and in the absence of any such evidence a Jones v. Dunkel inference will arise that the uncalled evidence would not have assisted the Liquidator's case.
 
Thus I am satisfied that the sole or predominant purpose is that of attaining the forensic advantages in the equity proceedings not available from ordinary pre-trial procedures." 
His Honour accordingly confirmed the Orders which he had made on 19 June .

A Notice of Appeal having earlier been filed on behalf of Mr. Sherlock in his several capacities, this Court, on 11 September 1995, granted leave to appeal from the Judgment and Orders made by Santow J.

In the Notice of Appeal there were assigned the following grounds of error: - that Santow J erred in holding that an examination pursuant to the provisions of ss. 596A or 596B of the Corporations Law of the Westmex officers or the employees of PTA, insofar as they related to the subject matter of the
Equity proceedings, would constitute an abuse of process; that his Honour erred in finding that Mr. Sherlock's sole, or predominant, purpose in seeking to conduct the examinations was to obtain a tactical or forensic advantage in respect of the Equity proceedings which was not available to him in ordinary pre-trial procedures; that his Honour erred in holding that the fact that a forensic advantage would, or might, be obtained by Mr. Sherlock if the examinations were conducted entitled him to infer that Mr. Sherlock's sole, or predominant, purpose in deciding to conduct the examinations was to obtain such an advantage; that his Honour erred in holding that the Orders for production constituted an abuse of process.

When the appeal came on for hearing, B.A. Coles Q.C. appeared with Ms. H.L.
Cox for Mr. Sherlock in his several capacities, while Mr. J.T. Svehla appeared for PTA, PTC and the employees of PTA.

Before proceeding to consider the matters raised by the appeal, it is convenient to record the relevant provisions of ss. 596A, 596B, 596D, 596F and of the Corporations Law, noting, first, that [s.9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s9.html) provides (inter alia): - "Unless the contrary intention appears: ..........
 `Eligible applicant', in relation to a corporation, means: ..........
 a liquidator or provisional liquidator if the corporation; ..........
 `examinable affairs' in relation to a corporation means: the promotion, formation, management, administration or winding-up of the corporation; or any other affairs of the corporation ...; or the business affairs of a connected entity of the corporation, insofar as they are, or appear to be, relevant to the corporation or to anything that is included in the corporation's examinable affairs because of paragraph (a) or (b); ...........
 `examinable officer' in relation to a corporation means: - a director, secretary or executive officer of the corporation; ..........
 `executive officer' in relation to: a body corporate; or an entity within the meaning of [Part 3.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/index.html#p3.6) and [3.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/index.html#p3.7) means a person, by whatever name called and whether or not a director of the body or entity, who is concerned, or takes part, in the management of the body or entity.
 ..........
 
A. The Court is to summon a person for examination about a corporation's examinable affairs if: - an eligible applicant applies for the summons; and the Court is satisfied that the person is an examinable officer of the corporation or was such an officer during or after the 2 years ending: ...........
 if the corporation is being, or has been, wound up - when the winding up began; ..........
 
B (1) The Court may summon a person for examination about a corporation's examinable affairs if: - an eligible applicant applies for the summons; and the Court is satisfied that the person: has taken part or been concerned in examinable affairs of the corporation and has been, or may have been, guilty of misconduct in relation to the corporation; or may be able to give information about examinable affairs of the corporation.
 
C (1) A person who applies under section 596B must file an affidavit that supports the application and complies with the rules.
 
C (2) The affidavit is not available for inspection except so far as the Court orders.
 ..........
 
D (1) ...
 
A summons to a person under section 596A or 596B may require the person to produce at the examination specified books that: are in the person's possession; and relate to the corporation or to any of its examinable affairs.
 
A summons under section 596A is to require under subsection (2) of this section the production of such of the books requested in the application for the summons as the summons may so require.
 ...........
 
F (1) Subject to section 597, the Court may at any time give one or more of the following: - a direction about the matters to be inquired into at an examination; a direction about the procedure to be followed at an examination; a direction about who maybe present at an examination while it is being held in private; a direction that a person be excluded from an examination, even while it is being held in public; a direction about access to records of the examination; a direction prohibiting publication or communication of information about the examination (including questions asked, and answers given, at the examination); a direction that a document that relates to the examination and was created at the examination be destroyed.
 ..........
 ...
 (5B) The Court may put, or allow to be put, to a person being examined such questions about the corporation or any of its examinable affairs as the Court thinks appropriate.
 
The Court may direct a person to produce, at an examination of that or any other person, books that are in the first-mentioned person's possession and are relevant to matters to which the examination relates or will relate.
 ..........
 (12) A person is not excused from answering a question put to the person at an examination on the ground that the answer might tend to incriminate the person or make the person liable to a penalty.
 (12A) Where before answering a question put to a person (other than a body corporate) at an examination, the person claims that the answer might tend to incriminate the person or make the person liable to a penalty; and the answer might in fact tend to incriminate the person or make the person so liable; the answer is not admissible in evidence against the person in: a criminal proceeding; or a proceeding for the imposition of a penalty; other than a proceeding under this section, or any other proceeding in respect of the falsity of the answer.
 ..........
 (14) Subject to subsection (12A), any written record of an examination so signed by a person, or any transcript of an examination of a person that is authenticated as provided by the rules, may be used in evidence in any legal proceedings against the person.
 
A person ordered to attend before the Court or another court for examination under this Division may, at his or her own expense, employ a solicitor, or a solicitor and counsel, and the solicitor or counsel, as the case may be, may put to the person such questions as the Court, or the other court, as the case may be, considers just for the purpose of enabling the person to explain or qualify any answers or evidence given by the person." 
Save as to one matter to which I will refer shortly, counsel appeared to accept, as a compendious statement of the principles to be applied on an application such as was before Santow J, the following passage in the Judgment of Gleeson CJ, with whom Mahony JA (as he then was) and Priestley JA agreed, in Hong Kong Bank of Australia Limited v. Murphy 18: - "In re Hugh J Roberts Pty. Ltd [(1970) 91 WN 537], Street J considered the principles applied in this State relating to the exercise of the power to make examination orders where a liquidator has already commenced litigation. His Honour said (at 541;585): `A liquidator needs information concerning his company just as much in connection with current or contemplated litigation as in connection with other aspects of its affairs. In using the statutory machinery of private examination he will in many cases be gathering evidence as an ordinary and legitimate use of this procedure ...
 
In my judgment it is immaterial in basic substance whether the private examination is sought to be used by a liquidator to gather information in connection with proceedings he believes he might be able to bring, proceedings he contemplates bringing, proceedings he has decided to bring, and proceedings he has already brought. There is no presently relevant distinction in substance between gathering information referable to commencing proceedings and gathering information referable to continuing proceedings.' 
In this respect, the law in England was, at least until quite recently, somewhat different from that in New South Wales. There the courts attached great importance to the distinction between making examination orders in favour of liquidators prior to the commencement of proceedings, and the making of such orders after such commencement. It appears, however, that the English courts are moving away from that position: cf Cloverbay Limited (Joint Administrators) v. Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA [[1991] Ch 90. (A] 
Street J pointed out that the Court would not permit applications for examination of witnesses and production of documents to be used in a vexatious or oppressive manner, or where such applications would constitute an abuse of process. His Honour gave, as an example of such an abuse of process, a case where the purpose of the liquidator was to rehearse the cross-examination of a potentially hostile witness in pending litigation. For this reason, the fact that current proceedings are pending makes it necessary for the court to be alert to the possibility that a proposed application might be used for an improper purpose. His Honour said (at 541-542; 585): `A liquidator need not be diffident in using a private examination for its ordinary and legitimate purpose in the gathering of information. But he must not abuse this process. For instance an attempt, where litigation is either contemplated or commenced, to summon the prospective or existing defendant's probable witnesses and examine them simply for the purpose of destroying their credit would exceed the legitimate use of the process. Beyond stating this extreme instance, I consider it unsafe to generalise - very often the gathering of information quite properly involves testing the reliability or credit of the examinee from whom the information is being obtained.' 
In Hamilton v. Oades <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 486], the High Court referred, in the context of an examination against the background of pending criminal charges, to the possibility of an abuse of process. In that connection, Mason CJ (at 496), observed that one of the important public purposes which an examination is designed to serve is to enable a liquidator to gather information which will assist in the winding up.
 
An illustration of a case where an application for an examination order by a person who was not a liquidator was found to have been made for a collateral purpose, and to constitute an abuse of process, is Re Imperial Continental Water Corporation [(1886) 33 Ch D 314.] There, the applicant was a person who held a mortgage on calls that might be made on the shareholders of a particular company. There was an order for the winding up of the company, and the applicant brought an action against the company and its directors, claiming to have his mortgage on calls enforced and any deficiency made good by the directors. Whilst that action was pending, he, as an alleged contributory, obtained an order under s.115 of the Companies Act 1862 (UK) for the examination of the directors. (Under that legislation the making of a winding up order was a necessary pre-condition to an order for examination.) This was held to involve an abuse of process. Section 115, it was said, was never intended to aid a private litigant to get information purely for the purpose of impending litigation. The object of the section was to enable information to be obtained for the general benefit of a company's contributories and creditors.
 
It is to be noted, however, as is implicit in the judgment of Street J, that there is no strict dichotomy between an advantage to be gained by an applicant for an examination order, such as a liquidate, in the capacity of a litigant, and a benefit that might flow to creditors, or contributories, or members of the public, from the conduct of an examination. Whilst the court will not permit a liquidator, or other eligible person, to abuse its process by using an examination solely for the purpose of obtaining a forensic advantage not available from ordinary pre-trial procedures, such as discovery or inspection, on the other hand, the possibility that a forensic advantage will be gained does not mean that the making of an order will not advance a purpose intended to be secured by the legislation." the point of departure between counsel being that, while Mr. Coles, adopting the language of Gleeson CJ, advanced what might be called "the sole purpose" test, Mr. Svehla supported the approach of Santow J - who, for this purpose, had relied on the Judgment of the High Court in Williams v. Spautz 19 - who favoured what might be called the "predominant purpose" test.

Although, in the light of the conclusion to which I have come, it is of no consequence, in the present case, whether one adopts "the sole purpose" test or "the predominant purpose" test, it seems to me, with respect, that it was not open to Santow J to adopt the course which he did. It is to be observed, first, that the High Court refused special leave to appeal from the decision of this Court in Hong Kong Bank of Australia Limited v. Murphy 20; second, that, although a similar argument was advanced in Burns Philp & Co.
Limited v. Murphy; Burns v. Murphy 21, Clarke and Handley JJA - Mahoney
JA did not advert to the matter - declined to entertain the point; third, that in Kelly v. Murphy 22 Sheller JA, with whom Meagher and Handley JJA agreed, expressly referred to, and relied upon, the Judgment of Street J (as he then was) in Re Hugh J. Roberts Pty. Limited 23 and the Judgment of
Gleeson CJ in Hong Kong Bank of Australia Limited v. Murphy 24 when dealing with the question whether or not the orders for production then under challenge should be set aside; and, finally, that, the approach proper to be adopted by a trial judge in a case such as it is suggested this is, is indicated by the following passage in the Judgment of McHugh JA (as he then was) in Attorney General for the United Kingdom v. Heinemann Publishers
Australia Pty. Limited 25: - "Before leaving this aspect of the case one matter needs to be mentioned. The learned trial judge, despite what the majority of this Court said in Director-General of Education v. Suttling as to the effect of the High Court cases, held himself bound by the statements in the later High Court cases. However, his Honour was in error in thinking that he was entitled to refuse to follow a decision of this Court on the ground that it was inconsistent with earlier High Court statements. Judges of the Divisions of the Supreme Court are bound by the ratio decidenti of a Court of Appeal decision until it is overruled by the High Court. In Jacob v. Utah Construction and Engineering Pty. Ltd <case>; [(1966) 116 CLR 200], Barwick CJ, speaking of the relationship between the High Court and the State Supreme Courts at a time when the High Court was bound by Privy Council decisions, said (at 207): `... It is not, in my opinion, for a Supreme Court of a State to decide that a decision of this Court precisely in point ought now to be decided differently because it appears to the Supreme Court to be inconsistent with reasoning of the Judicial Committee in a subsequent case. If the decision of this Court is to be overruled, it must be by the Judicial Committee, or by this Court itself. It cannot be treated by a Supreme Court as if it were overruled. The matter is, of course, different where this Court's decision is not precisely in point and comparison has to be made merely between two lines of reasoning.' 
That principle is directly applicable to the relationship of the Court of Appeal and the Divisions of the Supreme Court. It is the duty of the judges of the courts of justice `to accept loyally the decision of the higher tiers'. Broome v. Cassell & Co. Ltd. <case>; [[1972] AC 1027] at 1054." 
I have indicated that, in the light of the conclusion to which I have come, it is of no consequence in the present case whether the appropriate test is "the sole purpose" test or "the predominant purpose" test. I have done so for, with great respect to Santow J, it seems to me: - that such evidence as was before his Honour did not, in my view, permit him to make certain primary findings of fact upon which he appears to have relied as part of his process of reasoning to the conclusion that Mr.
Sherlock's predominant purpose in seeking to conduct the examinations was an improper one; and that, in any event, his Honour's process of reasoning to that conclusion was, in my view, flawed.

Before proceeding to record my reasons for the views which I have just indicated, I should first record that, in his Judgment, (Appeal Book pp.
-377) Santow J set out the following concessions which had been made by PTA and its officers: - that Mr. Sherlock was an "eligible applicant" for the purposes of s.596A and of s.596B; that the Equity proceedings fell within the definition of "examinable affairs" of Westmex, Operations and Vagrand; that the Westmex officers were at the relevant time "examinable officers" of Westmex, Operations and Vagrand; that the PTA employees were at the relevant time officers of PTA who might be able to give information about the Equity proceedings and, thus, about the examinable affairs of Westmex, Operations and Vagrand; that the examinations of the Westmex officers arose by virtue of s.596A; that the examinations of the PTA employees arose by virtue of s.596B.

The significance of these concessions is, as it seems to me, that prima facie, they would demonstrate that examinations of the Westmex officers and the PTA employees in relation to (inter alia) the transfer of funds from the Austpet
Market Money Account to the Operations Money Market Account was a proper purpose.

The primary findings of fact upon which Santow J appears to have relied in coming to his ultimate conclusion would appear to have been: - that there had been a significant delay - some 4 years - after Mr.
Sherlock had determined that Vagrand had a good cause of action against PTA and PTC (see Appeal Book pp. 372, 391-392); that "the examinations (were) sought to be conducted in the context of well advanced litigation" (see Appeal Book pp. 392, 394); that "there (was) no claimed legitimate purpose of needing information to determine whether to abandon the litigation or to add causes of action ... the mere seeking of information not (being) a legitimate purpose" (see Appeal Book p.394; cf. Appeal Book pp. 372-373); "allowing the examinations to proceed without restraint would bring about ... tactical and forensic advantages for (Mr. Sherlock)" those advantages being (see Appeal Book pp. 392-394): - avoiding the need to file any substantive affidavit evidence; gaining access to coercive pre-trial procedures; and pre-empting discovery by its orders for production; all of which forensic advantages were "not available from ordinary pre-trial procedures".

None of those primary findings of fact is, in my view, supported by the material which was before his Honour.

So far as the first is concerned, there is simply no evidence whatsoever that, in or about February 1991, Mr. Sherlock had decided to sue PTA and PTC to recover the funds which had been transferred. On the contrary, the evidence is that, between September 1989 and August 1991, employees of PTA had sought to recover the funds from Westpac as they considered - rightly, in my view (see
Young v. Murphy; Swinbank v. Murphy 26) - that PTA as the Trustee had a duty to do, and that, after the meeting between Mr. Sherlock and Mr. Carson in
May 1992, when Mr. Sherlock informed Mr. Carson that he was considering taking legal action against PTA, and the meeting between Ms. Raju and Mr.
Stern in June 1992, when Mr. Sherlock said he felt obliged to take proceeding against PTA, Ms. Raju advised Mr. Sherlock that PTA as trustee of the Trust had decided to commence legal action against "Westpac Money Market Operation", a decision which was not thereafter transferred into action beyond the letter written in July 1992 by Ms. Raju to Mr. Painter. It was after that when Mr.
Sherlock wrote to Mr. Davis asking that PTC "either acknowledge liability for the repayment of these moneys ... or commence proceedings against Westpac if you consider that it is Westpac that has a liability to disgorge to the funds". Thereafter, although a formal demand was made on PTC in May 1993, no proceedings were then commenced as a result of the request from Ebsworth &
Ebsworth that Vagrand delay commencing proceedings so as to allow the matter to be considered and advice to be given to, and instructions sought from,
PTA's insurers.

So far as the second of the matters to which I have referred is concerned, with great respect to Santow J, I consider that to describe the proceedings in
May 1995 as "well advanced litigation" is to indulge in hyperbole. All that appears to have been done following the transfer of the proceedings from the
Commercial Division to the Equity Division was that directions had been given as to the filing of a Defence and any Cross-Claim - which directions were not complied with by PTA and PTC - that particulars of the Summary of Plaintiff's
Contentions had been sought and delivered, that Mr. Registrar Berecry, so it is said, had made an order which in the circumstances was an incomprehensible order and totally inappropriate to the proceedings - and with which incomprehensible order on-one has in any event complied - and that eventually a Defence and Cross-Claim had been filed on behalf of PTA and PTC. Despite the complaint which appears to have been made on behalf of PTA and PTC on the hearing before Santow J, and despite the fact that it was at all times open to
PTA and PTC to seek to have the proceedings re-listed for the purpose of obtaining any procedural orders, or directions, that were thought to be necessary, or desirable, or even of obtaining an order the proceedings be dismissed for want of prosecution, nothing further was done so that, in May , the proceedings were far from ready for hearing.

So far as the third of the matters to which I have just referred is concerned, the material before his Honour, in my view, did not permit his Honour to find that "there is no claimed legitimate purpose of needing information to determine whether to abandon the litigation or to add causes of action ... the mere seeking of information `regarding the subject matter of the Equity
Division proceedings' ... could not in the present case be a legitimate purpose." While it is true that, in Hong Kong Bank of Australia Limited v.
Murphy, it was said that seeking to obtain information to determine whether to abandon litigation, or to determine if any other causes of action should be added, were held to be legitimate purposes, I know of no authority - and none was cited to us - for the proposition that those are the only two legitimate purposes once litigation has been commenced. It the present case, the concessions made on behalf of PTA and PTC would indicate that seeking information as to the circumstances in which the transfer of funds took place was a legitimate purpose; but, if more be thought necessary, seeking information in relation to the defences which had been raised by PTA and PTC and the matters alleged in the Cross-Claim - which matters had not been raised before the proceedings were commenced - would in my view be a legitimate purpose. Nor need one stop at those matters, for it is clear that, in the
Affidavit sworn on behalf of Mr. Sherlock - the deponent of which Affidavit, as I have previously indicated, was not cross-examined - three purposes were identified. Further still, it is to be noted that, whereas the issue of the
Summons pursuant to the provisions of s.596A did not require the filing of an affidavit, the issue of the Summons as directed towards the PTA employees did require the filing of an Affidavit or Affidavits setting out the purposes of the proposed examination and did require the Registrar to be satisfied, at the least, that each of the employees in question might be able to give information about examinable affairs of Vagrand. As it would appear that neither Santow J, nor counsel for PTA and PTC, sought access to, and, still less, tendered or read that Affidavit, or those Affidavits, it was not legitimate for Santow J to say that "there is no claimed legitimate purpose ...".

Finally, the tactical and forensic advantages which Santow J held would be gained by Mr. Sherlock if the examinations were permitted to proceed.

First, the suggestion that Mr. Sherlock would thereby avoid the need to file any substantive affidavit evidence. As best as I can judge it, the bases for this finding are, first, that, although the parties are bound by the incomprehensible order said to have been made by Mr. Registrar Berecry - which order could not be, and never was, complied with by the parties in any event -
Vagrand, by failing to comply with that order could force PTA and PTC to file their affidavits first, thus reversing the usual order; and, second, that, in some way which I am completely unable to understand, by seeking to proceed with the examinations, Mr. Sherlock would avoid the sanctions that would otherwise be available to the Court against a party which fails to comply with the orders and directions of the Court. It seems to be implicit in what his
Honour has said, in this respect, that it was his view, first, that, once Mr.
Registrar Berecry made the incomprehensible order, the provisions of Practice
Note 63 would forever control the future conduct of the proceedings; second, that the whole of the evidence to be given on each side would, in the first instance, be by affidavit; third, that no affidavit which was not filed within the times limited would be received on the hearing; fourth, that, in the event that it was not possible to obtain an affidavit from a potential witness, his oral, evidence would not be received on the hearing; and, finally, that
Vagrand might ignore the orders and directions of the Court with impunity.
None of these is correct. It is clear enough that, even if proceedings had effectively been made subject to the provisions of Practice Note 63, it would have been open to either party to apply to have those provisions varied insofar as they applied to the proceedings. Further, it is clear enough that, even if there had been a failure to comply with the provisions of Practice
Note 63 insofar as they related to the filing of Affidavits, it would always remain open to the Court, on a final hearing, to allow a late Affidavit to be filed and relied upon or to allow oral evidence to be given by a witness who had not been willing to swear an Affidavit, if the requirements of justice dictated that course (see, for example, GSA Industries Pty. Limited v. N.T.
Gas Limited 27; Bouton v. Labiche 28; Byron v. Southern Star Group
Pty. Limited 29; Cohen v. McWilliam 30). Finally, it is clear that, in a case in which a party has consistently failed to comply with the Rules of
Court, or with procedural orders or directions, it is open to the Court on application by the innocent party, to order - if the guilty party be a plaintiff - that the proceedings be dismissed or - if the guilty party be a defendant - that the defence be struck out.

Next, the suggestion that Mr. Sherlock "gains access to coercive pre-trial procedures". It is true that, in a case such as this, a liquidator may compel the attendance for examination of a person, or persons, who may ultimately be a witness or witnesses for the other party to the litigation, but, as the authorities to which I have earlier referred make clear, if the purpose for which those parties are to be examined is a proper one, that fact is of supreme irrelevance. The other matters to which his Honour refers are: - that Mr. Sherlock would be able to rehearse his cross-examination of the examinees - which, if it were the sole or the predominant purpose of the proposed examination - which is not demonstrated in this case - would be an improper purpose; that Mr. Sherlock would be able to gain material to attack the credit of the examinees - which, if it were the sole or the predominant purpose - which has not been demonstrated in this case - would be an improper purpose; that Mr. Sherlock may be able to use the evidence gained during the examinations to substantiate an application to have subpoenaed witnesses declared hostile (so allowing cross-examination) - which, if I may, with great respect to his Honour, say so, is purely speculative and could hardly provide any basis upon which one could ground a finding of improper purpose; and that Mr. Sherlock may be able to use the examination process to have the examinee lose protections such as potential claims of privilege, the basis for which suggestion is his Honour's statement that, where examined unassisted by a legal adviser, the examinees may make statements without claiming privilege unaware that such a statement might later be characterised as waiving a potential claim for privilege. Quite apart from the fact that this suggestion is again highly speculative, one could point to the facts, first, that the circumstances in which privilege, in one form or another, might be claimed on such an examination, are limited (see, for example, Mortimer v. Brown 31;
Hamilton v. Oades 32' Corporate Affairs Commission of New South Wales v.
Yuill 33); second that the judicial officer conducting the examination retains a discretion as to what questions might be put to a person summoned for examination (see, for example, Mortimer v. Brown 34); and, finally, that, as I have earlier recorded, s.597(16) provides that a person summoned for examination has the right to be represented on any such examination and the judicial officer conducting the examination has a discretion to allow any representative to put to the person summoned questions directed toward enabling that person to explain or qualify answers or evidence given by him.
In the present case, it is clear that those advising PTA and its employees were aware of the provisions of s.597(16) as, in her telephone conversation with Mr. Chapple on 13 March 1995, Ms. Crammond indicated that "(they) would be applying to be present at the examinations".

Finally, the suggestion that Mr. Sherlock pre-empts discovery by the orders for production, the basis for which finding seems to be the suggestion that many, if not most, of the documents sought under the orders for production will also be discoverable in the Equity proceedings so that the orders for production if enforced would enable Mr. Sherlock to obtain early discovery prior to providing discovery to PTA and its employees. As to this I can but say that if, as seems to be the case, that is but a consequence of requiring the production of documents which properly relate to the examinable affairs of
Vagrand, that fact would provide no basis upon which to ground a finding of improper purpose.

If, as I suggest what I have written above demonstrates, his Honour's primary findings of fact cannot be supported, it follows that it was not open to him, by relying upon Mr. Sherlock's alleged failure to conduct the examinations earlier and what he perceived to be the advantages which Mr. Sherlock would obtain from conducting the examinations, to infer that Mr. Sherlock's sole, or predominant, purpose was an improper one.

But even if some of his Honour's primary findings of fact could be supported, it seems to me, with respect, that the process by which Santow J proceeded to draw the inference in question was flawed.

First, it should be pointed out that, as I have earlier recorded, his Honour appears, wrongly, in my view, to have proceeded on the bases that Mr. Sherlock had reached a firm decision to take proceedings against PTA and PTC as early as 1990, so that the delay in commencing proceedings was some 4 years or thereabouts, and has completely disregarded the facts first, that Mr. Sherlock was not appointed Liquidator of Vagrand until 1992; second; that, until the disputes as to the true operation of the Class Order Deeds had been determined and the claims against Westmex had been withdrawn, it was commercially inappropriate for Vagrand to commence proceedings against PTA and PTC and that proceedings against Vagrand in the Federal Court were still pending in mid-1995.

Finally, it is to be observed that although, at first, Santow J appears to have eschewed placing upon Mr. Sherlock the onus of establishing that he had a proper purpose in procuring the issue of the Summonses for examination in the orders for production, he appears, nonetheless finally, to have proceeded on the basis that Mr. Sherlock, in fact, bore the onus. Thus, his Honour wrote (Appeal Book p. 391): - "It must be emphasised that while the onus in seeking to set aside or restrict an examination lies on the party seeking this, the matter of purpose being central, knowledge of that purpose starts as a matter peculiarly within the knowledge of the other party. Thus in practice liquidators and others are properly asked to disclose their purpose and may themselves be cross-examined as to that. And in that context, the applicant to restrain the examination must be able to draw inferences from what is said and not said and from what objectively will be the consequences of the examination." and, later (after referring to what he found would be the forensic advantages to be obtained by the conduct of the examination (Appeal Book p.394)): - "Thus for the reasons outlined above, I am satisfied that if the liquidator were to conduct such examinations in relation to the subject matter of the Equity proceedings, substantial forensic advantage would be conferred on the liquidator in the Equity proceedings which are not available from ordinary pre-trial procedures. It is true the question of abuse of process depends upon the purpose, not the result, of examinations but inference can be drawn as to that purpose where this is its natural consequence. Certainly the court is entitled to infer that at least one of the purposes of conducting an examination is to attain the advantages clearly achieved by that course of conduct. The question is whether that purpose is the sole or predominant purpose for conducting the examinations. The liquidator has not provided evidence of any other purpose for the examinations into the subject matter of the equity proceedings. The liquidator is the person best positioned to provide evidence of such other purpose (see my earlier comments on `onus and inference'), and in the absence of any such evidence a Jones v. Dunkel inference will arise that the uncalled evidence would not have assisted the liquidator's case." 
If I may, with respect, say so, the approach thus revealed ignores the facts, first, that, as I have earlier recorded, in order that the Summonses for Examination of the PTA employees be issued, Mr. Sherlock had first to file an Affidavit or Affidavits sufficient to persuade the Registrar that it was proper that they be issued, which Affidavit or Affidavits was, or were, on the Court file; second, that no application was made on the hearing before his Honour for access to that Affidavit, or those Affidavits; third, that there had been sworn by Ms. Cox, and filed, an Affidavit in which Ms. Cox deposed to Mr. Sherlock's purposes in seeking to conduct the examinations; and finally, that no application was made to cross-examine Ms. Cox upon her affidavit. In the circumstances it seems to me that, even if it could be said that such evidence as had been tendered on behalf of PTA and its employees, if unanswered, might permit the drawing of an inference of improper purpose, it was not open to his Honour to find that Mr. Sherlock had failed to provide evidence of his purpose, and, in reliance upon that failure, to draw the inference sought.

For these reasons I would propose the following Orders: -
ORDER that the Appeal be upheld.
ORDER that the Orders made by Santow J be set aside.
ORDER that the Respondents pay the Appellants' costs of the Appeal and of the hearing before Santow J.
ORDER that, if qualified, the Respondents have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
  <case>; [(1982) 153 CLR 134], 143-145 per Mason J (as he then was) (1992) 28 NSWLR 512 [(1992) 29 NSWLR 713 (McClelland] CJ in
Eq.); 723 (CA)  <case>; [(1988-1989) 166 CLR 486];  <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 319] [[1970] 2 NSWR 444] [[1971] 1 NSWLR 24] [[1972] 1 NSWLR 497 (Street] J) affirmed sub nom. Shapowlowff v. Stirling Henry Limited (In Liq.) [[1972] NSW LR 691] [(1993-1994) 14 ACSR 407], [(1992) 8 ACSR 146]; <case>; [(1992) 111 ALR 368],372 supra [13] [113 ALR 128] 11 June 1993 Court of Appeal (Clarke, Handley and Sheller JJA) (unreported) (1888) 38 Ch. Div. 410,413 per Cotton LJ (1958) 59 SR 352; [76 WN 150] [(1959) 78 WN 367] supra at 518-519  <case>; <case>; [(1993) 11 ACLC 1],230 [(1970) 91 WN 537] supra [(1987) 10 NSWLR 86], 189  <case> [(1990) 24 NSWLR 710] [(1994) 33 NSWLR 225] Court of Appeal 20 February 1995 (as yet unreported) [(1995) 38 NSWLR 476] [(1969-1970) 122 CLR 492]  <case>; [(1988-1989) 166 CLR 486]  <case>; [(1990-1991) 172 CLR 319] supra * * * 
