

C versus Registrar, Court of Appeal No. Ca 40130/94 Contempt [1996] NSWSC 103 (7 May 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P, MAHONEY AND POWELL JJA
Motion for discharge from or variation of orders providing for the custodial punishment of a contemnor earlier pronounced by the Court of Appeal (differently constituted).
HRNG
SYDNEY, 13 December 1995 #DATE 19:12:1995 #ADD 7:5:1996 
Counsel for the Claimant    C J Stevens QC with K E Burke 
Solicitors for the Claimant   Gillis Delaney Brown 
Counsel for the Opponent    K Mason QC with N J Williams 
Solicitors for the Opponent   I V Knight, Crown Solicitor
ORDER
Motion dismissed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P, MAHONEY AND POWELL JJA The claimant, to be known by the letter "C", moves the Court for relief from orders earlier pronounced in respect of a charge of contempt of court which was brought against him by the Registrar of this Court.
The Court agreed to adopt the expedient of identifying the claimant by his initial because he expressed fears of retaliation if it became known in the prison where he is presently serving his sentence, that he is cooperating with the Director of Public Prosecutions. Initially, it was asked that the Court make a "suppression order" to forbid reference to the proceedings in the
Court. The Court declined to take that course (assuming it to be open to it) out of respect for the principle of open justice. See Raybos Australia Pty Ltd and Anor versus Jones [(1985) 2 NSWLR 47 (CA).] But, there being no opposition by the
Solicitor-General on behalf of the Registrar, the Court agreed to adopt the expedient secondly requested by the claimant to safeguard his identity to the extent that this would be secured by using his initials.
 
A contemnor is convicted and sentenced
In the view which the Court takes of the present motion, it is unnecessary to analyse the facts. The
Court is convinced that the motion is premature and that the relief sought in it should be denied.
It suffices to state that the Registrar sought declarations that the claimant was guilty of contempt for his refusal, when a witness in the trial of a former business associate Y to answer certain questions. The same expedient will be adopted in respect to Y to prevent identification of
C. The claimant and Y held various offices in a group of companies which collapsed. Y was charged with offences under the Companies (New South Wales) Code. The investigating authorities took statements from the claimant over a period of years which they intended to use as proofs of evidence when the claimant gave evidence against Y at his trial.
There were detailed negotiations between the claimant and those representing him (on the one hand) and the prosecuting authorities (on the other). In those negotiations the claimant sought a transactional indemnity providing him with immunity against any charge arising out of the transactions to which his evidence related. The prosecuting authorities declined the claimant's requests. Instead, the claimant was given undertakings, pursuant to the [Corporations (New South Wales) Act 1990](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/), [s 91(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cswa1990344/s91.html) and the [Director of
Public Prosecutions Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/) (Cth), [s 9(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/doppa1983343/s9.html) that any answers or statements or disclosures which he gave in evidence against Y would not be used against him.
The claimant contended that he was entitled to decline to answer questions asked of him in the trial of Y upon the basis that he had reasonable grounds to apprehend a danger of incrimination if he were to answer. He argued that the undertaking given to him by the Federal authorities was not sufficient to prevent him from being prosecuted in this State for State offences.
It is unnecessary to trace the course of the proceedings which were attended by an acknowledged error on the part of the Court, as it was then constituted (Kirby P, Meagher
JA and Powell JA). It is sufficient to say that the Court eventually, on 30 June 1995, for the contempt which had been found, made the following orders (in which the claimant is referred to as the opponent): "1. Order that the opponent be fined the sum of $10,000;
Order that, in addition to the said fine, the opponent be sentenced to a term of six months imprisonment commencing on December 1995;
Order that the claimant's notice of motion filed 2 December be dismissed; and
Order that the opponent pay the claimant's costs of all proceedings in the Court except for the proceedings on 27 April ."
Within the Court, as then constituted, a difference of view emerged as to the proper orders. Kirby P was of the opinion that the claimant should be fined the sum of $10,000. He agreed that, additionally, a sentence of six months imprisonment was appropriate.
However, he proposed that the sentence of imprisonment be suspended upon the claimant's giving to the Court undertakings that he would cooperate with all lawful directions given to him in respect of a second trial of Y and that he would answer all questions put to him during that trial as directed by the presiding judge.
Meagher JA proposed a larger fine ($50,000) and, additionally, an order that the claimant be sentenced to a term of six months imprisonment commencing December 1995. He also proposed various other orders as to costs.
It fell to Powell JA to resolve the difference of opinion within the
Court. He joined with Kirby
P to propose a fine of $10,000. But he joined with
Meagher JA in agreeing that, additionally, a sentence of imprisonment was called for: "Although Kirby P would suspend the execution of the sentence, upon (the claimant's) giving to the Court the undertakings set out in his judgment both he and Meagher JA are of the view that it is appropriate that a sentence of six months imprisonment be imposed on (the claimant), a view with which I agree. However, in the light of the history of what has already occurred and of my assessment of (the claimant), I would regard any undertaking given by him as being worthless and, that being so,
I would not join with Kirby P in suspending the execution of the sentence.
Rather I would leave it to (the claimant) in the event of his later fulfilling his duty to give evidence, to move for his discharge." See for example Young versus Registrar, Court of Appeal (No 3) [(1993) 32 NSWLR 262.] 
Two supervening events, which occurred before Powell JA proposed the orders which became those of the Court, should be mentioned.
Despite the claimant's refusal to answer questions in the trial of Y, Y was convicted in that trial and sentenced. However, his conviction was set aside by the Court of Criminal Appeal. That Court ordered a retrial. That retrial has not yet taken place.
However, recently Y was presented on an indictment charging him with yet another offence to which indictment he pleaded guilty. He was convicted and sentenced to serve a term of imprisonment and is presently serving that term; and 
On 16 June 1995, the claimant pleaded guilty to the offence of making improper use of his position as an officer of the failed group of companies to gain advantage for another company of which he was a director. He pleaded guilty to certain other offences against the Companies (New South Wales)
Code.
He was convicted. He was sentenced by Abadee J to nine months imprisonment.
That sentence expires on 29 December 1995. The claimant was therefore still serving that sentence when he moved the Court for the relief sought in the present motion. New motion and reconstitution of the Court
When the present motion was filed, Meagher JA (one of the Judges who had constituted this
Court for the earlier proceedings) was on Long Leave. He would not return to duty until February 1996. For various reasons, it would have been normal for the consideration of the claimant's motion to be heard by the Court which had originally sentenced him for contempt.
The motion sought the following relief: "1. Leave be granted to vary the order of the Court pursuant to
Part 55 [rule 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s14.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/);
An order that the sentence imposed under order 2 of the
Court's orders given on 30 June 1995 be discharged; or
In the alternative to order 2 above, an order that the sentence be suspended until:
Two months after the commencement of the trial of (Y); or
In the event that the opponent is called as a witness by the prosecuting authorities engaged in the trial of (Y), after the opponent has been called to give evidence at such trial." 
Having regard to the relief sought and to the fact that the claimant would complete the sentence imposed by Abadee J on 29 December 1995, it seemed appropriate to list the matter before the Court differently constituted so that the claimant would not, by reason of the absence of one Judge, lose the opportunity to canvass his entitlement to relief on 30 December 1995. This was done
No objection was taken either for the
Registrar or for the claimant to the reconstitution of the Court. Indeed, the claimant sought to support it by reference to the large power of the Court which was explained in Cotogno v
Lamb [(1985) 3 NSWLR 221 (CA)], 223.
We see no difficulty in the reconstitution of the Court. The present motion amounts to a fresh proceeding. The previous proceedings were concluded in this Court by the declarations that the claimant was guilty of the offences charged and the orders providing for his punishment. Those declarations and orders were the subject of an application to the High Court of Australia for special leave to appeal. However, that Court declined to provide such special leave. Accordingly, the orders of this Court, which had been perfected for the
High Court proceedings, concluded the earlier hearings. Whilst retention of the same Bench would have been normal in a case of this kind, it was not essential. Neither party argued to the contrary. Evidence on the motion
Without objection, the Court received a number of affidavits and one exhibit in support of the claimant's motion for relief.
The claimant deposed that he had been in custody since 7 June 1995 by reason of the sentence of Abadee J. He stated that he realised, and accepted, that he had committed a contempt of court. He asked the Court to accept that he was a "markedly different person by reason of the events which have happened". As to his promise to give evidence at any future trial of Y, he "unreservedly" offered himself for cross-examination in this motion. Having gone through the criminal process and having served over six months in gaol already" he asked the Court to take into account various circumstances which had occurred to demonstrate the "change they have brought" upon him. The circumstances referred to included: 
The claimant's detention in remote custodial institutions including, on occasion, the place where Y was serving his sentence (contrary to the recommendation of Abadee J); 
The risk which he faced of being "bashed or subjected to violence" because of his cooperation with authorities; 
The impact which the custodial sentence had made upon him; 
His regret at being deprived of the company of his wife and of his son who has been born whilst he was in prison; 
His attempt to be "a model prisoner"; and 
His cooperation with investigating authorities by the signature "without reservations or protections as were raised by my solicitors" of the statement dealing with issues relevant to still further outstanding criminal proceedings pending against Y. Although, by reason of the course which the recent trial of
Y took, the claimant was not actually required to give oral evidence, he declared that he would have done so had he been requested and was willing to do so in future proceedings against Y as a contribution to affirming his unreserved apology and to purging his contempt.
The claimant's wife gave evidence of her employment as a cook and her present position on maternity leave following the birth of their son. She also gave evidence of a conversation with a potential employer who, by chance, had a position available to offer to the claimant commencing late December 1995.
An exhibit was tendered confirming this offer. It will be remembered that the claimant is still liable to pay the fine of $10,000 which was imposed upon him by this Court. It was pointed out that paid employment, which might otherwise be difficult to obtain on his discharge from his prison, would afford him the means to pay that fine, such being his intention.
Affidavits were also read, made by solicitors acting for the claimant.
These deposed, putting it shortly, to Y's plea of guilty in mid-November 1995 and the release of the claimant from an obligation to give evidence in that case. They also deposed to the fact that the prosecuting authorities were preparing for further trials of Y on other charges in respect of which they would speak to the claimant, and take a statement of evidence from him. The
Court was informed that one further proceeding concerning Y has been listed to commence in the first week of the new Term in late January 1996. The retrial earlier ordered by the Court of Criminal Appeal is presently listed to take place in October 1996. The claimant pointed out that it was no fault of his that he had not had the opportunity to give oral evidence as he would have done at the trial of Y had it been contested in November 1995. He would then have been able to "fulfil his duty to give evidence" as Powell JA had contemplated. He would do so in the future if afforded the chance.
 
The contemplation of custodial punishment
Essentially, by the relief sought in the motion, the claimant asked to be released at the end of the custodial sentence imposed by Abadee J. This would permit him to take up the offer of employment procured for him by his wife. It would also facilitate (as might later be more difficult or impossible) the payment of the substantial fine which remains outstanding under the orders of this Court. It would promote the claimant's rehabilitation in and restoration to society. The Court could now be sure that he would cooperate fully with authorities, including by the giving of evidence at future trials of Y. He had tasted imprisonment under the sentence imposed by Abadee J. Further custodial punishment was now unnecessary. In the most unlikely event that the claimant defaulted in any way in the duties of cooperation and the provision of evidence, he would be liable to punishment for a fresh contempt. He would know that any such punishment would be likely to be the more severe because it involved a serious breach of assurances which he had given to the Court.
The Solicitor-General, for the Registrar, made no submissions as to the punishment of the claimant.
However, he contested any suggestion that the
Court could, under the third order proposed in the motion, suspend and then possibly recommence the claimant's punishment under the orders of 30 June
In our view the Solicitor-General is right. No such power of suspension and recommencement of a sentence is open to this Court. See Parker versus Director of Public Prosecutions and Anor [(1992) 28 NSWLR 282 (CA)], 861. Nevertheless, the Court undoubtedly has the power, where a contemnor purges the contempt alleged, to relieve the contemnor, in whole or in part, from a sentence which awaits its commencement.
The Court has a wide power to discharge. See Young versus Registrar,
Court of
Appeal and Anor (No 3) [(1993) 32 NSWLR 262 (CA)], 281, 288. The existence of that power was anticipated by Powell JA in the sentencing proceedings in this case. See also Morris and
Ors versus Crown Office [(1970) 2 QB 114 (CA)], 529. A change of circumstances is relevant to enliven reconsideration of the case by the Court. See eg Re
Barrell Enterprises [(1973) 1 WLR 19 (CA)], 26. The question is not whether the
Court may do this. It is whether, in the circumstances, it should. Very properly, the Solicitor-General drew attention to the several purposes of punishment for contempt of court, such punishment being designed to uphold the due administration of justice. Those purposes include both individual and general deterrence, as well as denunciation of serious cases of interference in the conduct of a trial.
The difficulty inherent in the submissions of the claimant, contemplating his release at the end of the sentence imposed by Abadee J, is obvious. Such a course would, in effect, mean that the custodial sentence which this Court considered to be appropriate and necessary in the claimant's case would not be served. In effect, the claimant would, upon the completion of the sentence for his criminal offences against the Code, suffer no additional punishment for the contempt, save for a fine and the substantial burden of costs which amount, effectively, to a sanction.
Although Kirby P, in the sentencing proceedings, favoured suspending the custodial sentence, it was the clear opinion of Meagher JA and of Powell JA that a custodial sentence of six months imprisonment should be served. Meagher
JA offered no qualification. Powell JA offered the rider stated above. But each made it plain that serving a period of custodial punishment for the contempt found was necessary to meet the extremely serious case of contempt proved by the Registrar. As such, it was not the purpose of the orders to coerce the claimant to give evidence if again called to do so. the law can quite adequately deal with such future events and, if further contempts are shown, punish them according to their seriousness. See Witham versus Holloway AUR 847 (HC), 852. There can be few more serious cases of contempt than a persistent, repeated and obdurate refusal of a central witness in a criminal trial to answer questions when asked and directed by the Judge of trial. See Parsons versus The Queen [(1993) 115 FLR 270 (WACCA)], 284f. Such conduct presented the serious risk of occasioning a grave miscarriage of justice in serious criminal proceedings. So much must have been obvious to the claimant.
The Court was fully aware, when it pronounced its orders on 30 June 1995 both of the sentence imposed by Abadee J and of the chance events which had presented the claimant with a further opportunity to correct his earlier conduct, cooperate with the authorities and give evidence at a retrial of Y.
The Court's orders, as favoured by the majority, were therefore made upon the basis of full knowledge that the claimant would indeed serve a little more than six months imprisonment for his offences against the Code and have an opportunity to purge his contempt in respect of future proceedings against Y.
Thus the mere fact that the claimant, pursuant to the sentence imposed by
Abadee J, will shortly have served that period of imprisonment, does not relieve him of the remaining obligation, prima facie still applicable, to serve an additional period of imprisonment as punishment for the serious contempt found by the Court.
The only critical event which has occurred since this Court's orders were pronounced is the failure of the claimant's application for special leave to appeal to the High Court. The application included a challenge to the sentence for contempt proposed by the majority of the Court which became the Court's order. It would have been open to the High Court, had it chosen to do so, to have indicated its preference for the alternative course favoured by the
President.
It withheld intervention. The orders of this Court are, therefore, to that extent affirmed by the High Court's refusal of special leave.
That means that the claimant has exhausted the available avenues to challenge the determination that, for his proved contempt, he must, in addition to the payment of a fine and of costs, suffer custodial punishment.
Were he to be released on 30 December as he proposes, he would effectively escape such punishment altogether. We see no reason why the relief sought should be afforded, given the clear opinion expressed by the majority of the Court, reflected in the Court's orders. Whilst it is true that the orders of this Court may mean that the claimant loses the opportunity for employment in the position found for him by his wife, that fact cannot control the decision of the Court or provide a proper ground for relieving the claimant from the obligation to serve a custodial sentence for contempt, as the Court's orders clearly required.
It is true that, at some future time, before the expiry of the entire sentence (but after service of an appropriate portion of it) the claimant might move the Court for relief. In doing so he would be entitled to rely upon the matters placed before the Court in the present application and in an earlier motion dismissed as premature. Several of the considerations referred to in his affidavit would then be relevant to such an application. Most importantly, were the trial of Y to proceed early in the new Term in 1996 and were the claimant to give evidence in that trial, this could enliven the kind of application envisaged by Powell JA in his reasons of 30 June 1995. That is not to say that the application must depend upon the chance consideration (outside the claimant's control) of whether a trial of Y proceeds and whether the claimant is called as a witness in such trial. But such events would certainly allow the claimant to demonstrate, in a way going beyond the words of his affidavits, the fact that he has learned the lesson which the custodial sentence is intended to teach and has demonstrated that fact to the community generally to whom also the message of deterrence is addressed.
 
Conclusion: application premature
The result is that we are of the opinion that the present application, like an earlier one in September 1995, is premature. It was the will of the
Court, expressed in its orders of 30 June 1995, that, in addition to the sentence imposed by Abadee J, and at the conclusion of that sentence, the claimant should serve an additional period of imprisonment as custodial punishment for the additional criminal offence constituted by the serious case of contempt of court found against him. If circumstances change before the completion of the claimant's additional sentence for contempt, either because, whilst serving his sentence he gives evidence against Y, or otherwise, he will be entitled to move the Court for relief See [Pt 55](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/index.html#p55) r 14 SCR. But it is inappropriate to provide that relief now. It is equally inappropriate to discharge the claimant from the sentence imposed by the Court which he has not yet commenced to serve, indeed of which he has served no part. It is also inappropriate to "suspend" the serving of that sentence on conditions because the Court has no power, in the case of a breach of such conditions, to recommence the sentence. Although the proceedings have now been catalogued authoritatively as criminal (see Witham, above) it appears that the rule as to costs usual in civil proceedings is still to be observed. At least this was done in Witham, at 861. We shall follow that course.
 
Orders
The orders which we therefore make, for these reasons, are: 
Dismiss the motion; and
Order that the claimant pay the Registrar's costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/103.html  
