

Kalon Pty Ltd versus Sydney Land Corporation Pty Ltd Matter No Ca 40872/97 [1998] NSWSC 38 (27 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
KALON PTY LIMITED versus SYDNEY LAND CORPORATION PTY LIMITED 
CA 40872/97; ED 4837/97 February 1998 
Priestley JA, Meagher JA, Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: EQUITY DIVISION - YOUNG J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40872/97; ED 4837/97 
DELIVERED: 27 FEBRUARY 1998 
HEARING DATE: 16 FEBRUARY 1998 
PARTIES: KALON PTY LIMITED versus SYDNEY LAND CORPORATION PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY JA MEAGHER JA SHELLER JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: S.D. RARES SC / S.R.W. EMMETT 
Respondent: R.J. ELLICOTT QC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: DUNHILL MADDEN BUTLER 
Respondent: P.A. SOMERSET & CO 
CATCHWORDS 
CORPORATIONS LAW - DEED OF COMPANY ARRANGEMENT - POSITION OF CREDITORS
OPPRESSION - USE OF THE JUDICIAL DISCRETION 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 17 
KALON PTY LIMITED versus 
SYDNEY LAND CORPORATION PTY LIMITED 
CORPORATIONS LAW - DEED OF COMPANY ARRANGEMENT - POSITION OF CREDITORS - OPPRESSION - USE OF THE JUDICIAL DISCRETION - Part 5.3A of the Corporations Law (containing ss 435A to 451D) - provision for the execution of a Deed of Company Arrangement - respondent the sole creditor voting against a resolution to enter into a Deed - respondent applied for an order pursuant to <case>(f)(i) to have the Deed termination - Young J, using the discretion granted under <case>, along with the scheme of Part 5.3A and the interests of the other creditors, the company and the public in general, terminates the Deed, finding it to be oppressive to the Respondent.

On appeal: 
The appellant submitted:
Young J utilised the wrong test when exercising his power under <case>.
Young J, by referring to the creditor's position against insolvent companies prior to the operation of Part 5.3A, the ex debito justitiae rule, did not pay sufficient attention to <case>, which states the objective of Part .3A; or alternatively,
Young J, in his reference to the position prior to the commencement of
Part 5.3A, did not utilise the ex debito justitiae rule accurately.

Held:
When determining how to exercise his power under <case>, Young J was not overly influenced by the older approaches to creditors' rights. Rather, his reasoning demonstrated an awareness of the purpose of Part 5.3A and the alternatives available to terminate a Deed under <case>, and his finding of oppression was correct.
The appellant must persuade the court that the judge at first instance made an error of principle, or displayed a misunderstanding of the facts, or failed to take a matter into account. In this case the appellant failed.

ORDERS . The appeal be dismissed with costs. 
Subject to order 3, costs of the respondent be paid out of the assets of the appellant as if it were a deferred expense pursuant to <case>(e) of the
Corporations Law.
Operation of order 2 postponed until further order to allow parties to file written submissions on the question of costs within fourteen days after delivery of the court's reasons.
The order dismissing the appeal to operate forthwith upon delivery of the court's reasons.

KALON PTY LIMITED versus 
SYDNEY LAND CORPORATION PTY LIMITED 
THE COURT: Part 5.3A of the Corporations Law (which contains ss 435A to 451D) provides for administration of a company's affairs with a view to executing a Deed of Company Arrangement. 
Section 436A(1) authorises a company to appoint an administrator if the board has resolved that the company is insolvent or is likely to become insolvent.
On 2 September 1997, the board of Kalon Pty Limited (Kalon) resolved, pursuant to <case> to appoint Mr B.R. Silvia as administrator of the company.

In accordance with Pt 5.3A Mr Silvia then assumed control of Kalon's affairs and convened meetings of creditors. On 27 October 1997 the question before a meeting of Kalon's creditors was whether they should support a resolution to execute a Deed of Company Arrangement pursuant to <case>. Six creditors, the value of whose debts was approximately $4.1 million, voted in favour of the resolution. One creditor, Sydney Land Corporation Limited (SLC) the value of whose debt was approximately $2.1 million voted against it. There was a further creditor with a debt of a relatively small amount who did not take part in or vote at the creditors' meeting. The voting had the result that the
Deed of Company Arrangement was agreed to, and it was subsequently engrossed as a Deed dated 17 November 1997 (the Deed).

By summons filed on 21 November 1997 SLC asked for an order, pursuant to s
D(1)(f)(i), that the Deed be terminated.

SLC's summons came on for hearing before Young J on 12 December 1997. On that day, after hearing the evidence and submissions of the parties he ordered that the Deed be terminated.

Kalon appealed and the appeal came on for hearing on 16 February 1998.

From the materials in the appeal papers there are many signs that between some of the persons involved in the affairs of Kalon both through shareholding interests and as its creditors, there had existed and still exist quite complicated commercial dealings and disputes bearing upon the operations of
Kalon and companies and businesses with which it is associated. However, the evidence put before Young J consisted of affidavits upon which there was no cross-examination. Although much documentation was annexed to the affidavits, the way the case was presented, together with the absence of cross- examination, had the result that the complexities possibly lying behind the financial situation of Kalon and possibly relevant to the issues raised by the summons for termination of the Deed, were not investigated, and the case was argued and decided upon the relatively bare basis of the chief financial factors relevant to Kalon.

This basis was as follows. From November 1988 until June 1994 a company which changed its name from time to time and is now called Australasian Property
Holdings Limited (APH) owned all shares in Kalon. Then, and now, Kalon's only assets of any significance consisted of its shareholding of all the shares in two companies, Leisure Lea Retirement Village Limited (Leisure Lea) and
Numarra Pty Limited (Numarra). Leisure Lea is the proprietor of a retirement village and Numarra has the resale rights of individual units in the village.
APH was incorporated in New Zealand. Persons principally concerned with its management were and are Mr T. Lake and Mr L. Chartres. It seems that as at
June 1994 Leisure Lea and Numarra had not been profitable, and in that month
SLC purchased the shares in Kalon for one dollar. The person principally associated with the management of SLC was accepted by the parties in the appeal as being Mr Lindsay-Owen. We state this in this way because from company records in the appeal papers it is not clear how Mr Lindsay-Owen comes to be in control of SLC. However, he represented it at the meetings of creditors and it appears that it was on his instructions that SLC opposed the
Deed and subsequently filed the summons for its termination. It is also clear that he was the principal person giving instructions in SLC's defending
Kalon's appeal. The parties to the appeal said that it was not in issue, so far as the proceedings were concerned, that Mr Lindsay-Owen was in a position to make decisions and give instructions on behalf of SLC.

It was also treated as a fact, for purpose of the appeal proceedings, that Mr
Lindsay-Owen had no confidence in Messrs Lake and Chartres and that this had been taken as a fact before Young J. Whether or not Mr Lindsay-Owen's attitude was justified was not a matter in issue before Young J nor therefore in this court. The fact upon which the case was, in this respect conducted, was the state of Mr Lindsay-Owen's mind, not the validity of that state. The court has no knowledge, one way or the other, of the matters causing Mr Lindsay-Owen's concern. Another fact known to both Young J and this court is that there have been business disputes between Mr Lindsay-Owen and Mr Lake, but again, these disputes were among the matters not investigated before Young J. The fact of their existence is all that is known, nothing being known about their detail or where any merits might lie.

The principal operation of the Deed was that it effected the transfer by Kalon of its shares in Leisure Lea and Numarra to APH in return for which APH was to issue either shares in APH or "promissory notes". Young J said that these notes were just certificates that APH owed the creditor an amount of money which was payable interest free no later than 31 December 1998 on an unsecured basis; compare [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/s89.html) of the [Bills of Exchange Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/) (Cth).
Creditors had to elect whether to take shares or notes. If a creditor took a note its face value was to be a figure arrived at by dividing the admitted claim of the creditor by Kalon's indebtedness to creditors and multiplying the result by an amount being $1,100,000 less the face value of another class of notes referable to priority creditors (cl 2.2(c)).

The figure of $1,100,000 was one estimated by Mr Silvia on the basis of valuations he had obtained as being what he called Kalon's "equity" in the retirement village. Mr Silvia's estimate also took it as a possibility that the $1.1 million figure could be realised in six months.

On this basis Mr Lindsay-Owen calculated that if there were no Deed of Company
Arrangement, then SLC could within six months receive a dividend of $420,000 in liquidation of Kalon. This calculation was set out in an affidavit read in evidence before Young J. In an affidavit in reply, Mr Silvia pointed out that his $1.1 million estimated figure was based on a number of assumptions some of which might not turn out to be fully correct. A principal matter affecting the estimate was the occupancy rate of units in the retirement village. His estimate had assumed that a rate of 90% could be reached. In his affidavit he estimated that if the occupancy rate averaged 80%, then the value to creditors of Kalon's interest in the village would be such that SLC's dividend would fall in an approximate range of $298,000 to $261,000, in a winding up.

On the other hand, if bound by the Deed, SLC, which had indicated that if it had to elect between shares or a note it would choose a note, would be entitled to a note with a face value of approximately $440,000, which APH must pay no later than 31 December 1998 and which would not carry interest in the meantime. If APH were not to pay then, the only practical recourse SLC would have, as was acknowledged in the argument in the appeal, would be by way of winding up proceedings to be brought against APH in New Zealand.

The advantage which the creditors who voted for the Deed hoped to obtain was that APH would have a chance of disposing of the shares in Leisure Lea and
Numarra at a better price than the Administrator or a liquidator could obtain and thus either put more value into APH's shares if they elected to take those, or in the case of creditors electing to take notes, increase their chance of receiving a dividend in the amount of the debt assumed by APH.
Additionally there was some hope that APH might derive funds from a development venture at Katoomba which would help it to pay the amounts of any notes. Also, there was evidence that there was some prospect of bank finance for the running of the retirement village business becoming available on reasonable terms. This evidence showed that the bank concerned was considering making the advance referred to, but had by no means committed itself to it and intended to investigate the financial situation thoroughly before deciding whether or not it would do so.

These possibilities of advantage to the creditors seem to have had some reality; but overall it seemed that APH's ability to meet any note on time would largely depend on whether it could realise the "equity" in the retirement village for a figure approximating $1.1 million. Mr Silvia's evidence showed there were real doubts about that; there were also problems about at least the near future of the Katoomba development. In short there were materials before the court which justified scepticism about APH's ability to pay the face value of its note on or before 31 December 1998, a matter underlined by Young J when he remarked that the 1996 annual report of APH was in evidence but that "[d]espite strong criticism from Mr Somerset, the solicitor for the plaintiff [SLC] and my own caustic comments, no further financial material was provided".

So far as is relevant to the present case, <case> provides: "(1) The court may make an order terminating a deed of company arrangement if satisfied that: ...
 the deed or a provision of it is ... or an act ... proposed to be ...
done or made would be: oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, one or more such creditors; or contrary to the interests of the creditors of the company as a whole ..." 
This section must be read together with the first section in [Part .3A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/index.html#p5.3a)
This is <case>, entitled "Object of Part". It reads: "The object of this Part is to provide for the business, property and affairs of an insolvent company to be administered in a way that: maximises the chances of the company, or as much as possible of its business, continuing in existence; if it is not possible for the company or its business to continue in existence - results in a better return for the company's creditors and members than would result from an immediate winding up of the company." 
In the circumstances of Kalon, the relevant object in <case> was that of the property of Kalon being administered in a way resulting in a better return for the company's creditors and members than would result from an immediate winding up of the company.

Young J in deciding to terminate the Deed did so on the ground under s
D(1)(f)(i) that the Deed was oppressive to SLC. In doing so he said he must approach the discretion he was given under <case> "... untrammelled by any overriding considerations. I must look at the whole of the effect of the deed and assess its unfairness, if any, to the plaintiff, but in doing so, I must bear in mind the scheme of [Part .3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/index.html#p5.3a) of the Corporations Law and the interests of the other creditors, the company and the public generally." 
Although it may be that a more precise statement of the approach to exercise of the power and duty of the court under <case> could be made, we do not see any error of principle in the foregoing statement of approach, particularly when the ground upon which the judge acted under sub-par (i) of par (f) of s
D(1), (oppressiveness to one creditor) is borne in mind; cf Wayde versus NSW
RUGBY League [(1985) 159 CLR 459] at 472.

After considering the facts of the case as we have outlined them, Young J said that SLC said it was oppressed if it remained bound by the Deed because instead of having a certain sum of probably $400,000 if the $1.1 million were correct or at least something like $250,000 if it were not, in six months time, it would become a creditor of APH, a New Zealand corporation, run by people in whom it had no confidence, with an unsecured debt payable in twelve months time, free of interest.

Young J was impressed by the fact that of the six consenting creditors, two, whom he regarded as independent of APH, as the other four arguably were not, the independent two together having an aggregate amount owing to them of approximately $2.3 million, had, after agreeing to the Deed elected to take shares in APH. He said that were it not for factors involving the forcing upon
SLC a regime completely contrary to the one it occupied, in the absence of the
Deed, as a creditor, he would have thought that the attitude of these two creditors would have operated conclusively against SLC, for, in such circumstances it was difficult, he thought, for SLC to say it had been unfairly prejudiced when another independent creditor of substantial amount freely and voluntarily accepted the proposal.

The judge then referred back to the object of [Pt .3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/index.html#p5.3a) set out in <case> and expressed the opinion that he did not think SLC had shown it was worse off under the scheme than it would have been in the winding up. He said on the other hand that he thought the evidence was really "fairly close to line ball one way or the other". We read this as his coming to the view that on the evidence it did not appear that the object of [Pt .3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/index.html#p5.3a), relevant in the present case, of getting a better return for the company's creditors by the Deed than would result from an immediate winding up of the company, would be achieved under the Deed.

Then he said that other facts had to be added in to the situation as it would have been if all he had to consider was that an independent creditor of substantial amount had voted in favour of the Deed. These factors were: "(a) that the plaintiff, and indeed the other creditors, are not likely to be better off under the deed; that there is a collateral benefit to the shareholders in APH; that the plaintiff has to continue to have a commercial relationship with people in whom it has no confidence; that the assets are shares and the subsidiaries are effectively removed from the control of the administrator; and that the claim of the creditor is really not against the administrator any more, but against APH direct." 
His view was, that taking these factors into account he should reach the conclusion the Deed was oppressive with respect to SLC. On this basis he ordered that the Deed be terminated.

In the appeal, counsel for Kalon began by submitting that Young J had approached the exercise of his power under <case> by reference to a wrong test. He criticised the formulation of the test as Young J had expressed it (set out at p 7 above) and sought to reinforce his criticism by pointing out that on a number of occasions in the course of his reasons Young J had referred to the position of creditors against insolvent companies before the coming into operation of [Pt .3A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/index.html#p5.3a)
These references by Young J were to the general proposition that in earlier times a creditor of an insolvent company had been entitled to have it wound up ex debito justitiae. Counsel for Kalon submitted that it was apparent from the way in which Young J had referred to this earlier position that he had been over influenced by it in coming to his eventual conclusion and had not paid sufficient attention to the statement in <case> of the object of [Part .3A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/index.html#p5.3a)
Counsel also submitted that in his references to the previous position concerning the ex debito justitiae rule, Young J had not stated it accurately and had overlooked that it had been moderated by statutory provisions in force prior to [Pt .3A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/index.html#p5.3a) 
As to the latter criticism, we do not think it supports the view that Young J had misunderstood the previous state of the law. He was speaking generally, in a way that has been customary with company lawyers for generations, and causes no misunderstanding when used in the general way in which he was using it.

As to the other criticism, which, if correct, would be a more substantial one, we do not think that on reading Young J's reasons as a whole he can be seen to have been over-influenced by the older approach to the rights of creditors when deciding how the court's power under <case> should be exercised. In our opinion, his reasons demonstrate awareness of the purpose of [Pt .3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/boea1909148/index.html#p5.3a), of its object provision, <case>, and of the different grounds available under s 445D for the termination of a Deed of Company Arrangement.

The appellant's second argument was that even if Young J applied the correct test he did not reach the correct decision. Counsel for Kalon criticised the five factors which Young J said he took into account in reaching his decision.
The criticisms were directed both to the accuracy of statement of the factors and of the weight which they should be given. Each of the factors, however, in our opinion, has some validity, and each is something the judge was entitled to take into account in deciding what to do.

Young J found that under the Deed the assets of Kalon (that is the shares in its two subsidiaries) valued at about $1.1 million would pass to APH. In consequence, the assets of APH would be increased by that amount and it would become solvent. Since the other creditors of Kalon had elected to take shares in APH, the only claim against APH would be the amount of SLC's note. Thus, the shareholders of APH, that is to say, the existing shareholders of APH, which included not only the four creditors for $1.8 million but also other shareholders, not creditors of Kalon, would be put in a better position. On the other hand, SLC instead of having recourse to the assets of Kalon, namely its shares in the subsidiary companies, to pay its debt, (i) had access to no greater amount of money to pay its debt, (ii) had no security, (iii) was delayed in enforcing it without any compensation by way of interest, and, (iv) to enforce it, might be compelled to take winding up proceedings against APH in New Zealand.

In the meanwhile the affairs of APH were controlled by Mr Lake and Mr
Chartres.

Critically, Young J found that SLC and indeed the other creditors were not likely to be better off under the Deed and that there was a collateral benefit to the (existing) shareholders in APH. Thus the Deed failed to achieve the object set out in <case>(b), that is to say in the situation where it was not possible for Kalon or its business to continue in existence, the Deed did not achieve a better return for Kalon's creditors and members than would result from an immediate winding up of the company. The Deed was oppressive because not only were the creditors not advantaged by it, but the shareholders of a third party, APH, some of them but not all of them creditors, obtained a collateral advantage. Young J was right to conclude that the Deed was oppressive with respect to SLC and to make the orders that he did.

This makes it unnecessary to deal with the appellant's third submission that to the extent that Young J's judgment was discretionary there were grounds for this court to interfere with it. The respondent put as its principal argument that the appeal should be dismissed because, the judgment being discretionary, the appellant had not shown that the judgment suffered from one or other of the defects Dixon J described in House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] at 505.

House versus The King was an appeal against sentence. A sound exercise by a sentencing judge of the discretion on sentence will produce in different courts a range of severity. Assuming no error is manifest in the judge's approach, an appellate court will not interfere unless the sentence is shown to be outside that range so that it can be said to be unreasonable or plainly unjust.

Section 445D(1) provides that the court "may" make an order terminating a deed of company arrangement if satisfied of one of a number of matters which are set out, including (f) that the deed or a provision of it was oppressive and (g) that the deed should be terminated "for some other reason". If the court, applying the correct test, is satisfied of one or more of the matters listed, it is arguable that the word "may" goes further than simply empowering the court to make an order of termination and leaves the court with a discretion whether to do so or not. Ordinarily in such circumstances the court would not refuse the application though there may be cases where as a matter of discretion it could properly do so. This case did not concern the exercise of a residual discretion of that sort. The appeal raised the question of whether Young J had applied the right test. Quite clearly he did. That left only the question whether, having applied the right test, he came to the correct conclusion. Again quite clearly he did.

In our opinion Kalon's challenge to Young J's decision fails, and the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

A question was raised at the conclusion of the argument about the costs order that should be made in the event that the appeal was dismissed. Counsel for the respondent asked that the costs be deemed to be or treated as deferred expenses, saying that that would include the costs of proceedings below, and that Young J had not actually made an order. However, we note that the fifth order sought in the summons by which the respondent SLC had initiated the proceedings was that the costs of the plaintiff be paid out of the assets of the defendant as if it were a deferred expense pursuant to <case>(e) of the
Corporations Law and that at the conclusion of his reasons Young J (inter alia) made order 5 as asked; he then stayed his various orders, saying at the end of his reasons "I do not have to make any other orders as to costs".

In the circumstances, we would be prepared to make the same order in SLC's favour for the costs of the appeal as Young J made for the costs of the proceedings before him. In case however we have misunderstood some aspect of this costs question, we would postpone the coming into operation of such costs order until further order and give liberty to any party to file written submissions on the costs question within fourteen days after the delivery of the court's reasons. The court will consider any such submissions before finally deciding on the appropriate costs order. However the order dismissing the appeal operates forthwith upon the delivery of the court's reasons.
 * * * 
