

Iron Gates Pty Limited versus Environment Protection Authority Matter No Cca /97 [1998] NSWSC 255 (16 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 August 1998 
IRON GATES PTY LIMITED versus ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY 
CCA 40716/97 March 1998 
Meagher JA, Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: In this matter on 7 August 1997 her Honour Pearlman J in proceedings brought by the Environment Protection Authority against the present claimant Iron Gates Pty Limited made an order for costs. That order was that the EPA could recover its full costs even though it employed a professional solicitor, an employed solicitor. 
It has been urged by the claimant that this is at least dubious, if not wrong, as the decisions in the Environmental Court are not uniform. There is at least one decision by his Honour Talbot J in support of the claimant. There is another decision which was followed by her Honour, a decision of Lloyd J in the case of EPA versus Taylor Woodrow Australia Pty Limited No.2 given on 10
September 1997 - a very careful and elaborate judgment which would be supportive of her Honour.

Despite the fact that the matter is of very considerable importance, despite the fact that it is desirable that differences between judges at first instance be unified at some point, in my view this is not the appropriate case for this Court to intervene to achieve that unity.

I might add that in my view no error has been shown in her Honour's judgment.
Indeed from my point of view I need not go far, as her Honour's judgment seems to me to be clearly correct.

I would propose that the summons be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: I agree. 
KELLY: Your Honours before you arise could I just draw your attention to the notice of motion. The reason this summons was put on was because the EPA filed a notice of motion to strike out the appeals that had been lodged in October and December and I would just seek an order for costs in relation to those matters and an order that those appeals be struck out.

MEAGHER JA: The EPA notice of motion was when? 
KELLY: It was filed on 17 February.

MEAGHER JA: I see, yes I see. I can only find one notice of motion, that's a notice of motion which seeks 1. appeal number CO40716 be struck out.

KELLY: As incompetent, yes your Honour.

MEAGHER JA: And costs.

KELLY: Yes your Honour.

MEAGHER JA: Was there any other-- 
KELLY: No that was our notice of motion and then the claimant put on the summons.

MEAGHER JA: Well we've dealt with the summons.

KELLY: Yes your Honour.

MEAGHER JA: Yes.

RIGG: Your Honour can I just respond to that application. In the last proceedings reference was made to r 17(a). The original proceedings in this matter were commenced on 24 October 1997 at which the form 60A notice of appeal without appointment and then there was an appeal with appointment filed on 27 January 1998.

SHELLER JA: When does this cut in this rule, 28 days from when? 
RIGG: That would be from the material date your Honour.

SHELLER JA: 27 January.

RIGG: The application could have been made 28 days from 24 October 1997.

SHELLER JA: What from the notice of appeal without appointment? 
RIGG: Yes your Honour.

SHELLER JA: Twenty-one days, no it says after service upon the respondent to the notice of appeal with appointment apply to the Court, if you look at 17(a) do you have a copy of that? 
RIGG: I'm sorry your Honour.

SHELLER JA: Yes we've been looking at 51AA 17(a) subrule (1), but it's 21 days.

RIGG: Yes your Honour.

SHELLER JA: And this apparently was filed on 17 February, so it's 27 January to 17 February it looks as though it's just in time.

MEAGHER JA: As far as the notice of motion filed on behalf of the EPA of 17
February 1998 Order 1 as asked, order that Iron Gates Pty Limited pay the costs of that notice of motion.
 * * * 
