

Cipri versus Gio of NSW [1996] NSWSC 201 (18 June 1996) 
CIPRI versus GIO OF NSW /94; DC 654/87 
Tuesday 18 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Handley JA, Sheller JA, Cole JA 
CATCHWORDS: MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - LIABILITY - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
On 30 January 1987 the plaintiff suffered a motor vehicle accident which the trial judge found was a result of the plaintiff being misled by the appearance of a green arrow but actually entering an intersection against a red light. The defendant had entered the intersection on a green light while travelling around sixty kilometres an hour. Another driver going in the same direction and being overtaken by the defendant had braked though the defendant had thought that this was to enable a turn. Counsel for the plaintiff appealed contending that there was contributory negligence on the basis of excessive speed and that the actions of the driver should have alerted the defendant to the danger.

HELD: dismissing the appeal: (1) The defendant was not negligent in driving within the speed limit through a green light; (2) There was no reason why the defendant should have been alerted to a need to assume that the presumption that another driver was obeying the road rules had been rebutted: Trompp versus Liddle <case>; [(1941) 41 SR 108] followed.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an appeal by a plaintiff from a decision of Twigg QC DCJ who heard the plaintiff's claim arising out of motor vehicle accident which occurred on 30 January 1987.

The accident occurred at the intersection of Brennan and Catherine Streets,
Lilyfield. The plaintiff was travelling south in Catherine Street and approaching the intersection with Brennan Street. This intersection was controlled by lights. There was a dispute at the trial as to the situation with regard to the lights at the time of the collision but the trial judge found that the defendant's insured driver was travelling in the intersection with a green light in his favour, and that the plaintiff had entered the intersection against a red light, although another traffic light carried a green arrow indicating that traffic could turn left from Catherine Street into
Brennan Street.

The trial judge found that the plaintiff had been misled by the green arrow and had acted on the appearance of the green arrow to enter the intersection and this was the sole cause of the collision.

Mr Durie, who did not appear at the trial but appeared in this Court, did not attempt to challenge the judge's findings that the plaintiff entered the intersection against a red light and the defendant's insured driver, Mr Bell, entered the intersection facing a green light. This was a proper course for Mr
Durie to adopt as, in my judgment, the findings of fact by the trial judge on the state of the traffic lights was not open to any realistic challenge in this Court.

Mr Durie's submission was that, notwithstanding the conclusion that the plaintiff himself was guilty of negligence in entering the intersection against a red light, nevertheless, there was evidence from which the trial judge should have found that Mr Bell, the other driver, had also been guilty of some negligence which was a cause of the collision, and the case was therefore one for apportionment. The negligence relied upon was the speed with which Mr Bell drove into the intersection. It seems reasonably clear on the judge's findings, and on the evidence, that Mr Bell was travelling at thirty kilometres an hour immediately prior to the accident. He had been following a
Mr Flowers in a northerly direction along Brennan Street. Mr Flowers' vehicle had some mechanical problems and made a lot of noise when driven in excess of thirty kilometres an hour so Mr Flowers had been travelling at that low speed along Brennan Street.

When Brennan Street became a two-lane street for traffic travelling north, Mr
Bell moved out from behind Mr Flowers and attempted to pass him; accelerating up to sixty kilometres an hour or thereabouts. However, he was not proceeding above the speed limit. There was apparently an open traffic lane in front of him and he had the green light in his favour. In these circumstances, his speed alone, in my judgment, cannot constitute any proper basis for a finding of negligence.

The other matter relied upon by Mr Durie related to Mr Flowers' conduct as he entered or approached the intersection. Mr Flowers said that he applied his brakes when he saw that the two cars would collide. Obviously, by that time, it was too late for Mr Bell to take any effective, avoiding action so that the braking action of Mr Flowers cannot have operated as any effective warning to
Mr Bell.

Mr Bell in his evidence-in-chief given in statement form said that as he overtook Flowers, he found that he had braked and he thought that Flowers intended to turn to his right into Catherine Street, that is towards the north.

There was in my view, no basis on which Mr Bell should have been alerted by any action on the part of Mr Flowers, which he interpreted as indicating an intention to make a right hand turn into Catherine Street, into believing that there was a danger of a collision immediately in front of him with a vehicle entering the intersection from Catherine Street contrary to a red light.

Finally, Mr Durie relied upon the decision in Trompp versus Liddle (1941) 41 SR at 109 where Jordan CJ said: "A driver is entitled to assume that other drivers will observe the rules of the road ... it means that it is not unreasonable for him to act on the assumption that other drivers are obeying the rules unless there is something which should make him realise they are not".

It does not appear that this question was raised at the trial, but nevertheless, in my judgment the evidence accepted by the trial judge from Mr
Bell and Mr Flowers does not indicate that there was anything in this intersection which would have reasonably revealed to Mr Bell that Mr Cipri was entering the intersection on his right contrary to a red light. In these circumstances, I have reached the conclusion that the appeal fails, and should be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: I agree.

COLE JA: I also agree.

HANDLEY JA: The order of the Court therefore is appeal dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
