

Cigna Insurance Australia Limited and Ors versus Csr Limited and Ors No.
/1995 Application to take evidence by video conference [1996] NSWSC 1 (5
January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
ROLFE J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 29 November 1995 #DATE 29:11:1995 #ADD 5:1:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs:    Mr J.T. Gleeson 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs:   Phillips Fox 
Counsel for CSR Limited:
Mr J.C. Kelly SC 
Solicitors for CSR Limited:    Freehill Hollingdale and Page
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
ROLFE
J By the Notice of Motion which I gave leave to file in Court earlier today and made returnable instanter, the defendants seek to have the evidence of Professor Andreas Lowenfeld taken using video conference facilities (VCF).
The application is supported by the affidavit of Damien Gordon Lovell sworn 29
November 1995.
The proceedings, which are to commence before me on Monday 4 December , are for a stay, brought by the defendants, of proceedings instituted by the plaintiffs against them in New South Wales. Prima facie it will be necessary for the defendants, as applicants, to establish that New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum:
Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538.] However, to a not insubstantial extent, I imagine the stay application cannot be divorced or considered separately from an application which was made by the present plaintiffs for an injunction to restrain the present defendants or, at least, the first and second defendants, from going ahead with certain proceedings they have instituted in the Supreme Court of
New Jersey. I have granted such an injunction on an interlocutory basis and the final hearing of that has not been given a date as yet because the Court has not been requested to do so.
On the stay application each party proposes to call expert evidence in relation to American law. Professor
Lowenfeld is to be called on behalf of the defendants. He is a professor of international law at the New York University
School of
Law and it is not in issue that he has teaching commitments up to and including Thursday, 7 December 1995. The earliest he can conveniently arrive in Australia is late on Saturday 9 December 1995. That would mean that if he were to come to Australia he would be able to give evidence, subject to having a reasonable opportunity to recover from the journey, during the week commencing 11 December 1995.
His commitment in that week is stated in the following terms: "The Professor chairs a committee which it is proposed will be meeting in the week commencing 11 December 1995. Professor
Lowenfeld is chairman of that committee and ex US President, 
Jimmy Carter, has been invited to attend the meeting".
The date of that meeting is not specified with any great particularity.
The purposes of the meeting are not detailed, which may well be explicable for understandable reasons of confidentiality and, perhaps more importantly, the role of Professor Lowenfeld, other than as chairman, which in itself I appreciate has certain significance, is not set forth. In other words, the affidavit does not state that it is essential for Professor Lowenfeld to be present, nor does it state that his absence will cause the deliberations of the meeting to be ineffective or have less effectiveness than they otherwise would have had. It may be an inference can be drawn that this will be the case, but the evidence as to the meeting is fairly inconclusive.
The significance of the attendance of the former President of the United States of
America is not detailed. Once again, this may be because of matters of confidentiality.
The affidavit states that it would be convenient to Professor Lowenfeld for his evidence to be taken by VCF and facilities are available in the
Federal Court which would enable this to be done on 7 or 8 December 1995 and on days in the week commencing 11 December 1995.
Mr Gleeson, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, has stated that the cross-examination will take, on a conservative estimate, one day, which I take to be approximately five hours, and if that is a conservative estimate it may well proceed into a second day. That estimate has been given, as I understand it, on the basis that Professor Lowenfeld is present in Sydney giving his evidence. The significance of that is that, from my experience of hearing evidence given by VCF, and
I have heard such evidence now in three cases, two of which have involved the use of the facilities available to the Federal
Court, the cross-examination is necessarily somewhat slower than that which occurs when a person is present in a courtroom. One simple reason for that is that there is a necessary hiatus between the asking of the question and the receipt of it by the cross-examinee, and there is equally a hiatus between the giving of the answer and the reception of it by the cross-examiner. It is not a large break in time but all people would be familiar with it from watching interviews with people on television from overseas.
In most cases where the evidence is, perhaps, taken over a period of about half an hour to an hour, this is not a severe impediment. However, where the evidence is being taken over a longer, I can see that it will constitute an inordinate lengthening of the time. Nextly, it will be necessary in the cross-examination for reference to be made to a number of documents and in addition, I am told, to various texts of cases. If the matter proceeds by way of VCF that will necessitate copies of the documents being in America. In itself that is not a particular impediment, but it will be necessary for there to be present in America someone who can assist Professor Lowenfeld in marshalling the documents and anyone familiar with cross-examination on documents, particularly large numbers of documents, will be aware that even when that happens in court there can be delays as witnesses move from volume to volume and seek to find page numbers.
It seems clear that Professor
Lowenfeld will require some assistance in referring to the documents.
For those unfamiliar with the Federal Court VCF facilities, I should note that there is provision on the screen, when a document is shown to a witness, for that document to be shown to the court. I am not suggesting for one moment in this case there would be any attempt to look at different documents but I am just seeking to explain what happens. One can see, however, the potential for initial confusion and misunderstanding about documents and, in addition to that, I should say that while it is not a strain to watch evidence being given and, I assume from the cross-examinee's point of view, questions being asked because the cross-examinee has the reverse image of the court to the cross-examiner, the consideration of many documents over many hours in this way could cause inconvenience. In saying that I do not put it higher than a possibility, but it seems that it would be a definite impediment to the flow of evidence and would have the potential of creating difficulties both for the witness and the cross-examiner and also, I might add, in so far as it is thought to be relevant, to the Court.
I am told that the documents range over numerous bundles and that really only confirms the view
I have just expressed as to the potential for problems in looking at documents, and I hasten to say I think that is a problem for all parties who are engaged in the giving of evidence and the adjudication process. I repeat that the comments I have made are the result of my having had the advantage of using, albeit over relevantly short periods, VCF or, perhaps more correctly, of evidence before me being taken in this form. Also, in saying what I have, I am not it be taken in any way as seeking to derogate from the obvious usefulness of taking evidence by VCF. In cases where the evidence is not particularly controversial, or the cross-examination is not likely to be lengthy, or where no real issue of credit is involved, the system greatly facilitates and, perhaps more importantly, makes far less expensive the taking of evidence both from interstate and from overseas.
However, for the reasons I have sought to explain, that is not the present case. The first question which arises is the power of the court to make the order sought in the notice of motion. I am satisfied that the Court does have power pursuant to s76A to make the order. That section is obviously intended to give the Court wide powers for the purposes referred to therein.
Mr Gleeson has submitted that it does not give power because it would not lead to any "speedy determination", the time being taken being the same. However, it seems that those words have to be read having regard to the obvious purpose and intent of the section, and I would respectfully agree with Young J that that section gives the power: La Porte Group Australia versus Vatselias (25
November 1991 - unreported). However, having said that, I think I should note that his Honour made the order in cases where two witnesses were involved, cross-examination of each being anticipated to take "about an hour". His
Honour pointed out also the inconvenience to the witness and the need for the
Court to have regard to that.
In my view, that is a matter of importance, and
I take the view that the Court should, consistently with the proper administration of justice, meet, so far as is possible, the convenience of witnesses and nothing I say in these reasons is intended to indicate any different conclusion.
Mr Gleeson also made a submission to the effect that it would not be possible to administer an oath or obtain an affirmation from the witness by reference to the provision of the [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) and the Oaths Act. I do not agree with the submissions and I cannot think, in any event, that that would be any real impediment to the taking of the evidence. My experience has been that when evidence is taken overseas, unless it can be said the evidence is being taken in New South Wales by virtue of it being in an embassy or, perhaps, in Australia, in the same way, the oath or affirmation is administered by a person, in the place where the evidence is being given, competent to administer the oath or affirmation. There has been, to my knowledge, no difficulty to this being done in relation to the United States of America or Canada although, of course, the Court must be careful at all times to ensure that international protocols and international respect for the rights of the citizens of other countries are fully protected.
However, I would not refuse the application on the basis of the second submission put forward by Mr Gleeson. I do propose, however, to refuse the application because it seems that the length of the cross-examination to which
I have already referred sufficiently, and the nature of the cross-examination would make it far more convenient and appropriate, in the administration of
Justice, for the evidence to be given by Professor Lowenfeld's attending to give evidence in Court.
 .
I have referred to the reasons but I would add a further reason to them.
It seems if the evidence commences at 10.00am Professor
Lowenfeld would commence to give evidence at approximately 6pm on the night before in the place in America in which he is. On the basis that the evidence then continued until 4.00pm Sydney time, with the usual adjournments, that would mean the evidence would conclude at approximately midnight in the place where Professor
Lowenfeld is. I am prepared to assume that Professor Lowenfeld is aware of this call upon his time but it has to be taken into context that his convenience is being met in the sense that he would be teaching if his evidence was taken on 7 December. This is a further factor to which I have regard in the context of having regard to the convenience of the witness.
However, having said that, I appreciate that coming from America to
Australia and obviously the necessity to return imposes inconvenience in itself On the other hand, I cannot think that this possibility did not cross
Professor
Lowenfeld's mind when he agreed to give evidence in the case. I am informed there has been some correspondence between the solicitors in relation to his giving evidence by VCF but obviously that has not led to any resolution and I would have assumed if Professor
Lowenfeld was totally unprepared to travel to Australia to give his evidence he would have refused to make himself available as a witness at all. In this context I should also note that Mr
Johnson, the solicitor instructing Mr Kelly, or one of them, and Mr Bathurst of Queen's Counsel, have recently travelled to New York for the purpose, inter alia, of conferring with Professor Lowenfeld.
 .
In all the circumstances, I propose that the Notice of Motion be dismissed. I am informed that the expert being called on the same subject by the plaintiffs will be coming to Australia on the weekend prior to 11 December and in addition to all the other reasons
I have given, I can see great utility in the expert evidence being given when the other expert is available.
I would be hopeful that the parties would arrange a convenient time for both experts and, indeed, any other witnesses from overseas to give their evidence, but if there is any difficulty, and in this case I am not prepared to rule out the prospect of difficulty, then the court will certainly seek to resolve it.
I should perhaps add that I have referred to the hearing time as being between 10.00am and 4.00pm. The reader of these reasons may wonder why an extended hearing time cannot be provided for. Perhaps to some extent it can.
For example, it may be possible to sit at 9.30am and to conclude sitting at .30pm. So far as I am concerned and so far as my personal staff is concerned that is a matter of indifference, but one has to have regard to a number of other people's convenience including not only the court officer from this
Court and the court reporting staff, but also the court officers of the
Federal Court, who monitor and regulate the equipment necessary to ensure that the transmission continues.
Mr Gleeson seeks an order for costs. My normal practice is to order, even in interlocutory proceedings, the unsuccessful party to pay the costs. It seems to me, generally speaking, that that is far more desirable than reserving the costs. However, I have come to the view which I have, essentially, although not entirely, because of the length of time likely to be involved in the cross-examination. Many of the other difficulties to which I have referred would not arise if that time estimate had not been given. In the circumstances of this case I think the appropriate order to make is to reserve the question of costs. I will note, as Mr Gleeson has requested me to do, that the motion was not brought forward until to-day although, in itself, that merely stimulates further evidence, particularly in the context of this case, as to when it was first ventilated. However, I will deal with that at some other time. I order that the costs of the motion be reserved.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/1.html  
