

Simpson versus Grattan and Toomer Matter No 3133/97 [1998] NSWSC 577 (14
October 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 December 1998 `DORIS HEATHERINGTON SIMPSON versus JULIA ANNE GRATTAN and DIANA CLARE TOOMER AS
EXECUTORS & TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF JAMES ALAN FRANCIS SIMPSON & ANOR` `3133/97` `14 October 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The present proceedings are by a widow, in respect of the estate of her late husband, who makes application for further provision under the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) (the Act) out of time. If leave is granted she asks the court to make such provision as is appropriate in all the circumstances. 
The proceedings have been heard together with 3074/98, proceedings initiated by people who claim to be the trustees of the deceased's estate against the spouse of the residuary beneficiary, for the grant of an easement under [s
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s88k.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/). Although the two proceedings were heard together, I think it is expedient to give separate judgments and these reasons are confined to the Family Provisions Act application.

Doris Simpson was married for 53 years to the late James Alan Francis Simpson.
James Simpson was born 26 January 1909. There were three children of the marriage, two daughters, who are now Mrs Grattan and Mrs Toomer, and a son,
Brice.

Brice, who was born in 1943, married Barbara in 1964 and they have a daughter,
Inga, born 23 March 1971. Brice died suddenly on 14 June 1996 in a tractor accident.

The Simpson family had a series of properties in the Grenfell area, but the immediate family are concerned with two properties known as "Eureka" and "Netherleigh". "Netherleigh", which originally consisted of about 1050 acres, was the home of James and Doris Simpson immediately after their marriage. When
Brice married Barbara a house was built for them on "Netherleigh". At about the same time James also transferred "Eureka" to Brice, but there was a lease- back for two years.

In 1970 James sold 740 acres of "Netherleigh" to Brice and Barbara for, it would seem, $74,000. Part of the purchase money was secured by mortgage, the debt being reduced by some re-leases, so that at the date of James' death about $90,000, according to the trustees, and about $45,000, according to
Barbara Simpson, was still owing under the mortgage.

Of the remaining 310 acres of "Netherleigh", 10 acres were reserved for the homestead and the cottage on the homestead in which Doris still lives. These acres plus the other 300 acres were leased on 14 August 1970 to Brice and
Barbara for three years with the lessee to pay Pasture Protection Board assessments to keep the fencing in good repair, although the lessor was to pay the rates. Presumably, holdings over that lease continued to govern the relationship of the parties until a notice to quit was given to Barbara on 18
December 1996 and she eventually quit the 300 acres on 1 February 1998.
Thereafter, the trustees entered into some arrangement, which has been called in evidence a verbal lease, between Mrs Grattan's husband Geoffrey and the estate. The rental that is due under that lease is a little obscure, but it would seem to be the profits of a wheat crop that is currently sown on those acres.

James Simpson made his last will on 7 May 1982. He died on 26 November 1990 without altering that will. Probate was granted to his widow, Doris Simpson,
Brice and Mrs Grattan on 20 March 1991. Brice died in 1996 and on 16 October , Mrs Doris Simpson by deed purported to retire as trustee of the will and
Mrs Toomer was appointed in her stead. However, the deed leaves a bit to be desired because it is strongly arguable that at that date the executors' real duties had not been exercised so that it was not intended for Doris to retire.
That matter had some significance in the <case> easement proceedings but by reason of the addition of Doris Simpson as a defendant in those proceedings, for all practical purposes, I can disregard it.

The will, so far as relevant, provided that the plaintiff widow was to receive $5,000, the deceased's company shares, proceeds of an insurance policy, any motor car, trailer and boat together with furniture, household effects, carpentry, hand and power tools. The widow was then to receive a life interest in the real and personal property of the deceased other than that which was just indicated. The mortgage debt, which was owing by Brice and Barbara
Simpson in respect to 740 acres of land that had been transferred earlier, was not to be called up provided that the interest was paid. There were the usual investment clauses and clause 8 provided that the widow might direct the trustees to apply from the corpus of the estate up to $50,000 for the purchase of some dwelling unit in New South Wales which would be held for her for life, she paying all rates and other outgoings, keeping the same in due order and fully insured.

Subject to the life interest of the widow, the balance of the estate was to pass as to a legacy of $15,000 to be paid within three years of the death of the wife to each of the testator's two daughters, and the balance of the estate to be paid and transferred to Brice. The will is, as counsel have said, a not atypical will for a rural landholder to make.

Immediately after the testator's death, the situation was that Brice and
Barbara owned 740 acres of "Netherleigh", subject to the mortgage, and they also had a lease over the 310 acres, although that lease was subject to the 10 acres which the widow, for all intents and purposes, regarded as her own.

The relationship between the parties as at the death of the testator appeared to be relatively good. However, they have not always been in that situation and the evidence shows that just before the lease and transfer in 1970, relations were not particularly happy, in that the widow only found out from the family accountant that she was about to have a grandchild. Again, relations between the parties completely broke down after Brice's death in and there was a considerable degree of irritating conduct by various members of the family against the other or others, and so much so, that most of the parties have spent a considerable amount of money in recent months obtaining apprehended violence orders against each other.

The estate at the moment consists of the mortgage debt of somewhere about $50,000 which is subject to the will and is not to be called up except in certain events and the 310 acres, apart from possible claims that might be made as to whether the 310 acres have been properly used over the last year or so. For present purposes I will disregard that. The estate has no monies apart from the income from the mortgage and the proceeds of the leasings and the 300 acres to pay the debt. It is also clear that the plaintiff has herself loaned the estate at least $3,000 so that it can pay for legal representation in the present proceedings, and she may have lent other monies as well. Accordingly, the only estate asset which can be used to increase the plaintiff's provision is the 310 acres.

Bearing in mind that the costs of these proceedings have to be provided for and that the estate is without many resources, it seems to me that no one will receive any real benefit out of these proceedings in any event. However, Mr
Roche for the estate pointed out that is not necessarily correct. The 310 acres could be considered as three lots, lot X being the 160 acres adjoining the Grenfell/Young Road, lot Y being the 140 acres immediately to the south of that lot and lot Z being the 10 acres of the homestead. If lot X was sold, and the evidence is that it currently has a value of $64,000, there may be sufficient money in order to make any adequate provision that needs to be made for the plaintiff, plus pay the costs of these proceedings and perhaps repay the indebtedness to the widow.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s16.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) provides much more stringent criteria for making timeous applications than the previous legislation. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s16.html) of the Act requires that in the usual case application must be made in the period of eighteen months after the death of the testator. In the instant case that period expired on 26 May 1992. The plaintiff made her application on 8
July 1997, that is five years and one month out of time.
 [Section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s16.html) and (3) of the Act provides that the Court is only to make an order extending the time if sufficient cause is shown for the application not having been made within the time.

What will be sufficient cause will depend on the circumstances of each individual case. However, guidelines have been laid down by the court over the last fifteen years as to the matters that courts take into account and these can be seen in judgments, such as my judgment in Massey versus Laundy - 7
February 1986 unreported, and that of the present Chief Judge in Warren v
McKnight <case>; [(1996) 40 NSWLR 390.] 
I only mention those two in particular because one was referred to by Mr
Ralston for the plaintiff and the other by Mr Trebeck for the second defendant. They both really say the same thing, that is, that when one is looking at this sort of problem it is necessary to look to the reasons for the application being made out of time, to consider whether the beneficiary would be unacceptably prejudiced, to see whether there has been any unconscionable conduct on either side and to see, at least, whether the application is being made otherwise than in connection with the final hearing as to the strengths of the plaintiff's case.

The reasons advanced by the plaintiff for not making the application in time are, first, that there was a lack of advice given to the plaintiff as to her options. Secondly, it was her belief that her son Brice would look after her so that as long as Brice was alive it did not really matter to the widow that she only had a life estate because Brice would be making up any shortfall.

So far as lack of advice is concerned, the evidence was left in a relatively vague state. The plaintiff said that the will was read to her by a solicitor shortly after her husband's death. She understood what the will said but she received no advice that she could make an application under the Act. The solicitor who allegedly failed to give that advice was not called; that is significant because very often experience shows that people only remember part of their solicitor's advice, the bit they want to hear and not the rest.

Ordinarily, it is necessary to call the solicitor to make sure this is not one of those occasions. However, it seems to me it would not matter what the solicitor had said in 1990 because the plaintiff's belief that her son would look after her was her governing reason for not making any claim. Even if she had known there was a claim available she would not have made it. Is that sufficient? Certainly it goes a long way towards being a sufficient reason.
There is a lot in what Mr Trebeck says that it is difficult to accept the evidence that the plaintiff gives in all aspects because the evidence clearly shows there was a time in about 1990 when relations between the plaintiff and her son Brice were not close. One just cannot imagine him not telling his mother about the impending birth of her grandchild if this was not so.

But that is not the only matter to take into account. The question that has to be considered is whether the beneficiary would be unacceptably prejudiced. The beneficiaries, of course, must be prejudiced by the mere fact that the time has passed and their expectations would be that "there has been no challenge to the will". They are entitled to assume they are safe in organising their affairs on the basis that none would be. Even under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) where the court could see that the beneficiaries had re-arranged their affairs on the basis of the will being undisturbed, it was not usually proper to grant an extension of time. A good illustration is Re Newton [(1959) 76 WN .] 
In the present case, Mrs Barbara Simpson gave evidence in paragraph 19 of her affidavit as to what she might or might not have done had she realised there was to be a challenge. I rejected that paragraph because of its form and because it seemed clear to me from the evidence that Mrs Barbara Simpson had not in fact directed her mind, nor had her husband Brice directed his mind, to what would happen if they could not operate the whole 1050 acres.

However, one can infer from the evidence what might have happened and what their attitude might well have been.

As I said earlier, the lease over the 310 acres was purportedly terminated by notice to quit so there is now only the 740 acres plus "Eureka" which is over the other side of the Grenfell/Young Road.

Mrs Barbara Simpson gave evidence that the holding of 740 acres was, in her view, unviable. There are also other problems with operating the two properties separately, some of which have come out in the evidence directed mainly to the <case> proceedings, that is the ingress and egress of construction and heavy machinery over which the proprietors of the 740 acres have no real control. The balance of the material suggests to me that there is a very real possibility that Barbara and Brice would have organised their lives differently had the plaintiff made her challenge earlier. Furthermore, after May 1992 they expended monies in improving the properties, both the 740 acres and the 310 acres. Whilst it is true a lot of this work was done because of the lease, it does not seem to me that that was the only reason why it was done.

The onus is on the plaintiff to show that, despite her late application, there has not been unacceptable prejudice to the beneficiaries. Even though the estate has not yet been fully distributed, in the sense the whole 1050 acres is still owned by the estate and the mortgage is still current, there have been changes over the last five years which may well have come about in the legitimate expectation that the will would be undisturbed. The effect of the disturbance of the 300 acres when everything appears to be settled is one illustration of that.

In my view, the plaintiff has not shown that to extend time would not create unacceptable prejudice for the beneficiaries.

The next major matter is that a person who may have been a vital witness, namely Brice, has died. Mr Trebeck strongly pressed this matter of prejudice and relied on Re Burgess [[1984] 2 Qd R 379], 383. I agree that this is a weighty factor.

The other fact is unconscionable conduct. There has been a whole lot of nastiness in this case. It would seem to me there were a whole series of what appears, to a casual observer, to be trivial incidents, in particular shortly after Brice's death when both mother and wife were grieving over his death and in their grief said things they might not otherwise have said. That conflict led to petty acts and further ill-feeling to the point where, unless the family have a reconciliation or agree to live separately, they are likely to spend a lot of money in legal costs in the next ten years. However, it does not seem to me that is what is meant by the authorities in mentioning the words "unconscionable conduct" in this connection. What is more germane is the situation where a widow, for instance, is committing adultery or otherwise is not upholding the relationship which she has pleaded to get a benefit under the Act.

However, when one takes into account the great length of delay, not only the five years from May 1992 to July 1997 but also the eight months delay between the time when the widow obviously knew of her rights in December 1996 and when she actually made the claim, the prejudice to the estate of Brice and Barbara
Simpson and the fact that Brice Simpson, who may well have been able to give evidence in the proceedings which may have been significant, is now dead, it seems to me the plaintiff has not made out her case that sufficient cause has been established.

Accordingly, I shall not proceed any further.

I did in argument suggest what I thought, perhaps a compromise, was the sort of order I might have made had I found (a) that the time be extended; and (b) this was a proper case for making further provision. I will merely note this in case the matter should go further and would be of assistance to the Court of Appeal. I should say no party took up the suggestion with any favour at all, that is, that the fee simple in lots Y and Z should go to the plaintiff, that the mortgage should be forgiven on condition that Barbara Simpson grant a licence to use the existing roads to Doris Simpson, lot X would be sold and the estate's costs would be paid out of the sale. The balance would pay the conveyancing costs and the cost of these proceedings so far as the estate is concerned. The plaintiff could have what remained with each party to pay her own costs of the proceedings. However, as I say, no one had any enthusiasm for that order. I merely indicate that is the sort of order 
I might have made had the plaintiff succeeded on the two jurisdictional aspects.

I should make it clear that, because I have decided not to extend time, I have only briefly considered the merits of the plaintiff's application. It is clear that her application must have some chance of success as a life estate to a widow of a 50 years marriage is seldom sufficient. However, I never got to the stage of actually deciding whether the testator made proper provision for his widow in all the circumstances of this case.

Accordingly, the proceedings are dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
