

Steve-Watt Constructions Pty Limited versus Byers and Ors Matter No 11466/98 [1998] NSWSC 417 (28 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
STEVE-WATT CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus BYERS & ORS /98 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 15 June 1998. The first defendant is the registered proprietor of two properties (the Cronulla property and the Sutherland property). He has given a Mortgage over each of the properties to the plaintiff. These parties also entered into a Deed of Loan dated 13 May 1997. It is alleged that default has been made under each of the three securities. The plaintiff seeks possession of both properties and a monetary judgment. 
A Defence was filed on 25 June 1998. It sought to put in issue, inter alia, the entitlement of the plaintiff to exercise its powers as mortgagee. Since the filing of the Defence, the first defendant has made an application to file a Cross-Claim.

On 23 July 1998, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion seeking summary judgment against the first defendant. This application was heard on 24 August .

The plaintiff relies on an affidavit sworn by Mr Stevenson. The first defendant has sworn two affidavits. The second of the two affidavits was filed on 19 August 1998 (after the special fixture for the application had been allocated).

It is common ground that there has been default and that default entitles the plaintiff to possession under the documentation. There is an admission of indebtedness in the sum of $29,439.15. A significant part of the first defendant's indebtedness is yet to be quantified. The amount in dispute is the subject of an arbitration. The total amount claimed by the plaintiff in the arbitration is $648,968.24 (the amount in dispute is $619,529.09). The arbitrator is yet to hand down his award.

The Cronulla property has been sold. The plaintiff says that it was sold without its consent. It is not said that it has been sold at an undervalue.
The purchasers have paid the balance purchase moneys into a trust account and are now in occupation of the property. A transfer cannot be registered because of various caveats (including caveats lodged by the plaintiff). The purchasers have been added as defendants to these proceedings.

The granting of summary relief is discretionary. The Court has regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before it and exercises the discretion so as to ensure that justice is best served between the parties.
There is abundant authority for the proposition that relief should be granted only in what has been described as clear cases (see, inter alia, Webster v
Lampard <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 598).] The onus of demonstrating an entitlement to relief rests with the applicant.

The first defendant has made financial arrangements for the purposes of securing payment of the plaintiff's monetary claim. The detail of these arrangements may be found in the affidavits sworn by the first defendant. The fund which is now available to satisfy the claim is in the order of $748,143 (the second of the two affidavits revealed an additional arrangement involving a refinance with FAI which increased the quantum of the fund).

The first defendant says that these arrangements secure payment of more than the maximum amount claimed by the plaintiff. He further says that it can be expected that less than the maximum amount claimed will be recovered in the arbitration. The plaintiff disputes these contentions and further says that an acceptance of these arrangements will see it giving up its security. There is evidence to support the view that the fund should be sufficient to more than satisfy the plaintiff's monetary claim.

There seems to be a consensus that the problems ought to be capable of resolution. It seems that the plaintiff sees its bargaining position being strengthened if it obtains judgment for possession. There may be little utility in granting relief in respect of the undisputed part of the monetary claims and the monetary claims are being prosecuted in the arbitration. The position of the purchasers may be affected by the result of this application.

Both sides take comfort from what was said in Inglis & Anor v
Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia (1972) 126 CLR 161. The first defendant has referred the Court also to, inter alia, Equus Financial
Services Ltd & Anor versus RMBL Investments Pty Ltd [(1996) 22 ACSR 744] and
Murphy versus Abi-Saab (Court of Appeal, unreported, 20 July 1995).

In my view, Inglis does not render great assistance in this case. In
Inglis, the Court was dealing with the position of a mortgagor seeking injunctive relief. In this case, the Court is dealing with the position of a mortgagee seeking summary relief. The question is whether a discretionary power should be exercised in its favour.

I have deliberated at some length over the problem thrown up by this application. Ultimately, I have come to the view that the plaintiff has failed to discharge the onus and that justice is best served if relief is refused.

The Notice of Motion is dismissed. The first defendant is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion incurred up to and including 19 August 1998. The plaintiff is to pay the costs incurred thereafter.
 * * * 
