

Nus International P/L versus Jardine Fitzroy P/L [1996] NSWSC 118 (9 May 1996) 
NUS INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD versus JARDINE FITZROY PTY LTD /95 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
BAINTON J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, NUS International Pty Ltd ("NUS") is a subsidiary of National Utility Services Inc. of the USA. The business of NUS and its parent (and other subsidiaries in other countries) includes advising its clients on an ongoing basis of the cost to the client of their energy consumption and how it would be possible to reduce that cost. Jardine Fitzroy Pty Ltd ("Jardine"), trades under the name Jardine Restaurant Management. It operates Pizza Hut restaurants and the Sizzler restaurants in various States of Australia. I have used the rather vague term "operates" because the evidence does not make it clear whether it owns those businesses or franchises them to operators and acts in respect of the matters the subject of this case as undisclosed agent for those operators. The precise relationship was not suggested by either party to be material.

The first contact between the parties disclosed by the evidence is a letter from NUS to Jardine dated 18 February 1992. That letter commences by stating "Further to our recent discussions I have pleasure in enclosing our proposal for your consideration". As the content of that proposal is the major matter relied on in defence of the claim which I shall shortly outline, I set it out in full "INTRODUCTION 
NUS International Pty Ltd is the Australian subsidiary of National Utility
Service Inc. of Park Ridge, New Jersey, USA. National Utility Service was founded in 1933 and since specialised in the provision of Cost Control
Programmes for energy and telecommunications.
 
The company has offices through the world and is the acknowledged world authority on pricing structures, tariffs and petroleum contracts relevant to utility purchases.
 
NUS International Pty Ltd began in Australia in 1966 and from its North
Sydney headquarters provides Cost Control Programmes throughout Australia, New
Zealand, Hong Kong and South East Asia.
 
NUS has developed a unique data bank of information relating to pricing policies, tariff structures, oil and gas pricing and the regulations concerning the purchase of energy and telecommunication facilities. Its analytical staff specialise solely in this field and are uniquely qualified in this highly professional area.
 
NUS International Pty Ltd currently has in excess of 2,000 client companies and analyses energy and telecommunications expenditure on their behalf at more than 45,000 locations throughout Australasia.
 
THE RISK 
Suppliers of energy of all forms, electricity, natural gas, industrial gases, petroleum products and other utilities such as telecommunications, water and sewerage, are under no obligation, be it legal or otherwise, to provide their services at the lowest possible price.
 
Within the pricing structure of each of the energy sources there are various tariffs, options within tariffs, and other pricing variants dependent upon the amount of energy consumed, the time at which it is consumed and the usage pattern of that consumption, etc.
 
As a consumer your task is to select which of the diverse supply pricing mechanisms pertain most advantageously to you.
 
In the field of telecommunications, encompassing voice, data transmission, fax and telex, an equal number of highly technical alternatives exist with the responsibility of selection remaining that of the consumer.
 
While these circumstances occur at all locations, there is a continuing financial risk that consumers are not enjoying the most advantageous terms and conditions available.
 
PROPOSAL 
To eliminate such a risk of overpayment, it is proposed that NUS
International Pty Ltd provide a Cost Control Programme for Jardine Restaurant
Management. Such a programme is briefly outlined in the following.
 
THE SOLUTION - NUS COST CONTROL PROGRAMME 
Through analysis of paid invoices and the various contracts relating to supply, NUS is able to identify areas and to make recommendations where overcharges have been made in the past and create opportunities for reducing costs in the future.
 
The programme commences with analysis of the past 12 months' paid invoices and supplier contracts for energy and telecommunication facilities at each location. This is to identify past overcharges. If it can be shown that an error in previous accounts (resulting from either a mistake on the part of the supplier, or a failure to implement the current terms of a supply contract) has led to overpayments, recommendations are made to recover those excess charges.
 
In conjunction with the analysis of the past 12 months' invoices, a profile of usage is created which is then used as the basis for further analysis into the appropriate and most cost-effective method of purchasing future requirements.
 
The profile is used in conjunction with the extensive, current NUS database and is compared with both published and unpublished information pertaining to tariffs, alternative pricing structures, and the rules and regulations relevant to the supply of specific facilities.
 
Additionally, the profile is analysed with information on file concerning other consumers of a similar consumption or usage pattern, to ascertain whether there are other options of financial benefit.
 
An analysis report is prepared which provides an overview of the various factors affecting the price which the consumer is currently paying for energy and telecommunications, and where appropriate, makes recommendations. These recommendations may concern the recovery of overcharges or the implementation of new methods which will provide, when implemented, cost reductions for the future.
 
To ensure maximum benefit for Jardine Restaurant Management, this analysis continues for a further period of five years as further paid invoices are received. During this time changes will occur, both with your suppliers and in your own operations. Each change represents an opportunity to reduce costs.
 
Further reports resulting from this continuing analysis are forwarded and contain appropriate recommendations for consideration and implementation.
 
THE FEE AND REMUNERATION 
A once only service fee of 1% of the most recent twelve months' actual expenditure and of the next five years projected expenditure (providing a 6 year base) is payable on commencement of the programme with a minimum fee of $2,000, a maximum fee of $12,000.
 
Further remuneration is applicable only through participation in refunds or cost reductions which are achieved from submitted NUS recommendations. The level of participation is 50% of any refunds, and 50% of any ongoing cost benefits on a once-only basis for a period of up to 60 months, after which all cost benefits revert to Jardine Restaurant Management.
 
Participation in refunds and cost reductions is a precise calculation and invoices are submitted to show the exact value of each benefit achieved.
 
TERMS OF AGREEMENT 
The initial term of the programme shall be 5 years and may continue for further periods of 5 years at no additional service fee. The standard agreement outlining the terms and conditions is attached.
 
CONCLUSION 
NUS International Pty Ltd and its associate companies are the innovators and world leaders of cost control programmes in the area of energy and telecommunications. Over the past 59 years this has proved that the majority of organisations, through no fault of their own, or indeed of their suppliers, overpay for their requirements.
 
The role of NUS International is to eliminate the risk of overpayment and assure clients that they pay the minimum available price at all times.
 
There is no doubt this service would be of immense value to Jardine
Restaurant Management." 
Further discussions followed: the evidence discloses no more than their general nature. Neither party relied in any way on their contents.

A contract in writing was executed for and on behalf of the plaintiff on 17
July 1992 and by NUS on 20 July 1992. It appears to be a NUS standard form of contract. On the same dates the same persons executed what appears to be an addendum to the printed form, negotiated between the parties. I set out the contract in full: I have added the clauses in the addendum to the document as though they were originally part of it. The addendum is the addition to clause (a) of the last sentence of it and clause 9. The addition to clause 5(a) resulted from an earlier discussion between the parties. Its proponent was obviously Jardines.
 "NUS INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD 
Registered & Principal Office -130 Arthur Street 
NORTH SYDNEY NSW 2060 
Dear Sirs,
We hereby authorise you to submit recommendations for savings and refunds on our costs of Electricity, Gas, Industrial Gases, Oils and Petroleum
Products, Coal, Water, Sewerage/Effluent Disposal and Telecommunications. You will analyse such costs and tariffs, then advise where savings and refunds can be obtained.
Your initial analysis will cover the most recent twelve (12) months' invoices/credit notes and supplier contracts for all our locations. Where applicable, you will analyse invoices/credit notes as far back as possible for refunds. Your continuing analysis will cover current invoices/credit notes and contracts received during the term of this agreement. Such documents will be sent to you within sixty (60) days of their receipt by us.
Any recommendation you make is subject to our approval. Any recommendation acted upon by us shall be deemed accepted. We will pay you only for savings and refunds realised after your recommendation is implemented. You will not share in savings or refunds obtained in the absence of any prior recommendation from you. All information pertaining to your recommendations will be sent to you promptly for your evaluation and further advice.
All negotiations with our suppliers are to be conducted through us unless mutually agreed otherwise.
We agree to pay you: a. A service fee (minimum $2,000 - maximum $12,000) of $12,000, due to you on acceptance of this agreement and payable once only for the term of this agreement and all consecutive terms; the service fee will be recovered by us in full from gross savings and/or refunds realised after the implementation of your recommendation(s). After such recovery, we shall pay you as per clause b.
 b. A performance fee of: (i) fifty (50%) percent of each refund realised; fifty (50%) percent of each saving realised for a period of sixty (60) months after which the entire saving will be ours; c. Payment will be made upon receipt of your invoice showing service fee or computation of savings and/or refunds.
The authorisation term of this agreement shall be five (5) years from the date of your acceptance.
If at the expiration of this agreement your participation in a saving is not complete, as per 5.b. above, or a recommendation has not been implemented, our liability under this agreement will be automatically extended for those locations where a saving is realised or a recommendation is outstanding. For such purpose we will continue to send you information, invoices/credit notes and contracts within sixty (60) days of their receipt by us and we will pay you as agreed above.
This agreement and service fee covers all our present and future
Australian locations and those of our subsidiaries. Our present subsidiaries can take advantage of your service without an additional service fee by signing a duplicate agreement within three (3) months of the acceptance date hereof. Should any of our subsidiaries delay taking advantage of your service beyond three (3) months, or in the case of new subsidiaries three (3) months from the date of acquisition, and subsequently decide to participate a separate agreement and service fee will apply.
In the event that any location or subsidiary of our business is sold or otherwise disposed of, any savings participation will be terminated from the disposition date and we will not be liable for payment of your participation in any savings that are not complete." 
Thereafter Jardine proceeded, albeit in quite a leisurely fashion, to provide
NUS with the information it needed to carry out its contract obligations. The evidence does not disclose precisely how many establishments were involved, save that there were more than 60 Pizza Hut restaurants and at least 15
Sizzler restaurants in New South Wales alone and 14 of them in
Victoria/Tasmania. The Pizza Hutt restaurants and home delivery facilities were spread throughout New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia at least.

It was not until 7 September 1992 that Jardine was able to send to NUS "by road express" the information NUS required for each participating restaurant/store covering the period July 1991 to June 1992 for South
Australia, New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania.

On 20 October 1992 NUS submitted its initial analysis report to Jardine. As
Jardine relied heavily on the fifth paragraph of that letter to ground what was in effect an allegation of dishonesty against NUS, it is, I think, appropriate to set out the letter in full. It was in the following terms "Jardine Restaurants Victoria 
PO Box 639 
DONCASTER VIC 3108 
Attn: Mr Peter M. Cooper Group Financial Controller 
Dear Mr Cooper, 
RE: ENERGY COST CONTROL PROGRAMME 
We take pleasure in enclosing our initial Analysis Report referring to energy supplies. Our analysis has included all locations for which invoices have been provided, with analysis reports condensed wherever possible to avoid repetition.
 
Analysis of your energy costs will be undertaken on a continuous basis and further reports will be sent to you when additional cost reduction opportunities arise.
 
Analysis of your oil and telecommunications requirements is conducted separately within the appropriate department and separate departmental reports will be issued when analysis has been completed.
 
Where recommendations are contained in the attached report it is our procedure to provide a draft letter for release to the appropriate Supply
Authority. Such letters should be transcribed onto your own stationery and forwarded to the address indicated. Copies of these letters, and copies of any replies received, should be forwarded to us without delay, so that we may advise you further.
 
Experience has taught us that it may be in your interest to keep our relationship confidential in any discussions that may arise with representatives of your Suppliers. However, this is largely a question of discretion, although any such discussions should be confirmed in writing by your Supplier so that a continuous record of events is maintained.
 
In order that the Cost Control Programme can operate smoothly and efficiently, the following is outlined in your interests and should be strictly adhered to:
Please keep us informed of all developments which may affect your energy expenditure such as changes to installations, alterations of working hours, closures of premises, etc. You may consider such developments are not relevant to recommendations being pursued, but it is always possible that adjustments to our calculations are necessary as a result of this information.
The regular receipt of invoices is essential to our analysis, providing the most recent consumption patterns and indicating any fluctuation in supply characteristics. We understand that Mrs Barbara Thomson has been appointed as our contact for the provision of energy invoices and future requests for information will be directed to Mrs Thomson.
Please forward copies of any agreements offered by your Suppliers prior to their acceptance by you. Frequently, from analysis of the agreement terms we can advise if improvements are available. We can also assist with your negotiations.
 
We request you review the attached reports as soon as possible and remind you to contact us if any further points require clarification.
 
Yours faithfully, 
Bob Brewington 
Energy Cost Analyst" 
The report itself comprised four pages. It dealt with the 18 pizza hut restaurants in Victoria which among them drew their electricity supplies from six supply authorities in Victoria. The report analysed and documented in respect of each restaurant its electricity supply authority, the tariff from that authority under which it was being billed by the authority, the total energy consumption in kilowatt hours, the percentage of that consumption averaged over a period during the day and the percentage during the night, the cost of that electricity during the period analysed in respect of the restaurant, the anticipated cost of that amount of electricity if the payment basis were changed to a different tariff and accordingly the annual saving in power. It is obvious from the terms of that document that of the item in the last column headed "Projected Annual Savings", 50% would be payable to NUS under the terms of the contract which I have set out. The balance of the report explains how it was compiled and gave other information relevant to the adoption of the tariff recommended by NUS and it enclosed a draft of the letter which it recommended be sent to the authority by each of the analysed outlets.

A similar analysis was carried out in respect of each of the other "Jardine operations" throughout Australia, the subject of the contract.

There seems to have been some delay in the Jardine organisation in dealing with the NUS reports: whether that was due to a change in personnel or a deliberate failure to respond to NUS correspondence is not clear.

NUS submitted its first invoice to Jardine for what it had done under the contract which I have set out under cover of a letter of 15 June 1994. The service fee of $12,000 payable under 5a of that agreement had been paid much earlier. The account as submitted on 15 June 1994 gave credit, as the contract required, for that $12,000 against NUS's share of the savings and was accompanied by an invoice for $8,138.60. That invoice has not been paid. After that date Jardine submitted further energy accounts for analysis and advice and received the analysis and advice in respect of them. A typical example is
Jardine's letter of 2 August 1994 enclosing copies of the electricity accounts for the preceding six months for eleven restaurants and NUS's advice in respect of them sent under cover of its letter of 26 August 1994 which letter was accompanied by a further statement of NUS's fees to that date amounting to $35,801.69. That account also remains unpaid. Jardine initially asserted that it had not paid the invoices because there had been no fall in overall electricity costs at the analysed restaurants. That provoked correspondence from NUS in which it pointed out to Jardine that looking at total accounts for a period was apt to mislead. NUS asserted (obviously correctly) that it should look at the unit cost before and after the change as otherwise an increase in consumption or in price could disguise to the non-knowledgeable the savings in fact realised. And staff changes at Jardines did, or at least were asserted to have, delayed the approval of NUS's accounts for payment.

There was a meeting on 16 December 1994 between the managing director and the financial controller of Jardine with Mr Brewington, the analyst who had carried out the contract work on behalf of NUS. At this meeting the Jardine people continued to assert that their daily average energy costs had not been reduced. Indeed they were asserting that those costs had increased. Mr
Brewington produced his copies of the NUS worksheets and explained them. He pointed out that those worksheets showed both a drop in the unit price of electricity and an increase in overall electricity consumption. On 19
December 1994 in another discussion with Mr Brewington, Jardine personnel were asserting that their own investigation showed that their average daily costs for each location where the change of tariffs had been made had actually increased. Despite a detailed explanation by Mr Brewington recorded in a diary note which he made on the day of the first of those discussions, and on the
Monday after the second, which was on a Friday (the accuracy of which was not challenged in cross examination) those attending on behalf of Jardine continued to assert that the average daily price for each of the locations that had changed tariffs had increased since the change of tariff. It had not.

Jardine did not call any of the people who on its behalf were present at any of the discussions with NUS personnel. Their assertions in those discussions appear to me to be explicable only on the basis that they simply did not understand the economics of electricity consumption, and therefore needed the services of some organisation such as NUS, or that they were deliberately and knowingly endeavouring to avoid or delay payment of obligations incurred by their predecessor in the Jardine organisation who had signed and therefore presumably authorised the contract with NUS. That was a Mr P.M. Cooper, who at the time of his signing the contract on behalf of Jardine was its Financial
Controller. There was no evidence that by the time of the hearing he was dead, or for any other reason unable to be called. Indeed, the only evidence tendered by Jardine was a folder containing a total of six documents apparently published at various times by three suppliers of electricity,
Eastern Energy Ltd, United Energy Ltd and Integral Energy Ltd. And of those only one was honoured by any mention at all in the course of the hearing.

I shall have more to say about the absence of evidence from Jardine when I come to deal with its principal defence, a cross-claim relying on s52 of the
Trade Practices Act (Cth). At this stage, I need only add that Jardine's managing director, Mr Jack McLean, also at the 19 December 1994 discussion, later asserted in correspondence that "Pizza Hutt did not have any agreement with NUS". McLean also asserted in correspondence that Jardine had taken legal advice and maintained that Pizza Hutt was not part of the agreement. Once again Mr Brewington's diary note to the effect that it was, was not challenged in cross examination, nor did anyone from Jardine give evidence on this matter. Jardine did not assert, let alone endeavour to prove, that McLean was not available to give evidence.

On 20 December 1994 NUS wrote to Jardine over Mr Brewington's signature asserting that if NUS's accounts were not paid before 20 January 1995 and the contract performed by the furnishing of copies of paid invoices for analysis, then NUS would refer the matter to its legal representatives for recovery action. On 22 December 1994 the Jardine managing director of Pizza Hutt
Division telephoned Mr Brewington. He, according to Mr Brewington's diary note, asserted "that they were still convinced there was no agreement between
Pizza Hutt and NUS". He added, Mr Brewington said, that Jardine's had no intention of paying NUS's invoices, but he was speaking only on behalf of
Pizza Hutt. A similar letter written by Mr Brewington to the appropriate person at the Sizzler restaurant division remain unanswered. Jardine's actions as I have recounted them were a plain repudiation of the contract entitling
NUS to regard it as terminated and to sue for damages. Jardine's Counsel did not contend otherwise. Apart from suggesting that NUS's claim was for too much for various reasons, he relied on the s52 defence.

NUS's action against Jardine was not in fact commenced until it issued its summons of 30 August 1995. In that action it claimed to recover $49,989.21 due but unpaid at the time of issue of the summons and damages for breach of contract asserted to have been the failure to supply relevant information for analysis and advice amounting to a repudiation accepted by NUS. It claimed an unspecified amount of damages.

Jardine filed its defence and a cross claim on 25 October 1995.

In its defence, Jardine denied or declined to admit sufficient of NUS's allegations to require NUS's claim to go to a hearing. Among the denials was a denial of the assertions in para C11 of the summons. That paragraph asserted "The Defendant approved acted upon and accepted the plaintiff's recommendations in respect of numerous of the defendant's locations and made savings as a result of so doing and would, if it continued to perform its obligations under the contract, hereafter receive savings in respect of present and future Australian locations". The plaintiff then set out particulars of its recommendations and listed the participating restaurants in
Schedule A to the summons. That schedule gave details in respect of 28 Pizza
Hutt restaurants, five Pizza Hutt delivery units (I was told that these establishments provided Pizza's "to go" to borrow an American expression) and Sizzler restaurants. As well as putting that in issue, Jardine asserted by paragraph 11 of its defence "Further or alternatively, and in answer to paragraph 11 of the summary of contentions, the defendant says that if, which is denied, the contract covers the defendant's future Australian locations; such locations were automatically placed by the defendant on the most cost effective tariff without reliance on any recommendation of the plaintiff; or alternatively only one tariff was applicable to such locations so it would not have been possible for the plaintiff to make any recommendations for tariff changes in respect of such locations." 
Jardine made no attempt at the hearing to prove any of the allegations in paragraph C11.

In addition to its defence, Jardine raised a cross claim. Paragraphs 21 - 30 of that cross claim were in the following terms: "21. At all material times the plaintiff was: a corporation; and engaged in trade and commerce within the meaning of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) (the "Act").
On 20 July 1992 the plaintiff agreed to provide tariff advice to the defendant in consideration of the defendant paying the plaintiff a fee of $12,000 plus 50% of any savings or refunds realised by the defendant as a result of implementing the plaintiff's advice ("the Agreement").
 
Particulars 
The Agreement is in writing and was signed: on behalf of the defendant on 17 July 1992; and on behalf of the plaintiff on 20 July 1992.
On or about 18 February 1992 and in order to induce the plaintiff to enter into the Agreement the plaintiff represented that: it had developed a unique data bank of information relating to pricing policies, tariff structures, oil and gas pricing and the regulations concerning the purchase of energy and telecommunication facilities; its analytical staff were uniquely qualified in the area of pricing policies, tariff structures and regulations concerning the purchase of energy.
The plaintiff was silent as to the fact that: it had instituted proceedings against a number of its former clients; the following energy suppliers provided a free advisory service of the type represented by the plaintiff: 
State Electricity Commission of Victoria and municipal electricity undertakings; 
Sydney Electricity; 
Electricity Trust of South Australia; 
Hydro Electricity Commission of Tasmania; 
Gas and Fuel Corporation of Victoria.
 it had a poor reputation in the commercial community.
At all material times the defendant was: a highly respected company in the Australian commercial community; and concerned to protect its reputation.
Relying upon the representations referred to in paragraph 23 above and induced by them, the defendant entered into the Agreement.
The representations referred to at paragraph 23 above were false.
 
Particulars 
The plaintiff's knowledge and qualifications in the area of tariff structures was not unique since energy suppliers possessed such knowledge and qualifications and provided free advisory services of the type represented by the plaintiff.
Had the defendant known of the matters referred to in paragraph 24 above, it would not have entered into the Agreement.
Accordingly the plaintiff engaged in conduct, in trade or commerce, that was misleading or deceptive contrary to the provisions of the Act.
By reason of the conduct of the plaintiff in contravention of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the Act, the defendant has or will suffer loss or damage." 
On 24 November 1995, Rolfe J heard an application on behalf of Jardine to strike out subparagraph 24(c) of the cross claim. Rolfe J expressed the view that the particulars furnished of that allegation did not support it. Rolfe J directed that all witness' statements in support of that paragraph be furnished to the solicitors for the plaintiff no later than 4pm on Friday 19
January 1996. No such witness' statements were furnished by that date or at all. Nor was any attempt made in the hearing before me to substantiate that allegation. Nor was it withdrawn.

By leave granted by Rolfe J on 2 February 1996, Jardine filed an amended defence and cross claim. That document maintained the assertion that NUS had a poor reputation in the commercial community. What was added by the amendment were paragraphs 31 - 35 inclusive in the following terms "31. Further and in the alternative, the Agreement contained the provisions referred to in paragraph 8 of the summons, which included provisions that the plaintiff and the defendant would share the savings referred to in paragraph (d) thereof.
By reason of the provisions referred to in the preceding paragraph the plaintiff and the defendant were negotiating, prior to entry into the
Agreement, to enter into a partnership or joint venture and by reason thereof the plaintiff owed the defendant a fiduciary obligation to disclose to the defendant any material fact which might impact on the defendant's decision to enter into the Agreement.
The plaintiff wrongfully failed to disclose the following material facts to the defendant in the course of negotiations leading up to the making of the Agreement or at all, which facts were then known to the plaintiff: the plaintiff had instituted proceedings against a number of its former clients; the following energy suppliers provided a free advisory service of the type represented by the plaintiff: 
State Electricity Commission of Victoria and municipal electricity undertakings; 
Sydney Electricity; 
Electricity Trust of South Australia; 
Hydro Electricity Commission of Tasmania; 
Gas and Fuel Corporation of Victoria.
 it had a poor reputation in the commercial community.
The defendant was induced to enter into the Agreement by the plaintiff concealing from it the material facts referred to in sub-paragraphs 33(a)-(c) above.
Had the defendant known of the matters referred to in sub-paragraphs (a)-(c) above, it would not have entered into the Agreement." 
No attempt at the hearing before me was made to prove or otherwise attempt to support paragraphs 33(a) or (c). The assertions in paragraph 33(b) of the provision of free advisory service by the named entities was admitted by NUS in its defence to the cross claim but NUS asserted that the free advisory service so provided was not "of the type or was materially comparable to the service provided by NUS". With that I agree: it was materially different and of much greater utility to Jardine than was the advisory service available from any of the electricity retailers with whom it dealt.

Nor was any attempt made by Jardine to prove paragraphs 34 or 35 of this amended defence. Indeed, as I have already said, the only evidence from
Jardine, referred to at the hearing, was a copy of a brochure issued by the
State Electricity Commission of Victoria and an addendum to it setting out its various tariffs and charges. I should add that NUS admitted that the other entities named in paragraph 34(b) of the amended defence had available for issue to those seeking them similar brochures. I add also that there was no evidence from Jardine that it was aware of the availability of such brochures prior to or at the time of its contracting with NUS, or indeed at any time thereafter, except that I should infer that it became aware at some time before 30 April 1996 of those tendered on its behalf at the hearing.

NUS formulated its claim in respect of each of 44 participating restaurants first by calculating the number of months in which that restaurant participated, then by calculating the amount by which its electricity bill was reduced during that period as a result of the NUS recommended changes. NUS asserted its share to date was half the difference between those two amounts.
It then calculated the additional claim it would have in respect of the remainder of the 60 months of the programme simply by dividing the share to date by the number of months and multiplying the process of that division by minus the participating months to the time of the calculation. That gave a claim to date to which interest at Supreme Court rates was added to quantify the claim to the date of calculation, which was 11 March 1996. That obviously overstated the claim assuming NUS to be otherwise entitled because the value as at 11 March 1996 of the amount to be derived over the balance of what would have been the period of participation after 11 March 1996 must be less than the face value of that amount. It needed to be discounted back to a present day value. Both parties agree that the appropriate rate at which it should be discounted back was the Supreme Court interest rate presently pertaining. That recalculation was performed. I will return to this subject matter when I have dealt with what became the sole substantive defence.

I turn now to an analysis of Jardine's defences. They fall into two groups
The cross claim which asserts first that the contract was induced by a misrepresentation within the scope of s52 of the Trade Practises Act, or alternatively that there was "an affirmative obligation to disclose the non- disclosed facts because the parties were negotiating to enter into a joint venture pursuant to which NUS would provide advice to Jardine" so that it should be set aside pursuant to s87 of that Act (this was the defence principally relied upon); and that the NUS claim was excessive for various reasons.

The misrepresentation contention is based on the "Proposal" submitted by NUS to Jardine prior to the contract. It is asserted to be, or to contain, a misrepresentations because the assertion in the fourth paragraph under the heading "Introduction" is untrue; and because it fails to disclose "that the electricity authorities afford free tariff advice of the same type offered by NUS" - this, it is asserted, is a misrepresentation by silence.

The first basis can be briefly disposed of. What is relied upon to demonstrate that the statement is false and therefore a misrepresentation is simply the proposition frequently repeated but never established that Jardine could have got for nothing from the electricity suppliers the same service as NUS was offering for (as it turned out) a substantial charge. All that the evidence establishes is that electricity authorities do have available free advice as to the various tariffs available to each's own customers. It is obvious that
Jardine was either unaware of that availability, or was unable or unwilling to take advantage of it for whatever reason. It called no evidence that it "relied" as its pleading asserts.

NUS, as I have already stated, is a subsidiary of National Utility Services
Inc. NUS operates in Australia and has done so for 29 years: it has 65 employees and has contracts with approximately 1,500 users of its services, involving analysis of some 23,000 locations. Its clients include government departments and agencies and many of the largest business enterprises in
Australia. Non constat, of course, that all of these clients required analysis and advice as to the cost of their consumption of electricity, but many would have done so. What I have just recorded I have taken from the witness statement of Edward Realf, NUS's managing director. He was cross examined, but not on what I have just recorded. It would be strange indeed if NUS could have maintained a misrepresentation of the nature asserted by Jardine to so many substantial organisations over such a long period.

Next, the evidence goes no further than establishing that the various electricity retailers have available free advice which they will impart to a customer if asked for it by that customer. And it relates only to tariffs which each offers its customers. It does not extend to advice as to which might be available from other suppliers, a matter of some significance since deregulation of electricity supply.

Furthermore, the sort of advice proffered in the literature tendered would not, much of it, be understood by a person with no specialised knowledge concerning the consumption and supply of electricity.

Next, on this aspect of this case, it is obvious that Jardine had been spending much more on electric power (precisely twice NUS's claim for remuneration for services supplied) than it need have done. That can only be because there was no one in its organisation who knew of the availability of free advice or if he did, was capable of understanding and implementing it.
Jardine recognised the availability of that argument - hence its asserted duty to disclose, failure to do so being asserted to be a misrepresentation.

Finally, I need to deal with the argument based upon the fourth paragraph under the heading "Introduction" in the Proposal sent to Jardine. This was said to be false because there was nothing "unique" about NUS's databank. The onus is plainly on Jardine to establish this contention. There is not a tittle of evidence to support the assertion. The range and number of its clients and activities would strongly suggest otherwise.

I turn now to the asserted misrepresentation by silence, the asserted silence being failure to disclose that "the following energy suppliers provided a free advisory service of the type represented by (NUS)"; and they are identified in subparagraphs (i)-(v) of para 24 of the cross claim which I have set out earlier in this judgment.

First, there is no evidence that any one of them provided a free advisory service of the type "represented by the plaintiff" (semble that it could or would provide). The evidence established no more than that each would, if requested by a customer, provide that customer, without charge, advice as to its available tariffs and which it thinks would best suit that customer's business. Many businessman (and I would suspect all the most successful) would regard a vendor's representations as to the best product or price available with a degree of scepticism. I infer from Jardine's failure, in an action claiming from it a substantial sum, to call evidence that similar advice to that offered by NUS could have been obtained free (or even more cheaply than offered by NUS) that no such evidence was available.

Having so concluded, there is really no need for me to consider the authorities relied upon by Jardine. However, a deal of the argument proceeded on the basis that there was a duty on NUS to inform Jardine that the five named electricity retailers provided free advice of the nature of that which each did provide and that the failure to do that entitled Jardine to rely on ss52 and 87 of the Trade Practises Act. I do not regard that case as open on the pleadings, but even if it were, I would reject it for the reasons which I will now state.

Stated as Jardine put it, the proposition is that a supplier of a parcel of services is under a duty to inform a potential customer that parts of that parcel of services can be had from other sources without charge. Presumably if there were such a duty it would also exist if those parts of the parcel could be got elsewhere for a lesser price (unless, perhaps, the difference was de minimus). I know of no authority which would support that proposition: I would be surprised if there were any. If the proposition were sound it would mean that all vendors of knowledge (lawyers, accountants, doctors, economists etc) are under a duty to advise a potential purchaser that he can (if it be the fact) get some of the desired information free or more cheaply elsewhere. But even that advice must be valuable and would justify a charge.

With that introductory comment made, I will examine the authorities in fact relied upon. The earliest of them is Henjo Investments Pty Ltd versus Collins
Marrickville Pty Ltd <case>; [(1988) 79 ALR 83.] This case arose out of the sale of a restaurant business. The vendor represented that the restaurant seated (on one view 128, on another ) persons. It did, or could physically, but Council approval to the user limited the seating to 84 people. The trial judge, and the Appellate Court both took the view that the representation meant that the restaurant was licensed to serve 128 people (which it was not). That was enough to dispose of the appeal but Lockhart J (with whom on this matter Burchett and Foster JJ each agreed) took the opportunity to discuss "Representation by Silence".
Lockhart J said [(79 ALR 94-5)] "At common law, silence can give rise to an actionable misrepresentation where there is a duty upon the representor to reveal a matter if it exists, and where the other party is therefore entitled to infer that matter does not exist from the silence of the representor: W Scott Fell & Co Ltd versus Lloyd <case>; [(1906) 4 CLR 572], per Griffith CJ at 577; Halsbury's Laws of England, th ed, vol 31, para 1052. The circumstances in which silence may constitute misleading conduct under the Act were referred to in Rhone-Poulenc Agrochimie
SA versus UIM Chemical Services Pty Ltd [(1986) 68 ALR 77] That case established that silence may be relied on in order to show a breach of s52 when the circumstances give rise to an obligation to disclose relevant facts: see Bowen CJ (ALR) at 84; (FCR) at 490; Lockhart J (ALR) at 98-9; (FCR) at ; and Jackson J (ALR) at 102-3; (FCR) at 508. The duty to disclose is not confined to cases where there are particular relationships, such as trustee and beneficiary or solicitor and client, principal and agent and guardian and ward. There is no useful purpose in seeking to analyse the circumstances in which the duty to disclose will arise as this must depend on the facts of each case." 
The proposition thus enunciated has been followed in many subsequent cases and extended in some of them. Those on which Jardine relies are among them. I will refer briefly to each on which Jardine has relied.

Demagogue Pty Ltd versus Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] is one of those in which the principle stated in Henjo was extended. It arose out of the entering into a contract to purchase a lot in a strata plan of a newly erected "home unit" building at Noosa Heads. The plan shown to the Ramenskys (the purchasers) showed access by what on the plan looked like a private right of way and the purchasers were told by the vendor's agent that that was the access road which would be built. In fact a
Road Licence was necessary: it could not be transferred to the purchasers of the units, so complex cross-covenants would have been necessary. When the purchasers found out about these problems they purported to rescind. The trial judge found that had the purchasers been aware of the problems when they entered into the contract, they would not have entered into that contract. In my view that case could have been decided on the basis that the representation by the plan and the agent was that there would be the ordinary sort of access usually available to home unit owners and that there was not, so there was a misrepresentation. But Gummow J took the opportunity to point out that s52 of the Trade Practises Act was not confined to cases where under the general law there was a duty to disclose. The proper enquiry, he pointed out, was whether or not the representation relied upon was misleading (see in particular 39 FLR at pp40-41). All relevant circumstances, he said, were to be taken into account, be they acts, omissions, statements or silence (see 39 FLR at 41, lines 1-5).

The remaining case to which I was referred on this question was Warner v
Elders Rural Finance Ltd <case>; [(1993) 41 FCR 399.] This was a foreign currency loan case. The plaintiffs applied to amend an application to restrain Elders Rural Finance Ltd to exercise rights conferred on it by the security it had taken to add a contention that they were misled in contravention of s52 by a failure to warn them of the dangers implicit in a loan in a foreign currency. It thus directly raised the duty to speak contention. The Court comprised Foster, Hill and Drummond JJ.
Forster and Drummond JJ delivered a joint, and Hill J a separate judgment.

Foster and Drummond JJ said, at pp401-2 "Even if it be assumed for present purposes that the nature of the financial system in which the first and third respondents, along with all other lending institutions in Australia operate, is one which necessarily throws on to borrowers detrimental consequences of the kind referred to in oral argument and pleaded in the amended statement of claim (an assumption which we should not be taken to accept as well-founded), the appellants are still confronted with the difficulty of showing how conduct of the first and third respondents consisting entirely of silence in failing to explain to the appellants the nature of the financial system within which they operated might give rise to any liability either under the general law or under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). Unless the appellants can set up a case sufficient to show that the respondents were bound to warn or advise them, they are not entitled to the opportunity to litigate the validity of the theories which they seek to vindicate in this action.
 
In a recent decision of this Court, Demagogue Pty Ltd versus Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31] the circumstances in which silence may amount to conduct in contravention of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) were examined in detail by Gummow J, with whom Black CJ and Cooper J agreed. His Honour identified the proper approach to be taken in determining the issue of liability when silence on the part of the respondent is central to the applicant's case in the following way (at 41): 'But consistently with regard to the natural meaning of the terms of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), the question is whether in the light of all relevant circumstances constituted by acts, omissions, statements or silence, there has been conduct which is or is likely to be misleading or deceptive. Conduct answering that description may not always involve misrepresentation ...' 
His Honour approved the statement of French J in Kimberley NZI Finance Ltd v Torero Pty Ltd (1989) ATPR (Digest) 53,193 at 53,195: 'The cases in which silence may be so characterised (as conduct in contravention of [s52)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) are no doubt many and various and it would be dangerous to essay any principle by which they might be exhaustively defined. However, unless the circumstances are such as to give rise to the reasonable expectation that if some relevant fact exists it would be disclosed, it is difficult to see how mere silence could support the inference that the fact does not exist.' 
In addition to expressing general agreement with Gummow J, the Chief Justice observed (at 32): 'Silence is to be assessed as a circumstance like any other. To say this is certainly not to impose any general duty of disclosure; the question is simply whether, having regard to all the relevant circumstances, there has been conduct that is misleading or deceptive or that is likely to mislead or deceive. To speak of "mere silence" or of a duty of disclosure can divert attention from that primary question. Although "mere silence" is a convenient way of describing some fact situations, there is in truth no such thing as "mere silence" because the significance of silence always falls to be considered in the context in which it occurs. That context may or may not include facts giving rise to a reasonable expectation, in the circumstances of the case, that if particular matters exist they will be disclosed.' 
It may be granted that the appellants lacked knowledge of the nature of the
Australian financial system and also lacked knowledge of what they claim to be a risk of detriment inherent in the way that system operates to which they would be exposed, along with all other borrowers, by obtaining financial accommodation from a lending institution operating within that system. This, however, in our view, is not a situation that can give rise to a reasonable expectation that the lending institution will give them an explanation of how the Australian financial system works and how that will, so it is said, necessarily expose them to risk of loss should they borrow from the lending institution. There is no foundation for the appellants' contention that the respondents' silence amounted to conduct in breach of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)." 
Hill J said "In this matter I have had the opportunity of reading in draft the judgment of Foster and Drummond JJ. I agree with their Honours and for the reasons they have given that the appeal should be dismissed. I should, however, like to add some remarks on the important question of liability under [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), in circumstances where a failure to speak is alleged to constitute misleading or deceptive conduct.
 
In Winterton Constructions Pty Ltd versus Hambros Australia Ltd <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 97], in a discussion subsequently cited with approval by Wilcox J in General Newspapers Pty Ltd versus Australian and Overseas Telecommunications
Corporation Ltd [(1993) 40 FCR 98], I discussed circumstances where a failure to speak, sometimes referred to as 'silence', might attract the operation of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and warned against attempts to categorise the so-called 'silence' cases when so to do would divert attention from the statutory test of misleading and deceptive conduct.
 
I illustrated, however, by way of example, the case where the false or misleading conduct consisted of telling a 'half-truth', so that what was said, while true, was nonetheless, in the circumstances, misleading. I referred also to the case where the false or misleading conduct consisted of telling the truth, but when circumstances changed, not revealing that change. The misleading or deceptive conduct there would arise in circumstances where the person to whom the truth was originally told (for example, by way of a representation) was entitled to expect to be informed of any change.
 
Referring to what I called the so-called 'duty to advise' cases, I suggested that these rested upon the same principle. I said (at 114): 'Obviously, it is difficult to see how a mere silence could, of itself, constitute conduct which is misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive. However, if the circumstances are such that a person is entitled to believe that a relevant matter affecting him or her adversely would, if it existed, be communicated, then the failure to so communicate it may constitute conduct which is misleading or deceptive because the person who ultimately may act to his or her detriment existed. Thus, where a duty to speak is imposed, silence may constitute misleading and deceptive conduct.' 
Of course, where a duty to speak is imposed by the general law, the circumstances will obviously be such that the person to whom that duty is owed will be entitled to infer from the silence that no danger of detriment exists.
Failure to speak will thus easily be seen to constitute misleading or deceptive conduct. The converse is clearly not true. The fact that no duty to speak is imposed by the general law will not conclude the inquiry whether that failure to speak is to be characterised as conduct which is misleading or deceptive.
 
To that extent, therefore, I would agree with Gummow J in Demagogue Pty Ltd v Ramensky <case>; [(1992) 39 FCR 31], that the search for a 'duty to disclose' might be to digress from the application of the terms of [s52.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html)
Certainly I agree, with respect to his Honour, that neither Henjo Investments
Pty Ltd versus Collins Marrickville Pty Ltd <case>; [(1988) 39 FCR 546] nor Rhone Poulenc Agrochimie SA versus UIM Chemical Services Pty
Ltd [(1986) 12 FCR 477], ultimately depended upon the existence of a duty and my analysis in Winterton (supra) in fact points to the fact that Henjo , in which the applicant was successful, was what I have labelled 'a half-truth case'. I would not understand what his Honour said in Demagogue , however, to mean that it was irrelevant that a duty to speak arose, for so to say would be to disapprove the language of Bowen CJ in Rhone-
Poulenc (supra) (at 489-90) and of Lockhart J in Henjo (at 557), both of which passages have been often cited with approval, including by Full Courts of this Court (see, for example, Kabwand Pty Ltd versus National Australia Bank
Ltd [1989] ATPR 50,367)." 
The reasons for the decision in Warner reveal the principles which I should apply in this matter. I am unable to conclude that a party contemplating entering into a contract designed to his knowledge to save him money could be said to entertain a reasonable expectation that the intending provider to him of that service would tell him that he can obtain that service elsewhere more cheaply or for nothing. I am unable to conclude that a party contemplating entering into such a contract could be said to have a reasonable expectation that the intending provider to him of that service would tell him that he can get various disparate elements of that service from a number of other parties who though they have that service available do not advertise that fact (for the obvious reason that it may operate to their financial disadvantage).

I reject this defence to the NUS claim.

The "defence" in paragraph 32 of the amended cross claim can be dealt with quite shortly. On no possible view of what amounts to a joint venture or partnership can the contractual arrangement which is contained in the document which I have set out earlier in this judgment be so described. It is simply a contract to provide services: the remuneration is agreed to be 50% of the benefit of those services.

My conclusion is that no defence relied upon has been established.

I accordingly turn to the calculation of NUS's damages. That requires initially some additional examination of the contract. First, on my view of its proper construction, it required an up front payment from Jardine of $12,000, to be rebated against the first $12,000 of fees becoming due. The parties agree that that is what the contract required, that the $12,000 was paid, and that NUS has deducted it from what would otherwise have been its claim.

Next the contract required from the achieving of the saving a "performance fee" relevantly of 50% of each saving realised for a period of 60 months. The contract recognises that restaurants may be brought under the contract at different times so that the 60 months runs in respect of each recommendation from the date of Jardine's acceptance of the recommendation in respect of a specific restaurant.

The "authorisation" period of the contract was five years from the date of
Jardine's acceptance, that is five years from 17 July 1992 (clause 6). If a restaurant becomes "authorised" after 17 July 1992, as happened, the period during which remuneration was to be paid to NUS was 60 months from the authorisation date (clause 7), and during that period Jardine remained obliged to provide NUS with the necessary "information, invoices/credit notes and contracts". Finally clause 9 of the contract provided that if any of the restaurants covered by the contract was sold or otherwise disposed of, payment in respect of that restaurant "terminated from the disposition date".

NUS initially calculated its unpaid entitlement to the time of termination (or thereabouts, the actual dates vary somewhat). The number of months of that participation was calculated as was NUS's entitlement in dollar terms for the period ending on the dates to which the calculation was made. That amounted to $199,929.16 "to date", namely the date of repudiation. It then calculated projected savings to the end of the 60 month period. It did that in respect of each restaurant by calculating the average savings up to the repudiation date per month and extrapolating that at the same figure per month for a balance of the 60 months. The total thus claimed was $444,391.82 in addition to the $199,929.16. It then calculated interest at Supreme Court rates to 11 March , the date as at which I would assume the calculations were made.

That calculation was asserted to be excessive for a number of reasons. The first of them is that the sum under the calculation of the moneys which would be paid from repudiation to the end of the 60 months in respect of each restaurant, ignored the obvious proposition that the present value of the claim to be paid $X at a future time was less than $X: in other words it needed to be discounted back to present value. NUS agreed that its valuation was in fact excessive and that recalculation was required. Secondly, as the defendants admitted, this method of calculating the claim made no allowance for contingencies such as the disposition of restaurants bringing the obligation to make payment in respect of them to an end. Certainly the contract so provides, but I observe that Jardine led no evidence that any restaurant had been disposed of between the date of the contract and the date of the hearing (that is between 17 July 1992 and 30 April 1996 - 3 years, /2 months), nor any evidence of any intention to dispose of any at any time in the future. In those circumstances, I do not consider it proper to reduce what would otherwise be the appropriate amount of damages by anything at all in respect of that contingency.

Next it was submitted that the claim did not allow for the possibility of the reduction in the charge for electricity in the future. More accurately, the submission ought to have been that no allowance is made for the possibility of the reduction of the difference between the tariffs under which Jardine was previously paying and those under which it now pays as a consequence of NUS's recommendations. Once again the onus, in my view, was on Jardine and it did not lead or attempt to lead any evidence as to the tendency of price movements indicated by actual movements, if any, since the date of the contract. All I have been told, and that basically from the bar table, is that the distributors by retail of electricity in Victoria have been privatised, hence it was asserted that margins would be likely to be cut. I do not think it proper to act upon such assertions from the bar table: but in any event it was not made apparent to me, nor is it self-evident, that any particular restaurant could chose to receive its electric power supplies from more than one retailer of electricity. It is not self-evident (at least to me) that wires carrying electricity to shop A can supply shop A from power distributor
Z and shop B right next door on the same distribution system with electricity from distributor Y. In the light of the evidence and absent any knowledge on the subject myself, I think it not appropriate to make any allowance for that asserted contingency.

The Proposal referred to in the letter of 18 February 1992, after describing the analysis report which would be furnished, contains the statement "To ensure maximum benefit for Jardine Restaurant Management, this analysis continues for a further period of five years as further paid invoices are received. During this time changes will occur, both with your suppliers and in your own operations. Each change represents an opportunity to reduce costs".
Cl.2 of the Contract contains the following "Your continuing analysis will cover current invoices/credit notes and contracts received during the term of this agreement". It was not suggested in cross examination of either Mr Realf or Mr Brewington, or in submissions to me, that the cancellation of the
Contract by reason of Jardine's repudiation reduced expenditure which might otherwise have been incurred in that continuing examination, so that the amount otherwise properly payable by Jardine to NUS should be reduced to take such potential saving of expenditure into account.

I return now to the recalculation of the plaintiff's claim to allow the present value rather than the face value (as at 1 May 1996) of the entitlement to future payments in respect of each of the restaurants participating in the scheme at the date of repudiation. The actual calculations furnished by NUS have not been disputed as calculations. They indicate that NUS's entitlement under the contract up to 1 May 1996 in respect of all of the participating restaurants is $290,687.01. It is entitled to a verdict for that amount, it having done the work required to generate those payments and the payments having fallen due before this action was commenced, it is entitled to them in full. NUS has recalculated the present value (that is at 1 May 1996) of the remaining period of the 60 month period in respect of each restaurant, discounted back at 12% (the present Supreme Court rate). That amounts to $278,092.65. The total of those two amounts is $568,779.66.

There is one other matter with which I should briefly deal, in case my judgment be appealed.

Jardine submitted that I should not accept much of the evidence of either Mr
Realf or Mr Brewington. I record that each answered fully and frankly each question asked of him, without the slightest attempt to hedge or qualify any answer which might favour Jardine. Each impressed me as a frank and truthful witness. I accept entirely the evidence of both of these witnesses.

There will be a verdict for NUS for $568,779.66.

I further order that Jardine Fitzroy Pty Ltd pay the costs of NUS
International Pty Ltd of this action.
 * * * 
