

Regina versus Errol James McMinn [1996] NSWSC 142 (20 May 1996) 
REGINA versus ERROL JAMES McMINN /94 
MONDAY 20 MAY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
ABADEE J, JAMES J, SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: The appellant was tried by his Honour Judge Gibson sitting alone without a jury on one charge of homosexual intercourse with a male person under the age of ten years, an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act, and five charges of homosexual intercourse with a male person above the age of ten years but under the age of eighteen years, an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act. All the charges involved the same complainant, a boy born in March 1983, who I will refer to simply as the complainant.

Judge Gibson found the appellant not guilty on the first count in the indictment but guilty on all the other counts. On the sixth count in the indictment his Honour sentenced the appellant to a sentence of penal servitude for eight years consisting of a minimum term of six years and an additional term of two years. On each of the other counts of which the appellant had been found guilty, he was sentenced to a fixed term of penal servitude for two years to be served concurrently with the first two years of the minimum term of the sentence imposed on the sixth count.

The appellant has appealed against his conviction on counts two to six. He has not been legally represented on his appeal, although he did have legal representation at his trial. The appellant forwarded a document to the court in which he said that his ground of appeal against conviction was - "error by judge in determination of guilt." The main matters relied on in the document in support of the ground stated are that "during testimony by the complainant several errors and additions were made," as compared with the statements the complainant had made to the police. It is appropriate, in my opinion, to proceed on the basis that the appellant should be taken as contending that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory. The Crown case at the trial depended mainly, but not entirely, on the evidence of the complainant, who was only eleven years old when he gave evidence. Apart from the complainant, both the complainant's parents and a woman named Theresa Shearer and a number of police officers gave evidence for the Crown.

The appellant was interviewed by the police in an electronic recorded interview, in which he denied committing any of the offences. The defence case at the trial consisted of a two sentence statement by the appellant in which he said that he had not molested the complainant and that he had told the police the truth. He attributed the allegations against him to the breakdown in a relationship that he claimed he had had with the complainant's mother.

The principles to be applied in determining whether a verdict of guilty entered by a judge trying a case alone without a jury should be held to be unsafe and unsatisfactory were discussed by the Chief Judge at Common Law in
R versus Kurtic, unreported, 26 February 1996 and need not be repeated here at length. This court is required to make its own independent assessment of the sufficiency and quality of the evidence in order to see whether the judge ought to have had a reasonable doubt or whether the court itself experiences such a doubt or is persuaded that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. However, the court can interfere with a particular finding of fact by the trial judge only if there is no evidence to support that finding or if the judge misdirected himself in making the determination of fact.

I turn now to the evidence in the case and his Honour's judgment. From about the appellant had been a friend of the complainant's family. In 1990 the complainant's father and mother separated; the complainant and his brothers and sister continued to live with their mother. After the separation the appellant kept up his friendship with the complainant's mother and her children. The trial judge found it unnecessary to resolve what had been the nature of the relationship between the appellant and the complainant's mother.
The complainant regarded the appellant as his friend and the appellant and the complainant had gone out together to various places.

In his judgment the trial judge made no findings about the facts of the alleged offence charged in the first count, of which the appellant was found not guilty. However, because conflicts in the complainant's evidence about the first count could be relevant to the complainant's credibility generally, I will make some examination of the complainant's evidence on the first count.

In his evidence in chief the complainant had said that on a day in 1993 before his birthday in March he had gone to his bedroom, after having a shower. As he was about to get dressed the appellant came into his bedroom and put the complainant's penis in his mouth. Early in his cross-examination the complainant said that the incident had occurred at about 5 o'clock in the afternoon. However, he was then cross-examined about statements he had made to the police in January 1994 in which he had said that the incident had occurred at about 9 o'clock at night, after he had gone to bed, and that he had actually looked at the appellant's watch. He had also told the police that he thought the incident had occurred the night before his little brother's birthday, which was on 13 September 1993, more than six months after his own tenth birthday.

In further cross-examination the complainant said that the true version was that he had been in bed when the appellant had put the complainant's penis in his mouth and that what he had said in evidence in chief about the circumstances leading up to and surrounding the commission of the offence was untrue.

The trial judge did not give any reasons for acquitting the appellant on the first count. Under <case> of the Crimes Act the appellant could have been convicted of an offence under <case>, if the court was not satisfied that at the time of the offence the complainant was under the age of ten years.
However, I infer that because of the complainant's differing evidence about the circumstances in which the alleged offence was committed his Honour was not satisfied to the requisite standard that the offence had been committed.

The sexual intercourse alleged to have occurred in the offence charged in the second count of the indictment was penile-anal sexual intercourse. After the second count was amended the offence was alleged to have been committed at some time between the complainant's tenth birthday and his young brother's birthday in September 1993. It is apparent from his Honour's judgment that his
Honour found that the appellant had had penile-anal sexual intercourse with the complainant in the appellant's car, whilst it was parked in a paddock in the vicinity of a place called Beresfield.

The complainant gave evidence in his evidence in chief, which the trial judge referred to in his judgment, that after the offence had been committed, the appellant filled what the complainant said the appellant called his "peace pipe", with some "pot" and gave it to the complainant to smoke, saying that it would make the complainant feel better.

The sexual intercourse alleged to have occurred in the offence charged in the third count was also penile-anal sexual intercourse. In his judgment the trial judge referred to an inconsistency in the complainant's evidence. In his evidence in chief the complainant had said that one night, about a week or so before his younger brother's birthday, the appellant had entered the complainant's bedroom after the complainant had gone to bed and had put his penis in the complainant's bottom. However, in cross-examination the complainant, after reading the statements he had made to police in January , gave evidence in accordance with his statements that the incident had occurred in his bedroom after he had taken his bicycle into his bedroom to fix it and the appellant had joined the complainant in the bedroom.

The fourth count in the indictment played a key role in the trial judge's determination of the whole case. The Crown case was that on a day in November the appellant had had penile-anal sexual intercourse with the complainant at the home of a woman named Theresa Shearer. It was common ground that on a day in about November 1993 both the complainant and the appellant had been at
Ms Shearer's place and that the complainant and the appellant had gone together into the bedroom of one of Ms Shearer's children and had remained there for at least some minutes. The complainant gave evidence that the appellant closed and locked the bedroom door and that intercourse had then occurred. The lock was described by the complainant as a "sliding" lock.

Theresa Shearer was called as a witness by the Crown. She confirmed that the door of the bedroom had been locked from the inside while the appellant and the complainant were in the bedroom. She said that the appellant and the complainant were alone together in the locked bedroom for at least half an hour while Ms Shearer viewed a complete half hour program on television. There was independent evidence that the bedroom door was fitted with a sliding bolt enabling it to be bolted from the inside. Ms Shearer gave evidence that when the appellant and the complainant came out of the bedroom the complainant was pale, he was crying and he was upset and he went straight home. The appellant went to the bathroom. Afterwards, Ms Shearer asked the appellant what had happened to the complainant and the appellant said that he, the complainant, "could not handle the truth about his mother". The trial judge accepted Ms
Shearer's evidence.

When the appellant was first interviewed by the police he denied that he had ever been alone with the complainant in a bedroom at Ms Shearer's house. He later withdrew that denial. The trial judge did not attach much weight to the original untrue denial because he was prepared to find that the appellant might genuinely have not initially recalled the incident.

The appellant later told the police that he did remember an occasion when he had taken the complainant into a bedroom at Ms Shearer's house. He said that he had taken the complainant into the bedroom because the complainant had been accused of shoplifting and he had wanted to give the complainant a good talking to. He had shut the bedroom door because it was no one else's business what he said to the complainant. He did not remember locking the door. He said that he was in the bedroom for only about five minutes.

As I have already said, the trial judge accepted Ms Shearer's evidence. The trial judge considered that Ms Shearer's evidence tended to confirm the complainant's evidence and was inconsistent in important respects with what the appellant had told the police.

In regard to the appellant the trial judge said: "I think he is trying to manufacture an excuse when spoken to by the police as to why he was in that room and that he was trying to have himself out of there as quickly as possible." 
His Honour was satisfied that the complainant was telling the truth about the offence charged in the fourth count. Accordingly, his Honour reasoned, it was easier to accept the complainant's evidence on the other counts. Furthermore, the fact that the appellant had been sexually attracted to the complainant on this occasion increased the likelihood that the appellant had been sexual attracted to the complainant on other occasions and thus strengthened the complainant's testimony on the other counts.

The offences charged in the fifth and sixth counts were fellatio and penile- anal sexual intercourse and were alleged to have occurred on the same day, near Christmas 1993, at a crematorium at Beresfield. The complainant gave evidence that he and the appellant had gone to the crematorium in the appellant's car. In his evidence in chief he referred only to an act of penile-anal sexual intercourse. However, in cross-examination he gave evidence of an act of fellatio and, indeed, two acts of fellatio, which he had described in his statement to the police.

I turn now to the particular matters relied on by the appellant in his written submissions. In relation to the second count it was pointed out that the complainant had not in his statements to the police said that the appellant had supplied him with marijuana. It was submitted that this was a matter which, if it had happened, the complainant would surely have remembered when he was making his statements. It was also implied in the written submissions that the complainant had been coached to say this, after the appellant had been arrested and charged with possession of marijuana on 24 January 1994.
However, it seems to me that if the complainant had been anally penetrated by the appellant, that fact might well have remained in his memory much more vividly than that, after the sexual offence had been committed, the appellant had offered him some marijuana. It is apparent from the complainant's evidence that he was quite familiar with the appellant's "peace pipe", which he had seen the appellant using on other occasions, so that the production, at least, of the pipe on this occasion would not have been remarkable, so far as the complainant was concerned.

In regard to counts five and six the complainant, in cross-examination, marked a photograph taken by a police photographer as being where he said the appellant had stopped his car a second time, that is as being the place where the complainant said the offence had been committed. It is asserted in the appellant's written submissions that the complainant was then asked further questions on the basis that there was an inconsistency between the place indicated on the photograph and the place where the complainant had, on other occasions, said that the offences were committed and on the basis that the area of the crematorium in the photograph was inaccessible to vehicles.
However, after the complainant marked the photograph there would not appear to have been any further relevant cross-examination by counsel for the appellant at the trial. The police photographer, who had photographed the area indicated to him by the complainant as being where the offences had been committed, said that it was about fifty metres away from the carpark. The photographer said that he had walked to the area, that there were a number of telegraph poles lying on their sides acting as a sort of barrier between the carpark and the area indicated by the complainant, but he added that there were distances between the telegraph poles and he was unable to recall whether, notwithstanding the telegraph poles, it was possible to drive a car through between them. He thought that there would at least be some vehicular access for a tractor to the place where the complainant said the offences had been committed.

It was further submitted in relation to counts five and six that there were inconsistencies between the complainant's evidence at the trial and his previous statements to the police about the position of his own body at the time the offences were committed. It would seem to be the case that in parts of the cross-examination the complainant said that the anal intercourse had occurred after he was told to lie on his back and was lying on his back and that in another part of his cross-examination, consistently with what he had said in his statement, the complainant said that he was lying on his stomach when the offence occurred. A complicating factor is that the complainant said that the offence of fellatio had also been committed in the car, while he was sitting facing the front of the car.

At one part of his cross-examination the complainant said that on the night of the first day of the trial the police officer in charge of the investigation had visited him at his home and provided him with a copy of the statements he had given to the police and had told him to read them. Subsequently, both the complainant's father and the police officer gave evidence that the complainant had been supplied with a copy of his statements some time before the trial commenced and that the police officer had not visited the complainant's home on the night of the first day of the trial.

The complainant's father gave evidence that on the night of the first day of the trial the complainant had said that he was feeling confused from his experience in the witness box and the complainant's father advised his son to read the statements which had previously been provided to him by the police officer. It seems likely, and it appears to have been the view taken by the trial judge, that the complainant, in the course of a long cross-examination, had become confused and that it was not the case that the police officer had visited his home on the night of the first day of the trial.

In regard to Ms Shearer, the appellant claimed that if a witness, Steven
Rayner, had been available at the trial he would have been able to refute much of Ms Shearer's evidence. However, Steven Rayner did not give evidence at the trial. There is no affidavit from Steven Rayner and the conditions for the reception of fresh evidence are not satisfied.

It was further submitted that when Ms Shearer had given evidence at a bail hearing in opposition to an application by the appellant for bail pending the trial, Ms Shearer said that she was unaware that the appellant had a car registered in Queensland. It had been put to her at the bail hearing that a statement she said she had heard the appellant make, that he intended going to
Queensland, was made by the appellant in the context of his wanting to renew the registration of his car. It was suggested by the appellant that Ms Shearer should have been aware that the appellant's car was registered in Queensland, because of its distinctive Queensland number plates. However, there was no proper evidence before us of any of these matters and, in any event, they would not, in my opinion, provide any serious ground for impugning the credibility of Ms Shearer.

It was further contended that in his evidence in chief the complainant said that after the offences charged in counts five and six had been committed, the appellant took him to Beresfield swimming pool, whereas in his statement the complainant had said that the appellant had taken him to Glenrock lagoon. In cross-examination the complainant said that he had been taken by the appellant to both places.

I have conducted my own independent examination of the nature and quality of the evidence, taking into account, inter alia, the matters raised in the appellant's written submissions. After conducting that examination, I do not consider that Judge Gibson ought to have had a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the appellant or that I myself experience such a doubt or that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted.

It is true that there were inconsistencies and confusions in the complainant's evidence. In relation to the dates of the offences there was much "fluidity", as Judge Gibson put it in his judgment. There was no evidence of complaint, in the strict sense. When spoken to by a welfare officer the complainant had denied that the appellant had assaulted him. Furthermore, the complainant, as his Honour observed, was "no angel", having himself been in trouble with the police. All of those matters were taken into account by the trial judge and have been taken into account by me.

However, in my opinion, Judge Gibson was right in thinking that Ms Shearer's evidence confirmed the complainant's evidence on the fourth count and if the appellants' guilt was established on that count, that had important ramifications for the case generally, as supporting the complainant's overall credibility and as tending to show that the appellant was sexually attracted to the complainant.

Judge Gibson had the advantage of seeing and hearing the complainant give his evidence and be cross-examined at length, an advantage which is denied to this court. The appellant did not give sworn evidence at the trial and his unsworn statement did not descend to details.

I have taken into account the various matters urged by the appellant in his written submissions but, for reasons which I have already given, I consider that their combined weight is slight. In my opinion, the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

The appellant also seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed upon him by Judge Gibson. The sentences imposed were severe. However, the appellant had committed several sexual offences on a ten-year old boy, including four offences of full penile-anal sexual intercourse. There was little in the appellant's circumstances to entitle him to any leniency. He had not displayed any remorse. He had a previous criminal history, which included convictions and prison sentences for similar offences.

I would give leave to appeal against sentence, but I would dismiss the appeal against sentence.

ABADEE J: I agree with the orders proposed by James J and his reasons.
 
SIMPSON J: I also agree.
 
ABADEE J: The orders of the court are the orders as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
