

Dromore Fresh Produce P/L versus W Paton (Fertilizers) P/L [1997] NSWSC 72 (6
March 1997) `DROMORE FRESH PRODUCE P/L versus W PATON (FERTILIZERS) P/L` `4157/96` `Thursday 6 March 1997` ``THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal from a decision of Master Macready given on 11 February 1997 in which the learned Master ordered that the plaintiff's summons in these proceedings be struck out with costs.

The plaintiff's summons was filed to secure an order that "The Demand pursuant to <case> of the Corporations Law be set aside". That summons was filed on 22
November 1996, accompanied by an affidavit by the company's solicitor which contained simply the following two depositive parts:- "1. I swear this affidavit on behalf of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff disputes that it is indebted to the defendant as described in the demand or at all." 
The defendant, ie the creditor, issued a notice of motion to strike out the summons on two grounds (a) that the affidavit required to be filed and served under <case> of the Corporations Law did not comply with the requirements of that section; and (b) that the application was filed one day late. The learned
Master upheld both these contentions.

The evidence before the learned Master was such as he could find, and did find, that the statutory demand was served on 31 October 1996. The Master found this was so basically because the plaintiff's officer had signed for the envelope containing the demand at the local post office on that date. There was argument before the learned Master that there was some estoppel based on an alleged estoppel arising out of disputed conversations between solicitors.
The Master found against the plaintiff on the facts and it was open to him to do so. He did not have to consider whether in any event the doctrine that there can be no estoppel in the face of a statute would have prevented that submission being successful; cf Barilla versus James (1964) 81 WN (Pt 1) at 461 and following.

The facts which were found by the learned Master were well open to him to find on the evidence. In situations such as that, the Judge does not revisit those facts unless there is some good reason to do so. No good reason has been shown in the instant case.

On the appeal before me, Mr Mura for the plaintiff put four propositions.
First, that the demand was not a statutory demand within the meaning of <case> of the Corporations Law and hence there was nothing served on 31 October which could trigger off any time period under <case> of the Corporations Law.
Secondly, he put that, on a motion to strike out an application to set aside a statutory demand, the creditor must put before the court the material referred to in <case> of the Law. Thirdly, he put that the learned Master was in error in determining that a mere assertion that there is a genuine dispute in an affidavit is not a "supporting affidavit" within the meaning of <case> of the Corporations Law, and fourthly, that the Master was in error in holding, as a matter of fact, that the "demand" was served on 31 October. I have dealt with the fourth argument and need say no more about it.

The first problem with the first and second submissions is that they are not covered by the notice of appeal nor were they argued before the learned
Master. If a point is not taken before the Master, generally the Judge should not entertain it on appeal. Especially is this so where the matter is under the Corporations Law involving a statutory demand. The whole policy of the
Corporations Law is that matters involving statutory demands must be dealt with quickly and that a company that receives a statutory demand must act properly to set it aside or else suffer the consequences. Indeed, this is abundantly clear from the decision of the High Court in David Grant &
Company Pty Ltd versus Westpac Banking Corp <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 265.] It would be inconsistent with that policy to permit people to raise some only of the objections to the statutory demand before the Master and then appeal on different grounds.

However, I will put that side for a moment and consider the merits of the submissions.

The first point made by Mr Mura is that the statutory demand must comply with s 459E, that is, it must be in the prescribed form and must be accompanied by an affidavit that complies with the rules. The rules, Part 80A(15)(1) prescribe the form of affidavit as Form 154FA. That form concludes with the words "IMPORTANT NOTE:" under which there are three notes. The affidavit that was served as a statutory demand in the instant case did not contain the important note. Mr Mura then put that the so-called "demand" was not a demand at all. He submitted that just as the Law prescribes exact precision for a company setting aside the demand, so too there must be exact precision in complying with the Corporations Law for a creditor who seeks to use the law to wind up a company before the liability of the company is established under due process of law.

There are a series of answers to the proposition put by Mr Mura. The first of these is that his client's own affidavit and summons refer to the paper served as a statutory demand and the case was argued before the Master on that basis.
The second answer is that there is a difference between a statutory demand under <case> and the accompanying affidavit. The demand is Form 509H to the
Corporations Regulations, whereas the form of accompanying affidavit is to be left to the rules of court. The word "accompanying" itself shows this to be so. It is clear law that for a document to accompany another there is no requirement that they both be in the same envelope; see Garema Mackay Pty
Ltd versus Proserpine SC [(1984) 53 LGRA 121], 123 and
Winkler versus DPP [(1990) 25 FCR 79], 96. Indeed, the mere fact that the affidavit is said to have "accompanied" the statutory demand shows that it is not part of the statutory demand.

Mr Mura says that to take such a view would be inconsistent with the construction that the court had placed on <case>. However, <case> does not use the word "accompany". It makes it clear that an application is only effectively made if both the summons and supporting affidavit are filed and served within the time prescribed.

It must be remembered that "statutory demand" is defined by <case> of the
Corporations Law to include a document which purports to be a demand under s
E. The document in question in the instant case clearly purported to be a statutory demand.

In Delta Beta Pty Ltd versus Vissers [(1996) 20 ACSR 583], 589, RD
Nicholson, J said, "Whether the service of a demand accompanied by an affidavit which fails in a substantial way to meet the requirements of s
E(3) results in 'a defect in the demand' for the purposes of <case>(a) is undecided although it would seem to be doubtful: cf Hamilhall Pty Ltd (In
Liq) versus AT Phillips Pty Ltd  <case>; [(1994) 54 FCR 173], 175 and Besser Industries (NT) Pty Ltd versus Steelcon
Construction Pty Ltd <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 308], 317. I agree with Branson, J in her reasons in those decisions that it is more likely such a failure would constitute a defect in the service of the demand rather than the demand itself." 
In the Besser case Branson, J actually addressed her mind to the problem of the "Important Note" not being included in the accompanying affidavit. She said at 317, "In my view the failure to include the 'Important Note' in the affidavit is a defect within the meaning of <case> of the Corporations Law. I do not consider that such defect in the affidavit in the circumstances of this case constitutes 'some other reason why the demand should be set aside' within the meaning of <case>(b) of the Corporations Law. If I were to set aside the statutory demand by reason of the failure to include the 'important note' in the accompanying affidavit I would, in my view, be doing so 'merely because of a defect'. By reason of <case> I do not have the power to do so." 
However, Nicholson, J said in the Delta Beta case that one had to analyse the situation a little more closely than this. He referred to the decision of
McLelland, CJ in Eq in B & M Quality Constructions Pty Ltd versus Buyrite
Steel Supplies Pty Ltd [(1994) 15 ACSR 433.] McLelland,
CJ in Eq said, "The failure to comply with the rules in respect of the accompanying affidavit is not in my opinion a 'defect' within the meaning of s
J(2) which I think, having regard to subsection (1), must be read as a 'defect' in the demand itself ... ". However, his Honour considered that the absence of an affidavit that complied with <case> was another reason within s
J(1)(b) why the demand should be set aside. This is again referred to by
Branson, J as a defect in the service of the demand.

I thought at one stage that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s81.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) which puts into the category of defects anything which might be otherwise a nullity, could be used by the creditor to ensure that any fault in the service of the statutory affidavit would be a defect rather than a nullity. However, in the B & M case , McLelland, CJ in Eq at 436 convincingly demonstrated that that section cannot have any application to a statutory demand or its accompanying affidavit because neither was a document "in" any "proceedings" within the contemplation of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s81.html) 
At my suggestion, Mr Mura sought to amend his summons by inserting a claim for a declaration that either the document served was not a statutory demand, or alternatively, no statutory demand had been served. Miss Parsons, for the creditor, opposed this application and she referred me to a series of authorities, which are included in those I have cited above, to the effect that there is no room for a situation where a default by the creditor with respect to the statutory demand or the accompanying affidavit can be other than a matter which the court is to consider under <case>. The cases I have already discussed show this must be so except in the very rare case where the demand itself falls right outside anything that could be a "purported demand" within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s9.html) of the
Law. The present is not such a case. Accordingly, despite it initially having been at my instigation, I must refuse Mr Mura's application to amend.

The policy of the Corporations Law is, as I have said, that all objections to the statutory demand must be made in good time and at the time of the first challenge. There was no challenge before the learned Master as to the lack of the important notes to the accompanying affidavit. This was a matter which is comprehended within <case>: it could have been dealt with by the Master and it is too late to deal with it for the first time on this appeal.

I pass now to the second point made by Mr Mura, that is, that where the creditor seeks to strike out the debtor's application to set aside the statutory demand it must comply with <case> of the Law. Mr Mura puts that this must be so as otherwise the creditor would be able to outflank the statutory provisions merely by making an interlocutory application. He says that unless the court can see that the creditor can prove the matters mentioned in <case>, it should not be permitted to attack alleged non-compliance with a purported statutory demand. Whilst admiring this feat of advocacy, I cannot see any implication in the Law to this effect. Indeed, the Harmer Report reforms were directed more to the debtor company not being able to evade being wound up for insolvency on a procedural point; they were not directed to making life harder for the creditor. The scheme of the Law now is that the onus is on the debtor to file a proper application within 21 days, and if it does not, then it is virtually precluded from relying on technicalities. There is no requirement in my view on the creditor to first satisfy the spirit of <case> before attacking an invalid application to set aside the statutory demand.

Essentially the third ground is that the learned Master relied too heavily on the decision of Sundberg, J in Graywinter Properties Pty Ltd versus Gas &
Fuel Corporation Superannuation Fund <case>; [(1996) 21 ACSR 581.] In that case his Honour, in the Federal Court, said at 587 that <case> made it plain that there was a minimum requirement for a supporting affidavit and this went to jurisdiction. His Honour properly held, in my view, that the decision of Senior Master Mahony in Hire Works Pty Ltd v Elexpo Pty Ltd [(1995) 19 ACSR 114] to the contrary should not be followed. Sundberg, J then went on to say, "In order to be a 'supporting affidavit', an affidavit must say something that promotes the company's case. An affidavit which merely says 'I am a director of the company but am too busy at present to make a full affidavit, and I will do so later' would not support the application. It would in no way advance, further or assist the company's cause, which is to have the notice set aside." 
Mr Mura says that in coming to that conclusion Sundberg, J relied on Order 71 rule 36B of the Federal Court Rules which had no corresponding provision in the NSW Supreme Court Rules. The Federal Court Rule explicitly required that the grounds on which the court should make an order must be identified in the affidavit. There is no such provision in the NSW Supreme Court Rules.

Certainly one can attempt to distinguish the Graywinter case on the basis which Mr Mura has employed. However, it is not for the Rules to alter the
Corporations Law. The Federal Court Rules to my mind only flesh out what is in the Corporations Law. If it were otherwise, the Rules may well be invalid as making contrary provision to the Act under which they were made. Accordingly, there should not be any difference in the approach taken to the construction taken of <case> between the Federal Court and this court. The fact that there are more specific rules in the Federal Court dealing with the form of the supporting affidavit is not a valid point of distinction.

When one examines <case> of the Law, one can see that it is mandatory that there be a supporting affidavit. This ordinarily means an affidavit which backs up the claim that is made. As I said in John Holland Construction & Engineering Pty Ltd versus Kilpatrick Green Pty Ltd (1994) 14 ACSR 250, , there must be something more than mere assertion; see also Re
Louisbridge Pty Ltd [[1994] 2 Qd R 144], 145. In the present case there is nothing more than a solicitor's assertion that the plaintiff's claim is disputed. This is insufficient. I consider the learned
Master was correct to follow the thinking of Sundberg, J in the Graywinter case and to hold that there was no supporting affidavit in the present case.

The only other matter I should mention is that as the present objections do not go to solvency, there is no question of giving any leave under <case> of the Law to raise any of Mr Mura's objections on the summons for winding up. I asked Mr Mura whether he wished to make any application in the other suit to raise any matters as to solvency of his client, but he indicated that he would make that decision after he had digested these reasons.

It follows that the appeal must be dismissed.

The learned Master stayed his order until 17 February 1997. On 18 February the plaintiff asked me to extend the stay. I declined to do this on an ex parte basis and ordered that the creditor be notified. When the creditor's solicitor appeared shortly afterwards he informed me that without any knowledge of the application to extend the stay the summons for winding up had already been issued out of the court and had been posted to the registered office of the company. He undertook not to do anything else about the summons to wind up and the appeal and the summons were fixed for final hearing the following Thursday February.

After I had reserved my decision on that Thursday, Miss Parsons returned to court and pointed out that under <case> of the Corporations Law, a party could only rely on failure to comply with a statutory demand as being evidence of insolvency if after the three months ending on the day when the application was made the company failed to comply with a statutory demand. If Mr Mura's point about a defective or null and void statutory demand was correct, then the last day for curing the matter was that very Thursday 20 February. I gave
Miss Parsons leave to amend her summons in the winding up proceedings with leave to Mr Mura to move to discharge that order if he felt it appropriate to do so. Although I dislike making such orders ex parte, I could not see any other way in which I could do justice between the parties. However, there is a lesson here because when one issues a notice of demand in November and then there is an application to set aside the notice and the court's vacation intervenes, it is very difficult for a creditor to get the benefit of <case> of the Corporations Law even if the application made by the company is dismissed as hopeless. It may be when next the Corporations Law is reviewed, that some proviso can be inserted either in <case> or <case> to permit the court to order that the statutory demand will still carry the presumption of insolvency despite the lapse of more than three months where the lapse of time in issuing the summons has not been the result of any wilful delay on the part of the creditor.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
