

Regina versus Toomey Matter No Cca 60694/97 [1998] NSWSC 306 (22 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
REGINA versus BRADLEY JOHN TOOMEY 
CCA 60694/97 July 1998 
Smart J, Studdert J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, Bradley John Toomey, appeared before his Honour Judge Mahoney of Queen's Counsel in the District Court at Port Macquarie on 11 December 1997. On that date he adhered to a plea of guilty previously entered in the Local Court in relation to an offence of armed robbery. The learned judge sentenced the applicant to a total term of six years penal servitude comprising a minimum term of three years and an additional term of three years. The minimum term was backdated to 7 June 1997 when the applicant had been taken into custody. 
The applicant now seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed.

Under <case> of the Crimes Act, the maximum penalty for an offence of armed robbery is twenty years penal servitude.

The facts shortly stated were that the applicant entered the Waniora convenience store at Port Macquarie at about 6.45 am on 27 May 1997. He was wearing a balaclava and was armed with a screwdriver. The proprietor of the shop and an employee were in the shop at the time. The employee, Miss Newson, was working in the delicatessen area of the store and at that time the proprietor, Mr Symmons, was down in an area adjacent to the second cash register. The applicant proceeded from the corner of the delicatessen to go behind the counter where the two cash registers were and, having come to the second cash register adjacent to the proprietor's position, said in a loud voice "Give me the money or I'll stab you", brandishing the screwdriver.
Then, upon being instructed by Mr Symmons on how to open the register did so and withdrew money. He then went to the other register and took money from that before fleeing from the shop.

The applicant was recognised. His defacto wife and himself were regular shoppers at this particular store and he was wearing a white parka which was recognised by the proprietor of the shop. Miss Newson recognised the voice of the applicant as that of a customer. The applicant fled with $400.

He subsequently gave himself up at the police station at Port Macquarie on 7
June 1997 and made a record of interview in which he freely admitted what he had done. He has, as I observed earlier, been in custody ever since.

The applicant was born on 3 October 1972 so that he was twenty-five years of age at the time of being sentenced. He grew up at Nanima, an Aboriginal mission at Wellington. According to the pre-sentence report placed before the sentencing judge he was apparently raised by his father before leaving school at year 8. After leaving school the applicant remained unemployed. He became addicted as an adult to alcohol and to drugs and he developed a criminal record. Putting to one side offences committed as a juvenile, the applicant has a number of offences ranging from malicious damage of property to offences of dishonesty and drug offences. The only previous sentences attracting terms of imprisonment were a six month sentence for stealing imposed in August 1995 and further fixed terms for stealing and breach of recognizance attracting fixed terms of six months commencing on the same date. The applicant was also awaiting hearing on other charges in the Local Court at the time of his arrest on the armed robbery charge.

It seems that the applicant was on the local methadone programme which he commenced in April 1997 but he continued to use drugs and failed to attend for his methadone and was withdrawn from the programme. His explanation for the subject offence as he told the police was "I'm just hanging out for drugs".

Ms Burgess, who appears for the applicant, has presented very comprehensive written submissions which she has complemented in her oral submissions today.
The thrust of those submissions is that the sentence ought to be regarded by this Court as being manifestly excessive. In developing that submission reference has been made to a number of matters. The first of these is that the judge overstated the objective seriousness of the offence. It was argued that, on the scale of things, this robbery lacked aggravating features. It was submitted that a screwdriver was not the sort of weapon that one would compare with a knife or with a gun, weapons which are commonly used in armed robberies.

I am, speaking for myself, not impressed by those submissions. It seems to me that the use of a screwdriver coupled with the threat, which was announced by the applicant, was a serious feature of this case and I do not accept that a screwdriver was an object which was not capable of causing significant harm if used in an attack.

It was further submitted that the judge placed too much weight on the effect of the robbery upon Miss Newson. A statement which that person made included the observation "I was very fearful for my life and safety". His Honour was entitled to heed that expression and it seems to me that he was justified in concluding that the lady was affected by what had taken place. It was a relevant consideration for him in the sentencing process.

Reference has been made to the well-known statement of principle in
Fernando. The Court is invited to conclude that the judge did not pay due regard to the principles expressed in that case and that that inference ought be drawn from the sentence which was imposed.

It is plain that his Honour heeded Fernando's case. Indeed, he expressly referred to it. He referred to it in a paragraph in which he made it plain that he was influenced by that decision in the structure of the sentence which was imposed. I did not infer, though, from the fact that the judge expressly heeded it in addressing special circumstances that he did not heed it in determining overall what the total sentence should be.

I have read carefully the remarks on sentence in this case. I am not persuaded that any manifest error appears upon a reading of those remarks and I am not persuaded that the sentence was outside the appropriate range in all the circumstances of this case.

Reference has been made to statistics which would indicate that this sentence was in the top twenty percent of sentences for this class of offence. Be that as it may it seems to me that his Honour was correct in approaching this case as being a serious crime warranting stern punishment.

I would, therefore, propose that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

SMART J: I agree. The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Mr Justice Studdert. * * * 
