

Regina versus William John Toman [1999] NSWSC 1385 (26 August 1999) 
REGINA v. William John TOMAN /97 
Wednesday 14 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: William John Toman seeks leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence comprising a minimum term of nine months penal servitude and an additional term of two years and three months for breaking, entering and stealing from a dwelling house taking into account twenty-five other offences committed while on bail on the charge on which he was sentenced. These include another eight break, enter and steal offences. Further, in June 1996 the applicant stole two diamond rings having a value of $30,000 by snatching them from commercial premises. One ring was recovered but the other was not.

The remainder of these other offences covered matters of dishonesty, possession of a prohibited drug and possession of a replica Smith & Wesson pistol and a flick knife. The explanation given about the pistol and the knife reduced the seriousness of these offences.

The applicant who was born on 6 November 1975 first came before the courts in about August 1993, being dealt with on two counts of armed robbery by the
Children's Court. Thereafter there were offences of break, enter and steal and possess a prohibited drug prior to the subject offences in April 1995. He was subsequently dealt with for other matters and he spent some short periods in gaol.

The applicant's parents separated when he was six. He lacked a father's influence, his father being affected by his war service in Vietnam. The applicant proceeded to Year 11 at a good school. However, he was set a bad example by an elder step-brother as he grew up and he made friends with those who were interested in drugs and he took drugs.

Since the applicant has landed in his present trouble his father has sought to help him settle down and find employment. On the material that was before the sentencing judge some rehabilitation had begun but there was a long way to go.
The applicant had to take medication to sedate himself so he could cope with being in custody. The sentencing judge took into account factors which led to the applicant having to go into protection.

The sole ground of appeal as the matter has been conducted today is based on the marked deterioration in the medical condition of the applicant's mother.
It has emerged that the applicant has requested the gaol authorities' permission to visit his mother. He was told that because he is in the last month of his sentence he cannot be released for a visit.

For the offence itself, taking into account the other offences, the penalty imposed was a light one as the sentencing judge expressly recognised. In the normal course I would not have intervened as his decision on the materials before him was correct. The material now before the court, particularly in the report of 14 May 1997 of 
Dr Boyer, Head of the Department of Oncology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, indicates that the mother's condition has reached what is close to a terminal stage. Her life expectancy is to be measured in weeks, perhaps months.

The applicant is due to be released on parole on 26 May 1997. Having regard to the matters in Dr Boyer's report and the deterioration which has taken place since sentencing, this is a wholly exceptional case. The minimum term should be varied by being reduced by about ten days. I propose that there be a minimum term of 8 months and 20 days penal servitude commencing on 27 August and expiring on 16 May 1997 with an additional term of 2 years 3 months and 10 days commencing on 17 May 1997 and expiring on 26 August 1999.

We have not to altered the sentence overall but in the exceptional circumstances made a minor adjustment to the minimum term and the additional term.

An extension of time within which to seek leave to appeal should be granted, leave to appeal should be granted and the appeal to the extent mentioned should be allowed, and the sentence which I have indicated should be imposed in lieu of that originally imposed.

I propose also that it be ordered that the applicant be released on parole at the end of the minimum term which will be on Friday 16 May 1997.

BRUCE J: I agree. I wish to say but not by way of judgment - Mr Toman, you have been given an opportunity and you should take that opportunity and do not ever come back to the courts.

APPLICANT: Yes sir.

SMART J: The orders are as proposed.
 * * * 
