

Regina versus Lemura Matter No Cca 60344/98 [1998] NSWSC 699 (18 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 January 1999 
REGINA versus VICTOR JAMES LEMURA 
CCA 60344/98 December 1998 
Beazley JA, Sperling J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal Against Conviction (McGuire DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60344/98 
DELIVERED: 18 December 1998 
HEARING DATE: 3 December 1998 
PARTIES: Regina versus Victor James LEMURA 
JUDGMENT OF: Beazley JA, Sperling J, Hidden J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT: D C Anderson QC 
RESPONDENT: P G Berman 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT: AC Scotting 
RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal allowed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - sexual assault - "Why would the complainant lie?" - whether leave to argue this ground should be granted pursuant to Rule 4.

CRIMINAL LAW - sexual assault - Crown withheld evidence of earlier complaint on misunderstanding of the law - what course to be taken.

CRIMINAL LAW - sexual assault - delay in complaint - need for a 
Kilby direction in the context of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), <case> - need for a balanced direction.

CRIMINAL LAW - sexual assault - delay in complaint - [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), s 405B - whether error in specifying possible reasons for delay.

CRIMINAL LAW - sexual assault - delay in complaint - need for a 
Longman warning where the accused might have been precluded by delay in providing an account of his/her whereabouts at the time of the alleged events.

BD [(1997) 94 A Crim R 131] 
DJK (CCA, 8 October 1987, unreported) 
Graham  <case> 
Harvey (CCA, 9 April 1998, unreported) 
Johnston (CCA, 31.7.98, unreported) 
JTS (CCA, 18 September 1998, unreported).

Longman <case>; <case> 
Urig (CCA, 24 October 1996, unreported) 
Watts (CCA, 27 May 1998, unreported) 
No. of pages: 29 
REGINA versus Victor James LEMURA 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: The appellant was indicted before McGuire DCJ on 15 June 1998 on two charges. The first charge was sexual intercourse without consent. That offence was allegedly committed between 27 March 1997 and 7 April 1997. The second charge was indecent assault. That was alleged to have been committed between 6 April 1997 and 20 April 1997. In both cases, the complainant was a Ms Joanne Margaret Farrell. 
The jury returned a verdict of guilty on each charge.

The appellant and the complainant were neighbours. The appellant was thirty six years of age or thereabouts at the relevant time and the complainant was eighteen years of age or thereabouts. The appellant was a married man, living with his wife, who was terminally ill with cancer. The complainant lived with her parents.

The alleged offences occurred while the complainant's parents were absent on an overseas holiday and when the complainant was at home on her own.

The Crown case was that, on the occasion of the first offence, the complainant arrived home after work in her car. She could not specify the exact date. She parked her car in the garage. She was getting out of the car when she was confronted by the appellant. He forced her into the car and had penile-vaginal intercourse with her against her will. The appellant allegedly said that she had better not tell anyone and, even if she did, no one would believe he had done such a thing at a time when his wife was dying.

It was alleged that about a week later a similar confrontation occurred, with the complainant being forced into the car by the appellant. The complainant was epileptic. She had a fit. When she regained consciousness, the appellant was pulling up his shorts and her clothing was displaced, exposing the lower part of her body. On that occasion it is alleged that the appellant said she was not allowed to tell anyone about what had happened and that, even if she did, no one was going to believe her because she was too dumb.

The complainant gave evidence along those lines at the trial. She agreed, in answer to a question by the Crown Prosecutor, that it was "some time later" that she reported the matter to the police.

The investigating police officer, Detective Temby, gave evidence in the Crown case. The appellant was first questioned by the police on 12 August 1997. When told of the allegation his reply was, "What, Joanne said I raped her, I don't believe it". Following his arrest and on the way to the police station he said to Detective Temby, "Why would Joanne make something up like that? She has been very upset since my wife died a couple of months ago, maybe that's the reason." The appellant voluntarily participated in a recorded interview on 12
August 1997. He denied the allegations.

The appellant gave evidence at the trial. He said that his wife was unable to care for herself from 7 April 1997. Between 7 and 12 April and on 18 and 19
April he spent each day at the hospital with his wife and did not return home until evening. From 8 to 19 April, his parents-in-law were staying with him.
That did not exclude the possibility that the appellant might have gone next door for a brief time at some stage during the two periods specified by the complainant, without that being apparent to his own family. After the passing of some four months he was unable to give a more complete account of his movements which might have excluded that possibility if he was innocent.

The two families were close friends. The appellant relied on subsequent association between the complainant and himself as being inconsistent with her complaint. A number of witnesses gave evidence of the appellant's good character.

The appellant's grounds of appeal are as follows:
The verdicts of guilty are unsafe and unsatisfactory.
His Honour erred by raising material before the jury in his summing up that was not in evidence, namely that the Appellant had been asked by the police, "why would the complainant lie?"
His Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that if they rejected any motive to lie asserted to the complainant that was raised by the evidence, that did not necessarily mean that the complainant was telling the truth.
(Not pressed).
His Honour erred by misdirecting the jury as to the effect of delay in complaint.
His Honour erred by misdirecting the jury as to the nature of complaint in law.
(Not pressed).
His Honour erred by misdirecting the jury as to the significance of the lack of fingerprints and any other physical traces.
His Honour erred by misdirecting the jury as to the significance of the evidence of good character.
His Honour caused the trial to miscarry by making a gratuitous and prejudicial comment in front of the jury.
(Not pressed).
His Honour erred by misdirecting the jury as to the Murray direction sought by counsel for the appellant at trial.
His Honour erred in his directions to the jury by failing to give them a
Longman direction.
His Honour erred by misdirecting the jury as the meaning of beyond reasonable doubt.
His Honour erred in his summing up by failing to adequately put the defence case to the jury.
(Not pressed).
His Honour gave an appearance of bias against the accused by his demeanour in dealing with counsel for the accused at trial before the jury, which caused the trial to miscarry.
His Honour erred by presenting his direction as to the lack of corroborative evidence in a prejudicial and unbalanced manner.
His Honour used words which were intimidating towards counsel for the
Appellant at trial when counsel sought redirections.

Ground 1: The verdicts of guilty are unsafe and unsatisfactory 
Insofar as this ground of appeal asserts insufficiency of evidence, it does not warrant more than passing consideration. As is commonly the case in relation to charges of this kind, the case was very much one of oath against oath with little, if anything, in the way of objective evidence tending one way or the other. It was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the offences were committed as the complainant said they were. An appeal on this basis must therefore fail.

Insofar as the ground of appeal is intended to convey that there was not a fair trial because of errors on the part of the trial judge, I will deal with the asserted errors under subsequent grounds of appeal.

Ground 2: His Honour erred by raising material before the jury in his summing up that was now in evidence, namely that the Appellant had been asked by the police, "why would the complainant lie?" 
In his summing-up, the trial judge at first misstated the evidence. He said: "The police asked him `Well why would Joanne make up something like that?', to which he replied `I don't know. She has been very upset since my wife died a couple of months ago. Maybe that's the reason.'" 
As I have recorded in this judgment, that was not the evidence. At the conclusion of the summing-up, the Crown Prosecutor, in the presence of the jury, drew attention to the evidence as it had been given. The trial judge said: "Ladies and gentleman you have heard that. I was mistaken, I have misquoted the statement. The evidence is as the Crown Prosecutor just read it." 
There was no more potential prejudice to the accused arising from the misstatement than might have arisen from the evidence actually given. Both threw up the same question. Nothing therefore turns on the initial misstatement.

In a sexual assault case, it is impermissible for the Crown to elicit in cross-examination of the accused that the accused knows of no reason why the complainant would lie, as a vehicle for bolstering the complainant's credit:
Palmer <case>; [(1998) 151 ALR 16.] Arguably, evidence that the accused said out of court that he knew of no reason why the complainant would lie is similarly inadmissible, if led for the same purpose.
But, in this case, the evidence was not objected to and [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) must be considered.

The evidence was not all one way. It provided a vehicle for the appellant to submit that there was a plausible explanation for the complainant making a false complaint. It was an explanation suggested by the appellant spontaneously and, therefore, arguably, one that arose naturally from the sequence of events. Whether the proposed explanation was in fact plausible is questionable but that was for the jury to judge. Counsel for the appellant relied on it as such. He put it to the complainant in cross-examination that grief in relation to the death of the appellant's wife caused the complainant to make the allegation. Presumably, the implication was that emotional upset following the death of a close family friend had led the complainant to turn on the deceased's husband in some mixed up kind of way.

On the other hand, the suggestion by the appellant of an unlikely explanation could be invoked as the product of bewilderment on the part of an innocent man when first confronted with the allegations.

It is reasonable, in these circumstances, to ascribe the absence of any objection to the conversation between the police officer and the appellant to a tactical decision by counsel. I would not grant leave under [Rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) 
Ground 3: His Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that if they rejected any motive to lie asserted to the complainant (or) that was raised by the evidence, that did not necessarily mean that the complainant was telling the truth.

This ground should be rejected. There was no need for such a direction in the circumstances of this case in order to avoid any possible miscarriage of justice. Nothing in Urig (CCA, 24 October 1996, unreported) or Palmer which are cited by the appellant in support of this ground required such a direction in a case such as this.

Ground 5: His Honour erred by misdirecting the jury as to the effect of delay in complaint.

Ground 6: His Honour erred by misdirecting the jury as to the nature of complaint in law.

During the trial, the accused having given evidence but further evidence remaining to be called, a note was received from the jury asking the following question, "Why the delay in reporting the crime March/April-August?" 
The state of the evidence in relation to complaint was as follows. The complainant had been asked in chief by the Crown Prosecutor whether, after the second incident, it was "some time later" that she reported the matter to the police. The complainant said, "Yes". What meaning was to be given to the expression "some time later" was a matter for the jury. Detective Temby said that he interviewed the appellant on 12 August 1997 and the appellant was arrested and charged that day.

The jury was entitled to think the police were likely to have acted promptly on a complaint. They were entitled to infer - in the absence of direct evidence of earlier complaint - that there had probably been a delay of four months or so before a complaint was made to anyone. Their question conveyed that impression. The trial judge proceeded on the basis that that was their view. There was no objection by the Crown Prosecutor or by counsel for the appellant to the trial judge dealing with the point on that basis, notwithstanding that the evidence was not complete.

The situation was, however, more complicated. When the jury's question was read out in the absence of the jury, the Crown Prosecutor told the trial judge the following: "Your Honour could I just say this on that point, there was some evidence available of complaint made some time in June I think it was, yes June, to the girl's boyfriend. I agreed with my friend that as I understand the authorities, the only way in which the Crown can lead evidence of complaint is if there is going to be some issue as to failure to complain or delayed complaint, and my friend agreed that he would not be making either of those assertions on the basis - and so therefore I have no foundation on which to call that evidence." 
The Crown Prosecutor's understanding of the authorities was not correct. Leave would have been required pursuant to <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) because the evidence went to credit. However, leave is given in such cases unless the accused's legal representative states that no suggestion will be made that the complainant's evidence has been the result of fabrication, reconstruction (deliberate or otherwise) or suggestion: BD [(1997) 94 A Crim R 131];
Graham  <case> The concession made by counsel for the appellant fell short of that. Accordingly, the Crown was entitled to call such evidence of complaint as was available.

In fact, the Crown had a statement from the complainant that she had complained to her boyfriend and her parents at the end of May or at the beginning of June, and a statement from the boyfriend that it was on 23 June that a complaint was made to him. (It may be noted complaint at that time, rather than in August, was still two to three months after the alleged episodes.) The Crown Prosecutor had refrained from calling the evidence because of what had passed between her and the appellant's counsel.

It cannot be assumed that earlier complaint would have been established if the
Crown Prosecutor had proffered that evidence. Witnesses sometimes resile from their proofs. Important concessions can be made in cross-examination. The jury might disbelieve a witness or witnesses for its own reasons. But this is bye the bye. The evidence of earlier complaint, such as it might have been, was not before the jury.

When the trial judge was told the reason why evidence of earlier complaint had not been led, and of the related agreement between counsel, it should have drawn to the attention of counsel (particularly the Crown Prosecutor) that the assumption underlying the agreement was wrong, that delay in complaint was relevant and that the trial judge would have to give a complete direction to the jury in relation to such delay in order to inform them as to how they should deal with such evidence. Any possibility that that could be avoided was precluded by the jury's question. A complete direction would necessarily include a direction that delay in complaint could be treated as discrediting the complainant's evidence that the events had occurred. And such a direction could only be given in relation to the evidence as it stood, namely, that there was no complaint until the police were informed.

What would then have ensued is speculative. Being put on notice that such a direction would have to be given, the Crown Prosecutor might have sought leave to re-open or sought a discharge of the jury. Whether either of these courses was feasible or ought to have been entertained, in view of the agreement with counsel for the appellant or for other reasons, is not something we have considered. Nor have we considered what other course might have been open consistently with ensuring a fair trial for the Crown and for the appellant.
It is unnecessary to consider these points further because the trial judge, with the concurrence of the Crown Prosecutor and counsel for the appellant, decided to give a full direction to the jury on delay, and to do so at that stage of the trial. Having embarked on that approach, it was necessary to get the direction right in its fundamental elements.

The trial judge indicated to counsel what he intended to say to the jury in response to their question. His proposal involved an assumption that the jury had or would form the view that there was no complaint prior to 12 August 1997 or thereabouts, and there was no objection to that. The trial judge's proposal also involved giving an extensive direction at that stage of the trial rather than telling the jury that he would answer their question in the course of his summing-up when he had heard what, if anything, the Crown Prosecutor and counsel for the appellant had to say on the topic in their final addresses. As
I have said, there was no objection to the course the trial judge said he intended to take in that respect either.

The trial judge's proposed answer to the jury's question involved giving illustrations of reasons which the complainant might have had for not making an earlier complaint. Counsel for the appellant objected to that. His Honour rejected the objection.

His Honour then proceeded to give the following direction to the jury in answer to their question: "Ladies and gentlemen, you asked a question "Why the delay in reporting the crime March/April" and with a hyphen indicating "August." It emerges from the evidence that she didn't immediately tell anybody that is to say she didn't tell anybody in March or April and indeed we don't know the exact date when she did tell somebody. The matter eventually came to the attention of the police but we don't know what was the delay if any between her making a complaint and the matter then coming to the attention of the police and we further don't know what delay if any occurred between the police learning of the event and them taking it any further. And that's one of the difficulties that I pointed out to you a while ago in guessing or speculating. There might have been very good reason for that or there might've been no good reason, we simply don't know. But let me tell you ladies and gentlemen what the law is on this topic. It's the law and there's a section of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which specifically deals with this, that the lack of complaint or the absence of complaint or a delay in making a complaint doesn't necessarily mean that a sexual assault or sexual assaults didn't occur. That's because it's the law, that as people of commonsense you'll readily appreciate that there could be numerous reasons why a woman, a young woman, wouldn't want to tell anybody what had occurred and that she may only raise the matter at a later date.
Think about it for a moment ladies and gentlemen and you'll readily appreciate
I suggest that there could be numerous reasons why a woman who'd suffered sexual indignities wouldn't immediately raise the matter, and that some of the matters which might spring to your mind would be embarrassment, fear, the relationship which had existed between the two families, telling her father or mother or telling her sisters of conduct which had occurred at the hands of a man who was a close family friend, telling of conduct of a person whose wife was dying over a prolonged period and who died in tragic circumstances.
You'll also remember her evidence that following the first assault, he grabbed her and said `Don't tell anybody, nobody will believe it because Dot's dying.'
On the second occasion it was her evidence that he said to her `You're not allowed to tell anybody, even if you did nobody would believe you as you are too dumb.' You are permitted however to examine her conduct in delaying her complaint as material which could reflect unfavourably upon her credit as a witness. You are entitled to examine her conduct in this regard in deciding whether she has been consistent over a period as to what she says that the accused did to her. Don't guess or speculate. But as I say you are entitled to consider the matters or the sort of matters that I have referred to and you do not, it is the law that you do not say there has been a delay in complaining therefore the offence couldn't have happened. You may take that delay into account in determining her reliability, you must also however consider whether there could have been some good reason or reasons as to why an immediate complaint wasn't made. Crown, are there any matters arising out of that that you wish to--" (Emphasis added) 
In response to the invitation, the Crown Prosecutor raised no objection.
Counsel for the appellant drew attention to the objection he had already made concerning illustrations given by the trial judge as to possible reasons for delay. He raised no further objection.

I would uphold Grounds 5 and 6. The direction given in answer to the jury's question was unbalanced and did not convey with sufficient clarity the way delay was to be evaluated by the jury.

The first passage I have emphasised in italics stated that there had been a complaint to a person or persons other than the police, possibly earlier than the complaint to the police and, as to which, only the timing of that other complaint was in question. There was no evidence of any such other complaint.
Mention of another complaint, undisclosed by the evidence, which may have been earlier, was liable to reduce the significance the jury might otherwise have attached to such delay as they were otherwise entitled to find there had been.

Secondly, the direction failed to convey to the jury in clear and unmistakable terms that delay in complaint could be treated by the jury as discrediting the complainant's evidence that the alleged sexual assaults occurred. There is now a series of cases in which the point has been emphasised by this Court: DJK (CCA, 8 October 1987, unreported), Harvey (CCA, 9 April 1998, unreported),
JTS (CCA, 18 September 1998, unreported).

In JTS, Levine J (with whom Beazley JA and Sperling J agreed) said (at -21, 22-3): "In Kilby versus The Queen <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 460], Barwick CJ said (at 465): `It would no doubt be proper for a trial judge to instruct a jury that in evaluating the evidence of a woman who claims to have been the victim of a rape and in determining whether to believe her, they could take into account that she had made no complaint at the earliest reasonable opportunity. Indeed, in my opinion, such a direction would not only be proper but, depending of course on the particular circumstances of the case, ought as a general rule to be given.' 
In the judgment of Toohey, Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ in Crofts versus The
Queen <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427], their Honours reaffirmed that principle as continuing to operate following the enactment of a provision in Victoria in materially the same terms as <case>. They cited with approval a statement by the Court of
Criminal Appeal in Victoria in R versus Omarjee [(1995) 79 A Crim R 355] at as being applicable: `[A] trial judge should as a general rule give a direction in accordance with
Kilby ... being a direction which, the applicant asserted, the trial judge here had failed to give. In our view, no reason appears why the general rule should not apply here.' 
In Crofts their Honours went on to distinguish Regina versus Murray [(1987) 11
NSWLR 12], where the delay had been only two days, saying, contrasting the facts of Murray with the facts of Crofts: `There is no analogy between such a case and the present. Here, the delay was objectively substantial, being a matter of years. Delays of that order require a trial judge to give 'the jury a direction which [is] meaningful, and which [is] adequate to enable the jury to make a responsible evaluation of the matter': R versus Preval [[1984] 3 NSWLR 647] at 651, per Street CJ (at 450)'.

I respectfully agree with the following passage from the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL in Regina versus DJK (CCA, 8 October 1997, unreported).
 `The judge did not direct the jury that, in evaluating the evidence of the complainant and in determining whether to believe her they could take into account her failure to make a complaint at the earliest reasonable opportunity as reducing her credibility: Kilby versus The Queen <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 460] at 465-466, 469; Regina versus Zorad [[1979] 2 NSWLR 764] at 772.
Such a direction remains appropriate notwithstanding the provisions of <case> (R versus Davies [(1985) 3 NSWLR 276] at -278) as the High Court has recently re-affirmed (Crofts versus The Queen <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427] at -436, 449-452).' 
The first error by the trial judge in the present case was that he failed to give the Kilby direction.

The jury should have been instructed that, if they found there had been substantial delay, they were entitled to treat that as impugning the complainant's credit as to what had allegedly occurred.
 ...

The need for a Kilby direction is, in my opinion, heightened by the requirements of <case>. If the Kilby direction is not given, the jury has considerations tending to explain away delay without attention being directed to the main point, namely, whether delay in complaint casts doubt on the truth of the complainant's evidence. Necessarily, any possible explanation for delay in complaint is predicated on the possibility that the complaint may be true.
Unless the possible implications of delay are emphasised, talk of possible explanations for delay takes on the colour of affirming the truth of the complainant's evidence. The result is unbalanced and unfair. The effect is to bolster the credit of the complainant, when the matter truly at issue is whether the complainant's credit is impugned by delay in complaint." 
In the present case, the direction given in answer to the jury's question did not incorporate a Kilby direction with sufficient clarity. The trial judge said the jury was "permitted to ... examine her conduct in delaying her complaint as material which could reflect unfavourably on her credit as a witness". That observation was directed to the witness' credit generally. It missed the point. It was her evidence that the incidents had occurred at all which was potentially impugned by the evidence of delay.

The trial judge also said the jury was "entitled to examine her conduct in this regard in deciding whether she has been consistent over a period as to what she says the accused did to her". That language has been used in some of the authorities but, in an instruction to a lay jury, it would be unintelligible without further explanation, namely, that a lack of consistency between the allegations and delay in complaint could be treated by the jury as an indication that the allegations were false.

The observation that the jury could "take that delay into account in determining her reliability" did not go to the nub of the matter. It was another observation about general credibility rather than the credibility of the complainant's evidence that the incidents had occurred.

Thirdly, the priority given to the direction pursuant to <case> resulted in the direction as a whole being seriously unbalanced. Section 405B is designed to guard against untoward significance being given to the Kilby direction.
The direction given by the trial judge presented the <case> warning as the main theme. It was given first, at length and filled out with illustrations.
The Kilby direction - deficient as it was - was a mere supplement, interpolated with further cautions in terms of <case>.

Fourthly, the trial judge erred in advancing particular possible explanations for delay in the second passage I have emphasised with italics: "embarrassment, fear, the relationship which existed between the two families, telling her father or mother or telling her sisters of conduct which had occurred at the hand of a close family friend, telling of conduct of a person whose wife was dying over a prolonged period and who died in tragic circumstances". (Incidentally, the appellant's wife died on 30 April 1997, three and a half months before the jury thought the complaint had first been made.) The complainant had given no reasons for delay in her evidence. It is one thing to make allowance for the possibility of undisclosed and unknown reasons for delay. It is another to make allowance for the possibility of particular reasons which could have been advanced and tested in evidence if they were allegedly operative, and which were not given in evidence. The reference to possible fear on the part of the appellant was particularly prejudicial.

One of the reasons for allowing the appeal in JTS (at 23-26) was this point, ie the suggestion by the trial judge of a particular possible reason for delay which could have been given in evidence if it was so, and was not given in evidence. In that case, it was fear of revenge or reprisal. The mention of such a possible reason contributed to a lack of balance in the direction in that case. The mention of possible reasons in the present case, including fear, had the same effect.

Fifthly, the defendant may have been seriously prejudiced by the delay in the complaint coming to his attention. Whatever may have been said by the complainant before 12 August 1997 it was not said to him. The complainant specified periods during which the offences were allegedly committed, not dates. The appellant could not be expected to be able to account for his movements on each day within those periods after a lapse of some months. It was apparent from his evidence that he was unable to do so. The jury could have been told that, if the evidence of the complaint could not be adequately tested after such a lapse of time, it would be dangerous to convict on that evidence alone unless the jury, scrutinising the evidence with great care, considering the circumstances relevant to its evaluation and paying heed to the warning, were satisfied of its truth and accuracy: Longman <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79], 91; Watts (CCA, 27.5.98, unreported); Johnston (CCA, .7.98, unreported). In my view, that warning should have been given in this case. To leave the jury without such an appreciation of the danger was to risk a miscarriage of justice.

The trial judge revisited the topic in his summing-up. He said: "I have already dealt with the question of complaint, but I will briefly touch upon it again.

It is the law, and you must accept this from me, it is the law that the mere fact that there was a delay in the making of a complaint, that that does not necessarily mean that there was no sexual attack, that there was no act of sexual misconduct merely because there was a delay in raising the matter. As I have told you it is the law that there could be numerous reasons why a person who has suffered sexual indignities might not raise the matter immediately. I gave you by way of examples some of the things which you might consider would explain such a delay; embarrassment, the relationship between the two families, having to tell her parents what their trusted friend had done, the fact that at the time the accused's wife was dying, plus the warnings to her not to tell anybody, she would not be believed because his wife was dying. On the second occasion, she would not be believed, because she was too dumb.

I further pointed out to you that a delay in raising a complaint could be taken by you as material which might reflect unfavourably upon the credit of the witness. You are entitled to examine her conduct in this regard in deciding whether she has been consistent over a period as to what she says the accused did to her." 
This passage did nothing to rectify the deficiencies in the earlier direction.
It compounded them.

The only objection taken at the trial was to possible reasons for delay. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) applies to other aspects of the trial judge's directions. The deficiencies in the directions were, however, in my view, serious and fundamental. The Crown elected not to call evidence of earlier complaint. How that came about does not matter. Whether it would have been convincing is speculative. The appellant was entitled to whatever finding the jury might make concerning delay on the basis of the evidence as it was given. One inference open to the jury was that there had been a delay of four months or so. That was apparently their impression. The appellant was entitled to a balanced direction as to how the jury could use such a delay in resolving whether the alleged assaults had occurred. He did not get it. There is a serious possibility that, if he had, he would have been acquitted.

I note that in other cases, including Harvey, JTS and Johnston, where directions in relation to delay were held to have been inadequate, leave has been given under [Rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) 
I would grant leave under [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) in this instance and would uphold Grounds 5 and 6.

Conclusion 
In view of the conclusion I have reached in relation to Grounds 5 and 6, it is unnecessary to determine the subsequent grounds of appeal.

I would propose the following orders: 
Appeal allowed.

Convictions set aside.

Order a new trial.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Sperling J. 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Sperling J. * * * 
