

Australian Maritime Safety Authority versus Quirk Matter No 1755/96 [1998]
NSWSC 147 (30 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 `AUSTRALIAN MARITIME SAFETY AUTHORITY versus PATRICIA QUIRK` ` 001755/96` `30 April 1998` `Bryson J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT (See page 45 of transcript). ----- 
HIS HONOUR: The defendant's counsel seeks leave to file in court and read an affidavit of Mr P A Dempsey, valuer, sworn 30 April 1998. Leave is necessary because Pt.38 r.7(1) requires reasonable notice of an affidavit intended to be used and special directions in these proceedings fixed times which have expired for filing affidavits of experts. Mr Dempsey has given a report dealing with the issues produced with his affidavit 30 May 1996 and he made a further affidavit on 2 July 1996. 
Ordinarily an endeavour to open some large new subject by expert evidence without notice would be rejected on the grounds of its procedural unfairness, and that consideration bears strongly on the present application. It is very difficult or in practical terms not fairly possible for counsel to deal with expert evidence such as the evidence of valuers without time and the opportunity to consider a report, absorb its implications and consult the party's own experts, and the plaintiff's counsel and those instructing him have not had that opportunity. Further, their experts were in attendance earlier in the hearing and were cross-examined without Mr Dempsey's present report being available; they are no longer in attendance.

What makes this case to some degree different so that I am prepared to consider allowing such an affidavit to be read are the circumstances in which it emerged and became known to the defendant's advisers that the terms of the lease as in effect under State law are very significantly different to the terms on the face of the documents. It would have been very difficult to see these implications before the decision of the High Court given in August 1997 in Re Residential Tenancies Tribunal of NSW: Ex parte Defence Housing
Authority (1997) 71 ALJR 1254 to which I referred in earlier observations relating to adjournment applications. The implications could have been seen and responded to earlier than that, but no great severity should be visited on the fact that they were not.

Some of Mr Dempsey's report of 30 April 1998 raises material which it would not be fair to allow the defendant now to rely on: the last six lines of affidavit page 5, and page 6. That material is not effected by implications from the High Court's decision, has been available for some time, was not put to the plaintiff's expert witnesses and in procedural justice cannot be brought forward now.

The first passage is a very considerable development of a subject to which Mr
Dempsey referred in a brief and oblique way with far less development in his earlier report. The assumptions made at the earlier time by all parties about who bears the obligation to keep the premises in repair have now proved to be wrong and as I understand the evidence proposed to be read Mr Dempsey's view is that the obligation has some heightened importance for his calculations in the light of that knowledge.

His calculations turn on a hearsay statement given to him by Mr Hurst, a quantity surveyor, to the effect that the current cost of completing the works which the defendant and her son have undertaken is $124,500. This statement cannot be tested because Mr Hurst does not give evidence and his reasoning is not revealed. It would not be fair to put the plaintiff to any procedural task which involves the facts in the hearsay information possibly being found against it now.

I propose to allow the first part of the affidavit to be read but I will not treat the hearsay information as establishing what the current cost of completing the works is. At a later stage I will have the task of coming to a conclusion and ruling on Mr Dempsey's valuing method. If it emerges on that consideration that the current cost of completing the works undertaken by the defendant and her son is a significant matter I will have to give attention to devising some fair procedure for establishing what it is when I have a full grasp of Mr Dempsey's evidence. It still seems possible that I may decide not to act on it on grounds related to procedural fairness, always bearing in mind that the plaintiff's valuers passed through the witness box without being confronted with that method so that they did not deal with it. I will have to leave that to further consideration.

The defendant has leave to read the affidavit of Peter Anthony Dempsey sworn April 1998 and the annexed report but not the last six lines on page 5 or the material on page 6. The affidavit may be filed.
 * * * 
