

Regina versus Llc Matter No Cca 60122/96 [1997] NSWSC 253 (9 July 1997) 
Regina versus LLC /96 July 1997 
Gleeson CJ, James J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus LLC 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: This appeal arises out events that occurred on 30 December 1991. At a trial in the District Court in October 1995, the appellant was convicted of two counts of sexual intercourse with a four-year-old girl. I shall refer to the girl as "the child" in this judgment. 
The appellant was fifteen years of age at the time of the offences and nineteen years of age at the time of the trial. The appeal is against the convictions.

The child was eight years of age at the time of the trial. The appellant was known to her at the time. She gave evidence of penile penetration of the vagina by the appellant, followed by digital penetration. The episode giving rise to the charges was alleged to have occurred somewhat after 4 o'clock in the afternoon. There was evidence of complaint by the child, identifying the appellant, very shortly after the alleged episode. There was medical evidence that the vagina had been abraded and of a fresh tear in the hymen. A DNA analysis was carried out on a sample of semen from the child's underpants and of appellant's blood. The frequency of matching in the general population was approximately one person in 3,700. The results excluded 99.97 per cent of the population.

The appellant consistently denied that he was guilty of the offences charged.
He said to the police and in his evidence that he was at the home of a neighbour, to whom I shall refer as Ms F, on the day in question. He said he had met another adolescent, to whom I shall refer as CC, at the Ampol service station and had gone bike-riding with him at the back of the Jewel supermarket.

Ms F gave evidence that the appellant had been at her home on the day in question until about 4pm or possibly 5pm. That corroborated the first limb of the appellant's account of his movements but it left open the appellant's whereabouts as from 4 o'clock or thereabouts.

CC gave evidence. He was eighteen at the time of the trial. He said he was frequently in the vicinity of the Ampol service station. At first, he said he had never met the appellant there and gone bike-riding with him. Then he conceded that he might have done so and forgotten. He also conceded that he had spoken to the appellant at the service station once or twice. He said, however, that he had never ridden his bike in the area behind the Jewel supermarket, and certainly not with the appellant. He was unshaken on that point. Thus, CC's evidence tended to impugn the second and more important part of the appellant's account of his movements that day.

There are three grounds of appeal, with which I shall deal in turn. The first is that the investigating police refused or neglected to provide the appellant with a sample of blood taken from him for forensic-testing. It is asserted that the appellant requested parts of the samples of blood taken from him and that the request was ignored.

It is argued that this was unfair and unreasonable and did not allow the appellant to properly test the DNA evidence adduced by the Crown.

This ground of appeal must fail. The legal basis of the submission is not apparent but the argument can go nowhere unless it establishes miscarriage of justice of some kind. That is not established. No explanation is offered as to what use the appellant or his advisers would have made of the portion of the sample of blood taken by the authorities if it had been provided. But, whatever it is thought might have been done with it, the appellant suffered no prejudice because a further sample of the appellant's blood could have been obtained independently at any time.

The second ground of appeal is that a witness to whom I shall refer as Ms B could have given evidence of seeing the appellant with CC on the day of the alleged offences, contrary to the evidence given by CC. The appellant says his solicitors had that information. The implication is that the appellant has suffered a miscarriage of justice by reason of the evidence not being called.

There is a statutory declaration by Ms B, who apparently lived nearby with her children. She states in that declaration that the appellant and CC were at her home on 31 December 1991 from just after lunch until early evening. It may be assumed for the purposes of the argument that the date is a mistake for 30
December 1991. True, Ms B's evidence, subject to the date, would have placed the appellant in the company of CC contrary to CC's evidence in that regard.
Ms B's evidence would also have been evidence of an alternative alibi, namely, that the appellant was at her home when the offences were committed, assuming that the problem about the date was cured.

However, that would have contradicted the account given by the appellant himself as to his movements, both to the police and in his evidence. It would also have contradicted the evidence of Ms F which supported at least part of the appellant's account of his movements. The appellant's and Ms F's evidence could not stand with Ms B's evidence, assuming again that Ms B's evidence was made relevant to the case by curing the problem about the date.

The appellant's counsel was bound to conduct the case in accordance with the appellant's instructions. Ms B's evidence would have been inconsistent with those instructions and with the case presented in accordance with those instructions. It would not have assisted the appellant for evidence to be called which impugned the account of given by the appellant of his own movements, both to the police and in his sworn testimony.

In these circumstances, there was no miscarriage of justice arising from the decision not to call Ms B. This ground of appeal must therefore fail.

The third ground of appeal is that evidence given by another witness, LB, was unreliable and the jury should have been informed of that. LB was twelve years of age at the time of the episode and sixteen years of age at the time of the trial. LB said in her evidence that, earlier on the day in question, she and the child were sitting on the front steps of LB's house. She said the appellant had spoken to her and the child there and he had asked them to go to the shops with him, and that they had declined. She said she and the child went to the shops later without the appellant. She said they caught sight of him there and ran home. She said she had taken the child back to the child's own home a little after 3 pm. She insisted in cross-examination that the child was with her earlier that day when the appellant allegedly approached them and asked them both to go to the shops with him. The appellant disputed that he had asked the child to go to shops with him earlier that day as LB asserted.

The argument in support of this ground of appeal is that the witness's mother, to whom I shall refer as Ms B, worked at the Police Centre with the investigating police. It was argued that because of that association and the influence of Ms B on her daughter, LB's evidence was or could have been unreliable and the jury should have been made aware of that.

The employment association between LB's mother and the investigating police officers is not in itself probative of a likelihood that the mother may have improperly influenced her daughter to give false evidence. Nor is there any reason to believe that use of the information in cross-examination of LB might have affected the outcome of the trial. In the broad view, LB was not a major witness in the Crown case.

There has, accordingly, been no miscarriage of justice arising from the employment association not having been brought to the attention of the jury at the trial. This ground of appeal also fails.

For the reasons I have given, none of the grounds of appeal raised by the appellant has substance. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.
 
GLEESON CJ: I agree.
 
JAMES J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the court will be as proposed by Sperling J.
 * * * 
