

Jackson versus The State of New South Wales [1997] NSWSC 51 (24 February 1997) 
JACKSON versus THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /95 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
Appeal from Decision of Master 
Such an appeal is a re-hearing 
Government Insurance Office of NSW versus Weekes [[1981] 1 NSWLR 713]; Do Carmo v Ford Excavations Pty Limited [[1981] 1 NSWLR 409]; Martin V
Abbott Australasia Pty Limited [[1981] 2 NSWLR 430]; Morrison & Anor versus Judd (Court of Appeal - 10 October 1995 - unreported) applied.

Exercise of discretion 
House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] and Morrison applied.

Leave to commence proceedings under s.151D of the Workers Compensation Act refused.

Salido versus Nominal Defendant [(1993) 32 NSWLR 524] considered.

Appeal dismissed with costs. 
Appeal From Decision of Master 
Such an appeal is a re-hearing 
Government Insurance Office of NSW versus Weekes [[1981] 1 NSWLR 713]; Do Carmo v Ford Excavations Pty Limited [[1981] 1 NSWLR 409]; Martin v
Abbott Australasia Pty Limited [1981] [2 NSWLR 430];
Morrison & Anor versus Judd (Court of Appeal - 10 October 1995 - unreported) applied.

Exercise of discretion 
House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] and Morrison applied.

Leave to commence proceedings under s.151D of the Workers Compensation Act refused.

Salido versus Nominal Defendant [(1993) 32 NSWLR 524] considered.

Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
Mr Peter James Jackson, ("the appellant"), for whom Mr R.I. Goodridge of
Counsel appeared, appeals against the refusal of Master Greenwood to grant him leave, pursuant to s.151D(2) of the Workers Compensation Act, ("the Act"), to commence proceedings out of time in this Court for damages against The State of New South Wales, ("the respondent"), for which Mr L. King of Senior Counsel appeared. Neither Mr Goodridge nor Mr King were counsel who appeared before the Master.

The appellant, who was born on 25 April 1957, alleges he sustained personal injuries to his low back, which then affected his legs, in the course of his employment by the respondent at the Cessnock Corrective Centre on 21 July , when he was descending an unlit exterior stairway and slipped on dew, which had settled on it, falling and landing heavily on his low back. He alleges there was no railing provided to the stairs and that since the incident external lighting over the stairs and a railing on them have been installed.

On 25 July 1988 a CT scan disclosed a large herniated disc with a fragment compressing the nerve root. Since the accident the appellant has received various medical treatment. There was some dispute before the Master as to the extent to which, if at all, the appellant will be able to work in the future and the extent of the injuries he sustained. The Master held:- "It is clear from the medical evidence that the plaintiff has a very bad back indeed. He has been described by various medical reports as unfit for any work requiring mobility and this was said to be permanent. The best he can hope for is some work of a semi-clerical kind but the prognosis is poor and continuing problems are inevitable." and:- "There is no doubt that his prospects of any form of permanent meaningful employment in the future are dismal. In that sense the deprivation to the plaintiff would be very serious if he were precluded from bringing proceedings." 
On 20 December 1993 the appellant instituted proceedings in the Compensation
Court, which were settled on 6 April 1994 whereupon the following Award was made "by and with the consent of the parties":- "1. That the respondent pay the applicant as lump sum compensation under section 66 - $17,514.00 in respect of 35% permanent impairment of the applicant's back.
 $9,382.50 in respect of a 15% loss of use of the applicant's right leg at or above the knee.
 $5,838 in respect of 10% loss of the use of the applicant's right leg below the knee.
 . That the respondent pay the applicant, as lump sum compensation under section 67, $16,415.50 in respect of pain and suffering; such sum being inclusive of any claim for interest.
 . That any claim for interest be dismissed save as aforesaid.
 . That the respondent pay the applicant's section 60 expenses in respect of the provision of a mattress in the sum of $850.
 . That the applicant's claim for section 60 expenses of Home Care Service be dismissed.
 . That the respondent pay the applicant's costs (including one qualifying fee and fee for counsel for advice on evidence) forthwith after they have been agreed or taxed." 
The reference to "applicant" and "respondent" in the Award is, of course, a reference to the appellant and the respondent respectively.

On 18 July 1995 the appellant filed a Summons seeking leave to commence common law proceedings against the respondent out of time and, in support thereof, he relied upon his affidavit of 20 June 1995 and the affidavit of his solicitor,
Mr Stephen Paul Firth, of 23 June 1995. The respondent relied on an affidavit of its solicitor, Mr Gregory John Sarginson, of 17 August 1995. The Summons came before the Master on 5 October 1995. The affidavit evidence to which I have referred was read and there was no objection taken to any of it and the deponents, save for the appellant, were not cross-examined. The Master reserved his decision until 9.30am on 6 October 1995 when he gave his reasons for judgment. The parties agreed that on the hearing of the appeal I could have regard to all the evidence before the Master and the documents of record.

On 26 October 1995 the appellant filed a Notice of Appeal, which set forth in four paragraphs what were asserted to be the grounds of appeal. They were:- "1. The learned master fell into error of fact and law.
 . On the whole of the evidence the learned master ought to have granted the Plaintiff leave to commence his proceedings out of time.
 . The learned master failed to exercise his discretion under Section 151D of the Workers Compensation Act.
 . The learned master took into account an irrelevant consideration in the exercise of his discretion to wit the fact that in the view of the learned master the Plaintiff had a strong claim for recovery against his previous solicitors when there was no evidence before the learned master of the strength or otherwise of the Plaintiff's rights against his former solicitors." 
The first three grounds of appeal did not, in my opinion, disclose the bases upon which it was asserted the Master was in error. Mr Goodridge, very frankly, conceded as much and he identified the following asserted errors of fact, as being the errors to which reference was made in the first ground of appeal. The first was that the Master stated, at p.2.8 of his reasons, that: "The award was in excess of $60,000." 
The second appeared in the immediately preceding sentence and was identified as:- "... a 39% disability of the plaintiff." 
It is as well to quote the three sentences giving rise to these two alleged errors. The Master said:- "On 6 April 1994 the defendant consented to an award for permanent loss compensation in the Compensation Court. The compensation, which I will return to in a moment, contained a determination of a 39% permanent disability in the plaintiff. The award was in excess of $60,000." 
It is convenient to deal with a matter, which was not in issue, immediately. Mr King conceded that the statement that the Award was in excess of $60,000 was in error. However, he submitted this error was irrelevant. In fact the amount awarded in paragraph 1, pursuant to s.66, was $32,734.50. The amount awarded in paragraph 2, pursuant to s.67, was $16,415.50 and that awarded in paragraph 4, pursuant to s.60, was $850. The total of the first two amounts is $49,150 and the total of the three amounts is $50,000.

It was common ground that the maximum amount, which could be awarded at the time of the Award under s.66 was $83,400 and that $32,734.50 equalled 39.25% of that amount. In paragraph 16 of his affidavit Mr Firth deposed:- "I say that the Award of the Compensation Court set out in annexure 'a' constitutes 39.25% of the maximum payment pursuant to Section 66. It is therefore greater than the 33% threshold required." 
I will return to the significance of these figures in due course.

The third error of fact asserted by Mr Goodridge appears at p.4.8 in the following sentences:- "However the assessment by his medical advisers, Dr Millians (sic) was 18 per cent, Dr Nield was 18 per cent and Dr Ghabriel whilst in April 1993 assessed the percentage as 50.24 per cent on 18 March 1994 prior to the assessment for workers compensation proceedings, assessed the injury at 21 per cent. Thus, the basis on which the defendant has compromised is well beyond that which the medical advice suggests would be appropriate and the compromise occurred at a time when the period for bringing these proceedings had passed." (My emphasis.) 
The reference to Dr Millians should have been a reference to Dr Millons.

Mr Goodridge also observed that neither Dr Millons nor Dr Nield were the appellant's doctors, in the sense of treating him or giving an opinion for litigious purposes. I did not understand him to suggest that the use of the word "his" had any significance to the ultimate issue to be decided.

Annexure "G" to Mr Sarginson's affidavit which, as I have said, was admitted without objection and upon which there was no cross-examination, is headed "Table of Assessments". It sets out four headings namely "Doctor", "Assessment", "Amount Payable under the [Workers' Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/)" and "Percentage of the maximum amount payable under [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the [Workers' Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/)". In respect of each doctor the table sets forth his assessment of permanent impairment, and then the amount which would have been payable under the Act for that percentage of impairment and, in the final column, the percentage that amount bore to the maximum amount payable under [s.66(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the Act. It was not suggested the table did not correctly set forth the information to which it referred. This table showed that Dr Millons and Dr
Nield, who each assessed thirty percent permanent impairment of the back, provided an eighteen per cent figure of the maximum amount payable under [s.66(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html), whilst Dr Ghabriel, who assessed thirty five per cent impairment of the back as at 18 March 1994, threw up twenty one per cent of the maximum amount payable under that section. Included in the Table of Assessment was Dr
Ghabriel's view as at 14 April 1993. His percentage of permanent impairment of the back was the same, namely thirty five per cent, and he assessed at fifteen per cent the loss of efficient use of the right leg at or above the knee; ten per cent loss of efficient use of the right leg below the knee; ten per cent loss of efficient use of the left leg at or above the knee; and five per cent loss of efficient use of the left leg below the knee.

Paragraph 1 of the Award reflected Dr Ghabriel's percentage impairment to the back and the percentages he attributed to the loss of efficient use of the right leg both above and below the knee. The Award did not reflect Dr
Ghabriel's or any other assessment of loss of efficient use of the left leg.

A submission was made that the passage from the Master's reasons, which I have just quoted, was inaccurate and applied wrong principles.

The fifth asserted error was said to be:- "A general failure to appreciate that the defendant as both the employer and workers compensation respondent has been informed of all details of the claim history including every medical procedure and attendance, every cost, every witness, every referral and the defendant has had an ongoing right to appoint medical examinations and has in part exercised those rights." 
The sixth asserted error is said to appear in the second sentence of page 6.1 of the reasons. I think it appropriate to quote the whole paragraph:- "Another matter that I can take into account in the plaintiff's case although I do not put much weight upon it is the evidence about his lack of advice from his previous legal advisers. However that basis he would seem to have a claim for recovery from another source." 
It would seem that the word "on" should have been inserted after the word "However".

This particular is covered, speaking generally, by the fourth ground of appeal, although I see no basis for asserting in the ground of appeal that the
Master concluded that the appellant had a strong claim for recovery against his previous solicitors.

The errors of law were identified as:- 
A failure to apply the Workers Compensation Act and to construe it beneficially towards the appellant as a worker.

The failure to exercise the discretion in favour of the appellant in circumstances where, on a proper weighing of the prejudice between the parties, the leave sought by the appellant ought to have been granted.

An error in the construction of s.151H of the Act, namely that the Master thought "it was a whole of body assessment rather than the items under the
Table". The Table to which reference is being made is that generally referred to as the Table of Maims appearing after s.73 of the Act.

The Relevant Provisions Of The Act 
It is not really possible to understand the submissions, which appear to have been made before the Master and which were made before me, without a consideration of the relevant provisions of the Act. I hope to be able to undertake this task shortly because, if I may say so with respect, it is clear that the Master, who deals on a frequent basis with common law claims for damages, is totally familiar with the way in which the Act operates as, no doubt, were counsel who appeared before him on the hearing of the Summons, and as were counsel who appeared before me. In the circumstances the Master, who conducts a busy running list, could hardly be expected to engage in a detailed exposition of each and every relevant provision of the Act and, in my opinion, there was no requirement that he should have. The language adopted by him in setting forth the effect of the Act was criticised by Mr Goodridge as disclosing error and as failing to evidence an understanding of the way in which the Act operated. Mr King submitted that whilst some statements may have been elliptical the Master did not fall into error. He submitted that any lack of felicitousness of expression was explicable by the matters to which I have just referred and by the fact that the judgment was given, effectively, ex tempore. The issue, on this point, is whether, on a fair reading of the judgment, the Master fell into error which would vitiate his decision.

In an attempt to overcome a lengthy exposition to me of the operation of the relevant portions of the Act the parties agreed on the following statement:- "A. In 1989 the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) was amended to introduce modified claims for damages.
 
To get economic loss a worker had to be entitled to: % of the basic [S.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) Lump sum or damages for non-economic loss of $100,000.
 
B. In 1991 the Act was further amended to, inter alia, retrospectively reduce these thresholds to: % or $60,000 (indexed thereafter) 
The amounts are fixed by reference to date or (sic) injury.
 
C. The 1991 amendment took effect on 26 March 1991.
 
D. Therefore: 
Between 1987 and 26 March 1991 (A) above applied (this was when Mr Fox advised) and from 26 March 1991 (B) above applied." 
It is convenient to refer immediately to the advice of Mr Fox of Counsel, which was furnished on 4 October 1990, i.e. before the 1991 amendment became law. In short, but I think sufficiently for present purposes as the advice of Mr Fox was accepted by the Master and the parties as being correct, Mr Fox was of the view that the appellant would have great difficulty in passing either of the thresholds as they existed when he wrote his advice. He summarised his view in the following terms:- "In my opinion it would be hazardous and risky for Mr Jackson to institute common law proceedings against his employer as he would have to elect to forgo his workers' compensation rights to do so and there is a real risk that he would get no damages payable to him because of the threshold set out above. Mr Jackson should retain his workers' compensation rights." 
However, as from 26 March 1991, the thresholds were lowered in the way set forth in paragraph B and this applied to injuries which occurred prior to 30 June 1989. At the same time a three year limitation period was provided by the Act, which ran from 26 March 1991. The Master set forth these matters in his judgment. Also the requirement to make an election was removed. In essence the appellant's case before the Master was that had he been aware of these changes he would have brought proceedings at common law because it would have been easier to meet one of the thresholds for the recovery of economic loss and, even if that was not achieved, there was no need to make an election.

The Master recorded that it was the appellant's evidence that at no time prior to his settling the workers compensation proceedings on 6 April 1994 was he informed that the amendments to the Act, which took effect on 26 March 1991, changed his position "concerning the benefit of his pursuing common law rights": p.2 of the reasons. He accepted that the appellant did not have this knowledge. Importantly, of course, the thresholds for the recovery of economic loss, which is generally such an important component of common law damages, were lowered, and the necessity to make an election was removed.

The position which existed on 6 April 1994, when the respondent consented to the Award, was that notwithstanding that the lower thresholds had been in place from 26 March 1991 the appellant had not sought to bring any proceedings at common law and, as at 6 April 1994, these proceedings were time barred, unless there was a grant of leave pursuant to [s.151D(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151d.html) 
The Master found that on 21 March 1995 the appellant instructed his present solicitors, who advised him on 25 May 1995 "of his rights to claim at common law".

At p.3 of the reasons the Master said:- "It is conceded by learned counsel for the plaintiff that at the time of the expiration of the limitation period, that is, 26 March 1994 the plaintiff was possessed of the knowledge necessary to bring these proceedings. The only fact of which he was ignorant was a right to bring proceedings." [Section 151G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151g.html) provided that no damages for non-economic loss, being pain and suffering; loss of amenities of life; loss of expectation of life; and disfigurement, are to be awarded unless the injured worker's ability to lead a normal life is significantly impaired by the injury, and that the amount of such damages is to be a proportion, determined according to the severity of the non-economic loss, of the maximum amount which may be awarded. The section also made provision for depriving a worker of the whole or part of such damages if certain internal threshold figures were not achieved.
 [Section
H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151h.html) provided that no damages for economic loss are to be awarded unless the worker receives a serious injury or dies as a result of the injury received. A serious injury is one for which the compensation otherwise payable under [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) for the loss or losses resulting from that injury is, in the opinion of the
Court, not less than thirty three per cent of the maximum amount from time to time referred to in [s.66(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html)
As I have observed there is no dispute that the amounts payable for the losses under [s.66(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) are in the order of thirty nine per cent of the maximum amount and, therefore, exceed the statutory percentage. Accordingly, if the Award gives rise to an estoppel, or evidence of the terms of settlement could be led in the common law proceedings as an admission against the respondent and was accepted by the
Court as such, the appellant would have established a serious injury such as to entitle him to claim economic loss. The second basis, which will establish that an injury is serious, is that it is one for which damages of not less than $60,000 for non-economic loss are awarded in accordance with that
Division of the Act and whether or not compensation is payable under [s.66.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) 
The Nature Of The Appeal From The Master 
An appeal from the Master's decision is by way of a re-hearing: s.75A(5), and not a hearing de novo. Thus I am restricted to reviewing the findings of fact and law and the exercise of discretion in the same way as any appellate court: Government Insurance Office of New South Wales versus Weekes [[1981] 1 NSWLR 713] These various requirements were emphasised by Kirby P in Morrison, when his Honour said:- "I am prepared to accept that Spender AJ approached the appellate function appreciating that he was reviewing a discretionary decision of the primary decision-maker which should not be disturbed unless it was shown to be wrong in some relevant respect - ie, for failing to take into account a material consideration; for taking into account an immaterial consideration; for reaching a conclusion which was otherwise manifestly wrong; or for evidencing an error of principle. See Wentworth versus Rogers & Anor (No 3) [(1986) 6 NSWLR 642 (CA)], 644. It is self-evident that, in appeals of this character within the Supreme Court, it cannot have been Parliament's intention that one member of the Supreme Court (a single judge) should simply substitute his or her opinion on a discretionary decision concerning a matter of practice for that earlier determined by another member of the Supreme Court (a master). If this were the principle of appellate review, few cases would conclude at a master. Every contested case where the party had 'a long pocket' would be taken for re-determination by a judge. This Court, in its own appellate review, must uphold the primacy of the original decision- maker's determination. But I am not prepared to infer that Spender AJ misconceived his function or took the wrong approach." 
The Applicable Principles 
Accordingly on this appeal it must be shown that the Master's exercise of discretion has miscarried. The question is whether the Master was justified, on the material before him, in exercising the discretion in the way in which he did. He described his approach thus:- "The discretion is a wide one and has variously been described as a determination of what is just and reasonable or fair and reasonable or fair and just in the circumstances which pertain in a particular case. The onus remains on the party seeking an indulgence to satisfy the court that it is proper for time to be extended." 
This, in my respectful opinion, is a correct statement of the principles he was required to apply.

In Salido versus Nominal Defendant [(1993) 32 NSWLR 524] Gleeson
CJ, with whom Powell JA basically agreed, was considering s.52(4) of the Motor
Accidents Act, which, for all presently relevant purposes, is in the same terms as s.151D(2). The Chief Justice noted that where there is no positive indication of the considerations on which a grant or refusal of leave is to depend the limits of the discretion are to be found in the subject matter and the scope and purpose of the statute: p.530. He continued:- "The usual purpose of a limitation period is to protect a defendant from the injustice of having to face a stale claim ... Additionally, Part 5 of the Motor Accidents Act evinces a legislative intention to promote prompt settlements of claims and to encourage forensic diligence: ..." 
His Honour said that the real question was to ask whether it was "fair and just" to extend the time and, at pp.532-533, he proffered the following guidelines:- "1. Section 52(4) confers a discretion which is to be exercised judicially, in a manner that furthers the purposes of the statutory context in which it appears. The immediate purpose, as with any limitation period, is to protect defendants against the injustice of stale claims; the statute is also aimed at promoting forensic diligence.
 . Bearing in mind those statutory purposes, the question is whether, in the circumstances of each individual case, the applicant for leave has demonstrated that it is fair and just that leave should be granted.
 . The diligence, or lack of diligence, shown by a plaintiff or a plaintiff's representatives, in ascertaining and asserting his or her rights will ordinarily be a material factor, as will the extent of the relevant delay, and the reason for it.
 . The nature and extent of any forensic disadvantage to a defendant resulting from a plaintiff's delay will also be material. The effect, if any, of the delay upon the defendant's ability to defend an action is a matter to be taken into account, and may in some cases be of decisive importance.
 . Leave under s.52(4) may be refused if it would be plainly futile to grant it, and in that connection an applicant's willingness and ability to give a full and satisfactory explanation of any delays in reporting to police, notifying claims and commencing proceedings will be material." 
Kirby P proffered a more wide-ranging list of guidelines and Powell JA held that the only two guidelines were:- "1. Whether a sufficient explanation has been given for the failure to commence proceedings in time; and . If so, whether, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, it is fair and just to grant, or to refuse, the application": p.541.

In coming to his conclusion the Master said:- "In my view therefore, weighing up the case put by the plaintiff, the prejudice to the defendant, and the fact that the plaintiff was aware of all matters concerning his claim other than his rights to bring an action I am of the view that it would not be just and reasonable to allow the extension of the limitation period." 
The question is whether the various asserted errors vitiate this decision, which amounted to an exercise of his discretion in a matter of practice, conformably with the principles to which I have referred.

The Master's Decision 
It is convenient to state the competing claims before the Master. The appellant sought leave to bring the common law proceedings because he was unaware that from 26 March 1991 the thresholds had been lowered and the need to make an election had been removed. His case was that had he been so aware a claim would have been made for damages. The respondent opposed the grant of leave on the basis that it was prejudiced because it had settled the workers compensation proceedings when no common law action had been initiated and the time for doing so without leave had expired, on terms which would enable the appellant to say that there was an issue estoppel in relation to the percentage of the maximum payment pursuant to s.66 such that he was entitled to recover for economic loss in the common law proceedings. As will appear the Master did not necessarily accept there was such an estoppel in the circumstances, (although counsel agreed before me there was), but he was of the view that evidence could be led of the payments pursuant to s.66 and the percentage they bore to the maximum amount under that section as an admission that the threshold to a claim for economic loss had been reached. Obviously the claim for economic loss for the appellant, who was aged 38 years at the date of the Master's decision and was claiming in respect of injuries having the potential consequences to which the Master referred, had the real prospect of being substantial. Before the Master the appellant was not prepared to make any concession that he would not rely on the Award or the effect of the payments under s.66 in any common law proceedings. It was in all these circumstances that the Master was called upon to exercise his discretion.

Mr King submitted that the proper inference to draw was that the respondent was prepared to settle after the limitation expired on somewhat more generous terms that it otherwise would have settled because it was no longer able to be sued at common law, unless leave was granted, and that had it been aware that the respondent would have sought to proceed at common law it would either have negotiated harder to try to ensure that the first threshold was not reached, or it would have contested the matter in the Compensation Court. Mr Goodridge, initially, did not cavil with this submission.

Somewhat belatedly he made a written submission to this effect that for all the evidence disclosed and for all the respondent knew when it compromised the compensation proceedings the appellant may have issued common law proceedings within time, but not served them. There are a number of difficulties with this proposition, not the least of which is that the appellant's evidence was that he had not instituted common law proceedings because he believed at all times that it would not be in his interests to do so and that by doing so he would have made an election not to pursue the compensation proceedings.

Nextly I think it is far too late to be raising this point. The question of prejudice was obviously before the Master, and I think there is an indication in his reasons to which I shall refer, that a submission was made by the respondent that the settlement was effected on the basis to which Mr King referred. However, even if there is not, it was open to the appellant to make this submission before the Master in answer to the claim for prejudice in which case the knowledge of the respondent at the time of the settlement could have been explored. There is no suggestion that any such submission was made to the Master.

Thirdly, the point is purely hypothetical because it is known that no proceedings had been instituted prior to the settlement. I think, therefore, that the Master was entitled and, in the light of the submissions, probably bound to proceed on the basis that a settlement was effected at a time when common law proceedings were time barred and the settlement was of such a nature that the respondent would be prejudiced if leave was granted to institute common law proceedings.

I shall deal now with the asserted errors of fact made by the Master. The first is that he stated the Award was in excess of $60,000, whereas it is conceded that the figure was $50,000. I appreciate Mr Goodridge does not accept that the $850 for the mattress should be included and that the correct figure is $49,150. I do not see why the figure for the mattress should not be included, which would provide a figure of $50,000. It was submitted that this was an immaterial error with which I agree. Nothing in the Master's reasons depends upon it. It was also asserted that there is error in that "no interest was allowed" and "no home care costs allowed". However, as this occurred in a compromise settlement I do not consider either of the matters are significant.

Secondly, it was asserted that the statement by the Master that the compensation contained a determination of a thirty nine per cent permanent disability in the appellant was an error of fact. In my view the position could, if I may say so with respect, have been put more clearly by the Master.
But in the context and having regard to what he said later, it is clear he was not mistaken. The thirty nine per cent was the approximate relationship between the amounts awarded pursuant to s.66 and the maximum amount, which could be awarded under that section. The significance of this figure was that it provided a statutory threshold from which the appellant could recover economic loss in proceedings for common law damages in the way to which I have referred. This was a matter with which Mr Firth dealt in his affidavit no doubt to show the potential extent of the common law claim, which the Master acknowledged in the passages I have cited.

The Master showed he completely understood this when, at p.4, he referred to the respondent's submission that prejudice arose because of the threshold laid down in s.151H(2)(a), which he quoted and, having done so, he continued:- "In this particular instance the matter was settled for a sum which constituted approximately thirty nine per cent of the maximum amount which at that time".
 
It seems that the words, or words to the effect "was applicable" have not been inserted in the reasons after the word "which" where secondly appearing. This showed that the Master understood the way in which the figure of approximately thirty nine per cent operated. 
The Master went to look at the alternative position under s.151H(2), namely if damages of not less than $60,000 for non-economic loss were awarded. The first two sentences of the paragraph make it quite clear the Master was referring to this. He continued that the appellant would seek damages in excess of that threshold. He then set out the sentence, which has been so roundly criticised by Mr Goodridge, and continued:- "Thus, the basis on which the defendant has compromised is well beyond that which the medical advice suggests would be appropriate and the compromise occurred at a time when the period for bringing these proceedings had passed." 
This paragraph has the potential to cause difficulties. However I think that on a fair reading in the context of the judgment it does not. The appellant only had to pass one of the two thresholds to recover economic loss and the Master had already found that he had overcome the first. It was, therefore, unnecessary, for the purpose of deciding the issue of prejudice, to consider whether he had also passed the second. Mr King submitted, initially, that once the Master had found that the first threshold was passed it was logically necessary for him to consider whether the second was also met. For the reasons I have just given I do not think this is so.

Mr Goodridge submitted that there was no such logical requirement for the
Master to find that the second threshold had been met and he said that was the way he read the reasons. He submitted further that the Master's reasoning was infected with error because there was no legal relationship between the percentage of impairment, which figures the Master obviously derived from
Annexure "G" to Mr Sarginson's affidavit, and damages for non-economic loss.
He submitted that damages for non-economic loss would have to be worked out quite differently. Strictly speaking that is so, but I do not see that the
Master could not adopt the approach he did, having regard to his experience in assessing damages for non-economic loss, to provide at least a prima facie view as to whether a person with that percentage of permanent impairment would be likely to recover damages for non-economic loss in accordance with the Act.
His prima facie view seems to have been that it would not. Mr Goodridge submitted that only a prima facie view was required. The question then posed is the reason for this enquiry.

Mr Goodridge submitted that the concluding sentence indicated that the Master thought that the appellant had received "a pot of gold" from the workers compensation settlement and took this into account when exercising his discretion adversely to him. I do not accept this submission. In my opinion the Master was simply drawing attention to the fact that the appellant's case, on the material before him, may not give rise to a claim for non-economic loss, which merely emphasised the prejudice which would be suffered if the appellant was allowed to pursue a claim for economic loss.

This is the passage which, I think, indicated that a submission was made that the respondent may have settled somewhat more generously because the limitation period had expired. However, if it does not have that meaning it does, in my opinion, cast doubt on the way in which the Master exercised his discretion.

The fourth error is the assertion that the Master said that he accepted that the respondent "may be well subject to grave prejudice".

This was said in the following context:- "The defendant claims that it would be prejudiced and that he (sic) would be estopped from denying that the plaintiff passes the thresholds of s.151H.
 
I do not accept that estoppel would necessarily arise in the circumstances in which the matter was dealt with. However, I do accept that the defendant may be well subject to grave prejudice in that the plaintiff would be entitled to lead evidence as to the percentage of assessment which was used as the basis for settling the Compensation Court aspect of the claim.
 
No submission was made on behalf of the plaintiff concerning any concession that the plaintiff would be prepared to make at a trial." 
The prejudice to which the Master was referring is obvious. Further this paragraph makes it clear that the prejudice he found related to the thirty nine per cent and not to the alternative basis, which accords with the way in which I have read his reasons. As he had said the respondent had compromised the Compensation Court proceedings on a basis which, even if an estoppel did not run in respect of achieving the first threshold for economic loss, none-the-less evidence could be led of the relevant facts as an admission that the percentage referred to in s.151H(2)(a) was above thirty three per cent. In those circumstances the respondent had settled the matter after the limitation period had expired on a basis which, if common law proceedings were allowed, could prove highly detrimental to it by admitting a claim for economic loss. It is obvious there was some discussion about this matter before the Master and he noted, in the paragraph I have quoted lastly, that no concession was made on behalf of the appellant as to the stand he would take at a trial.

As I have said the parties agreed that such an estoppel would run if pleaded.
The Master, of course, did not say that would not happen, but rather that he did not accept that it would necessarily do so in the circumstances in which the settlement had been affected. However, the Master clearly accepted the possibility of proving the facts necessary to establish an admission.

Mr Goodridge adopted, initially, the approach that if an attempt was made to establish an admission the respondent would be in a position to call evidence to deny that any admission was made or intended to be made. However, that does not take the matter further than saying that there would have been an issue to be determined in the common law proceedings, which could, depending upon the view taken of the evidence, be decided adversely to the respondent with the consequence that it would be exposed to a claim for economic loss and the prejudice flowing therefrom. Of more significance though is the concession that the Award would act, relevantly, to create an estoppel.

Ultimately in reply Mr Goodridge said he had express instructions from the appellant, that he would not assert that the Award either gave rise to an estoppel or an admission. In these circumstances, so Mr Goodridge submitted, any prejudice was removed.

The Master was reviewing the matter on 6 October 1995, some sixteen months ago. It was not suggested by Mr Goodridge that there could not be prejudice to the respondent of the type to which the Master referred or, perhaps more accurately, it was not submitted in the end. In any event the concession Mr
Goodridge demonstrates an appreciation not only of the prejudice but of the significance of it. However the Master was dealing with the matter as things then stood and Mr King submitted that the appeal involved a determination as to whether the Master was in error as the matter was presented to him. He also submitted that the making of the concession could not be said to remove any actual prejudice, which may have occurred since 6 October 1995, or any presumptive prejudice of the type referred to in Brisbane Southern Regional
Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] per Dawson J at p.866; per Toohey and Gummow JJ at pp.868 and and per McHugh J at pp.870 to 872. In my opinion these submissions are an answer to the belated concession offered by the appellant. I would add, consistently I believe with what the Chief Justice said in Salido, that the failure to make the concession until now is a matter which, if the matter were remitted for further consideration, would have to be taken into account.

Error five is concerned with the submission that the Master did not have regard to the fact that there was no other prejudice suggested and, in the circumstances, no other prejudice could have accrued. I do not consider that to be correct: Brisbane Southern Regional Health Authority versus Taylor.

Finally, there was criticism made of the concluding paragraph in the Master's reasons, which I have set forth above. In my view the Master dealt with this aspect of the matter in a manner totally consistent with the way in which the
Court of Appeal considered it in Morrison. Kirby P discussed this point from pp.9 to 11. At p.11 his Honour said:- "The availability of an action against a negligent legal representative is relevant because commonsense says that it is so. It means that the litigant, who may be wholly or mainly innocent, is not put out of court without some chance of redress, however difficult that chance may be to enforce. To that extent an injustice, which might otherwise occur to the litigant, may be capable of being avoided. However, precisely because of the kind of difficulties which Smith J listed in Scard Amaglia, it is a consideration which 'cannot carry much weight'." 
Accordingly when the Master said this was a matter he could take into account he was correct, and in saying that he did not put "much weight upon it" he was echoing the words of Smith J, which were adopted by Kirby P. In these circumstances I do not see that there can be any criticism of this passage in the Master's reasons.

Asserted Legal Errors 
Mr Goodridge submitted there was an obligation to construe the Act beneficially to workers. However, in deciding the issue the Master was bound to apply the principles to which he referred. If by doing so he came to a proper conclusion adverse to the appellant I do not see how calling in aid the beneficial construction approach assists the appellant.

The second legal question Mr Goodridge identified merely states that in exercising the discretion in the way in which he did the Master was in error.

The third legal question is not one which, in my opinion, arises. I am satisfied the Master made no error in his consideration of the relevant terms of the Act.

Conclusions 
If one returns to the guide-lines specified by the Chief Justice in Salido and, at least inferentially, reinforced in Brisbane Southern Regional Health
Authority, the first requirement is to protect defendants against the injustice of stale claims and to ensure forensic diligence. The Court must then look to what is fair and just. These discretionary considerations were undertaken by the Master. For the reasons I have given I am unable to see any error which would justify my interfering with the way in which he exercised his discretion. The appeal must, accordingly, be dismissed with costs.

Orders 
I order that:- 
The appeal be dismissed.

The appellant pay the respondent's costs.
 * * * 
