

Slater versus State of New South Wales [1996] NSWSC 516 (25 October 1996) 
SLATER versus STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES  /95 CLD 13462/92 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, BEAZLEY JA, SIMOS AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Police - claim for trespass to person 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
POLICE - CLAIM FOR TRESPASS TO PERSON - plaintiff claims he was thrown off roof of building by members of police force - suffered significant injury - at trial plaintiff asserted defendant liable on express basis plaintiff was pushed from roof - Master does not accept plaintiff's case.

APPEAL - at trial Master did not accept version of circumstances given by defendant's witnesses - a number of inconsistencies and discrepancies noted in evidence in defendant's case - plaintiff's version of facts not accepted by
Master either - absence of independent corroboration - not satisfied that inferences supporting plaintiff's case could be drawn - judgment entered for defendant - in Court of Appeal appellant argues that there were areas in which plaintiff's evidence was corroborated - submits that correct inference to be drawn from Master's findings is that there was an element of fabrication in police evidence - makes further submissions against Master's findings of fact.
 
Held: There being no demonstrable error of significance in the Master's findings of fact the court had no reason to interfere. The main findings were fairly open to the Master on the evidence before him including his not drawing inferences supporting the appellant's case.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: The appellant in this appeal was the plaintiff in proceedings against the State of New South Wales as defendant. They were decided by Master Malpass, who gave judgment for the defendant.

The plaintiff's case was based on events of 6 February 1990, early in the morning. His account of what happened was that he had gone to the Doonside
Public School. He got on to the roof of a one storey building. He took off some roof tiles. He heard a noise from inside the school grounds. He "went and hid right down the other end of the roof" inside the roof of the building, above the ceiling and below the tiles [that is, the other end from the spot where he had moved the tiles] "pulled batts off and put bits on top of me and hid a knife under another batt, a few batts away so that it was not close to me." Then someone called out from the hole he had made telling him to come out. He did not answer. Then tiles were taken off the roof above him.
He then said he was coming out but they said, "'No, you are not,' and they threw the dog on top of me". Two men got inside the roof. The plaintiff then struggled with the dog. The men told him to get out through the hole. As he climbed up "They said, 'You are under arrest, breaking and entering'". They then dragged him up to the point of the roof and then said, "Jump". They then said "If you don't jump, we will push you". The plaintiff then grabbed one of the men by the throat. There were then angry words and "One of them hit me across the wrist with a baton to get me off him. I was not holding him very hard so my hands went straight down and I felt a hit and push on my back and I lost my balance and I went over the roof and hit the concrete below".

There is no doubt that the plaintiff fell from the roof while police and security guards were on it. In the fall he suffered significant injury to his right foot, left shin and nose.

In his statement of claim the plaintiff alleged that at approximately 1 am on February 1990 he had been arrested by members of the New South Wales Police
Force, and was on the roof of the Doonside Public School in the company of four named policemen, when some or all of them pushed him from the roof.

In the beginning of his reasons Master Malpass made it clear that on the question of liability the issue in dispute between the parties was whether or not the plaintiff's undoubted fall from the roof was caused by a push from police. In this court likewise, counsel for the plaintiff agreed that at no time was the plaintiff seeking to make out the lesser case against the defendant that a trespass had been committed against him by the use by the police of unreasonable force in his arrest. The issue the plaintiff intended to have decided in the proceedings was the one identified by the Master, was he pushed from the roof? 
The evidence which was called in the plaintiff's case before the Master consisted of his own evidence which, as given in chief, I have already summarised, and that of two other witnesses. In cross-examination of the plaintiff, matters emerged, both as to the facts he was asserting and as to his credit generally which led the Master to say "... in the absence of independent corroboration, I do not consider that I can accept his evidence." 
The first of the other witnesses in the plaintiff's case was Mrs Clynick. She lived in a house in the same street as the school, on the other side of the road. Her son was a pupil at the school and she was familiar with its layout.
She said she could see all of the roof of the school from her house.

The first part of Mrs Clynick's evidence in chief was as follows. She had been woken up on the night of the plaintiff's fall by voices and the sound of cars pulling up. She looked towards the school through a window from inside her house, about seventy-three metres away, according to Exhibit 8, a measured plan tendered in the defendant's case. She saw what looked like policemen with torches walking around the school's grounds. She saw a car arrive. Some dogs and a man got out of it. She saw figures and heard voices on the roof of the school. She heard police singing out "Come out. Come out.". She saw what looked like two policemen start to pull tiles off the middle section of the roof. She then saw somebody push the dogs in, heard screaming, dogs barking and a voice sing out, "Get them off". Then she saw the man with the dogs come out with the dogs and then another person came up on the roof. There was a scuffle and the two policemen punched him a few times in the stomach. Then they took him down to the end of the roof. They were right behind him as he walked up to the end of the roof. Mrs Clynick then gave this evidence: "There were lots of conversations going on that I couldn't hear but one part that I could hear was when they got to the end of the roof and they were standing behind him and he said, 'Well, how am I going to get down' and they said 'Well there is no other way down.' Then he looked over his shoulder and then he said to the policeman, 'You are not going to push me, are you' and then I don't know what they said but I just shut my eyes and turned my head the other way." 
She then heard a thud, opened her eyes and saw a man lying on the ground.

In her evidence in chief she said she thought the distance from where she was watching to the roof of the school was about eighty feet.

In cross-examination she was asked whether the distance was closer to eighty metres than eighty feet and replied that she was not sure on metres, she was only sure on feet. When asked whether it was fair to say that there was not much illumination by artificial light of the area of the roof of the school on the night she witnessed the events she answered "You could say that". She said she could see the silhouettes of the figures on the roof. She said she was certain she saw more than one dog and that there were no more than three people in uniform on the roof. She said that only once did she let the curtain at the window where she was standing close and that was when a policemen on the roof shone a torch in her window at her. She said her husband had been with her at the window, but not all the time. She agreed a lot of people were talking all at the same time while she was watching what was happening on the roof. The transcript then shows the following evidence: "... what you are saying is this that you picked up snippets of conversation here and there? 
A. That's right.
 
Q. Am I right to say that those snippets of conversation created a picture in your mind of what was actually going on on the roof? 
A. The picture was what I could see.
 
Q. And that was silhouettes on the roof? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. I take it you were not at your window taking notes of the conversation? 
A. No, that is right.
 
Q. You do not suggest, do you, that the words that you have used in your evidence as the words that were used by the people on the roof were the precise words that were used that night? 
A. No, they are not precise.
 
Q. You could be mistaken, I take it about some of the words that were used and about who might have uttered them? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Much of the noise there was muffled? 
A. Quiet, yeah.
 
Q. Indeed much of it was hard for you to hear because of the barking from the dog or dogs on the roof? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. There was a lot of barking, was there not? 
A. Only when the dogs were in the roof, up on the roof and going in.
 
Q. I take it that the events that you have described took place over a very short space of time? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. It is often hard when you are trying to create a picture in the court room. Everything seems to take forever but what you are describing occurred in the matter of a few moments, did it not? 
A. Not the whole lot.
 
Q. But the events on the roof itself? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. While the dog or dogs were on the roof they were barking? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. They or it was barking? 
A. Yes." 
Mrs Clynick agreed that it was possible that she was mistaken in thinking she had heard someone say "There is no other way down". There then occurred the following: "Q. It is fair to say, is it not, that the other man on the roof was patently, as far as you could tell, agitated? 
A. He was scared.
 
Q. He was apparently scared? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You say he was scared, do you because of the words that you heard uttered? 
A. Not actually the words but the way he said it.
 
Q. And that is, 'You are not going to push me, are you?'? 
A. And also, 'You don't understand'.
 
Q. You certainly didn't hear any police officer say the words, 'Jump. Jump', did you? 
A. No.
 
Q. You certainly did not hear any police officer say, 'If you don't jump we will push you'? 
A. No.
 
Q. There is no question, is there, that at no time that you had your eyes on the roof, did you see the man who apparently came off the roof put his hands on another person? 
A. No.
 
Q. Do I understand your evidence to be this, that that is highly unlikely to have occurred because your recollection is that he had his hands behind his back all the time? 
A. Well, from my - from what I could see his hands were behind his back most of the time. I didn't see his hands in front." 
Towards the end of her cross-examination it was suggested to her that she had effectively put together bits and pieces of what she saw in her mind and what she heard and had come up with an account of what took place that did not in fact take place. She denied this.

The cross-examiner then obtained from her that she was more certain about the number of dogs being more than one than she was about the words that were used. She was also asked whether her husband was at court, and answered that he was sitting outside. (He did not give evidence.) 
In re-examination Mrs Clynick said that her husband's eyesight was pretty good; that following an incident involving one of his eyes he had been supplied with glasses; he had not been wearing glasses at the time he was with her looking through the window at what was happening at the school; and he had made a successful industrial deafness claim.

The other witness called in the plaintiff's case was Mr McDonald who, at the time of giving evidence, (1 September 1995) had recently become a member of the New South Wales Police Service, but who had in February 1990 been a member of the Education Department Security Group.

Mr McDonald's evidence was that he had gone to the school on the night in question with two other Security Agents. They had noticed the hole through which the plaintiff had got into the roof. Mr McDonald saw the other two go into the hole and come out again. The three then waited until police arrived.
Then he and the other two security officers, a police officer who was a dog squad handler and one dog and approximately another two police officers went on to the roof. The dog would not go into the hole through which the plaintiff had entered the roof. The group then went to the part of the roof beneath which they thought the plaintiff was lying and removed tiles there. Then the dog handler and the dog went in through that newly made hole. Mr McDonald could hear the dog barking and the person inside yelling. Then the plaintiff came out of the roof and one police officer grabbed him by the left arm and started to walk to the peak of the roof. The plaintiff was struggling. Another police officer started to walk towards the pair who were struggling. At that time the dog handler was having some trouble getting out of the roof and Mr
McDonald turned to help him. When he turned around there were only two police officers standing on the roof. The last time he had seen the plaintiff, before turning to help the dog handler, one of the two police officers was still holding the plaintiff by the left arm.

In cross-examination Mr McDonald agreed that the plaintiff had been trying to break free from the police and in doing so was moving towards the edges of the roof.

Then followed these questions and answers: "Q. Do I understand your evidence to be this: that you saw a police officer ... [t]ake hold of the man who had emerged from the roof cavity by one hand, is that right? 
A. By - he physically grabbed this man's left arm.
 
Q. Right. How did he do that? 
A. From where I saw he had him just near the elbow with his hand under here and I believe he had his other hand on his wrist or lower part of his arm.
 
Q. And the man Slater was waving his arms around? 
A. Yes, he was very distraught from my observation.
 
Q. And waving his arms around? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And you cannot say whether or not he seemed to break free but he may well have broken free while you were there? 
A. That's correct.

Q. And while he was doing that, that is waving his arms around endeavouring to break free, he moved backwards? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You certainly did not see any police officer push him, did you? 
A. Off the roof you mean? 
Q. Yes.

A. No.
 
Q. You saw no police officer assault him? 
A. No.
 
Q. He was certainly not punched? 
A. No, not that I seen.
 
Q. No batten (sic) was applied? 
A. No.
 
Q. You were certainly in a position to have observed any police officer to have assaulted him in any fashion? 
A. Whilst I had him in my sight while I was on the roof, yes.
 
Q. For all the time you were on the roof until you turned around to assist the dog handler you would have been in a position to observe any assault taking place? 
A. That's correct.
 
Q. And indeed any pushing of anyone? 
A. Off the roof? 
Q. Yes.

A. Yes.
 
Q. At no time that evening did you see him being pushed, kicked or hit, correct? 
A. That's correct.
 
Q. Now, I take it that you are giving this evidence today not because you have an independent recollection of what took place but because you have refreshed your recollection from a statement or statements that you made previously? 
A. That's correct.
 
Q. When were you first asked to apply your mind to the events in question? 
A. It was in February 1991 I believe which is the date on my record of interview.
 
Q. So to be fair to you may we take it that it was 15 January 1991? 
A. January yes - sorry, it might have been January.
 
Q. So it was eleven months after these events? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. At no time between 6 February 1990 and 25 January 1991 were you called upon to give an account either orally or in writing about what you had observed on the roof that night? 
A. That's correct.
 
Q. You see what I want to suggest to you is that your recollection about the police actually or the police officer actually having hold of Mr Slater is faulty, that in fact he was trying to take hold of him but could not do so? 
A. That could be possible. As I said, it looked like to me that he had hold of his arm but Mr Slater was jerking his arm around and possibly he didn't quite have a grip on him.
 
Q. Indeed it was dark up on the roof? 
A. That's correct.
 
Q. There was little artificial light? 
A. Yes, on the roof it was mainly just the street light illuminating the roof.
 
Q. And your description of the lighting in that area on the roof is that it was dark? 
A. That's correct." 
Mr McDonald was quite definite that there was only one dog there that night.

In re-examination there were the following questions and answers: "Q. Under your observation how far did Bradley and the plaintiff move in the western direction up towards the ridge of the roof together? 
A. As I recollect it was just about to the peak of the roof.
 
Q. Are you able to estimate how far from the hole to the peak of the roof they had moved? 
A. No I'm sorry.
 
Q. And during that time at any stage did you actually see the plaintiff break free from Brad? 
A. No." 
The first witness for the defendant was a licensed private inquiry agent who at the request of the New South Wales Crown Solicitor had in 1994 spoken to
Mrs Clynick at her house. He had made the measurements for the plan which became Exhibit 8. He also said that he had asked Mrs Clynick whether the curtains then on the windows in her house were the same as on the night of the incident. She had said yes. He had asked her whether she had pulled the curtains aside to see what was going on and she had said no and that her husband had not done so either. He also gave evidence that he had visited the school both at night and during the day. There was no street lighting on the school side of the street. On a sunny day he had looked through the window Mrs
Clynick had looked through on the night in question and said he found it difficult to see or describe the roof of the school.

Mr Mitchell was thoroughly cross-examined, but as I read the transcript, was not significantly damaged on any material point.

The next witness for the defendant was the police officer who had been the dog handler on the night in question. He said he took one dog to the school. He gave evidence that he had not seen the plaintiff at the school, after he had left the ceiling space through the hole in the roof the police had made.

Next, the defendant called one of the two security guards mentioned by Mr
McDonald, the police officer with whom the plaintiff had been struggling immediately before he fell off the roof, another police officer who had been on the roof and another police officer who had been at the school, but not on the roof.

There is no point in giving any detail of the evidence of these witnesses. It was carefully considered by Master Malpass and his conclusion was that he did not accept the version of the circumstances of the fall given by the security guard and the two officers who were actually on the roof at the time of the fall. Of the other two police officers, the Master observed that neither the dog handler nor the officer who had not been on the roof were able to help in ascertaining the cause of the fall. One of the roof witnesses conceded that some conversation had taken place outside the court concerning the manner in which he had given his evidence before the magistrate. Master Malpass mentioned many inconsistencies and discrepancies in the evidence given by these witnesses in the defendant's case.

However, as earlier mentioned, the Master did not believe the plaintiff either. His reasons fully justified his non acceptance of the details of the plaintiff's evidence concerning the facts relevant to his fall.

As to Mrs Clynick, the Master noted she was an independent witness and that he felt she had done her best to give truthful and reliable evidence. He pointed however to a number of difficulties in accepting her evidence as reliable. He found that there was a distance of about seventy metres between her house and the relevant school building and that although there may have been some artificial lighting, the conditions were generally dark at the time of the fall. He was not satisfied that she was able to give a reliable account of what she claimed to have seen and heard. In any event her version did not correspond on significant matters with that of the plaintiff.

The Master said of Mr McDonald that he was an honest and reliable witness. His evidence conflicted with that given by Mrs Clynick. The Master said that Mr
McDonald had seen physical contact between the police officer with whom the plaintiff was struggling on the roof and had also seen those two moving to the peak of the roof. Except as to those matters the Master was of the view that
Mr McDonald's evidence did not give much support for the plaintiff's version.

In dealing further with the plaintiff's version, the Master said that there were aspects which did not receive support from any other witness or other evidence. He had said a baton was used against him. No other witness saw a baton. The evidence was that none of the police had one. No other witness heard the use of the word "jump". No-one saw him put his hands on a policeman's throat, as he had claimed. No-one saw him being pushed.

In reaching his conclusion, the Master noted the final submissions made on behalf of the plaintiff. It was said that the evidence supported that the plaintiff had been grabbed by police and taken to the peak of the roof and then manoeuvred towards the edge. It was submitted the plaintiff then realised he was close to the edge and that he was going to be pushed off the roof. It was submitted then that the plaintiff had tried to get support from the police but his hands were knocked away with a baton and he was pushed off the roof.
The Master then said: "I do not accept that the evidence supports such a case. In the past, the plaintiff has given other versions of the fall. He is not a credible witness.
There is no other evidence which enables the Court to find that he was pushed from the roof by police." 
The Master went on to say that after hearing all the evidence, he was left with no direct evidence of the fall itself that he could accept. He was not satisfied that inferences supporting the plaintiff's case could be drawn. He then said that there was some material which aroused suspicion that police action may have been involved but on the other hand the whole of the material which he found acceptable was also consistent with the fall having been an accident. Then he expressed his conclusion: "Ultimately, the onus rests with the plaintiff to prove his case.
Unfortunately for the plaintiff, it seems to me that the evidence fails to sustain the allegation that he was pushed off the roof by police. This is not a case where the claim fails because the Court accepts evidence given on behalf of the defendant. It is a case which fails because the plaintiff has failed to prove his case. I find that the onus of proof has not been discharged." 
The Master therefore decided judgment must be entered for the defendant.

In the appeal, counsel for the plaintiff recognised the difficulties in seeking to persuade the court to alter Master Malpass's finding that he would not accept the evidence of the plaintiff about how he fell.

In the argument by which he sought to overcome these difficulties, he began with Master Malpass's statement that he could not accept the plaintiff's evidence in the absence of independent corroboration. He then went on to argue that there were three areas in which the plaintiff was corroborated, and this being so, adopting the Master's own approach, he should have concluded and this court should conclude that in fact the plaintiff had been pushed as his case claimed.

The first area of corroboration, it was submitted, lay in what was said to be the inference to be drawn from the Master's findings that there were elements of fabrication in the police evidence. That the police witnesses had gone to these lengths, and not been believed, showed they had something to hide, which could only have been the truth of the plaintiff's claim.

The second area of corroboration was the acceptance by Master Malpass of Mr
McDonald's evidence. This corroborated the plaintiff in two respects. One of these was the matter of the arrest of the plaintiff, the other that there had been physical contact between the plaintiff and at least one of the police officers. (The evidence of the defendant's roof witnesses was that there had been no physical contact.) 
The third area of corroboration was said to be Mrs Clynick's evidence. It was submitted that she had not been cross-examined on the critical evidence that she gave that she had seen men standing right behind the plaintiff at the edge of the roof when she had heard the plaintiff say "You are not going to push me are you", immediately before he fell from the roof.

Even assuming that these matters amount to corroboration in the general sense of the word, it does not in my opinion follow that the Master's conclusion was in any way defective. This is because, taking the view most favourable to the plaintiff, on any way of looking at the evidence, there is always an absence of acceptable evidence of what happened at the critical moment when the plaintiff fell from the roof. Even on his own evidence, as the Master pointed out, in referring to that part of the plaintiff's evidence set out at the top of page 2 above, it is not plain that the push he said he felt on his back was intended to push him off the roof as distinct from something which happened in the course of the struggle which he himself said he was then having with a police officer, who according to the plaintiff's evidence, was trying to get the plaintiff off him.

Further however, I think the submission for the plaintiff somewhat overstates in the plaintiff's favour the matters relied upon for corroboration.

In regard to the Master's findings concerning the defendant's witnesses' evidence, it seems to me the Master was careful not to go so far as to make a finding or to leave an inference open of a case deliberately fabricated between the men who were on the roof. The Master's non acceptance of the evidence of those witnesses was based upon "many inconsistencies and discrepancies" which he found in it. There were unlikelihoods in it, and, the
Master said, in a remark which comes closest to giving some foothold for the submission made by plaintiff's counsel that "there was material which aroused suspicion that police action may have been involved" in the plaintiff's fall.
I do not think that these views of the Master, critical though they are of the defence case, can reasonably be taken as an indication on his part that he felt there had been concerted fabrication amongst the witnesses. Nor do I think this court would be justified in drawing such an inference from the
Master's findings.

Mr McDonald's evidence corroborates the plaintiff in part and is contrary to what the plaintiff said in another and significant part. The primary thing about Mr McDonald's evidence is that he did not see how it was that the plaintiff came to fall.

The force of the submission concerning Mrs Clynick as corroborator depends upon the assertion that she was not cross-examined upon what was said to be the critical part of her evidence. It is correct that she was not directly cross-examined about it, but the cross-examiner adopted other means, quite legitimate in my opinion and, as it turned out, successful, for bringing what was submitted on behalf of the defendant to be Mrs Clynick's unreliability to the attention of the court.

Further, although the cross-examiner may not have taken Mrs Clynick detail by detail through each item of her evidence that arguably supported the plaintiff's case, there can have been no doubt that she was being cross- examined in a way which would permit counsel subsequently to submit that her evidence was not acceptable on grounds of unreliability; these being, inter alia, the distance of the place where she was standing inside her house from where the plaintiff fell; the poor light at the time, which, in my opinion, the Master was entitled to find was the case; the improbability, on the witness's own account, of her having been able to hear, at the distance and in the noise she described, what she heard; and, the length of time between the fall and her giving of evidence.

Further, no doubt as a matter of fairness in conformity with the ideas lying behind Brown versus Dunn, the cross-examiner put to her that in fact by a process of reconstruction she had come up with an account of what took place that was incorrect (see page 7 above). I therefore do not think that the effort by counsel for the plaintiff to use the corroboration argument to persuade the court to draw inferences of fact which would allow the plaintiff to succeed, should be accepted.

A further argument relied on for the plaintiff was that there had been no cross-examination of the plaintiff himself directly on what he said had happened when he said he felt the push in the back that sent him over the edge. It was submitted that, because of that omission and the similar omission in regard to Mrs Clynick, the Master subsequently erred in not properly examining the facts concerning that final moment before the plaintiff's fall.

I do not think that this criticism succeeds. The plaintiff seems to me to have been quite thoroughly cross-examined. His credibility, both in a general sense, and in relation to the events directly surrounding his fall, was strongly questioned; as with Mrs Clynick, the cross-examination made it plain that the plaintiff's version of events, including that of his fall itself, was being challenged. In these circumstances I do not think the Master's method of considering the witnesses and their evidence was at any fault.

A further question raised by the plaintiff's counsel was whether Master
Malpass was right in saying that Mr McDonald's evidence conflicted with that of Mrs Clynick. Without going into a detailed comparison of their two accounts, there are certainly two matters on which their evidence differed, one perhaps being of significantly more importance than the other. This lies in the contrast between Mrs Clynick's statement that she saw a person who on her account must have been the plaintiff being punched in the stomach by men on the roof and Mr McDonald's evidence that he saw no such thing. He had turned away from watching the police officer and the plaintiff immediately before the plaintiff fell, but this can only have been for a brief time. Mrs
Clynick also, probably for a shorter time, but nevertheless almost simultaneously, looked away from what was happening on the roof. According to her, the punching had happened appreciably before the figures got near the edge of the roof. Mr McDonald's evidence was that he was watching the men at that time.

The lesser matter was Mrs Clynick's quite definite assertion of having seen two dogs on the roof. Mr McDonald saw only one. All the dog evidence, apart from that of Mrs Clynick, is that there was one dog only.

The arguments for the plaintiff that I have so far described comprised the main lines of attack upon Master Malpass's judgment. For the reasons I have indicated, I do not think the arguments can overcome the position that the
Master's detailed consideration of the evidence in the case led him to the view, for reasons which seem to me to have been open to him, that he was left with no acceptable evidence supporting the plaintiff's case that he had been pushed from the roof. The case is in my opinion one of the kind where this court could not interfere with the tribunal's findings of fact unless, at the least, demonstrable error had been shown by the Master on some significant aspect of his fact finding. Although it may well be that different minds may have arrived at different factual conclusions on the evidence, that does not mean that the Master made any appellable error. As it happens, in my opinion, the main findings that he made were well open to him on the evidence before him.

There were some further factual matters about which submissions were made on behalf of the appellant, but they would only need to be discussed if the submissions I have already dealt with had had some success. As they have not,
I do no more than mention that the further arguments were made and that for reasons generally of the kind I have mentioned in regard to the principal submissions I do not think they are of any help to the plaintiff.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Priestley JA.
 
SIMOS AJA: I also agree with Priestley JA * * * 
