

Regina versus Fleming Matter No Cca 60104/97 [1997] NSWSC 220 (26 May 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 July 1998 
REGINA versus MARK FLEMING 
CCA 60104/97 May 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL, McInerney J, Sully J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Luland QC DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60104 of 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 10, 11, 24 April 1997 
DELIVERED: 26 May 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Mark FLEMING 
JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL, McINERNEY J, SULLY J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - M A Green QC 
RESPONDENT - L M B Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Segal Litton & Chilton 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Teacher charged with sexual assaults upon fifteen year old girl - whether unsafe and unsatisfactory - "New" evidence - whether available at trial - whether cogent. 
No. of pages: 52 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The appellant (Mark Fleming) was tried by Judge Luland QC in the District Court, without a jury, and found guilty of three charges of aggravated indecent assault upon a fifteen year old girl and one of sexual intercourse with that girl as a person under his authority. The judge imposed an effective total sentence of penal servitude for four years, consisting of an effective minimum term of two years and an additional term of two years. 
The Crown case was that the complainant was a pupil at the school where the appellant was deputy principal and her mathematics teacher. She had spoken to him about emotional problems and she had visited him in his office almost daily during recesses and lunch breaks to discuss these problems. Each of the offences occurred in places other than the appellant's office, at places where they had either met by arrangement or gone together, over a period of about six weeks. The circumstances of aggravation were the complainant's age and the appellant's position of authority. The Crown did not have to prove an absence of consent by the complainant, and indeed she was a willing participant in each of the offences which were charged.

The first of the indecent assaults took place in a room behind the school canteen. The appellant kissed her, unbuttoned her shirt and kissed her nipples. The second took place in a laboratory storeroom. He felt the insides of her legs and then brushed her vagina on the outside of her underwear. The third took place in the music room. He rubbed his hand up and down her vagina, pulling aside her pants, and his finger was "almost" inserted in the vagina, to the extent that his finger was wet. The sexual intercourse took place in the computer room, when he inserted his finger into her vagina. She had originally been seated on a chair but, in order to afford better access, she lay on the floor and he moved his finger around inside her vagina. He said that he wanted her to experience an orgasm. He later told her that she could remember the day as the first time she had been "fingered". They had met by arrangement for the first two incidents and went to the location together for the last two.

There was evidence also given by the complainant of meeting the appellant by arrangement in empty classrooms when they would kiss, and of one occasion (a "half" day at school) when they met by arrangement in a park and were in the back of a white van driven by the appellant with the complainant partially undressed, but they had had to drive off because there was a boy fishing nearby.

The appellant gave evidence and denied that there had been anything of a sexual nature between the complainant and himself. He said that he had seen the complainant in his office on a number of occasions in order to assist her with her mathematics, and she had come of her own volition and not at his request. There had been no meetings elsewhere. He called evidence to support his assertion that he had been busy at school during the whole of the "half" day, and had not left.

The first of the appellant's grounds of appeal which should be dealt with is that numbered three, that the verdicts of guilty entered by the judge were unsafe and unsatisfactory, because success upon this ground leads to a judgment of acquittal rather than to a new trial. The test to be applied by this Court is the same whether the case was heard by a judge alone or with a jury.[1] That test is whether this Court, having made its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence, is persuaded that it was not open to the judge, upon the whole of the evidence, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty.[2] This is an issue upon which we must look at the evidence for ourselves, just as we would in an appeal from a jury trial, without reference to any particular findings of fact made by the judge.

It was submitted that the Crown case was an implausible one, consisting only of a series of bizarre and strange actions. There are a number of matters to which our attention has been drawn which are said to affect the quality of the
Crown's evidence. The Crown case depended solely upon the evidence of the complainant. This evidence is said to have had critical weaknesses. The complainant was only fifteen years old at the time. She was depressed, unhappy, and had emotional and eating disorders at the time, as confirmed by her mother. She conceded that her school work, particularly her mathematics, had suffered. It was natural that she would seek assistance from the appellant, who was her mathematics teacher. She conceded that she was infatuated with him. She told no-one of these incidents for some months.[3]
She first spoke to one of the other teachers, but she initially said that there had been no physical contact. Her first complaint (in the true sense of the word) was made to her mother, and it was expressed in terms of girlish romantic fiction ("he took my innocence") which were totally inconsistent with her evidence of being a willing participant in the incidents.

The complainant was unable in her evidence to fix the incidents which she had described by reference to time or date or even the order in which they took place. She had nevertheless (some months after the event) nominated 12
November 1994 as the date upon which the digital penetration had taken place, yet this was a Saturday and not a school day. The places where she said that the incidents took place were used by other students, so that she and the appellant could have been disturbed; it is said that it is unlikely that anyone would choose those places for that reason. The complainant and the appellant would have been observed going together to the music room (where the third indecent assault took place) because they would have had to pass all of the students in the playground. The complainant had given evidence that the doors to the appellant's office had always been closed when she was visiting him, whereas other witnesses had given evidence that they had on some occasions seen the complainant with the appellant in his office with the doors open. The appellant's opportunity to meet the complainant in the park on the "half" day was disputed by the evidence of witnesses who said that they had not seen him leave the school on that day.

Reliance was also placed by the appellant upon the contents of an anonymous letter which the judge received between the time when he gave judgment and the imposition of the sentences, from someone purporting to be a student at the school and disputing the findings which the judge had made. The letter was rejected by this Court upon this issue. It was never in evidence at the trial, so it cannot form any part of the evidence which we have to consider. The fact that such a letter was written after the judgment was delivered was subsequently admitted by this Court in relation to the "new" evidence ground of appeal, because it led the appellant's supporters to follow up a new line of inquiry, but even in relation to that ground of appeal its contents have not been taken into account as any evidence of the truth of what was said by the anonymous author.[4] 
Account must also be taken of the well accepted vulnerability of school teachers to false allegations of sexual impropriety with students, but it should not be overlooked that male school teachers in a girls' high school are also vulnerable to temptation, particularly where the girl involved is only to willing to tempt.

In response, the Crown has argued that the complainant's infatuation was consistent with her evidence, as she was a very willing participant in the incidents of which she gave evidence, despite an initial reaction of surprise.
Her emotional state at the time no doubt predisposed her to seek the relationship which she said had been formed with the appellant. The coincidence between her troubles with mathematics and such a relationship with the teacher who happened to be her mathematics teacher only underlines the opportunity for that relationship to develop. Her infatuation would also explain the fact that she spoke to no-one about that relationship for some time. The very delayed complaint to her mother was no doubt a consequence of her disappointment that the relationship had ended, which would also explain (but not excuse) the falsity of the impression of injured innocence which she sought to convey to her mother.

The Crown argued that it is not unusual for any child complainant to be unable to fix the times of the incidents with any precision. That is true, but it means only that such an inability does not often suggest dishonesty; it does not mean that there should be any allowance made, so far as reliability is concerned, simply because the complainant is a child.[5] The significance of a
Saturday morning being nominated by the complainant as the date upon which the digital penetration took place depended upon the accuracy of the evidence of the teacher to whom the complainant had spoken, and that teacher said that she could only say that to the best of her knowledge that was the date which the complainant had nominated. There was a substantial dispute in the evidence as to whether other students would have been likely to disturb them at the times of day when it seems that these incidents took place, although those precise times are impossible to establish. None of the first three incidents is likely to have taken long. The complainant said that there was no-one in the playground when they went together to the music room. In any event, as it is suggested that they only went together twice to the relevant places, it is unlikely that anyone - teachers or students - would have seen any significance had they indeed noticed the two of them together on those two occasions only.

The dispute as to whether the doors to the appellant's office were always closed appears to be of a somewhat peripheral nature, as there was no dispute that, whether or not the doors were closed, passersby could always see into that office through a large window.[6] The weight to be given to the evidence that the appellant had not left the school on the "half" day is necessarily dependent upon whether there was anyone who could say from their own knowledge, rather than merely from inference, that he had not in fact been absent at any time. None of the witnesses gave that evidence, and one of the teachers (Mrs Wilkinson) gave evidence that she did see the appellant leave during that day.

We do not have the advantage which the judge had of seeing each of the complainant and the appellant give their evidence. Whatever effect the matters to which our attention has been drawn may have had upon the credit of the complainant, they were very much matters for the judge (as the tribunal of fact) to consider. This is not a case where, notwithstanding the advantage enjoyed by the judge, I am left with any concern at the judge's acceptance of the complainant's evidence. Once that evidence was accepted, each of the charges was made out.

There were in any event matters which supported the complainant's evidence. A fellow teacher told the appellant that other teachers had commented upon the time the complainant was spending in his office, to which he had replied that she was helping him with the timetables, an explanation which is different to that which he gave in evidence - that he was assisting her with her mathematics. It is clear from the evidence that the appellant's colleagues thought that his conduct in relation to the complainant was at the least inappropriate, rather than merely a breach of some school rule.

The complainant also gave evidence that the appellant had told him his date of birth and the fact that he had had a vasectomy. This had been said in the context that she did not have to worry about becoming pregnant because he had had a vasectomy. Although the appellant was able to point out that the number plate on his car bore the year of his birth, and that (as with all the teachers) his birthday was well known to students, he was unable to give any satisfactory explanation for her knowledge of the accepted fact that he had had a vasectomy. The only explanation which he could suggest was that he had undergone the operation at a local hospital, where the anaesthetist and at least two of the nurses had daughters who attended the school, that there had been some discussion of his operation amongst the teachers and that he had spoken to two or three different families (apparently with children at the school) about the operation which he had undergone. In my view, not much weight (if any) can be placed upon the argument that it is unlikely that the appellant would have needed to assure the complainant that she would not get pregnant because there had been no penile intercourse. That does not mean that it is unlikely that there had been any discussion of it between them.

The appellant had written a message in the complainant's year book, "ten out of ten in more ways than one". His only explanation for that statement (highly ambiguous as it is in the light of their association) was that, at one stage, she had been about ten assignments behind in her academic work but had completed them and that she had subsequently become a prefect. He said that he had intended the statement to mean that she deserved eleven out of ten for effort. It is true that this was written in a book where the appellant would have known that anyone could read it. But he would also have realised that its very ambiguity could be used to explain what appears to have been a private joke between them - at least when it is considered in isolation. The Crown, of course, relies upon the cumulative effect of all these matters.

The complainant gave evidence that the appellant had given her his home telephone number, and had told her that, if she rang him, she was to identify herself as being from "the security people". The evidence was that the appellant was in fact the first on the list for the security people to call in the event of a security problem. There was no suggestion made that the fact that the appellant received calls from the security people was commonly known amongst the students. Whilst the circumstances in which the appellant may have told the complainant of this fact could have been quite innocent, the Crown relied upon the cumulative effect of all these matters as supporting the complainant's evidence.

It should be stressed that none of these matters is said by the Crown to establish the appellant's guilt by itself. Nor do they do so in combination.
What the Crown says is that their cumulative effect is such as to provide strong support for the complainant's evidence, as they demonstrate by their cumulative effect that the appellant has not always acted in a way in which an innocent person would have acted. It is not suggested by the Crown that the appellant should have been convicted simply because his conduct was inappropriate, or even because it was very imprudent. These matters support the complainant's evidence - which, if accepted, necessarily convicts the appellant - because, by reason of that conduct, he does not start from the usually accepted position of strength in a case of word against word where he has given sworn evidence denying the allegations against him.

In my view, the appellant's undisputed conduct went far beyond being merely imprudent. I am not satisfied by him that it was not open to the judge (in the relevant sense of the term) to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he was guilty. Acknowledging that the verdicts could have gone either way, I nevertheless experience for myself no reasonable doubt based upon the quality of the evidence as to the safety of the verdicts which the judge entered; nor do I see any basis upon which the judge ought to have experienced such a doubt. The matters to which our attention has been drawn do not lead me to the conclusion that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person had been convicted.[7] 
The remaining grounds of appeal can lead only to a new trial, except in one respect to which reference will be made later.

The first ground of appeal is that the judge failed to direct himself that, in a case where the only evidence against the accused of sexual assault is the evidence of the complainant, it was necessary to scrutinise her evidence with great care before accepting it beyond reasonable doubt. [Section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s33.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) requires a judge trying a criminal case without a jury to take into account any warning which is required to be given to a jury in any such case. Such a direction is said to have been required in the present case by the decision of the High
Court in Longman versus The Queen.8 
Section 504C(2) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) removed complainants in sexual cases as a category of suspect witnesses whose evidence needed to be corroborated. Section 42A of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ea189880/) similarly removed children as such a category, and neither has reappeared as such a category in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).
Longman's Case makes the point that such a direction was not universally required at common law; it was necessary only in that limited type of case where there is otherwise a perceptible risk of miscarriage of justice arising from the circumstances of the case.[9] That is consistent with the general rule stated in relation to any Crown case dependent solely upon the evidence of one witness, in cases such as Regina versus James William Glencourse.10 It was submitted that the present was such a case in which a direction was required because of the complainant's age, her emotional problems, her admitted infatuation with the appellant and her delay in making a complaint.
However, I do not accept that those factors, even taken cumulatively, would have required such a direction in a jury trial, as all of those factors would already have been abundantly apparent to a jury.

Even if they would have required a direction in a jury trial, it does not follow that a judge hearing a case alone has to refer expressly to that warning in his or her reasons for judgment. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s33.html) of the [Criminal Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) requires such a judge to include in his or her judgment only the principles of law applied and the findings of fact made by the judge; [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s33.html) requires the judge only to take into account any warning to be given to a jury, not to include such warnings in his or her judgment.[11] In my view, it would usually be preferable nevertheless to refer to such a warning in the judgment (if only to prevent arguments being raised on appeal that they have been overlooked), but the judge in this case was very experienced in relation to criminal trials. He knew that he had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of the appellant and that the only evidence upon which that satisfaction could be achieved was that of the complainant. He made it very plain in his judgment that the whole Crown case depended upon her credit, and he took great care in that judgment to show the extent of his consideration upon that issue. It is obvious that he did in fact scrutinise her evidence with great care before accepting that it established the Crown case beyond reasonable doubt. I would reject the first ground of appeal.

The second ground of appeal asserts that the judge erred in certain of his findings of fact, and that these erroneous findings led the judge wrongly to accept the evidence of the complainant and to reject the evidence of the appellant. However, an appeal from a judge alone trial is not a rehearing; the judge's verdict is given the same effect as a verdict of a jury for all purposes,[12] and error may be demonstrated only if there is no evidence to support a particular finding, or if the evidence is all one way, or if the judge has misdirected himself or herself leading to a miscarriage of justice.[13] This Court has no power to substitute its own findings for those held to have been made in error; its only course if error has been established, unless it is satisfied that there has been no miscarriage of justice, is to order a new trial.[14] Most of the findings challenged depend upon the judge's acceptance of the evidence of one or more witnesses notwithstanding the contradictory evidence by one or more other witnesses. In such a case there was necessarily evidence to support the finding made, and no suggestion is made that the judge misdirected himself in relation to most of the disputed findings.

There were, however, two findings which were attacked upon a wider basis. The first was a finding by the judge that the appellant was not being truthful when he said that the doors of his office were never closed when the complainant was in his office. This was accompanied by a finding that there was some secrecy in that office when they were arranging to meet in other places. Whether the doors were open or closed is one of a number of issues relevant only to credit which assumed an importance at the trial far beyond its true significance in the evidence as a whole. As already stated, the complainant gave evidence that the doors to the appellant's office had always been closed when she was visiting him, whereas other witnesses gave evidence that they had on some such occasions seen the doors open. Others said that they had seen the doors closed.

The issue here is not the fact as to whether the doors were always open or always shut, or somewhere in between. It is whether the judge was correct when he criticised the credit of the appellant upon the basis that he was asserting (contrary to the fact as the judge found it to be) that "the complainant was never in the room with him when the doors were shut". It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that this had not been the stand which he had taken at the trial, and the following cross-examination of him is pointed to: "Q. You never had [the complainant] alone in your room with both doors closed? A. From memory no.

Q. From memory is it possible? A. Well I don't think so. Can I explain? 
Q. Yes? A. If I was working in my office with both doors shut by myself and [the complainant] and[15] closed the door behind her, well she's returning the door to the way it was.

Q. So it is possible that you were in the room with [the complainant] with both doors closed? A. Well yes if she closed the door behind her.

Q. How many times would have that occurred, can you remember? A. No."[16] 
The appellant, however, had placed considerable emphasis in his evidence upon his "open door" policy in rebutting the evidence of the complainant that the doors had always been closed. He said that the circumstances in which the door would be closed were very limited, and before the concession which he made in the passage quoted he had already agreed that the effect of his evidence was that the doors had not ever been closed when the complainant was in his office. He subsequently twice repeated that the doors had not been shut when the complainant was there with him. I do not accept that the limited concession made by the appellant in the quoted passage destroyed any finding that the appellant was attempting to assert that they had never been alone behind closed doors, and this seems to me to be the general thrust of the judge's finding.

It is said nevertheless that, because they could always have been seen in the room together even with the doors shut, the judge erred in finding that there was "some secrecy" involved in their meetings. I do not agree. There is a significant difference between being seen together, in perfectly appropriate circumstances of teacher and student where the student has had problems with the subject which the teacher taught her, and being heard making assignations to meet elsewhere and discussing such things as his vasectomy.

The other finding which was attacked upon a wider basis related to the appellant's reaction to the information given to him by a fellow teacher that other teachers had commented upon the time which the complainant was spending in his office. That teacher gave evidence that she had advised the appellant either to have a group of students in his office or to leave the door open. In his own evidence, the appellant said that the fact that he had been given this advice caused him no disquiet because the complainant had never been in his room with the doors closed. He had not pointed that fact out to the other teacher. The complainant gave evidence that the appellant had subsequently told her that the other teacher had said something to him about "how students get crushes on teachers".

It is submitted, first, that the judge should have accepted the appellant's evidence because it was "perfectly acceptable". I do not myself see that there was ever any dispute that the appellant had said nothing to the other teacher to deny the sexual implication in what she had said or that he had later spoken to the complainant about that conversation. Even if there were some dispute, there can be no complaint in this Court when there is evidence to support the judge's acceptance of the other teachers' and the complainant's version.

Secondly, it is submitted that it was therefore not open to the judge to conclude (as he did) that the appellant's non-response to the concerns expressed by the other teacher, together with his subsequent discussion of that conversation with the complainant, were "indicative of a liaison being had between the complainant and the accused". The relevance of this issue appears to have been that, if the appellant had never been alone with the complainant in his office with the doors closed, he would have been expected to experience disquiet at the concern expressed by the fellow teacher. That was, in my view, an acceptable line of reasoning, and I see no misdirection in the judge saying that this was "indicative" of the relationship of which the complainant had given evidence. It certainly could not have been any more than merely indicative of such a relationship, but the judge did not suggest that it was.

I do not accept the arguments put in relation to either of the findings attacked upon this wider basis. I would reject the second ground of appeal.

The last of the grounds of appeal asserts that there is "new" evidence available which is relevant to the complainant's credit as a witness and which points to the innocence of the appellant. What must be established in support of a claim that there is fresh (or "new") evidence is that the absence at the trial of the evidence upon which reliance is placed by the appellant amounted to a miscarriage of justice; this Court will so conclude in favour of the appellant only if it considers that there is a significant possibility that the tribunal of fact at his original trial, acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant if that evidence had been before it.[17] Relevant to that test is the credibility and the cogency of the evidence put forward,[18] but its credibility and cogency must be considered in the context of the evidence which was already before the trial court, and the appellant must show that it is of such a nature that, in that context, such a significant possibility exists.[19] There is no miscarriage of justice if that evidence was available to be called at the original trial and if the appellant had been content to go to trial without it.[20] He will not be given a second trial simply because the material which he was content to produce at the original trial was unsuccessful in achieving the result which he sought to achieve and because the result at a second trial with the additional evidence may be different. That is not, of course, a universal and inflexible rule, but it will be departed from only in unusual circumstances; those circumstances will ordinarily be related to the strength of the fresh (or "new") evidence in question.[21] 
The appellant relied upon a number of affidavits. Not all of the material in them was pressed. Many of the deponents were cross-examined. The evidence upon which the appellant finally relied fell into six categories.

The first category of evidence came from students who were at school with the complainant, and who were members of the same group as her, who asserted that the complainant used to tell a lot of lies, including lies concerning her relationships with male students. Although the common law permitted one witness to give evidence that he or she would not believe the evidence given by another witness on oath,[22] such evidence would appear no longer to be admissible under the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), because the definition of "credibility" in the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s3.html)
Dictionary to that Act now includes reliability as well as honesty, so that the restrictions provided by [Pt .7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p3.7) upon the admissibility of evidence which is relevant only to a witness's credibility would prevent it being led.[23] 
Subject only to these matters being shown to have substantial probative value in relation to her credit,[24] the complainant could no doubt have been cross- examined in relation to being untruthful upon such occasions, but she is unlikely to admit to having been so and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s106.html) would prevent these witnesses giving evidence in rebuttal of her denial.
Unless the denials themselves cast a reflection in some way upon the complainant's credit, such as by her demeanour when making those denials, the net result in raising these issues would be nil. I am not satisfied that the absence of this evidence at the trial caused any miscarriage of justice.

The second category of evidence upon which the appellant relied asserts that the places where the complainant said that the incidents took place were so public that the appellant is unlikely to have chosen them. This was an issue which was run strongly at the trial. The evidence at the trial has only been added to in the sense that some of the students have supported what had been said by the appellant and the teachers called at the trial. Such evidence could have been given at the trial, and no explanation has been given for not calling it. The new evidence itself does not add any weight to the evidence which was given at the trial, and the Crown is able to answer it in the same way as it answered that which was given at the trial. I am not satisfied that the absence of this evidence at the trial caused any miscarriage of justice.

The third category of the "new" evidence sought to give further support to the assertion made by the appellant at the trial that his vasectomy was known around the school. The school bursar (Mrs Earle), who had given evidence at the trial and who was called on the second day of the hearing of the appeal in order to strengthen the evidence which she had given at the trial about the car which the appellant was driving on the "half" day, was called yet again on the third day of the hearing of the appeal to say that, although she had no knowledge herself that the appellant had undergone a vasectomy, she had joked with other staff members when the appellant was away for a couple of days that he was "off having a snip", because (she said) he had so many children. She said that she had made this joke only to staff members and not to students, but that she had been either in her office or in the general office when she had said this and there could have been students there: "If there was a student there I wouldn't say it, but they could walk behind you. It is a very big place." 
She did not know of any particular student who could have heard her joke about the appellant's "snip".

In determining whether, in the context of all the evidence given at the trial, the availability of any particular "new" evidence would have led to a significant possibility of a different verdict, it is open to this Court to form its own impression of the demeanour of the witness or witnesses giving that evidence and to assess their credibility.[25] I found this evidence to be of no particular cogency at all. That the complainant may have heard of the vasectomy from some student who was standing behind Mrs Earle is sheer speculation. It is significant, too, that not one of the many teachers and students who gave evidence before this Court was asked on behalf of the appellant whether he or she know about his vasectomy at the time. He is, after all, the appellant, and he has to persuade this Court to quash his convictions. Insofar as those witnesses called by the appellant are concerned,
I conclude that their evidence would not have assisted him upon this issue.[26] They are the very persons who would also have heard of that fact if the complainant had heard of it elsewhere than from the appellant himself.

In any event, and as it was made clear during the hearing of the appeal, I frankly find it quite incredible that a deputy principal in the Catholic school system would bring the fact that he had had a vasectomy to the attention of his teaching colleagues generally. I regard the possibility that the complainant learnt of that fact from others within the school community as quite unreal.

The remaining categories of evidence related to the incident at the park on the "half" day when, the complainant said, she and the appellant were in the back of a white van driven by the appellant and she was partially undressed, but they had had to drive off because there was a boy fishing nearby. Although this incident did not form the basis for any of the charges laid, it was evidence of a "guilty passion",[27] and it was an important issue in the case because, if the complainant's evidence in relation to this incident could be shown to be false, it was of substantial probative value in relation to her credit in general. This evidence was admissible pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s106.html) to contradict her evidence.[28] Although the Crown prosecutor at the trial did not effectively challenge the evidence of the complainant upon this issue, a substantial amount of evidence was called by the appellant relating to it. It was very clearly an issue which was run, and as an important one in the case.

The fourth category of evidence upon which the appellant relies asserts that the appellant could not have left the school to meet the complainant in the park because he was busy at the school preparing for speech night that evening. This, too, was an issue run strongly at the trial. The "new" evidence in this category is provided by the appellant's colleagues. Many of them in fact gave evidence at the trial. I have already said that none of the witnesses who were called at the trial gave evidence from their own knowledge, rather than merely from inference, that the appellant had not in fact been absent at any time. One of those witnesses now says that he remembers seeing the appellant in the general office area at the school every five or ten minutes over the relevant period, but his evidence as to why he had not given evidence of this at the trial was unimpressive. He appears to have assumed the role of advocate for the appellant, and the evidence itself was unimpressive.
No explanation has been given by the appellant for not calling this additional evidence (and that of the other witnesses) at the trial, and the explanations provided by the other witnesses themselves for not giving it at the trial are also, in my view, unimpressive.

The school principal at the time was called by the Crown in relation to this issue. He gave evidence that he had been looking for the appellant early on the afternoon of the "half" day and had noticed that he had not been in his office; the appellant's absence had bothered him because the staff were expected to be around helping with preparations for the presentation ceremony that night. The appellant had been missing for at least a half hour or more.
This evidence directly conflicted with that of the witness who said that he saw the appellant every five or ten minutes over that period. The former principal's evidence impressed me, and it became more impressive the more he was cross-examined. He had not known when he gave his evidence at the trial that the appellant's movements during the afternoon of the "half" day was an issue raised in the trial, but he had learnt of it a short time after the trial when it was being discussed by someone from a higher school authority.
He had at that stage recalled the appellant's absence at the relevant time, which he identified as being after the students had left the school. When asked how he was able to remember it, he said: "Well, I don't really know. I mean, how does one remember anything? You either do, I suppose, or you don't. I remember a few particular things on that day. That happens to be one of them. This was the end of my time at the school. It was an important day and a few events on that day stand out." 
That reply only added to the impressive nature of his evidence generally. It was suggested to him that the appellant may have been missing for less than the half hour, but he said that that was not his recollection. He added that, whenever the school is dismissed for a "half" day, it is rare for students to stay around.

Again, I am not satisfied that the absence from the trial of the additional evidence from the appellant's colleagues in this the fourth category caused any miscarriage of justice.

The fifth category of "new" evidence relates to whether the appellant was driving his white van rather than (as usual) his red sedan on the "half" day.
This was, again, an issue run at the trial, although not very strongly. The new evidence was certainly available at the trial, and no explanation has been given by the appellant for not calling it. The evidence now provided by the appellant's wife that she was driving the white van on that particular day does, in my view, have cogency but only if it be accepted. The explanation by the appellant's wife for not revealing what she could say to her husband's legal representatives at the time of the trial was unimpressive. This is very relevant to the weight to be given to the evidence which she now provides.

It is, of course, difficult to know fully what would be the effects of the pressures which must inevitably be placed upon any wife of a teacher accused of offences such as these, but I am not satisfied that she did not remember at the trial that she would have been driving the white van at the time of these events. Her present explanation for believing that she would have been driving the white van at the time - that the alternative vehicle (the red sedan) could not have child restraints fitted - should and must have become very apparent to her when this issue was raised during the trial (at which she was present), whether or not she remembered the particular party which she now remembers having attended on that particular day. There is nevertheless evidence which supports hers that she was driving the white van on that day, although all of the evidence suffers from strong indications of reconstruction rather than actual memory. This evidence does not amount to "new" evidence, so that whether its absence at the trial caused a miscarriage of justice must necessarily depend upon its strength. Upon that issue, I reserve my conclusion for the moment.

The final category of evidence upon which the appellant relies relates to whether the complainant left the school at lunch time with a number of other students. This evidence is provided by a student who was a member of the same school group as the complainant. I am satisfied that this is genuinely "fresh" evidence, in that the appellant could not be expected to have discovered its availability even acting with reasonable care. Its availability became known only when the anonymous letter was received by the judge between the time when he gave judgment and the imposition of the sentences.

The evidence provided by this student was that the complainant was with her and other members of the same group on the bus leaving school at lunch time on the "half" day, and that it would be extremely unusual for the complainant to return to school on her own. She says that the complainant was definitely with them, but she was unable to remember whether the complainant had accompanied the others when they got off the bus. The demeanour of this young witness was not impressive. The school roll, moreover, shows that this student was absent, sick, from school on that day. The student denied that she was away on that day. She explained that the whole school had attended Mass that morning, that there was some confusion and that some rolls may not have been marked or she may have missed the roll call. That would be a reasonable explanation for being shown as absent, but it does not explain the additional description of "sick".

Ms Wishart, who was the roll call teacher for this student's class during the last term, gave evidence that she would not have marked the roll "S" (for sick) unless a written note had been received from a parent or other responsible person. She said that the "S" marked against this student for the "half" day had not been written by her, and that no-one else had had access to the roll until the end of that term when she surrendered it. The evidence of the current principal at the school suggests very strongly that not all teachers were as strict as Ms Wishart. He said that he would not object if a teacher marked the roll "S" upon the basis of a telephone call from someone whom the school secretary was sure was a parent of the child or other responsible person.

Evidence was given that the school roll is regarded as having a special status, as being a legal document required by statute to be kept and retained, and produced to courts and to the police.[29] Evidence was also given that sickness (or absence) notes are sometimes produced only after repeated reminders to the student who had been absent, and that they could be supplied even at the beginning of the new term following the absence. It seems to me to be extraordinarily unlikely that whoever did note this student as having been sick on the "half" day would have done so without first having received the required written note or other appropriate notification. That fact, together with her unimpressive demeanour, makes the cogency of this witness's evidence very suspect.

A search of the school's records during the hearing of the appeal produced a very incomplete set of sickness notes for this student's class for the final term. Thirtytwo absences on the roll for that term were accounted for by sickness. The notes which were found explained only twelve of those absences.
Five of the remainder could reasonably be explained as being absences on consecutive days for which only one note would have been required. There are still fifteen absences unexplained. No note was found relating to the absence of this particular student on the "half" day. Evidence was also given that another student who was marked sick on that day was seen by a teacher on that day at Mass. (This was not the student who was said to have been on the bus with the complainant.) 
All of this is said on behalf of the appellant to demonstrate the unreliability of the roll, and thus to support the appellant's case that this student was with the complainant on the bus on that day. I do not agree. Even if it were shown that the records were complete and that there was no note relating to this student, the conclusion would still be open that, after Ms
Wishart had surrendered the roll at the end of term, someone had marked her sick as a result of an appropriate telephone call. The fact that the records are very obviously incomplete does not deny the availability of that conclusion. Indeed, because the records are so incomplete the conclusion would be open that someone marked her sick as a result of a note being received after the roll had been surrendered. If there was indeed an error made in relation to the other student, I do not see why that error demonstrates that an error may reasonably have been made in relation to this student. I remain of the view that it would be extraordinarily unlikely that this student was marked sick on the "half" day unless she had in fact been reported sick.

Another of the students who were identified by this witness as having been on the bus with the complainant said that she could not remember that "half" day specifically. She too was shown on the school roll to have been absent, sick, from school that day. Yet another of those students said that she remembered the "half" day but she could not remember whether the complainant was there too. All that she could say was that she had no recollection of anyone in their group not being there. In my view, the cogency of the evidence in the last category upon which the appellant relies does not, in those circumstances, rise above that of the student who says that the complainant was with her on the bus - that is, its cogency is very suspect.

An affidavit from the complainant was tendered, in which she repeated the effect of the evidence which she had given at the trial in relation to the "half" day, but adding that she did not travel on the bus that day, and identifying the only times when she had travelled with the student who said that she had been with her on the bus that day. They did not include the "half" day. The appellant did not require her for cross-examination on that affidavit.

What is left, therefore is: evidence in the fifth category which has some cogency, although not substantial, but which was clearly available to be called at the trial, and the evidence in the last category which was not so available but the cogency of which is very suspect.

As to the former, I am not satisfied that the strength of that evidence is such as to constitute the unusual circumstances which must be shown before evidence which could have been led at the trial and was not can lead to a new trial. As to the latter, when considered in the context of the evidence which was given at the trial, there is in my opinion no significant possibility that, if it had been given at the trial, it would have led to a different verdict.

I am not satisfied that there was any miscarriage of justice caused by the absence of any of the "new" evidence upon which the appellant relies - considered either separately or cumulatively. Accordingly, I would reject the fourth ground of appeal. In those circumstances, it is unnecessary to deal with the argument put by the appellant that he is entitled to a judgment of acquittal upon the basis that, when this "new" evidence is added to that given at the trial, the verdicts were necessarily unsafe and unsatisfactory.

I propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed. There is no application for leave to appeal against sentence. Nor could there be. The appellant is to surrender himself into custody to serve the remainder of his sentence.
 --------------- 
Since writing the above, I have had the opportunity to read in draft form the judgment to be delivered by Sully J. I have considered that judgment with care but, with all due respect to the judge, I am unable to accept the conclusion which he has reached. At the risk of some repetition, I state the following propositions:
In relation to a ground of appeal asserting that a verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory, this Court must make its own independent assessment of the evidence.
The principal purpose of that assessment is to determine whether the appellant has established to this Court's satisfaction that the tribunal of fact at the trial (in this case, the judge) ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to his guilt. It is not to determine whether the Crown has established to this Court's satisfaction that the tribunal of fact ought to have found him guilty. In no sense is it a rehearing.
In the present case, the whole of the Crown case depended upon the evidence of the complainant. If her evidence be accepted, then the appellant was necessarily guilty, and this ground of appeal must fail.
There was no obligation upon the Crown at the trial to produce evidence corroborating that of the complainant, although the absence of corroboration was relevant (but not decisive) to whether that evidence should be accepted.
The issue in relation to this ground of appeal is thus whether the judge ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to the truth of the complainant's evidence. Relevant to that issue, in addition to the lack of corroboration, are the fact that the appellant also gave evidence denying her allegations and the other matters which cast doubt upon her evidence and the matters which supported it.
The matters upon which the Crown relied as supporting the complainant's evidence were not, and are not, put forward by the Crown as themselves establishing, either individually or collectively, the guilt of the accused.
None of those matters, therefore, had to be established by the Crown beyond reasonable doubt.
As matters supporting the complainant's evidence, the Crown relied upon them in combination, not individually, and none of those matters should be looked at in isolation. Although some of them - perhaps each of them - when looked at in isolation may be open to an innocent explanation, that does not mean that that particular matter should be interpreted in that innocent way and then discarded.
What the Crown says is that each of those matters exists in combination with the others only because the appellant has not always acted in a way in which an innocent person would have acted. The rather loose analogy is to a circumstantial evidence case, emphasizing that that conclusion does not have to be established beyond reasonable doubt. What must therefore be considered is whether the existence of those matters in combination can reasonably be given an innocent explanation. I do not believe that it can, but in any event
I am not satisfied that it was not open to the judge, on the whole of the evidence, to come to the same conclusion.

PROPOSED ORDER: 
The appeal is dismissed.

JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY J: In this matter I have read the draft judgment of the presiding judge and I agree with the orders proposed by him for the reasons he has advanced. I have also read the draft judgment of Sully J. 
In respect of the third ground of appeal, namely whether the verdict reached by the trial judge was unsafe and unsatisfactory, the trial judge carefully considered the complainant's evidence and said: "I found the complainant to be forthright in her evidence and she readily accepted matters which may have reflected on her credit, if one were to take such a view. She readily admitted her emotional problems and her lie to Mr
Neil that no physical contact had occurred." (J.12) 
In M versus The Queen [181 CLR 487] it was said at page 493 in considering the question whether a verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory the court must not disregard or discount either the considerations that the jury (in this case the judge) is a body entrusted with a primary responsibility of determining guilt and innocence or the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses. In this case there was evidence to sustain a verdict and the judge had the distinct advantage of having seen the accused and the complainant give evidence before him and this Court must pay full regard to that advantage in a case such as this.

His Honour was fully alive to the issues in this case and in particular the argument as to the implausibility of these offences occurring where the complainant alleges they took place. His Honour visited the school and inspected the various relevant areas and although conceding the inspection was during the school holidays His Honour was in a better position in assessing this aspect of the case than this Court.

One of the matters that has weighed heavily on me on the question as to whether the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory is the fact that the complainant alleged that the appellant told her that she could not become pregnant because he had had a vasectomy. It is a fact that the appellant has had a vasectomy. For a deputy school principal to make such a remark to a fifteen year old female student strongly suggests a relationship concerned with matters other than mathematics and timetables. In respect to this aspect
I have read the reasons and conclusions of Sully J but, with respect, I am unable to agree with His Honour's reasoning or the conclusion he has reached.

I have also read the presiding judge's comments on the draft judgment of Sully
J and I agree with the presiding judge's views.

An examination of the whole of the evidence in this case does not lead me to the conclusion that it was not open for the trial judge to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant's guilt.

As to the other grounds of appeal argued, I agree with the orders proposed by the presiding judge for the reasons he has advanced.

JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL. As to the first, second and fourth of the four grounds of appeal which were argued before this Court, I agree with what his Honour has written; and I have no need to add anything. 
For my own part, it has been the third ground of appeal, that is to say the ground challenging as unsafe and unsatisfactory the appellant's convictions at trial, that I have found the most difficult and troubling to resolve. In the end, I have come to a conclusion contrary to that reached by Hunt CJ at CL.
That is to say, I have come to the conclusion that Ground 3 should be upheld; with the necessary consequence that the appellant's convictions should be quashed and there should be substituted in respect of each count in the indictment upon which the appellant was tried a judgment of acquittal.

The relevant law in this country has been re-stated recently by the High Court of Australia in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] The relevant principles are to be taken as stated in the joint majority judgment of Mason CJ, Deane J, Dawson J and Toohey J. The joint majority judgment focuses upon four, in particular, of its component sentences, which four sentences are said in terms to have been framed by their Honours "in order to provide authoritative guidance to Courts of Criminal Appeal". The four sentences read as follows: "It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by a Court of Criminal Appeal that the Court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred. That is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by the
Court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced. If the evidence, upon the record itself, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the Court of Criminal
Appeal to conclude that, even making full allowances for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the Court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence. In doing so, the Court is not substituting trial by a Court of Appeal for trial by jury, for the ultimate question must always be whether the Court thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty." (181 CLR, 494, 495) 
It is now well settled law in Australia that an intermediate court of criminal appeal, in giving dutiful effect to the "authoritative guidance" thus provided by the joint majority judgment, must make its own independent examination and assessment of the evidence, and must assess for itself the quality of that evidence. The object of that appellate exercise is to judge whether, in the opinion of the appellate court, it was open to the primary fact finder, - whether Judge alone or jury,- to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the accused. It is not a sufficient discharge of that appellate duty for the appellate court to consider, only, whether there was sufficient evidence to sustain a conviction, for a verdict may be unsafe and unsatisfactory notwithstanding that there was evidence sufficient to entitle the primary fact finder reasonable to convict: Morris versus The Queen <case>; [(1987) 163 CLR 454]; per Mason CJ at 463,464; Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ at ,473. These views were endorsed by Mason CJ, Dawson and McHugh JJ in
Chidiac versus The Queen [(1990) 175 CLR 432.] 
In my opinion, it is important in such a case as the present one, to approach that independent examination and assessment by defining, first and with care, the relevant context within which the examination and the assessment are to be made. In my opinion the following considerations are relevant to that defining process.

The first thing to be noted is, in my opinion, what Hunt CJ at CL refers to as "...... the well accepted vulnerability of school teachers to false allegations of sexual impropriety with students ......". His Honour adds the rider, with which I respectfully agree, that ".... It should not be overlooked that male school teachers in a girls' high school are also vulnerable to temptation, particularly where the girl involved is only too willing to tempt". In the present particular case, it seems to me that the relevant point is that the present appellant, as the second-highest ranking male authority figure in an all-girls' high school with an enrolment of 500 adolescent girls odd, was particularly vulnerable to false allegations of sexual impropriety with any of those students.

The next relevant matter, in my opinion, is the actual emotional condition and disposition of the complainant herself at the material times. Hunt CJ at CL has summarised these features of the complainant, and it is not necessary for me to repeat in detail what his Honour has said. Obviously, it would be quite wrong to make a simple[cedilla] generalised assumption that a school girl manifesting those particular personal and emotional characteristics ought, without more, not to be believed when she makes an allegation of sexual impropriety against one of her teachers. That said, it seems to me to be no more than simple common sense to scrutinise with very particular care complaints of the kind made against the present appellant, when the complainant is as labile, as lacking in self-esteem, and as generally troubled emotionally as was the case with the present complainant.

The third relevant consideration is, in my opinion, that, if one sets for the moment to one side four particular matters, to which I shall come presently, the complainant's version of the offences charged against the appellant was wholly uncorroborated. Moreover, the complainant's version was simply and flatly contradicted, and on oath, by the appellant. If one leaves aside those particular matters, this case was essentially one of oath against oath.

There is one further and final general consideration which requires, in my opinion, to be taken into account when setting the overall context appropriate to the requirements of an independent assessment by this Court of the whole of the available evidence in the present case. It should be frankly acknowledged, in my opinion, that in the areas of school teacher - school pupil relationships, there is widespread contemporary acceptance of degrees of informality and familiarity which would have been unthinkable according to the corresponding standards of the years immediately preceding the revolutionary social changes of the late 1960's. I would suggest, as well, that the same point is validly to be made with respect to the definition of acceptable community standards in the matter of discussing any and all aspects of human sexuality, whether personal or inter-personal. I wish to stress that my purpose in drawing attention to such matters is not to dispute whether those latter-day trends have been beneficial or not; prudent or not; or socially desirable or not. That is no part of my present function What is, as I see it, very much a legitimate part of my present function is a level-headed recognition that those changes have in fact occurred; and that they have created, in the nature of things, a climate and a standard of personal behaviour which are apt, if not kept in a very careful focus, to cause such an independent assessment as the law now requires of this Court, to miscarry by reason of the drawing of inferences which would have been entirely valid once upon a time, but which are no longer valid in any real sense at all.

I have not had the trial Judge's advantage of seeing and of hearing the complainant and the appellant. His Honour, with that advantage, accepted the complainant's version of relevant events. Acceptance of the complainant's version necessarily entailed a finding against the appellant of guilt established beyond reasonable doubt.

In such a case, how, I ask myself, am I to make in the requisite sense an independent examination and assessment of the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence at trial? It seems to me that the only logical answer is that I must look for myself at the record of the evidence at trial, and ask whether I think that it "lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given". If at the end of that exercise I am left with a reasonable doubt about the guilt as charged of the appellant, then I ought to act and set aside the verdicts at trial because the primary fact finder ought to have had a similar doubt.

In my opinion, there are four matters deriving from the evidence at trial, and bearing upon that crucial and difficult examination and assessment.

The first matter is the fact that there was credible evidence at trial that colleagues of the appellant had thought that he was seeing altogether too much of the complainant. One of the appellant's fellow teachers, Miss Drinan, gave evidence that she had taken it upon herself to approach the appellant in 1994 and to raise this topic with him. According to Miss Drinan, the conversation between her and the appellant was along the following lines: "I went to see Mr. Fleming and I had a conversation along the lines of `Mark
I feel very embarrassed about this conversation but I feel that I have to say something to you. Teachers have commented to me that Megan Armstrong is spending a lot of time in your office'. Do you want Mr. Fleming's reply?...................................................................
 ................................................................................................................................................................................................

CROWN PROSECUTOR: A. His reply? 
A. He said, Mr. Fleming said, `She is helping me with the time-table'.

Q. Did you say anything after that? 
A. Yes, I said something along the lines of `perhaps you should have a group of students with her or leave the door open'." 
The appellant, in his evidence-in-chief, gave this version of that conversation: "Miss Drinan felt embarrassed about mentioning this conversation to me, about how she had heard that Megan was spending some time in my office, and I told Miss Drinan, in fact I showed Miss Drinan, an example of the daily planners that I had been helping Megan with, to try and organise her academic progress." 
Later, and in cross-examination, the appellant agreed that the substance of the conversation that had passed between him and Miss Drinan had been, essentially, as she had narrated. In the early stages of his evidence-in- chief, the appellant had explained what was involved in the so-called "daily planners". It appears that during term 3 of 1994, the appellant had been helping the complainant with some of her academic work "via some daily planners which had been directing, helping her, and she had been filling these in to help her plan her academic work and that was in term 3". The appellant went on to explain that in the following term, that is to say in term 4 of , the complainant had told him, early in the term, that she no longer needed the daily planners. She had continued, however, to come to see him, for "some help with the Maths work particularly to the best of my knowledge", and that she had so continued to attend "of her own steam".

Miss Drinan, in her evidence, was clear and firm about the dating of the conversation that she had had with the appellant. She placed it in November or early December 1994. That would have been towards the end of term 4 of 1994.

I daresay that it is possible to propound that if the appellant had his admitted conversation with Miss Drinan at or towards the end of term 4; and if, therefore, he told Miss Drinan at that time that he had been seeing the complainant about something to do with time-tables, when in fact the complainant had ceased to seek his assistance about her "daily planners" and was continuing to see him only for assistance with her Maths; then there is, to some extent, an inconsistency between the explanation he gave to Miss
Drinan and the explanation that he gave in his evidence. With all respect to those who see the issue differently, I am bound to say for my own part that I simply cannot accept that the credibility of the complainant's version is strengthened by the splitting of hairs as fine as that one.

The second matter concerns a very brief portion of the complainant's evidence at trial concerning an alleged comment made to her by the appellant concerning a vasectomy which he had admittedly undergone. The complainant's version at trial is very much to the point as is as follows: "Q. Is that the only occasion you went to room 17? 
A. No there was another time when we were talking. He was saying - he said I didn't have to worry about getting pregnant and I said - 
HIS HONOUR: 
Q. Just a moment. First of all tell us if you are able to just about when this was and where it was that he was talking to you about not being worried about getting pregnant. Is that what you say? 
A. Yes. It was in term 4 in room 17.

Q. Room 17 term 4? 
A. Yes.

Q. So he said to you `Don't worry about getting pregnant'? 
A. You don't have to worry.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: 
Q. Was there anything else said? 
A. And then I said `Is that something like getting your tubes tied' and he said `It's called a vasectomy'. I remember cause it felt really stupid." 
The complainant was cross-examined at length by senior counsel then appearing for the appellant. The cross-examination does not seem to have taken up in any particular way this alleged exchange concerning the appellant's vasectomy.

The appellant does not appear to have been asked any questions during the course of his evidence in chief about the alleged conversation respecting his vasectomy. He was, however, cross-examined about it and in the following terms: "Q. What about the vasectomy? 
A. I have no idea.

Q. How would Megan become aware of that? 
A. I have no idea. It certainly became a topic of conversation in the staff.
The female, sorry, of the staff there were about two-thirds females and amongst the males there were a number of us who had either thought of or discussed or had or were going to have a vasectomy ............

A. So there's one way that the notion of a vasectomy may have got out.
Secondly, in that conversation, in those conversations there were some males who were having their vasectomies done outside of the Central Coast. I had mine done at North Gosford and at least two nurses on the shift, when I was in hospital overnight, were parents of girls at the school and in fact the anaesthetist who is still there that worked on me, he still has a daughter at the school/ 
Q. Very well? 
A. So I would suggest that many people knew and also after I had my vasectomy done the following week-end we attended a Christening for the local Parish and there were two or three different families there who at the same time were talking about the same issue." 
There does not appear to have been any further cross-examination upon this particular topic.

The appellant's admitted vasectomy loomed large in debate during the course of the hearing of the appeal before this Court. My impression at that time was that those who saw something sinister, and therefore something capable of buttressing the credibility of the complainant's version, about this episode, were convinced that the complainant could not have become aware of the fact that the appellant had undergone a vasectomy except by having been told by the appellant himself that such had been the case. It followed, so the argument appeared to proceed, that there could not have been any reasonable explanation for such a disclosure by the appellant to the complainant, other than what is frequently called in this kind of case a guilty passion or a guilty liaison.

For myself, I would not be prepared to accept that it is not reasonably possible on a fair view of the evidence, such as it is, that the complainant did not get wind, otherwise than from the appellant personally, that the appellant had undergone this particular operation. I cannot find in the transcript any challenge made to the evidence of the appellant, as I have previously quoted it, when the appellant came, later, to be cross-examined. I do not see, for myself, anything inherently incredible, or fanciful in any other sense, about the notion that the fact that the Deputy Principal of a large local school in a fairly contained community, had had a vasectomy became known in any or all of the ways suggested by the appellant in the very brief evidence given by him on the topic.

Let it be supposed, however, that the more reasonable view is that the appellant did tell the complainant that he had had a vasectomy. I myself would take a great deal of persuading that such bare premise justified the drawing of a rational inference that the only reasonable hypothesis explanatory of the disclosure was an attempt to prime the complainant to consent to full sexual intercourse. If it be accepted that a personal disclosure by the appellant was the source of the complainant's knowledge of the vasectomy, the nature of and the extent of the inferences reasonably to be drawn from that bare fact must depend, surely, upon a very careful analysis of the circumstances in which the disclosure was made. The evidence of the complainant, as I have earlier quoted it from the trial transcript, is, in my opinion, wholly lacking in any kind of detail that would permit of a careful and rational analysis of just what was going on to cause the appellant to make such a disclosure to a schoolgirl pupil at his school. Speaking in purely subjective terms, I confess to thinking it wholly inappropriate that a school teacher would discuss so personal a matter in any circumstances at all with one of his pupils, let alone with a pupil presenting with the obvious problems of the present complainant. But, as I have said, that is a very subjective point of view. Whether I happen to like it or not, I think that I would be closing my eyes to what goes on in the real world if I were not to acknowledge that what I would regard as proper standards of decent reticence, of proper discretion, and of appropriate modesty respecting so personal a thing as a vasectomy, simply cannot be assumed to be as much the social norm as, at least in my own belief, they once undoubtedly were. I think that such considerations call for very great care in handling this particular part of the present matter. It is possible to accept readily that the appellant, on the view of the whole of the evidence most favourable to him, is shown to have acted with egregious imprudence and lack of professional tact and judgment in much of his dealing with the complainant. It is, I think, all the more necessary constantly to reaffirm that there is a very big difference between saying that somebody has behaved foolishly, even to the point of giving rise to rational suspicions about his conduct, and saying that there is available material of such force as to convert those suspicions into proof beyond reasonable doubt of the serious criminal offences that have put this particular appellant at risk of going to gaol for a minimum term of 2 years.

The third matter concerns the undoubted fact that the appellant wrote in the complainant's Year Book an autographed message reading "Ten out of ten in more ways than one".

As to this incident, the complainant, when asked during the course of her evidence in chief to narrate the circumstances in which the appellant had written that message in her Year Book, gave this simple response: "I went and approached him and asked him could he autograph my Year Book and
I left it with him for a while and then I went back to his office and he handed it to me." 
When the appellant was examined in chief about this topic, he gave the following explanation: "Q. Now with regard to the circumstances in which you wrote that can you tell the Court in what circumstances that comment became annotated on to that text that book there? 
A. Well very quickly from the point of view that I was being handed 30 and 40 of these to sign.

Q. ................... How much thought do you recall putting into the words that you wrote on that page.

A. Well not very much from the point of view that most schools want the booklets back immediately.

Q. Can you recall having any though in mind when you wrote that remark? 
A. The 10 referring to at one stage that Megan had been about 10 assignments behind in her academic work. .................

HIS HONOUR: 
Q. .................. ten out of ten in more ways than one, and I am sorry your evidence then was that she was 10 assignments? 
A. She had been ten assignments or presentations behind and she had completed." 
The appellant was cross-examined upon this evidence, and as follows: "Q. But you signed her Year Book? 
A. I signed many Year Books.

Q. And you did that without much thought you tole the Court? 
A. Yes.

Q. But you had the time to go to Megan's school photograph and pick out her school photograph in the Year Book? 
A. No, well - 
Q. You wrote this writing next to her school photograph did you not in the
Year Book at page 26? 
A. Her year. Her year group photo, class photo is there.

Q. Yes her school photograph for that year.

A. School photograph yes.

Q. You have written it next to that? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did you mean by `In more ways than one' again? 
A. What did I mean? 
Q. Yes.

A. Well from my recollection at one stage she had been up to ten assignments behind. She was heading into Year 10. She had, I was patting her on the back basically along the lines of saying `Well done'. She'd worked hard at getting the assignments caught up and also she'd been nominated for prefect so I suppose another way of saying it would have been 11 out of 10 for her efforts in the last six months of the year and she went on to be prefect the following year.

Q. I put it to you that that is not the connotation that you intended when you wrote that.

A. Well that's not right.

Q. You meant that to have a sexual connotation did you not? 
A. No I did not.

Q. And that was as a result of the sexual relationship that you had with
Megan? 
A. No.

Q. That is correct is it not? 
A. No that's not correct.

Q. You see this was a planned seduction was it not of Megan. You planned this. 
A. No." 
At the hearing of the appeal it was contended, as it had been contended at trial, that a reasonable reading of what the appellant had admittedly inscribed on the complainant's Year Book, was meant "to have a sexual connotation". The appellant denied it on oath. The complainant was not asked to give, and did not in fact give, any evidence of any circumstance or circumstances tending to support such an allegation. It was clear from the material before the Court on the hearing of the appeal, that various of the complainant's year class-mates had exchanged among themselves valedictory autograph notes. The few samples that were seen by this Court at the hearing of the appeal were, at least to my eyes, simple, girlish and exuberant in a way that one would imagine not to be in any way remarkable in context. Why should the appellant's note be given some dark and sinister construction rather than a construction that accepts what he wrote as a gesture in the spirit of what was going on throughout the school at the time? Why should it not be accepted as having, in the way that the appellant himself described, and without any contradiction from the complainant at that, as having been an intended message of encouragement to the complainant? It seems to me that, at the very least, the two hypotheses are equally available on the evidence, such as it is. I could have understood such a message as having such an undertone as is now suggested, had it been in the form of a billet doux passing from the appellant clandestinely to the complainant. But such was plainly not the case. All to the contrary, the comment was written in the broad light of day on a document which was obviously of such a kind as was likely to be seen by people other than the appellant and the complainant themselves. To suggest that the inscription is not capable of any other reasonable interpretation than that of an intended sexual innuendo, imputes to the appellant either a stupidity or a hubris of so extreme a kind as, in my opinion, cannot possibly be justified by reference to the few isolated scraps of available evidence touching the topic.

The fourth matter which is said to give in a real way significant support to the evidence of the complainant, concerns evidence suggestive of the appellant's having given to the complainant his home telephone number, and of his having told her that, if she rang him, she should identify herself as being from "the security people".

As to this particular topic, the complainant's evidence in chief was, once again, very much to the point. It was as follows: "Q. Did you ever phone Mr. Fleming? 
A. No but he did give me his home phone number and his mobile phone number.
...............................................................................................................................................................................................

Q. Do you remember when he did that? 
A. It was in his office but I don't know, like, what the time of year was.

Q. Was there any conversation surrounding him giving you that, those numbers 
R. Yeah, he said that if I was ringing his house to say it was the security people from the school and if I was, like, if I was to ring the school say it was his sister." 
So far as I can see, there was no other evidence from either the complainant or the appellant touching upon this particular matter. As Hunt CJ at CL points out in his Honour's judgment, there was, certainly, evidence that the appellant had been, at the material time, in fact the first person on the list given to the security people for them to call should there be a security problem. I agree with his Honour that there "was no suggestion made that the fact that the appellant received calls from the security people was commonly known amongst the students". I acknowledge, in common with his Honour, that "......the circumstances in which the appellant may have told the complainant of this fact could have been quite innocent ......".

The relevant evidence is, in my view, so sparse that one could hardly do other than concede that, if it be the fact that the appellant gave the complainant the information and instructions as she alleges , then the state of the evidence cannot possibly establish that the only reasonable explanation for such a thing having occurred was a guilty liaison of the kind alleged in the complainant's version.

I think that neither any one of these matters, nor any combination of them, strengthens the credibility of the complainant's version. Rather do these matters strengthen my initial.impression at the end of the hearing of the appeal, that in the words of M versus The Queen;"....even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by [the primary fact finder], there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted...".

I am mindful, also, of those other imprecisions and deficiencies in the complainant's evidence, to which Hunt CJ at CL has referred. I agree with what his Honour has written with respect to those matters.

Having made as best I can that independent assessment which the law requires of me, I am left with an overall doubt about the guilt as charged of the appellant; and I am of the opinion that the learned primary Judge, as the tribunal of fact at the trial, ought to have had such a reasonable doubt.

In M versus The Queen, when it was before this Court, I had a similar feeling of discomfort; but for reasons which I explained in my judgment in that matter, I did not give effect to that feeling. The High Court held, in the joint majority judgment, that I ought to have done so. On the present occasion, and guided by that joint majority opinion, I propose to do so.

For the whole of the foregoing reasons I would, as earlier indicated, uphold the present appeal upon Ground 3; entering thereupon, and as earlier indicated, judgment of acquittal upon each count in the indictment.
 [1] Regina versus Kurtic [(1996) 85 A Crim R 57] at .
 [2] M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at -495, 508; Regina versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333] at -339.
 [3] When she did so, it was not, strictly, a "complaint" except in the very technical sense in which that word is understood in sexual assault cases.
 [4] After this Court had reserved its decision on the appeal, we received another anonymous letter, this time from someone purporting to be a teacher who had been present at the hearing of the appeal, and we also received a signed letter from a teacher who had given evidence at the trial, responding to what appears to have been an inaccurate report to her of some of the evidence before given before us. Copies of both letters were supplied to counsel. We have not taken either letter into account.
 [5] Regina versus Ian Robert Coombe (CCA, 24 April 1997, unreported) at 34.
 [6] cf Regina versus Dellapatrona [(1993) 31 NSWLR 123] at -141; Regina versus RMM (CCA, 19 June 1996, unreported) per Mahoney P (at -13), McInerney J (at 5).
 <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79.] [9] (at 85-86, 89, 95-96, 106-107).
 (CCA, 21 April 1995, unreported) per Hunt CJ at CL (at 1-2).
 [11] Regina versus William Francis O'Brien (CCA, 5 November 1993, unreported) per Wood J (at 8); Regina versus Winner [(1995) 79 A Crim R 528] at -531; Regina versus MPW (CCA, 14 December 1995, unreported) per Dunford J (at 11).
 [12] [Criminal Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), [s (1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s33.html) [13] Regina versus Kurtic (at 59-60).
 [14] Ibid (at 60).
 [15] Sic - query "had".
 [16] The name of the complainant has been omitted, so that the publication of this judgment in the usual course on the Internet, without editing, will not constitute a breach of <case> of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/).
 <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 392] at 399, 402; Mickelberg versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259] at 273, 301-302.
 [18] Gallagher versus The Queen (at 395-396, 399, 401-402, 408-409);
Mickelberg versus The Queen (at 301).
 <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 659] at 670, 676-677; Gallagher versus The Queen (at 397, 410);
Mickelberg versus The Queen (at 302); Regina versus Gregory Mark Hemsley (CCA, 8
December 1996, unreported), at 5.
 [20] Lawless versus The Queen (at 666, 675); Mickelberg versus The Queen (at ); Regina versus Asfour [(1992) 60 A Crim R 409] at .
 [21] cf Gallagher versus The Queen (at 395); Regina versus Goonan [(1993) 69 A
Crim R 338] at 341-342.
 [22] Toohey versus Metropolitan Police Commission [[1995] AC 595] at 605-606.
 [23] Regina versus Ivan Robert Marko Milat (Hunt CJ at CL, 9 April 1996, unreported) at 5-6. See also ALRC 26, vol 1, par 819.
 <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 429] at 439; Gallager versus The Queen (at 396-397, 407, 408, -422); Regina versus Frank Arthur Maggs (CCA, 21 May 1993, unreported) at 6;
Regina versus Gregory Mark Hemsley (at 6).
 [26] Regina versus Beserick [(1993) 30 NSWLR 510] at 532.
 [27] Rex versus Ball [[1911] AC 47] at 71; Regina versus Beserick (at 515).
 [28] In any event, the test for a "new" evidence ground of appeal is no stricter where that evidence goes only to impugn the credit of the principal
Crown witness: Regina versus Saleam [(1989) 16 NSWLR 14] at 21.
 [29] The school principal identified the statute as the Education Reform Act
Section 123(1) may be the basis for the regard in which the school roll is held.
 * * * 
