

Regina versus Hakija Sinanovic [1997] NSWSC 98 (28 March 1997) 
REGINA versus HAKIJA SINANOVIC /96 
Friday 20 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for bail by Hakija Sinanovic who was convicted following trial by judge alone by her Honour Judge Karpin in the District Court on 1 December last year on two counts of fraudulent misappropriation involving a total amount of approximately $62,000. The applicant had been on bail and her Honour notwithstanding that she had found the applicant guilty continued the applicant's bail. However on 9 February her Honour revoked bail as far as I can tell because of numerous applications on behalf of the applicant for adjournment of the sentencing proceedings.

Following that an application was brought to this Court on 5 March 1996 which came before his Honour Mr Justice Bruce who in accordance with the well established principle that where an applicant for bail has been convicted in the District Court and is awaiting sentence and the District Court Trial Judge has refused bail, the usual practice is for a single judge of this Court to decline to exercise jurisdiction and accordingly the application for bail was dismissed.

The applicant was ultimately sentenced on 11 April 1996 and to concurrent terms, the longer of which was for a minimum term of fourteen months to date from 29 January 1996 and expire on 28 March 1997.

He has appealed against the conviction to the Court of Criminal Appeal and on June this year he brought a fresh application for bail pending the hearing of his appeal which was determined by Mr Justice Sperling on 6 June.

The applicant faced an initial hurdle in section 30AA of the [Bail
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/) which provides that where an appeal is pending to the Court of Criminal Appeal against a conviction on indictment, bail shall not be granted unless it is established that special or exceptional circumstances exist justifying the grant of bail.
It would appear that at that stage no grounds of appeal had been formulated.
His Honour had regard to the fact that if the appeal were to succeed the applicant would, by the time such appeal was determined have served a large proportion of his sentence, but notwithstanding that was not satisfied in accordance with the usual authorities and practice of the Bails Court that special or exceptional circumstances existed and dismissed the application for bail.

A fresh application was then made which was determined by Mr Justice Bruce on August last. By that time a notice of appeal had been lodged apparently without the assistance of legal representation but his Honour noted that a perusal of that grounds did not indicate any material which could satisfy the requirement that there be exceptional circumstances which would justify the granting of bail and so the application was again refused.

Meanwhile the applicant has been committed for trial at the Sydney District
Court on a number of other matters which as I understand it are all set down for hearing early in February. There have been numerous applications to vacate those hearing dates, all of them unsuccessful as have appeals against such refusals but I am informed that there are now fresh applications to vacate the hearing dates. However, the applicant was on bail in relation to those matters but on 6 September this year his Honour Judge Court revoked bail in respect of all outstanding matters pending in the District Court.

Section 22A of the [Bail
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/) provides that the Court may refuse to entertain an application by a person in relation to bail if an application relating to that bail has already been made and dealt with by the Court and the Court is not satisfied that there are special facts or special circumstances that justify the making of a fresh application, and I have already referred to <case>.

It is therefore necessary for the applicant first to overcome the restrictions in section 22A and then if successful to overcome the limitations in the section 30AA. It is submitted that in relation to section 22A that the prisoner has now been in custody for nine months and has served a significant length of time in respect of his sentence; secondly that by the time the matter comes before the Court of Criminal Appeal he will have served his sentence. In that circumstances have changed in so far as he is now apparently for the first time legally represented and has counsel available to argue the substantive merits of his appeal. In my view the last of these matters is the only one that is fresh or which could possibly constitute special facts or special circumstances.

I therefore turn to consider the need for the applicant pursuant to section
AA to show special or exceptional circumstances which justify the grant of bail following a conviction and pending an appeal to the Court of Criminal
Appeal. Unlike section 22A which provides that in the circumstances which there apply, the Court "may refuse to entertain an application" the Act is more stringent in relation to section 30AA because it there provides that unless it is established that special or exceptional circumstances exist justifying the grant of bail "bail shall not be granted".

In relation to section 30AA Mr Fairbairn has submitted with considerable diligence and emphasis that there are grounds which are most likely to succeed, including that the charge in the indictment was changed during the course of the trial and thereupon the applicant was denied an adjournment although one was sought, that such conduct amounted to a lack of procedural fairness and he also relies on the difference which he submits is vital to the charges between Peruvian dollars and Greek drachmas. It has been said many times that the judge sitting in the Bail Court is not required to consider in detail the prospects of success on an appeal but what must be established is a ground of appeal which is most likely to succeed R versus Wilson 1994 34 NSLR1 at 6 or one which is certain to succeed in the sense of one that can be seen without detailed argument to be certain to succeed R versus Lance Lawrence
Smith, Hunt CJ at CL 18 May 1993 at 2 to 3 R versus Oliver Court of
Criminal Appeal 15 September 1993.

None of the grounds suggested are clear to me as ones that are certain to succeed or even most likely to succeed and as I have already said it is not the function of the judge sitting in the Bails Court to consider detailed argument on the prospects of success.

Accordingly Mr Fairbairn has submitted that in an appropriate case, and he submits this is an appropriate case, the Court should consider the matters set out in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/s32.html) rather than those in section 22A or 30AA but the words of the latter two sections are clear and where successive applications are made, those matters need to be considered first. In this case, although I am prepared to concede that because the applicant is now legally represented there may be grounds for finding that there are special facts or special circumstances that justify the making of the application and in any event the Court has a discretion under that section to refuse to entertain an application, there is no such discretion under section 30AA and in the absence of special or exceptional circumstances the application for bail must be refused.

I should add that the grant of bail at this stage would in any event appear to be pointless as the applicant is bail refused on a large number of other matters that have been stood over until February unless one is to infer, and there is absolutely no evidence to justify such an inference, that this application was some kind of hidden agenda which would be used within the next few days to support an application for bail on the other matters.

The application is dismissed. Bail refused.

I have invited Mr Fairbairn to seek an order for an expedited hearing of the appeal but such invitation has been declined. I understand that is because the applicant is not presently legally represented for the purposes of the appeal.

FAIRBAIRN: Your Honour he will be legally represented on the appeal.

HIS HONOUR: Do you want an order for an expedited hearing of the appeal? 
FAIRBAIRN: No your Honour I would want an order that the appeal doesn't come on whilst he is in custody.

HIS HONOUR: Why not? I would have thought if he had an appeal against conviction and he had so many good points he would want his appeal on the first day of term.

FAIRBAIRN: Thank you your Honour, I appreciate that point.

HIS HONOUR: I would.

FAIRBAIRN: Your Honour if I could just mention the fact that could the appeal be expedited at the request of my client and I'd ask the matter just be adjourned shortly.

HIS HONOUR: What matter? 
FAIRBAIRN: This matter.

HIS HONOUR: Why? 
FAIRBAIRN: I want to just take some instructions from my client and I'll return to the Court in the absence of my client when I've seen him.

HIS HONOUR: No. Any proceedings in relation to your client have to be conducted in the presence-- 
FAIRBAIRN: Well apparently I've just been informed your Honour that there's another special factor that I haven't put to you today that my client has just become aware of and I may be required to put that to you.

HIS HONOUR: Well put it to me now.

FAIRBAIRN: I'm at this stage not quite sure of it. I'm in the middle of being told of that special factor. I'll, with your leave, just approach the prisoner.

HIS HONOUR: Yes by all means. I'll just mention the other matter while you're dealing with that.

MATTER INTERPOSED 
FAIRBAIRN: Your Honour I would like to address the seriousness that the prisoner faces at the moment upon return to gaol. His life has been threatened by prisoners that have just arrived last week. His life was threatened two days ago and I-- 
HIS HONOUR: So you want him to go on strict protection? 
FAIRBAIRN: I would like him on strict protection for the remainder of the sentence please.

HIS HONOUR: He has to apply to the gaol authorities for that as I understand it. Do you want me to make it part of my order? 
FAIRBAIRN: I would like you to recommend it and make it a part of your order.

HIS HONOUR: On application of applicant, recommend that applicant be placed on strict protection for his own safety.
 * * * 
