

Regina versus G M Khouri [1996] NSWSC 466 (3 October 1996) 
REGINA v. Gerard Maroun KHOURI /96 
Thursday 3 October 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ AT CL, SMART, IRELAND JJ 
CATCHWORDS: Double jeopardy - conspiracy to defraud - making a false statement with intent to obtain a financial advantage - delay, prejudice, costs and stress caused by new trial.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
HEADNOTE 
The applicant was charged with making a false statement with intent to obtain a financial advantage as to a claim under an insurance policy for the alleged theft of a family motor vehicle. The applicant and his brother had previously been acquitted by direction of a conspiracy charge arising out of the same claim. The applicant sought leave to appeal against the decision of the
District Court declining to grant a stay of proceedings.

Held: . The present charge against the applicant does not depend on the motor vehicle not having been stolen or on the Crown proving that the applicant had falsely claimed that the vehicle had been stolen. The charges are different in substantial respects. It cannot therefore be said that the applicant has not been given the full benefit of his acquittal.
Job DCJ was correct in holding that it would not amount to an abuse of process to proceed to trial on the present charge.
Although the applicant submitted that the delay, prejudice, costs and stress caused by a new trial are of such an order that any reasonable exercise of the judge's discretion would have led to a stay, the outstanding charge is of some seriousness and directions could be given to meet any prejudice.
In all the circumstances it is therefore not open to this court to disturb the discretionary judgment of Job DCJ.
 
Orders: 
Application for leave to appeal refused.

JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Gerard Maroun Khouri seeks leave to appeal against the decision of Job DCJ QC who declined to grant a stay of proceedings on a charge of making a false statement with intent to obtain a financial advantage. This charge arises out of statements made by the applicant to the Government Insurance Office or its agent in support of a claim under an insurance policy consequent upon the alleged theft of a family Mercedes-Benz. In brief, the present charge is based upon the applicant claiming that the car had undergone substantial restoration and was in much better condition than it was. 
The applicant and his brother had previously been acquitted by direction of a charge that between 1 May and 30 August 1990 they had conspired with Deafallah
Elfar together and amongst themselves to cheat and defraud the GIO of divers sums of money. The reasons given by the trial judge, Armitage DCJ, record that it was the Crown case on the conspiracy charge that the Mercedes had not been stolen but that Elfar had been given a key by the brothers and had taken possession of the Mercedes so it would appear that it had been stolen. The judge also recorded that the Crown also relied upon the vehicle not being in the condition that the two brothers had claimed it to be. Armitage DCJ said that the case was all about the Mercedes not being stolen. Having regard to the addresses of counsel, that seems to be so.

It was not suggested that if the judge found that there was no evidence that the brothers had falsely claimed that the vehicle had been stolen, the judge should leave the conspiracy count based on the statements made as to the condition of the vehicle by the brothers.

That material was used as evidence of the conspiracy to defraud and went, inter alia, to motive. Armitage DCJ held that the Crown case could not succeed unless the Crown proved that either or both the brothers had falsely claimed the vehicle had been stolen. The judge held that there was no evidence capable of proving that matter. The judge further held that there was no evidence upon which the jury could find either of the accused guilty of the charge.

At the start of the conspiracy trial, there was some debate about the indictment. The Crown presented an indictment against the applicant and his brother containing three counts. The first count charged that the applicant,
Anthony Khouri and Deafallah Elfar between 1 May 1990 and 30 August 1990 did conspire to cheat and defraud the GIO of New South Wales of divers sums of money. The second count was a substantive charge against Anthony Khouri and the third was a substantive charge against the applicant, that he with intent to obtain for a company a financial advantage made a false and misleading statement that a Mercedes motor vehicle had undergone substantial restoration and that this vehicle had been stolen. Both the applicant and Anthony Khouri successfully submitted to Armitage DCJ that the Crown should be put to its election whether to proceed on the conspiracy charge or the substantive charges. The Crown elected to proceed with the conspiracy charge but said that it wished to include in the indictment an alternative count against the applicant charging that the applicant made a false statement to the insurance company concerning the condition of the vehicle with intent to obtain a financial advantage.

Counsel for the applicant objected to this course and Armitage DCJ rejected the Crown's application to include the alternative count. As I read the transcript, the alternative count was foreshadowed but never formally handed up to Armitage DCJ in view of his ruling. Understandably, no reference was made to it after Armitage DCJ had directed a verdict.

The count which is now under consideration is based on section 178BB of the
Crimes Act and reads that the applicant "on or about 29 August 1990 at
Parramatta ... with intent to obtain for Amflo Holding Pty Limited a financial advantage, namely, the proceeds of an insurance settlement, made a statement in an insurance claim in relation to a motor vehicle, Mercedes-Benz sedan number RFY 910, which he knew to be false or misleading" in specified material particulars.

Eleven matters are listed and they include that the motor vehicle had been completely dismantled and re-built, the overhaul of major parts and systems of the vehicle, that the cost of parts would have been about $12,000 and that the vehicle was in "as new" condition.

I interpolate that the applicant had attended at Leichhardt Police Station on the afternoon of 2 May 1990 with his brother and reported that the Mercedes had been stolen earlier that afternoon while the applicant was at the dentist.
On 29 August 1990, he attended at the GIO office in Parramatta and made a statement allegedly covering the matters particularised in the count to an investigator retained by the GIO.

In the present case it is known exactly why the Crown case on the conspiracy charge failed. The Crown had not proved, even to a prima facie level, that the applicant or his brother had falsely claimed that the vehicle had been stolen.
In any future criminal proceedings between the Crown and the applicant, it would not be open to the Crown to suggest that the applicant had falsely claimed the vehicle had been stolen. That would be to fail to give the applicant the full benefit of his acquittal.

The count now propounded does not depend on the Mercedes not having been stolen or on the Crown proving that the applicant had falsely claimed that the vehicle had been stolen. For this count it suffices if the applicant made statements to the effect that the vehicle's condition was much superior to its actual condition and worth much more with intent to obtain a financial advantage, that is, more money from the insurance company. There is no substance in the complaint that the applicant has not been given the full benefit of his acquittal.

The charges are different in substantial respects. It was the applicant who did not want the count under section 178BB included in the indictment. Job DCJ was correct when he pointed out that no relevant findings were made at the previous trial on the matters on which the Crown intends to rely and that it would not amount on that account to an abuse of process to proceed to trial on the present charge.

The applicant submitted that it was the jury which had acquitted, that it was not possible to go behind that acquittal and that such an acquittal embraced the jury not being satisfied that the applicant made false statements as to the car's condition with intent to obtain a financial advantage.

The court should not proceed on a theoretical basis when it is in the position of knowing exactly why the accused was acquitted. There is an appreciable difference between a conspiracy to defraud and making a false statement with intent to obtain a financial advantage. I am unable to agree with the approach advanced by the applicant.

The applicant also relied on the related features of delay and prejudice. The applicant pointed out that it is over six years since the alleged offence took place and nearly three years since the directed acquittal on the conspiracy charge. It will be the best part of seven years before any trial could take place on the section 178BB charge. That is a long time. There was a delay of eight months between the first trial ending in October 1993 and the Crown having the matter re-listed, but since re-listing there has been some delay while various applications by the applicant have been considered by the
Director of Public Prosecutions and the Attorney General.

Some of the delay has been due to congestion in the court lists. The false statements on which the Crown relies are, we were told, contained in the applicant's statement made for the GIO in late August 1990. Evidence was led at the conspiracy trial about the condition of the vehicle when it was recovered. This is not the critical time. The real question is its condition as at 2 May 1990 when it was stolen and whether the car had as at that date been substantially restored or was in "as new" condition.

The applicant was a car body-builder. However, he proposes to rely on the evidence of mechanics and others who worked on the vehicle. I accept that it may be difficult for them to remember back to 1990. The evidence on this point is somewhat sketchy.

It was also asserted that the Mercedes did not belong to the applicant. It has now been sold. It was available at the hearing of the conspiracy charge. The applicant had been intending to show it to the jury and explain what work had been done and what damage the thieves had done.

The original trial took fourteen days and that was without hearing from the applicant and his witnesses. The next trial, if it is had, may well take a similar period. It is a heavy burden to bear the costs and expense of two lengthy trials covering at least in large part much the same ground.

To some extent the applicant contributed to the situation by objecting to the alternative charge being added. The better course may have been to sever the joint trial and hear the two charges against the applicant together. This possibility does not seem to have been considered.

Despite the applicant having been aware of the terms of the indictment for some months, no objections were taken until the first day of the trial when there were last-minute challenges and much debate. That did not give either the Crown or the judge much time to reflect on the best course to take. The applicant's objections were not raised in a timely way or at a timely point.
The applicant also relied on his previous good character and the mental stress he has been under and will be under if there is a trial.

The applicant's case is that the delay, prejudice, costs and stress are of such an order that any reasonable exercise of the judge's discretion would have led to a stay. It was not contended that Job DCJ had not taken these matters into account. On one view, the outstanding charge is of some seriousness. If proved, it reveals criminal conduct.

In all the circumstances, I do not think that it is open to this court to disturb the discretionary judgment of Job DCJ. It is a matter for the Director of Public Prosecutions to decide whether this case should proceed. It may turn out to be a relatively minor fraud case. Even if it proves to be a little more serious, it may well be that the punishment may only consist of a bond or a fine or perhaps both.

Obviously at any trial the judge will have to give directions dealing with the questions of delay and the difficulties that this may have given rise to. He will, of course, be in a much better position than we are with all the evidence then before the court.

In the whole of the circumstances, I am of the opinion that the application for leave to appeal should be refused.

HUNT CJ AT CL: I agree with the order proposed by Smart J, for the reasons which he has given.

IRELAND J: I also agree.

HUNT CJ AT CL: The order of the Court is that the application is refused.
 * * * 
