

Application of Michaelis [1996] NSWSC 91 (6 May 1996) 
Application of MICHAELIS /95 
Monday, 6 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff has applied, pursuant to s.5 of the Public Notaries Act 1985 (the Act), for appointment by the Court as a public notary. The proceedings were commenced in the Common Law Division and, by order made by the Chief Justice, have been transferred to the Equity Division.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff fulfils each of the criteria set out in paragraphs (a)-(d) inclusive of s.5(1) of the Act, and therefore that the
Court has power to make the appointment sought. There has been no notice of objection to the application filed under Part 82 rule 6 of the Supreme Court
Rules by the Society of Notaries of NSW Inc (the Society) or by any other person.

Nevertheless, the Court's power under s.5 of the Act is discretionary and an application of this kind invokes an administrative function of the Court in which considerations relating to the public interest and the interests of persons other than the applicant (or any other party to the proceedings) may play a substantial role. The need to give effect to such considerations may require some departure from procedural rules and practices applicable to the determination of purely private rights. In this respect the proceedings are analogous to other classes of case where considerations wider than the interests of the parties intrude (eg disciplinary proceedings in respect of legal practitioners - see Walter versus Council of the Qld Law Society <case>; [(1988) 62 ALJR 153] at 157; proceedings relating to the welfare of children - see
Official Solicitor versus K [[1965] AC 201] at 239-241, Re an Infant K [[1973] 1 NSWLR 311] at 349,
In re E [[1984] 1 WLR 156]; applications for licences to own or deal in firearms - see Kavanagh versus Chief Constable of Devon [[1974] QB 624]; proceedings relating to mentally ill patients - see In re WLW [[1972] Ch 456).] 
There are circumstances revealed in the present case which raise a question whether as a matter of discretion the application should not be granted. These circumstances are that the plaintiff is the Group Legal Counsel for a large corporation with responsibility for overseeing legal requirements of the Group in Australia and a number of other countries in the Pacific and South-East
Asian areas. The corporation and its associated companies carry on extensive business activities in all States of Australia and elsewhere including the
Pacific and South-East Asian areas, which generate a constant need for notarisation of documents which it is proposed that the plaintiff would undertake. The plaintiff also operates a private practice as a solicitor from his home at Chiswick, principally outside ordinary business hours. He proposes to make his services as a public notary available to the public after ordinary business hours at his home, in association with that private practice, as well as during ordinary business hours at his office in his employer's premises at
North Sydney. He would be permitted by his employer to be available to notarise documents for members of the public in the North Sydney area during ordinary business hours. He holds a full practicing certificate as a legal practitioner and has taken out professional indemnity insurance with Law
Cover. Fees received for notarial services performed by the plaintiff would be paid to him personally and not to his employer. However, it is clear that the primary reason for the present application is his desire to perform notarial acts for his employer and its associated companies and that the principal activities which he would perform as a public notary comprise the authentication of documents for the companies, particularly documents associated with applications for the registration of trade marks in other countries.

In accordance with a direction which I gave, the Registrar wrote to the
Society inviting it to apply to be joined as a defendant in the proceedings, or to apply to be heard as amicus curiae, for the purpose of assisting the
Court, on the following questions of principle: 
Is it proper or desirable that a public notary provide notarial services for his or her employer? 
In the case of an applicant for appointment as a public notary who is, or intends to be, employed by a person or corporation engaged in a business other than that of legal practitioner, should a condition be imposed under s.5(2) of the Public Notaries Act prohibiting or limiting the provision of notarial services by the applicant for his or her employer? 
In the case of an application for appointment as a public notary whose private practice as a solicitor is carried on, or intended to be carried on, otherwise than in an office used principally for that purpose during ordinary business hours, should a condition be imposed under s.5(2) of the Act requiring public notification or advertisement of the availability of the applicant to provide notarial services for members of the public? 
Subsequently the Society indicated that it did not wish to be joined as a defendant, but did, through its Honorary Secretary Mr Russell appear, with the leave of the Court, as amicus curiae for the purpose of making a brief written submission in relation to the question (c) in the Registrar's letter, to the effect that the plaintiff should comply with conditions of the kind imposed by Powell J in Re Fitzpatrick and Partington [(1989) 18 NSWLR ], and that there should be a public advertisement or notification as to the plaintiff's availability as a public notary. The Society declined to make any submissions in relation to questions (a) or (b).

In Re Fitzpatrick and Partington, Powell J held that it was not open to the
Court to refuse an application under s.5 of the Act for appointment as a public notary on the ground that the applicant was not a principal solicitor in private practice. In that case one of the applicants, Mr Fitzpatrick, (at the time of the hearing) held a full practising certificate, and was a senior associate with a firm of solicitors. The other applicant, Mr Partington, held a full practising certificate and was corporate secretary and general counsel of a bank, but had, and exercised, a right of private practice. His Honour granted both applications subject to conditions. Mr Partington's appointment was conditional upon (a) his retaining and exercising the right of private practice, (b) his private practice as a solicitor and notary being covered by a policy of insurance issued pursuant to the provisions of the [Legal
Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), and his private practice as a solicitor and notary being conducted in an office or other like place set aside exclusively for his use, which office or place is notified to members of the public as being his office, and to which office or place members of the public wishing to deal with his in the course of his practice, may have ready and convenient access. Powell J did not in that case express any view upon the appropriateness or otherwise of a public notary who was an employee performing notarial acts for his employer, although the submissions of the parties had adverted to that question (see paragraphs 4 and 5 of the outline of submissions for the Society, recorded at page 22 of the report, and paragraphs 3 and 4 of the outline of submissions in reply for
Mr Partington, recorded at page 25).

In the present case it is necessary to give specific attention to the question because, as already indicated, the principal purpose of the plaintiff's application is to enable him to provide notarial services for his employer and associated companies.

As noted by Powell in Re Fitzpatrick and Partington the status and functions of a public notary have a long history originating in Roman law, with little or no substantive contribution from the common law or from English or
Australian statute law, and have widespread international significance. In international practice, great reliance is placed by authorities of one country on the accuracy and validity of notarial acts performed in other countries.
This is particularly the case in jurisdictions founded on the civil law, in which, according to Brooke's Notary (11th ed) at page 60, the acts of a notary are regarded as probative in Court proceedings. At page 71 of the same work, it is recorded that the "Declaration of Madrid" approved by the
Permanent Conference of European Community Notariats on 23 March 1990, contains the following definition of a notary, namely: "a public official to whom has been delegated the authority of the State in order to give to the instruments which he draws up, and of which he is the author, the character of authenticity which he confers on the said instruments, whose keeping, probative effect and executory effect are thereby assured." 
The author adds: "It is the authenticity, or public faith, accorded to his instruments which is the hallmark of the civil or Latin notary. Statements made by the notary in his instruments relating to matters seen and heard by him are accepted as true without further proof." 
In Australia and other common law countries notarial acts are not afforded the same evidentiary status as in civil law countries, nor are they capable of having the same executive force (cf Brooke's Notary at page 73). The "public office and duty" of a notary in English practice is described in
Brooke's Notary in a passage quoted by Powell J in Re Fitzpatrick and
Partington at page 14, which it is unnecessary to repeat. However, the potential significance of Australian notarial acts in other, civil law, countries, cannot be disregarded.

In Re Fitzpatrick and Partington, at page 30-31, Powell J referred to the "public" nature of the office of public notary, from which his Honour inferred that the evidence tendered in support of an application under [s.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s5.html) "should show that there may well be some advantage to the public". However, it is important to recognise the other "public" aspect of the office, namely that the authority conferred on a public notary is, in a sense, an emanation of the authority of the State itself, attracting requirements of impartiality and disinterestedness analogous to those associated with quasi-judicial administrative functions.

These considerations tend to suggest that it may at the least be undesirable for a public notary to perform notarial acts in which his employer has an interest, including the certification of the authenticity of the employer's documents. I was not referred during the hearing to any material concerning the law or practice in other countries on this question. I do note however that the Notaries Practice Rules 1989 in England include a rule set out at p of Brooke's Notary in the following terms: "Rule 4 (Employed Notaries) (The general prohibitions) 
A Notary who is the employee of a non-notary shall not perform any notarial act as part of his employment or do or perform any notarial act for his employed [sic, presumably employer]. Provided, however, that nothing in this
Rule shall prevent a Notary who is employed by a solicitor or is a member of a firm of solicitors from performing notarial acts for the clients of that solicitor or firm.
 (Interpretation) 
In this Rule: references to a Notary's employer include the employer's holding, associated or subsidiary company; and references to an employee include an employee of such holding, associated or subsidiary company; and `holding company' and `subsidiary company' have the meanings assigned to them by the Companies Acts 1985 and 1989, and two companies are `associated' where they are subsidiary companies of the same holding company." 
The position may be different in the United States. In an article by an
Illinois attorney and notary, published in The National Law Journal of 9
October 1995 at page A23, entitled `Why Notaries Get Little Respect', the following passage appears: "Notary-related dishonesty appears to be on the rise. Many notarizations do not deserve the level of trust and confidence traditionally given them.
Notaries commonly backdate documents and witness signatures for people who do not appear before them personally. In the case of employee-notaries, they tend to do whatever their employers direct them to do, even if shortcuts and misconduct are involved.

Some of the worst offenders are lawyers who, as notaries, disregard the legal requirements for valid notarizations and, as employers, order their employee- notaries to stamp documents in violation of legal standards.

The marginal role of American notaries is in stark contrast to the seriousness with which the responsibility is taken in many foreign countries. They are an embarrassment when it comes to international commerce. In many other countries, businesspeople and government agents rarely take American notarizations seriously, and sometimes reject them." 
I have no means of knowing whether, or to what degree, these assertions are justified by the facts. However, the very fact of publication of such expressed concerns at least suggests the desirability of giving close attention to the question of the performance by a public notary of notarial acts for his employer.

As I have already indicated, no material relating to practice in other countries was adverted to during the hearing before this Court. For this reason the plaintiff should have the opportunity, if he wishes, of adducing further material or making further submissions in the light of the matters to which I have referred in these reasons. In the absence of any such further material or submissions, I would be disposed to dismiss the plaintiff's application. However, in order that the plaintiff can consider his position, all I will do today is to adjourn the application for an appropriate period. I should add that nothing in these reasons involves any adverse reflection on either the plaintiff or his employer.
 * * * 
