

Vella versus Wall and Anor Matter No 15285/92 [1998] NSWSC 765 (20 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
ANTHONY CHARLES VELLA versus PHILLIP WALL & ANOR /92 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings for assessment of damages against one of two defendants against whom default judgment had been signed in an action for damages for personal injury caused by negligence. 
The plaintiff, who was born on 20 November 1968 and who is right handed, was years of age when he was thrown from a seat at the rear of a motor boat into an uncovered drive coupling. His right arm became trapped and was severely mauled prior to the motor being shut down. Amputation of his arm above the elbow was held to be medically necessary after he had been taken to hospital and his mother, a nurse, had refused to accept the opinion to that effect of the initial medical consultant. During all this time, he was in some severe pain. He had been suffering greatly whilst the arm was caught in the drive coupling and subsequently since it was not desired to afford him, so he said in evidence, pain killers lest that might affect the medical treatment that he might thereafter receive. The arm was amputated and later it became necessary to undertake a revision of that amputation and to exercise a neuroma.

For the original amputation, he was apparently hospitalised at the Hawkesbury
District Hospital, Windsor from 14 March 1981 to 9 April 1981 and for the subsequent revision from 19 April 1983 to 28 April 1983. The original injuries were described as gross including multiple lacerations of the right arm from the elbow to the wrist, involving muscle, tendon, nerve and bone. The limb had become devitalised. (In passing, it is plain that the allegation of propeller injuries in the report of Dr. Whitty is an error.) The medical fees had been paid on the plaintiff's behalf and I am informed that as there was no insurer no records have been kept. Doing the best I can from the exceedingly limited material, I am prepared to allow $4,000 for past medical expenses.

It has been necessary for the plaintiff to be fitted with a prosthetic arm and in that regard, costs to date have been incurred on his behalf by the New
South Wales State Health-Artificial Limb Service:- .6.91 Minor repair to prosthesis $96.64 .9.91 Replace above elbow heavy duty arm cable $120.96 .11.95 Replace above elbow heavy duty arm cable $133.30 .8.96 Right above elbow limb with silicone socket, 
XA hook and E400, WE400 $2,869.76 
His future requirements according to Appliance & Limb Centre
Pty. Limited in the document I have admitted and marked
Exhibit B, are :- "Future requirements 
Mr. Vella would require an Above Elbow Myoelectric socket replacement every -24 months, at a current cost of $4,122.60 and a full limb replacement every three years, being an Above Elbow Myoelectric battery operated arm, at a current cost of $57,550.

Mr. Vella would also benefit from an everyday limb with a 5XA hook, E400 elbow and WE400 wrist and cable at a current cost of $4,756.80.

The life expectancy of the above limbs will depend on the extent of use, however on average around three to five years.

Repairs & Maintenance 
This would average to seven hours per prosthesis per year at a current labour rate of $94.50 per hour.

The Myoelectric arm will require regular observation and components will have to be replaced, the cost of this will depend on the component and type of repair.

Other requirements 
Mr. Vella will require a replacement glove every 10 to 12 months at a cost of: $314.95 
Also required is a replacement Harness and Cable every 12 months at a cost of: $391.80." 
Those costs are valid for three months from 30 April 1998. I am unable to predict whether such costs will rise or fall over the duration of the plaintiff's life. I am prepared to allow these costs on the basis I refer to below.

The plaintiff resides with his father at Lethbridge Park. He is employed at the Family Court as a Grade Three Clerk in counselling. He had, at the time of the accident, resided with his mother and father and two younger sister and was in Year Seven at Shalvey High School. He expressed the view that he was a medium student who ended up getting 214 in the Higher School Certificate which he supposed was the median. He was interested in sport with his mates, in particular snow boarding.

He described his feelings at the time of the accident as follows:- "Well I hopped in the back of a speed boat and we were going up the river and there was Maureen - she was sort of observing and a gentleman by the name of
Peter, he was driving the boat, controlling the boat. I remember Maureen was drinking but anyway I think my main purpose at the time was being observer. I mean, I wasn't actually told that but I think that was the purpose of me being there, to be an observer, and I was sitting in the back seat and just going up the river with two water skis at the back and we had hit the wake of another boat. I flew forward into the motor. I remember I got my arm caught up and I was trying to call out for Maureen. She was still drinking, talking. I was just trying to get her attention. But the noise from the motor right beside myself, but I was trying to scream out.

Q. The boat kept on going? A. Yeah and I just thought. Actually I felt like doing something, shove my head in to get it over and done with, but a minute later she turned around and started screaming and turned the boat off, sort of scraped me back together they picked up the water skis and went straight to shore. I didn't know who the people were. They put me in the four wheel drive and took me straight to hospital, sort of thing. Then we got to the hospital and called, because my parents hadn't arrived yet, they wouldn't amputate.

Q. So your mother wasn't working that day? A. Yeah, she was working that night.

Q. But she wasn't there when you got there? A. No. She came. I told her I said, 'Look mum, they have got to cut my arm off'. She said, 'They just told me it was a broken arm on the phone'. I said, 'They couldn't tell you that I lost my arm on the phone'.

Q. Were you in a lot of pain, can you remember? A. It was a weird sort of a pain. I mean, I couldn't really explain it. I couldn't really explain it. Some parts weren't hurting but just touch something, the bed, and it starts killing me.

HIS HONOUR: Q. They give you very fast pain killers? A. No, not at the time.
They were trying to keep me awake. They were worried about a coma. Kept me awake. Mum came in. Saw the report and wanted a second opinion. So then we had to wait for a second opinion. That came back 'no go' and they give me drugs and - the police partially interviewed me. I just said, 'Come back another time please. If I make it through the night come back' and I never saw them again, the police, but that was it, woke up the next day.

Q. Subsequent to that operation how long did you stay in hospital? A. I stayed in for a month there because my mum worked in the hospital and just couldn't do it all at home, do all the bandaging and that stuff I had to go every week for check ups. She just took me home then." 
The effect of the accident on him he described as:- "Q. The accident and thereafter? A. Well yeah scared me, threw me about, changed my whole life, turned by whole life upside down. Just at school, that was a big warp, I mean, I couldn't keep up with everyone because was right handed and basically having to pick up the pen with the left handed, so at the end of the day I couldn't understand my writing, sort of thing. So you were frustrated there. I never really passed at - everything just got assessed because they couldn't understand me at the time. Just the whole social thing,
I mean girlfriends, that sort of stuff. Me parents, they busted up a couple of months straight after, sort of thing." 
His father provided him with care thereafter and he expects that when his father, now retired medically unfit, grows older he will have to care for his father.

His mother left the family about three months after the accident. He felt some responsibility for his mother leaving. It was a nuclear family, "a couple of kids, dog and the rest and [his] mum just sort of freaked out a bit, lost control, had to have some psychiatric assistance". His father had to take a year off work to look after the three children and it seems as though it may have been on social security. After his mother became detached from the family he didn't get on with her. She still blames herself and her reaction to the plaintiff's accident for the marriage breaking down. She blames herself also for the accident. This has, no doubt, contributed to the detachment of the mother and indeed the loss of the mother is to be taken into account under general damages.

The plaintiff had trouble at school and with his school work. He was unable to play sport. He has had to give up snow boarding. He has had to learn to write with his left hand which he started to do himself because no-one had ever told him he could get help. It was not until Year 12 that one of the teachers mentioned to him that he could get some help and he went after school and tried to get it for a whole year and was given some additional time to complete his HSC exams. His subjects at school included science, maths, computer studies and sports and he learned to use a computer.

He had, following the accident, been sent by his father to Malta "well just to sort of show them that I was still okay. I wasn't dead or deformed, sort of thing". The plaintiff was in Malta for about six months in the middle of the school year. Effectively, he lost the benefit of one year.

On his return to school after having been in Malta, although he was a decent student, he couldn't write well and couldn't understand his own writing and this was embarrassing and his reaction to the reactions of his classmates was to make himself act as a sort of joker so as to look "cool". He was frustrated, angry, "peed off", all sorts of things really, but it was his good mates at school that stuck by him that let him get through a lot of stuff.

About a month after leaving school he was involved in a car accident and received a bit of whiplash injury which threw him around so that he couldn't wear his artificial arm and he believed that he wasn't going to be able to wear the artificial arm. He obtained employment thereafter at age 19. His job in the Family Court was obtained through Resource Rehabilitation Services who obtained a special placement for a person with a disability and he was able to achieve sufficient to stay on.

The plaintiff is not involved in any present stable long term relationship but did enjoy a stable relationship with a partner from early 1996 until November
The plaintiff has little contact with his sisters.

He is able to write to an extent with his left hand now and uses the computer as basically his writing and communication tool for 50% of his time. He does not have a home computer, enjoying access to one at work.

The plaintiff has provided himself with special driving lessons and a special motor vehicle, an elderly Torana adapted to his condition, for which he cherishes great affection. He has been very interested in motor vehicles, including motor bikes, cars and go-carts. He is no longer able to drive the go-cart which still sits in the backyard.

His prosthesis is strapped onto a harness that crosses his entire back and which, from time to time, causes blisters and has caused a lack of symmetry in his build together with some degree of consequent pain and a very obvious degree of personal embarrassment at the restriction on his movement and the lack of the limb. He is, at work, feeling the wear and tear on the body that problems created by the artificial limb and its weight create for him. It wasn't until he had been in the job for a year that Occupational Health provided such things as door stoppers to assist with the job. At work he does not rely on his right arm much at all. He uses it for holding doors, lifts, whatever or dropping things. He wears his prothesis for cosmetic appearance as well so that "you don't get as many people gawking". "It is just one arm but people look at you like - a five dollar note - and sticky beak, whatever. If you've got it on they look at you for one second. End of story". He pointed out that with the harness he is always much hotter than other people and he covers it with long sleeved shirts. His body is warped but nonetheless he has been able to step up the ladder a bit and go up a couple of grades in the
Family Court. He is presently earning about $30,000 per annum gross, yielding him about $410 a week after tax and superannuation.

All his friends at school left at the School Certificate and have gone into manual labour so that there is no real comparable available.

A degree of depression and a considerable degree of self-pity for his circumstances were obvious in his demeanour and in the content of his replies but I have no doubt that he has, if anything, understated the effect of the accident on him in his evidence. His present role in the Family Law Court is in Counselling. He points out that this is a fairly gloomy job and he has had no real psychological or psychiatric assistance either with his problem or with coping with the job. He saw a psychologist once "probably about 1992" and "just didn't like the whole situation". He pointed out:- "We have got a lot of weirdos coming in and if I am going to the psychiatrist
I am thinking what are they thinking about me. Just that situation." 
The plaintiff is depressed by his job in the counselling section, drilled to clients every day, day after day, looking at other people's problems and having to work it out himself. He does not really like it, is not hopeful of going somewhere else. He wouldn't mind eventually getting out of the court system because it is "pretty gloom and doom seeing people breaking up and children splitting up". He would like to go somewhere else where people are positive and happier. He did like family law but it is just too much the same stuff. He doesn't want to have to look at other people's relationships. He has gone from Grade 1, which was about $20,000 per year to Grade 2 and now to the bottom rung of Grade 3. He has rejected or deferred a promotion to Grade 4 because he would be distracted by his court case from the counselling which requires a fully focused 100% attitude, there being all sorts of issues - domestic violence and such like. He sees himself as having the attitudinal and intellectual capacity to go higher but doesn't think that his body will last much longer. He refers to the excess swelling of his knuckles, the sore shoulder and the wear and tear on the body. His doctors propose no solution and have not diagnosed arthritis. He is worried that he may find himself in the position where he may not be able to work at all.

The depression that followed after his amputation involved him, whilst quite young, taking any sort of pills he could get his hands on after he came out of hospital, smoking marijuana and drinking alcohol and in addition, he became involved with hard drugs, including heroin. He hasn't touch a needle now for years, having gone to drug and alcohol counselling for about two years, some four years ago. That counselling continued for some two years and now he is "completely much all and straight, 180%". His life is limited to work, chores, playing with the car and occasionally the local RSL club scene. He suffers phantom pains and in addition pains in the vicinity of the collar bone, particularly in the area of the harness and is taking Panadeine Forte for that pain that comes every so often, particularly in winter and he tries to avoid attendances on the doctor and taking pain killers. He phantom pains are occasioning real problems, in that it feels as if there is a severe cramp in the missing limb.

As to the sports that he formerly indulged in, he said:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. Do you swim? A. No.

Q. Surf? A. No.

Q. Ever done any? A. Yeah.

Q. Have you had to give it up because of the difficulties of getting the arm on and off? A. Strangely I don't really - I don't go swimming with the artificial arm on. It is like a boat anchor. I would simply sink. I never mind, like swimming sports, but yet again living up the bush, Penrith - can't go surfing every day, but once I did try the snowboard - one thing I realised when I snowboard I could only turn one way, go down the hill, keep flicking left, so I gave that sport up after one day. I realised it is like swimming. I would be going around in circles.

Q. You don't have to just turn one way - you could train yourself to pick it up, could you? A. Yeah but see I felt like - with your arm you throw yourself around like for instance I move this around to turn but I didn't have it there. I couldn't really turn. I sort of turn 90 degrees one way but say turn degrees the other way.

Q. I understand that too - so you have given up the skiing? A. Um-hm.

Q. You didn't go surfing all that often but you now don't go surfing or swimming? A. No.

Q. Do you do any form of sport? A. Not really, no - used to do skateboard up until a couple of years back. Gave that up.

Q. Why did you give that up? A. 24 your old still going around on a skateboard, didn't look socially acceptable in these days. I like the car racing but it is a pretty expensive sport, so I sort of leave that on the burner.

HEALEY: Q. Could you go go-cart racing with the artificial arm - would you be allowed to go in the -? A. I wouldn't be go-carting I would be car racing.

Q. They would allow you in? A. Yes." 
As to the psychiatrist:- "HEALEY: Q. Talking about your mental state and how you are feeling, do you ever have thoughts of suicide? A. Yeah, quite often.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Have you thought about seeing a psychiatrist about that or do you take the view that that would be an admission? A. Well I am not sure what you mean by 'admission'. Yet again I am - I work with 20 psychologists and psychiatrists every day. I see how things go on in there and I am afraid to get labelled whatever it is to other departments. I don't think there has been a government worker - I have seen how people get their records subpoenaed this and that. Might sound like I am paranoid but I am paranoid that would happen to me. Unfortunately I know the ropes a bit better than most other people so I am pretty worried of what I say these days - especially like you say things like that I am suicidal. I mean a God knows what bastard they are going to label these days and I remember a few years ago I was really badly stressed out and somebody said to me - 'don't put down stress because if you do it is going to affect your job, make it even harder for job prospects'. So I put myself down as manic.

Q. You have been very careful in your work like, I mean you have been under exaggerating how you have been feeling? A. Well yeah. You can't let them know the whole story. People get the wrong idea - wrong impression - sometimes when you are under all that stress and strain yourself you are not sure what you projecting." 
Further, although the plaintiff's home does not require any particular modification, he has slipped in the bath tub a couple of times and has objected to a glassed in shower stall because of the amount of times he has fallen in the bath, he was worried about going through the glass. He thinks the home might require hand rails. I accept the evidence of the plaintiff and feel that he is substantially understating his disabilities.

It is quite clear that the plaintiff has suffered most severely as a consequence of the action; he is unable to engage in any activity that requires any real use of two arms; he has been deprived of the use of his right arm, he being right handed; he is deprived of the ability to engage in activities that involve heavy use of the left arm; and this has grossly affected his employment, his social, sporting and leisure activities, requiring him to make use of a difficult and painful prosthesis, to suffer intermittent but frequent pain, continuous embarrassment, anxiety and depression and that it is further clear that it has grossly affected the relationship of his mother with the family and particularly, the plaintiff, to his detriment. I accept the submissions put orally and in writing on the plaintiff's behalf.

In the circumstances, this is a matter in which a most substantial award of general damages is appropriate, having regard to the effects upon the plaintiff, including the psychological effects, that the only apparent avenue of employment is in circumstances which are attended by feelings of severe depression on his part and which affect him as to his future prospects of remaining in employment. Further, the effects of the injury indirectly through the use of the prosthesis and harness would seem to limit his future employability. Doing the best I can, and having regard to what was said in
Planet Fisheries Pty. Limited v. La Rose <case>; [(1968) 119 CLR 118] at 124-125 per Barwick, CJ., Kitto and Menzies, JJ.:- "It is the relationship of the award to the injury and its consequences as established in the evidence in the case in question which is to be proportionate. ... It is not a matter to be resolved by reference to some norm, or standard supposedly to be derived from a consideration of amounts awarded in a number of other specific cases." 
I am prepared to allow a sum of $185,000 together with interest thereon at the rate as set out in the attached schedule. In this regard, I take into account the care that has been provided to him by his father, the attempt to make provision for him by way of the trip to Malta, and his expectation that in the future he and his father residing together, he will find himself caring for his retired, medically unfit father. As to the interest, I am prepared to award two percent on past general damages, allowing $85,000 for past damages and $100,000 for the future at the rate of two percent. In respect of past medical expenses paid on his behalf and past out of pocket expenses by way of provision of the prosthesis, I allow, as found above, $2,869 for the prosthesis and $4,000 for the medical expenses. For past wage loss I allow $13,000 with interest on the past wage loss of $10,868. As to future out of pocket expenses, I allow :- 
Socket replacement $4,122 every 21 months is $45.29 per week.

Full limb replacement $57,550 every three years is $368.91 per week.

Everyday limb at $4,756 every four years is $22.86 per week.

Repairs and maintenance is six hours per year for two prosthesis at $94.50 per hour equals 12 x 94.50 รท 52 = $21.80 per week.

Replacement glove $315 every 11 months is $6.60 per week.

Replacement harness and cable $7.50 per week.

The total of (a) to (f) inclusive is $472.96 (rounded up to $473) per week.
The plaintiff is presently almost 30 years old. Working on a male life expectancy for a 30 year old of 47 years, provides for $473 per week for 47 years discounted at three percent less 15% for contingencies, a total of - $532,836.86 
As to future wage loss on the basis that the plaintiff is presently on $30,000 gross per annum and is capable of earning $35,000 gross per annum, I allow $246,661 since $35,000 gross per annum is $510 per week and the plaintiff has lost 50% of his earning capacity and has 35 years working life - 255 x 1138 x %, ie. $255 per week for 35 years discounted at three percent and 15% and bearing in mind the likelihood that the plaintiff will cease remunerative work either for physical or psychological reasons in the immediate future.

This would result in an award of damages in accordance with the schedule which
I append to these reasons and therefore I find a verdict in the sum of $1,024,135.30 and direct the entry of judgment accordingly. The first defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.

Plaintiff's schedule of damages . General damages 
Loss of arm, overuse syndrome of other arm, psychological factors etc. $185,000.00 . Interest on general damages 
Two percent on past general damages for 17 years on an award of $185,000 with $85,000 for past - $85,000 x 2% x 17 years $28,900.00 . Past out of pocket expenses $2,869.00 . Past medical expenses $4,000.00 . Future out of pocket expenses 
Socket replacement $4,122 every 21 months is $45.29 per week 
Full limb replacement $57,550 every three years is $368.91 per week 
Everyday limb at $4,756 every four years is $22.86 per week 
Repairs and maintenance is six hours per year for two prosthesis at $94.50 per hour = 12 x $94.50 รท 52 - $21.80 per week 
Replacement glove $315 every 11 months is $6.60 per week 
Replacement harness and cable $7.50 per week.

Total of (a) to (f) inclusive is $472.96 per week (rounded up to $473). The plaintiff is presently almost 30 years old. Male life expectancy for years male is 47 years - ie. 473 x 1325.3 x 85% $532,836.86 . Past wage loss $13,000 gross per annum for one year (1987) $13,000.00 . Interest on past wage loss 
Average interest 1987 to date (Supreme 
Court Scale) is 15.2%. Say at half rate of .6% - $13,000 x 7.5% = $988 per annum x 11 years $10,868.00 . Future wage loss 
Plaintiff presently on $30,000 gross per annum.

Capable of earning $35,000 gross per annum.
 $35,000 gross per annum is $510 per week net.

Plaintiff has lost 50% of his earning capacity and has 35 years working life - 255 x 1138 x 85% - ie. $255 per week for 35 years discounted by three percent and 15% $246,661.50 $1,024,135.30 * * * 
