

Macdonald versus C E Heath Underwriting and Insurance (Australia) Limited [1997] NSWSC 185 (9 May 1997) 
MACDONALD versus C E HEATH UNDERWRITING & INSURANCE (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED /95 DC 2787/89 MAY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA, POWELL JA 
CATCHWORDS: CONTRACT - CONSTRUCTION OF INSURANCE POLICY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
CONTRACT - CONSTRUCTION OF INSURANCE POLICY - Respondent provided accounting firm with professional indemnity insurance - policy extended cover to the appellant who was an employee of the firm - proceedings brought against firm for professional negligence - firm settles claim - any claim for cover by the firm against the insurer would have been excluded by the policy - trial judge orders indemnity in firm's favour against appellant - trial judge refuses appellant's claim for indemnity from respondent. On appeal: the appellant argued: (1) the exclusion in the policy could apply only to the assured firm and not to the appellant; (2) s48 of the Insurance Contracts Act did not operate to exclude the appellant's claim. Held: (1) the cover extended to the appellant under the policy was no greater than that provided to the firm. The exclusion in the policy therefore operated to exclude the appellant's claim. (2) s48(1) extends only to contracts of general insurance where indemnity is provided to a party and extended to a person specified in the contract. On the construction of the policy advanced by the appellant, that is that the contract provided him with cover wider than and therefore different from that provided to the firm, the appellant could not rely on s48(1).

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: This is an appeal from a decision of his Honour Judge
Garling in the District Court, given on 20 December 1994.

In the court below, the plaintiff, Mrs Aleksanian, brought proceedings for damages for professional negligence against her accountants, a firm known as
M. A. MacDonald & Co, and also against Mr N. MacDonald, who worked for the firm as a consultant. The firm's only principal was Mrs MacDonald, a qualified accountant. She was the mother of Mr N. MacDonald who although not a qualified accountant had worked in the business for twenty years. The firm had an
Accountants' Professional Indemnity Insurance Policy with CE Heath
Underwriting & Insurance (Aust) Ltd (Heath). Section II of the policy extended the cover to employees, who were defined to include consultants. It was common ground in the proceedings that Mr N. MacDonald was a consultant, but it was disputed at first instance that he was such within the meaning of the policy.

In November 1987 Mr N. MacDonald advised Mrs Aleksanian to invest in a car detailing business. The business failed and Mrs Aleksanian lost her funds. She then commenced the proceedings for damages. The firm in turn claimed against
Mr N. MacDonald. He claimed indemnity from Heath. The firm settled Mrs
Aleksanian's claim, and the judge ordered an indemnity in the firm's favour against Mr N. MacDonald. There is no appeal against that order. The judge rejected Mr N. MacDonald's claim against Heath. Mr N. MacDonald appealed against that decision of the judge, and that is the only part of the case with which this court is concerned.

Heath relied on three main grounds of defence against Mr N. MacDonald's claim.
The first was that Mr N. MacDonald was not an employee of the accounting firm, the second that cover was excluded by Section III of the policy, and the third that Heath was entitled to refuse cover by reason of [s48(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s48.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth).

In relation to the first ground, Garling DCJ held against Heath. He found Mr
N. MacDonald was a consultant to the firm within the meaning of the insurance policy. This finding has not been questioned in this court.

The second point was said to depend on the proper meaning of Section III of the policy. This relevantly provided: "III EXCLUSIONS 
This Certificate shall not indemnify the assured firm against claims made upon Assured: ....
 by or on behalf of any person operated or controlled by the Assured or by any employees, nominees or trustees of the Assured and in which the Assured or any member of the Assured's family has a direct or indirect financial interest; by any person advised or induced by the Assured or employees of the
Assured to invest in or lend money to any person being a person referred to in the preceding sub-clause or to any person named as the Assured under this
Policy; or .....
 
The business in which Mrs Aleksanian had lost her funds was a car detailing business which had been started by the appellant and one of the firm's clients, Mr Franks. To conduct it, a shelf company was purchased. Mrs
Aleksanian subscribed what was, for practical purposes, all the capital. She was advised to do this by the appellant for taxation reasons. The directors of the shelf company became Mrs Aleksanian, Mr N. MacDonald and Mr Franks. Mrs
Aleksanian had little to do with the management of the company. The company had three types of shares, management shares, equity shares and dividend shares. Mr N. MacDonald's family company and Mrs Aleksanian had one of each type of share, and Mr Franks had one management share and one dividend share, but no equity share. There were no other shareholders.

At p 7 of his judgment Garling DCJ said: "The clear inference is that Mr MacDonald induced Mrs Aleksanian to put up the funds so that he with his client Mr Franks could enter into business together with her. ...
 
I am satisfied that Mrs Aleksanian was induced by an employee Mr MacDonald, a consultant, to invest in a company which was operated and controlled by an employee of the first defendant and the company was one in which a member of the first defendant's family held an interest." 
He concluded that cover was excluded by Section III of the policy. The appellant argued against this finding on the basis that the introductory words of Section III provided that the exclusion applied only to "the Assured firm" and not to the appellant. This is a straightforward argument, and at first sight, and particularly if Section III alone is looked at, plausible.
However, when the whole of the relevant parts of the policy are considered, it seems to me that the argument fails.

Section I states what it is that is indemnified by the policy: the assured firm is indemnified against defined claims.

Section II is called "Extensions" and extends the policy's cover to the liability of persons, specified in seven paragraphs, connected in one way or another with the assured firm. As already indicated, Heath does not dispute in the appeal that Mr N. MacDonald was within a relevant category to which the cover extended. However, the heading to Section II, taken together with the whole of its wording, seems to me to be significant. Section II of the policy does not, in my view, give to the categories of person named in it independent cover for any relevant liability they may cause to the firm.
What is extended to them is the same cover, that is indemnity against the same claims, as Section I provides to the firm.

Section III is headed "Exclusions". It begins by saying that the policy does not indemnify the assured firm against certain claims subsequently specified.
This section reduces the ambit of cover given by Section I. It was not disputed in the appeal that the claim made by Mrs Aleksanian was, so far as the assured firm was concerned, an excluded claim. In my opinion this means that the claim did not fall within the area of cover provided by Section I.
Further, in my opinion, it was only the cover in Section I which was extended by Section II. Thus, the claim against Mr N. MacDonald did not fall within the cover of the policy.

On this footing, the appeal fails and it is not necessary to consider the other ground on which Heath resisted Mr N. Macdonald's claim - [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s48.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth).
Difficult questions would arise if the Section III exclusions were found not to apply to persons other than "the assured firm". The first question would be whether [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s48.html) applied to Mr N. MacDonald. That subsection provides: "Entitlement of named persons to claim . (1) Where a person who is not a party to a contract of general insurance is specified or referred to in the contract, whether by name or otherwise, as a person to whom the insurance cover provided by the contract extends, that person has a right to recover the amount of his loss from the insurer in accordance with the contract notwithstanding that he is not a party to the contract." 
In terms of the present case the "insurance cover" referred to is that of the assured firm and does not extend to Mrs Aleksanian's claim. The person referred to in the subsection as "that person", Mr N. MacDonald, would not have a right greater than that of the assured firm and on the construction being assumed for present purposes pursuant to which his cover was wider than that of the assured firm, he would not be within the provision. Put slightly differently, [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s48.html) seems to me to be dealing with cases where (i) cover is provided by a contract of general insurance to a party to that contract and (ii) that cover is extended by the contract to a person specified or referred to in the contract.
In those circumstances the person has a right to recover in accordance with the indemnity provided to the contracting party. Contracts of general insurance not of this kind are not in my opinion within the meaning of the provision. On the construction advanced by him, Mr N. MacDonald would thus not be able to rely on any statutory entitlement against Heath and would have to contend that the law as it stands since the High Court decision in Trident
General Insurance Co Ltd versus McNiece Bros Pty Limited <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 107] supported his claim and overcame the rules about consideration long recognised in Anglo Australian (but not United States) law in regard to insurance contracts. This would raise some debatable matters. A reasoned decision about them would require extensive discussion. In view of the conclusion I have come to on the construction of the policy I will not embark on this exercise.

On the basis of the construction of the policy which seems to me to be the proper one my opinion is that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with Priestley JA.
 
POWELL JA: I agree with Priestley JA * * * 
