

Ross versus Ross [1997] NSWSC 122 (9 April 1997) 
ROSS versus ROSS /97 
Wednesday, 9 April 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: These proceedings arise out of orders made on 20 March 1997 pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) by the second defendant, a Local Court magistrate sitting at Cowra, NSW. The plaintiff alleges that the orders were made in denial of natural justice, and constitute an abuse of process. She seeks an order in the nature of certiorari. The second defendant submits to the orders of the court save as to costs. 
S 562BB is, relevantly, in the following terms: "(1) A court may make an interim apprehended violence order ("interim order") if it appears to the court that it is necessary or appropriate to do so in the circumstances.

An interim order may be made by a court whether or not: the defendant is present at the proceedings; or the defendant has been given notice of the proceedings.
 ...

If an interim order is made by a court: the court is to summon the defendant to appear at a further hearing of the matter by the court as soon as practicable after the order is made; and the court may, at the further hearing or an adjourned further hearing, confirm the interim order (with or without variation) or revoke the interim order (whether or not the defendant appears at any such further hearing.) ...
 ..." 
The order which is challenged by the plaintiff was made in favour of the present first defendant, and was in the following terms: "The defendant is not to engage in conduct which intimidates the protected person or any person with whom the protected person has a domestic relationship and is not to stalk the protected person. Plus the following order: not assault, intimidate, threaten, molest, harass or otherwise interfere with the person in need of protection; not to reside at, enter or go within 50 [kilometres] of the premises at "Glen Haven Park" Trangie Road, Narromine.(work) "Glen Haven Park"
Trangie Road, Narromine except in the company of Police to remove personal items; not to approach or contact the person in need of protection except in strict compliance with Family Law orders; to surrender all firearms and related licences; not to contact the person in need of protection except in strict compliance with Family law orders.
 any contact between the parties to be strictly through their respective solicitors." 
The "person in need of protection" or "protected person" was the first defendant in the present proceedings and the defendant referred to in the orders is the present plaintiff.

It was the circumstances in which the second defendant came to make this order that gives rise to the application.

The plaintiff and the first defendant had been married for many years, and had lived on the property Glen Haven Park at Narromine in NSW and worked the property in partnership until they separated in September 1996. During the time they cohabited on the property they occupied a house which is referred to in the evidence as the old homestead but they had commenced and almost completed the construction of a new house upon the property. At the time of separation neither had taken up residence in the new premises. Upon separation the plaintiff initially moved to live in the Stockman Motel in Narromine, then to Hornsby in Sydney for a time before travelling overseas until early
February. The first defendant continued to occupy the old house on, and to work, the property. He did this until 5 February 1997 when the old house was burnt down. Neither party makes any allegation against the other, or against any other person, in relation to the burning of the homestead.

In December 1996 the plaintiff had made a statement about the conduct of the first defendant to Narromine police, who initiated a complaint and summons in the Local Court at Narromine seeking, on the plaintiff's behalf, orders under s 562 B of that Act, which confers wide powers upon the court to make orders encapsulated in the general description "apprehended violence orders". In the application the plaintiff's address was given as the Stockman Motel,
Narromine. On 13 January, 1997, without admissions, the first defendant consented to orders under that section, which included a restraint upon contact with the plaintiff other than through solicitors, and a restraint upon assaulting, intimidating, threatening, molesting, harassing or otherwise interfering with her.

There appears to have been no major difficulty until the burning of the old homestead, and the return of the plaintiff from overseas. Early in March she re-commenced living in the new homestead, although the first defendant had moved his possessions into the house and had taken up occupation. There was an incident between them which precipitated each to seek restraining orders. What followed was a proliferation of court applications and proceedings and is confusing. The confusion in part, at least, was brought about by the exigencies of Local Court sitting in rural NSW.

On 10 March the plaintiff made a statement to Narromine police in which she made allegations against the first defendant, and on 13 March she made application to the Local Court at Dubbo for variation of the orders of 13
January. Amongst the variations, she sought the addition of a further condition in the following terms: "Not to go within 200 metres of the premises at which the protected person may from time to time reside or work or other specified premises." 
In this application the "protected person" is the plaintiff. Her address was given as "Glen Haven Park", Narromine. Such an order, if made, would have denied access to the first defendant to the new house, and, arguably, to parts, at least, of the property which was his (and the plaintiff's) livelihood.

Notice was given to the first defendant of the application which was returnable in the court at Dubbo on 21 March.

On 11 March Mr Geoffrey Casey, solicitor acting on behalf of the first defendant, initiated in the Cowra Local Court a complaint against the plaintiff under the same legislation. He sought, inter alia, an order that the plaintiff be restrained from going within 50 metres of the premises identified as Glen Haven Park, other than in the company of police to remove personal items. The application was supported by affidavit of the first defendant.
Notice was given to the plaintiff's solicitors by facsimile. That application was returnable in the Cowra Local Court on 12 March.

There were, then, by this time: existing orders made by consent on 13 January: the plaintiff's application for variation, inter alia, in effect seeking an order restraining the first defendant from entering or going within 200 metres of the property on which he lived and worked; an application by the first defendant for orders restraining the plaintiff from residing at, entering or going within 50 metres of the same premises other than in the company of police to remove personal items.

On receiving notice of the first defendant's application, the solicitor for the plaintiff sent by facsimile a request to the Registrar of the Local Court at Cowra for the transfer of the first defendant's proceedings to the Local
Court at Narromine to be consolidated with those proceedings taken out by the plaintiff in the apparently mistaken belief that the plaintiff's application for variation was to be heard in that court.

When the matter was called on before the magistrate in Cowra, the first defendant was represented but the plaintiff was not. It now appears that no orders were, in fact, on that day made. It is clear enough that there was a misunderstanding. Mr Casey deposed in an affidavit in the present proceedings that the second defendant referred to "a final order" which Mr Casey took to mean that, on the previous day, interim orders had been made in some other court. That this was not an entirely unreasonable supposition appears from the arrangements made for court sittings in country towns such as those where these various proceedings took place. Mr Casey accordingly wrote to the plaintiff's solicitor advising that, by consent, the matter had been adjourned to the Local Court at Narromine on 14 April, which, he said was the next list day at that court. It was not until 19 March that Mr Casey realised that the orders he believed had been made on 12 March had not in fact been made. He thereupon on behalf of the first defendant prepared a fresh affidavit, in identical terms to that which had supported the application of 11 March, but with the addition of two further paragraphs. A fresh complaint and summons were prepared and made returnable the same day. In doing this, Mr Casey said, he believed that what had occurred (or not occurred) on 12 March had been a slip which could be corrected by the magistrate under what is commonly known as "the slip rule". In any event, the fresh complaint and summons, supported by the expanded affidavit, came before the second defendant at about 11 am on March. On behalf of the first defendant Mr Casey applied for orders ex parte, pursuant to <case> BB. The second defendant then made the orders set out at the commencement of these reasons. They were expressed to remain in force until 14 April, and to be returnable in the Local Court at Narromine on that date.

There followed some correspondence between the solicitors to which it will be necessary to refer in more detail at a later stage.

There is no doubt that this legislation envisages the making of an order under the section in the absence of notice to the other party. So much is not disputed by counsel for the plaintiff. What is argued on her behalf is that, in the whole of the circumstances relating to the proceedings between these parties, the discretion to do so miscarried, not by reason of any fault on the part of the second defendant, but by reason of his ignorance of material matters in the history, specifically of the existence of the plaintiff's variation application, and that her application was listed for hearing in
Dubbo on 21 March ie the day following the day the contentious orders were sought and made.

In my opinion it would have been a relevant matter for the magistrate to have known of the existence, and the imminence of the hearing, of that application by the plaintiff. There was evidence that the court at Dubbo was closer to
Narromine than was the court at Cowra and that, if the court at Narromine was not sitting (it does not sit daily, and is often unattended) then the Dubbo court was the natural court for the locality in which the parties lived.
Although one cannot predict what the magistrate would have done had he been in possession of that information, it is not unreasonable to suppose that he may well have forwarded the first defendant's application to the Narromine court to be heard together with plaintiff's application.

But the real question is whether the magistrate, not being in possession of that relevant information, erred in the exercise of his discretion or was misled in such as way as to characterise the proceedings before him as an abuse of process. I am inclined to the view that the information was of sufficient significance as to render its denial to the magistrate a circumstance which, without error on his part, vitiates his decision. However,
I do not think it is necessary to reach a final conclusion. Counsel for the first defendant argued that, as a matter of discretion, I should dismiss the summons before me.

Notification to the plaintiff's solicitor of the orders of 20 March was followed by acrimonious correspondence. The plaintiff's solicitor, Mr Chapple, accused the first defendant's solicitor of a "total lack of professional courtesy which in my opinion borders on professional misconduct." On the same day he invited Mr Casey to re-list the matter either at Dubbo or Cowra to have the interim order vacated and advised that if he had not received confirmation that that had been done by 4 pm on the day of writing he proposed to seek instructions to make an appropriate application for a writ in this Court to be listed the following week. He warned that if he made such application he would also seek an order against Mr Casey personally for indemnity costs in relation to the Supreme Court application. That letter was received by facsimile in Mr
Casey's office at about 1.30 pm on 21 March which was a Friday. On the same day Mr Casey's office staff notified Mr Chapple by facsimile that Mr Casey had left the office for the afternoon prior to the arrival of the letter from Mr
Chapple, and that he would respond on the following Monday 24 March. This he did. He began by answering certain specific questions that had been asked by
Mr Chapple, and giving a good deal of detail about the proceedings. He explained why notice had not been given of the application of 20 March.

On the same day, 24 March, Mr Chapple wrote to Mr Casey serving the summons and affidavit in the present proceedings, which were made returnable at 2 pm on 26 March. (It was then adjourned to 3 April). On 25 March Mr Casey wrote to
Mr Chapple referring to a telephone call at about 12.30 pm that day and referring further to an offer made by him to have the matter "re-heard" at the
Dubbo Local Court on 26 March. On 26 March he wrote again, apparently with the intention of making his position, on behalf of his client, explicit. He wrote: "The purpose of this letter is to make it clear, if it has not been clear to you to date, that our client consents to having our client's application for interim orders filed in Cowra Local Court on 20 March 1997 re-heard. By "re- heard", we mean that the application may be heard from the beginning, and it is implicit that the Court must set aside the earlier interim order and take no account of the fact that interim orders have been made. As a matter of procedure, we would consent to the Local Court setting aside the interim orders made on 20 March, once the re-hearing has commenced.

Alternatively, to achieve the same result, we will consent to the summons filed on 13 March 1997 being heard on an interim basis earlier than 14 April if you would prefer this course. If this happens, we would consent to the orders made on 20 March being set aside.
 ...

In any case, it is imperative that a joint approach be made to the Dubbo Local
Court as a matter of extreme urgency if the plaintiff wishes to accept this offer. It is also desirable that the hearing take place before the matter goes before the Supreme Court on 3 April. Would you please obtain instructions as a matter of urgency." 
In my view, Mr Casey was taking the only sensible approach and one which was conciliatory. Mr Chapple replied on the same day in the following terms: "Your assumption as to my client' position regarding the re-listing of the proceedings in Dubbo on 26 March is correct. Apart from the fact that you are on notice of my client's intention to seek relief in the Supreme Court you did not even have the courtesy to seek my view concerning the re-listing of the matter. In any event I am unaware of any proceedings that are currently pending in Dubbo, as they have all been adjourned to Narromine, so any re- listing to have the matter "re-heard" would have been futile. Even if the matter was re-listed in Dubbo, what power would the magistrate in Dubbo have to "re-hear" the matter after his brother Magistrate had made orders in Cowra on 20 March.

In my letter of 21 March you were invited to re-list the matter to "have the interim order vacated", not for any other purpose.

It is absurd to suggest that the matter should be re-heard, given that there has never been a re-hearing on the merits of the case. The orders obtained by you on 20 March should never have been sought, given that proceedings commenced by your client seeking the same orders had already been adjourned to April, by consent. Your actions on 20 March are amongst other things, an abuse of process." (emphasis in original) 
In my view, whether deliberately or otherwise, Mr Chapple misunderstood the offer that had been made. Mr Casey had made an offer in the clearest possible terms to agree to setting aside the orders of 20 March and his application proceeding afresh in the Local Court.

This alone provides a strong discretionary reason why the orders now sought should not be made. There are additional discretionary factors which strengthen that conclusion. It was not in dispute that the first defendant is the member of the partnership who performs the physical work in conducting the business or businesses on the property. He must have ready access to it. There was no suggestion that the plaintiff is without alternative accommodation pending the resolution of their disputes.

It is now less than a week before all matters will be before the Local Court at Narromine and, in my view, that Court is the appropriate court forum to deal with these applications.

The summons is dismissed.
 * * * 
