

Austen and Butta Ltd and Another versus Maritime Services Board of NSW [1996]
NSWSC 609 (10 December 1996) 
AUSTEN & BUTTA LTD & ANOTHER versus MARITIME SERVICES BOARD OF NSW /1996 
FRIDAY 6 DECEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were started in the Common Law Division in 1984. I am not able to state the precise date as the original Statement of Claim is not with the file. The Statement of Claim was amended pursuant to leave granted by Master Allen on 10 June 1986 and the defence to that amended Statement of Claim was filed on 6 March 1996. What happened to the case between the date of its commencement and early 1996 is perhaps not necessary to recount.

On 6 May 1996 it was stood over in the Common Law Division to 20 May 1996, on which date it came before Justice Hidden and his Honour directed that the matter be transferred from the Common Law Division to the Admiralty Division and also that the hearing be expedited. Precisely upon which basis that order was made is not clear to me, but it probably does not matter. On 31 May 1996 the matter came before me and I noted that I had been informed that it "is ready for hearing in the sense that statements had been exchanged and that, no doubt, is because the matter was set down for hearing in the Common Law
Division on or about 18 May 1996." 
I specially fixed the matter for hearing on Monday 9 December 1996 and said that in order to regularise it, "I give the usual directions in accordance with the Commercial Division and Construction List Practice Note although I appreciate that a number of those directions may have already been carried out." 
What had occurred would, in my opinion, have made it abundantly clear to all concerned, but particularly to the plaintiffs, that the matter had to be prepared for hearing so that there would be no doubt that it would be ready to be heard on the date I specified. In view of the fact that the time allowed for preparation was some seven months, that, in my view, was not an unreasonable expectation on the Court's part. The issues, from what I have been able to see of the pleadings, are not complicated. The real complication
I would think, for this case, is that it has just taken far too long to be brought on for hearing with the result that interest perhaps wanes, memories fade and other matters overcome its progress.

The claim is relevantly modest by modern day standards, although probably in
August 1981 it was one of some greater financial significance. The first amount claimed is $25,375 being for the costs of diversion of coal to Port
Kembla. As I understand Mr Einfeld of Queen's Counsel, senior counsel for the defendant, it is most likely this amount will be in issue, although the plaintiff's entitlement to recover it will be. The second claim is for $183,624, it being alleged that the first plaintiff suffered financial charges for coal stockpiled which would otherwise have been exported had the loader been operational as per scheduled use. Mr Tapp has indicated that it is unlikely that the evidence will support the claim for the full amount and that, "at the least" the amount claimed under this heading will be about $90,000. It is worth considering this claim further for a few moments.

Apparently at the moment it is supported by a statement of Mr Morris. Very recently, in fact on 3 December 1996, the solicitors for the plaintiffs furnished to the solicitors for the defendant the statement of Mr Ian Wilson.
When the matter was first mentioned before me Mr Einfeld suggested that this raised completely new issues. Mr Tapp has said it does not raise new issues but is corroborative of the evidence of Mr Morris. Mr Einfeld then points to certain material in the statement which, prima facie, is of little assistance to the plaintiffs.

Mr Einfeld has submitted that if the case proceeds next week and there is an insistence by the plaintiffs upon reliance on Mr Wilson's evidence, the defendant will not be in a position to meet that case. I am not certain now that Mr Tapp has explained the effect of Mr Wilson's evidence. Whether that is necessarily the case, I repeat what I did say during the course of submissions, viz that the plaintiffs will either have to decide, if objection is taken to Mr Wilson's evidence, whether they wish to pursue it, in which case the matter will be adjourned at the cost of the plaintiffs, or whether they to not wish to rely upon his evidence.

The third claim is in relation to demurrage and, as I understand, is based on a claim for $US 80,000 being the base amount at which the plaintiffs settled a demurrage claim against them. There is also a claim for interest and perhaps a more live issue in the case will be the period over which interest should be paid in the event of the plaintiffs being entitled to a verdict.

The matter came before me this afternoon based on the affidavit of Dennis
Vuaran sworn 6 December 1996.

Notwithstanding the time that has been made available for the preparation of the case, on 3 December 1996 the solicitors for the plaintiffs sent to the solicitors for the defendant a number of documents by way of, "Further discovery" and the statement of Mr Wilson. On 4 December 1996, in answer to a notice to produce, the solicitors for the plaintiffs enclosed production and sales and other material from January to July 1981 for inspection, and concluded, "We will provide you with material for January/February 1982 shortly." 
On 5 December 1996 there was enclosed in a letter, by way of further discovery, the various documents which are specified. This led to the defendant having the matter listed this afternoon to state that in the light of this avalanche of material it would not be in a position to proceed on
Monday and an adjournment until Tuesday was sought. That was not opposed by the plaintiffs. It seems to me that in those circumstances I should accede to the request, particularly if, in the light of the further material, the parties can refine the issues even more. I am told that certain issues are likely to be excised by consent from those which have to be determined by the
Court.

I would also hope that the legal representatives will draw to the attention of the parties the amount involved and the anticipated costs of the proceedings.
If the second claim to which I have referred does in fact produce some $90,000, it seems to me the costs of the proceedings, which will include the taking of evidence via video link from a witness in London, will exceed the amount in issue. The reason for that, of course, is the delay in bringing the proceedings on for hearing, and in saying that I am not to be taken as blaming either the parties or the Court. In due course I will find out why there was such a delay in the event of the matter being heard to a conclusion, because it will be relevant from the point of view of any claim for interest. But it seems to me that the parties, now that they are confronted with a hearing, improbable though that may have appeared to them over the years as ever happening, should now direct themselves to the commercial reality of this litigation.

I direct that by 3pm, Monday 9 December 1996, each party furnish me with a list of the statements upon which it proposes to rely and, of course, before that is done, the other parties should be advised. I direct that by 4 o'clock on Monday 9 December 1996, I be furnished with the list of objections to the statement. The parties can assume that I will have prepared preliminary rulings on those objections and they should be ready to call witnesses shortly after 10 o'clock on Tuesday, 10 December 1996, unless the matter has by then settled. I also direct that by 4 o'clock on Monday, 9 December 1996, the plaintiffs furnish me with a written opening - of course, such document should be sent to the legal representatives for the defendant - and that the parties, by the same time on the same day furnish an updated list of the issues.

My present inclination is that the plaintiffs should, in any event, pay the costs of today - I note that the matter has proceeded from 2pm to 2.55pm - and the costs thrown away by the matter not proceeding on Monday. However, I will not make an order for that until Mr Allsop of Senior Counsel, who is senior counsel for the plaintiffs, has had the opportunity of addressing that.

I will adjourn this matter to 10 o'clock on Tuesday, 10 December 1996.
 * * * 
