

Regina versus Baartman Matter No 70368/93 [1998] NSWSC 781 (18 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 11 February 1999 
REGINA versus JOHN LESLIE BAARTMAN /93 December 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SENTENCE: 
HIS HONOUR: The prisoner, John Leslie Baartman, has been found guilty by the jury of the murder of Leszic Josef Henryck Betcher at the front door of his home in Lugarno on 23 February 1993. 
The Crown case, which the verdict shows was accepted by the jury and which I accept for sentencing purposes, was that the prisoner and another man, Paul
Crofts, possibly with a third man, Wayne Crofts, drove to Lugarno that evening to carry out, for the paltry sum of $1,000 between them, the contract shooting of a man named "Tony" for allegedly carrying on with another man's wife, the plan being that Paul Crofts would shoot Tony in the leg whilst the prisoner, who was also armed, would keep lookout.

What happened was that they went to the wrong address and when the victim informed Paul Crofts that there was no Tony at that address, Crofts apparently panicked and shot him through the wire screen door at virtually point blank range in the abdomen, inflicting an injury from which he shortly afterwards died.

The deceased was a gentleman of the utmost respectability with no criminal associations, a complete stranger to his attackers, who was spending a quiet evening in his own home in the company of his wife.

The prisoner and his co-offender, who were engaged in a common purpose to shoot someone in the leg, therefore went to the wrong house and shot the wrong person in the wrong part of his anatomy.

As it happened, the prisoner retained possession of the murder weapon, a .32
Beretta pistol, and it was discovered by ambulance officers when they attended the prisoner for a heroin overdose in a flat at Kings Cross occupied by a then friend of his, referred to in the trial as "Miss Brown". The police were then able to match this gun with the cartridge and cartridge case located at the murder scene and thus set in train a series of inquiries which led to the arrest and subsequent indictment of both Paul Crofts and the prisoner.

The prisoner claimed that the gun was not his and suggested it must have been
Miss Brown's, but the jury, quite rightly in my view, clearly rejected such suggestion, and Miss Brown's evidence was that earlier in the evening before he collapsed the prisoner had shown the gun to her, and whilst waiting for the police to arrive told her that it was a "murder weapon".

Although there was no intent to kill, but only to inflict grievous bodily harm, this was nevertheless an offence of very high criminality.

There is no room in our society for contract shootings of any kind, and this case demonstrates in a tragically vivid manner the type of thing that can go wrong when guns are used by criminals or other persons who have no legitimate need of them.

Even if Tony had been correctly located and identified and shot in the leg, it would still have been a most serious offence calling for condign punishment, irrespective of whether or not Tony was a respectable citizen or a criminal.

In cases of this nature the elements of retribution, the community's denunciation of the conduct and general deterrence are of primary importance.

In my view it matters little that the prisoner did not fire the fatal shot. He was part of the common purpose that someone would be shot, albeit in the leg, he had tested the gun the evening before, and on the evening of the shooting he was himself armed, keeping look out and ready to assist if needed.

The prisoner was first convicted of this offence in 1994 and on 7 December that year sentenced by Abadee J to penal servitude for a minimum term of fifteen years with an additional term of five years to date from 1 July 1993, the date of his arrest, but following disclosures at the Royal Commission into the Police Service about one of the police witnesses, he successfully appealed to the Court of Criminal Appeal and a new trial was ordered, 30 June 1997. His second trial took place in March of this year when the jury failed to agree.
Hence, this was the third trial.

Meanwhile, Paul Crofts pleaded guilty to murder, and on 6 December 1996 Grove
J sentenced him also to penal servitude for a minimum term of fifteen years with an additional term of five years. His Honour expressed some dissent from the approach adopted by Abadee J as to whether a total sentence of twenty years was, "towards the top of the range for a determinate sentence", and expressed the view that objectively speaking an appropriate penalty would have been in the order of thirty years penal servitude. His Honour considered that giving Paul Crofts credit for his plea of guilty, low intellect, and deprivation of a guided upbringing, he should receive less then the prisoner.
But, having regard to his view that the prisoner's sentence was inadequate, sentenced Crofts on an equal basis.

Wayne Crofts was not prosecuted due, I am told, to a lack of evidence.

Whilst I have some sympathy for Grove J's sentiments on whether twenty years is properly categorised as "towards the top of the range for a determinate sentence", I also bear in mind that although the prisoner was engaged in a common purpose to cause grievous bodily harm, and someone having been killed in the course of carrying out that common purpose he is guilty of murder, nevertheless, the decision to shoot in the abdomen instead of in the leg appears to have been that of Paul Crofts alone, and I am also conscious of the principle that a successful appellant should not normally receive a longer sentence on a retrial than on his first trial: R versus Gilmore [(1979) 1 A
Crim R 416], R versus Bedford [(1986) 5 NSWLR 711.] 
The prisoner was born on 2 March 1956 and was aged thirty-seven at the time of the shooting. He has an extensive criminal record dating back to 1969 when he was a juvenile. As an adult he has convictions for break enter and steal (x4); being armed with intent to commit an indictable offence, namely, assault; break and enter with intent whilst armed; conspiracy to commit armed robbery; possess unlicensed pistol; assault and carry a firearm. He has spent a considerable part of his adult life in gaol. There is nothing in his record to justify any leniency.

He has been in custody on this charge since his arrest on 1 July 1993.
Notwithstanding that, no subjective material as to his progress towards rehabilitation whilst in custody was attempted to be placed before me on the sentencing proceedings.

It was submitted that I should adjust the ratio between the minimum and additional terms because of the delay from the date of his arrest on 1 July until now and R versus Todd [1982] 2NSWLR 517 was referred to, but totally different circumstances applied in that case.

Here, the prisoner was originally sentenced on 7 December 1994 and the only delay has been due to his appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal and the hung jury earlier this year; but notwithstanding his successful appeal, he has still achieved the same ultimate result.

Finally, it was submitted I should backdate the sentence a further three weeks because of time spent in custody prior to his arrest on this matter on a firearms charge in respect of which he was subsequently acquitted: But this is irrelevant: R versus Niass (Court of Criminal Appeal-16 November 1988), R v Webster-Jones (Court of Criminal Appeal-11 May 1992). Accordingly, I am not prepared to make any adjustment.

John Leslie Baartman, for the murder of Leszic Josef Henryck Betcher I sentence you to penal servitude for a minimum term of fifteen years with an additional term of five years. The sentence will be deemed to have commenced on 1 July 1993. The earliest date on which you will be eligible for release on parole will be 30 June 2008.

The exhibits are to be returned to the Crown.
 * * * 
