

Capital Television Group Ltd and Anor versus Darling Down Tv Ltd (Receivers and
Managers Appointed) and Ors No. 50004/94 [1995] NSWSC 63 (9 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
BAINTON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 4 April 1995 #DATE 9:8:1995 #ADD 9:10:1995 
Counsel for Applicants:       Mr P. Garling SC 
Solicitors for Applicants:     Atanaskovic Hartnell 
Counsel for Respondents:      Mr R.G. Kaye 
Solicitors for Respondents:     Mallesons Stephen Jaques
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
BAINTON J Capital Television Group Limited and Capital Television Holdings
Limited (I shall simply refer to both as "Capital" for the purpose of these reasons) commenced proceedings number 50004 of 1994 in the Commercial Division of this Court in January 1994.
The defendants initially were Darling Down TV
Limited (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (First Defendant), John Menzies
Spark and
Andrew Michael Cornell (Second Defendants) and Toronto Dominion
Australia Ltd (Third Defendant). As initially constituted the plaintiffs sought a declaration that there existed a valid and binding contract between the then sole plaintiff Capital Television Group Ltd and Darling Downs TV
Limited for the purchase of certain shares and an order for specific performance of that contract.
By the time of the filing of the Further Amended Summons (3 June 1994),
Capital Television Holdings Ltd had been added as a second plaintiff and seven more defendants had been added, namely Northern Rivers Television Pty Ltd (Fourth Defendant), Telecasters North Queensland
Ltd (Fifth Defendant), Terry
Matthew Stokes and Australian Capital Equity Pty Ltd (collectively the Sixth
Defendant), John James
Cowin (Seventh Defendant), The Ten Group Ltd (Eighth
Defendant) and CanWest Global Communications Corp (Ninth Defendant) ("Canwest
Corp"). At this stage of the pleadings the plaintiffs were still seeking specific performance of the contract earlier pleaded, but in addition damages for breach of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) against the first, second and third defendants, damages against the fourth to eighth defendants inclusive pursuant to [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and [s68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s68.html) of the [Fair
Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) and a declaration that the fourth, fifth, seventh, eighth and ninth defendants had acted in breach of [s53(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s53.html) of the [Broadcasting
Services Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/) [(s53(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s53.html) of the [Broadcasting Services Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/) provides that a person must not be in a position to exercise control of commercial television broadcasting licences whose combined licence area populations exceed 75% of the population of Australia).
On 13 February 1995 a Second Further Amended Summons was filed, but it sought the same relief as its predecessor.
While the pleadings were as set out in this Second Further Amended
Summons, a number of subpoenas were issued, all of them on 27 February 1995.
After the issue of those subpoenas the plaintiffs reached a settlement with the original first, second and third defendants and those three defendants have been dismissed from the action which now proceeds against the fourth to ninth defendants.
After the dismissal of the proceedings against the initial three defendants, a Third Further Amended Summons was filed (on 25 May 1995). What it adds to the claim in the Second Further Amended Summons of June 1994, is a claim for a declaration that "the fourth to ninth defendants inclusive, or some of them, combined to bring about the acquisition by the fourth defendant,
Northern Rivers Television Pty Ltd, of the issued capital of Meridian Holdings
Ltd and the television broadcasting licence with call sign NRTV ... in contravention of the [Broadcasting Services Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/) so as to injure the plaintiffs and cause them loss". It claims, in the alternative, a declaration that each of the eighth and ninth defendants intentionally and in contravention of the [Broadcasting Services Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/), interfered with the plaintiffs' attempt to acquire the issued capital of Meridian and the NRTV licence". Those claims assert the tort of intentionally interfering with the trade or business of the plaintiffs by unlawful means.
I return now to the subpoenas.
Though they were issued before the filing of the Third Further Amended Summons, I propose to consider them as if they had been issued after that filing, as it repeats the earlier claims and adds the additional claim in tort. There can be no useful purpose in setting aside these subpoenas if their reissue could be justified by the Third Further
Amended Statement of Claim. To make intelligible what follows I need to set out an outline of two corporate structures. The first is that of the Capital
Television Group, if I may so describe it. The evidence in the application to set aside the subpoenas did not reveal this structure but the argument before me proceeded on the basis that I would have been aware of it having heard but not yet given judgment in other proceedings brought by
Network Ten against
Capital Television Holdings Limited. I think it appropriate that I use that knowledge in determining the present question.
There is, I understand, a difference in the rights conferred by the shares in Capital Television Group Ltd held by
Curran Media Pty Ltd and those held by the Ten Group Ltd, but I do not know what that difference is, except that the shares held by The Ten Group Ltd are non-voting shares.
The other structure I can set out only in the broadest of detail as it was at some time between the beginning of November 1993 and end of April 1994, said in these subpoenas to be the relevant period.
John
Anthony Mitchell had been a director and employee of Turnbull and
Partners Ltd. While so employed, John Mitchell and Partners Pty
Ltd acquired a parcel of shares in Kanji Ltd and a parcel of shares in Fulcrum Capital
Corporation Ltd. When the other directors of Turnbull and Partners (Messrs
Turnbull and Wran) discovered this, they asserted that Mitchell had acquired or caused John Mitchell and Partners Pty Ltd to acquire these shares in breach of his duty to Turnbull and Partners Ltd and Turnbull and Partners Ltd claimed to be the beneficial owner of the shares. Thereafter there were negotiations to settle the dispute. A company Gabtech Resources Inc., incorporated in
Ontario, Canada, participated in those negotiations. A resolution was reached and embodied in a document described as a deed of release executed on 23 May
The relevant end result was that the shares in Kanji Ltd and the shares in Fulcrum
Capital Corp. Ltd became beneficially owned by Turnbull and
Partners Ltd who paid Gabtech Resources Inc. $1.8m. There are assertions that
Gabtech Resources was in some way under the control of Canwest Corp., the
Ninth Defendant. There is other as yet unresolved litigation between Turnbull and Partners Ltd and Mitchell.
The subpoenas to which I have referred fall into three groups.
The first group comprises two subpoenas in identical terms, one addressed to Turnbull and Partners Ltd and the other addressed to
Malcolm Bligh Turnbull.
Those subpoenas required production of the documents described as follows "1. All files and documents, including letters, faxes, memoranda, minutes, notes and statements, brought into existence in 1993 or 1994 referring or relating to any purchase, sale, mortgage, charge or other dealing in shares in 
Fulcrum Capital Corporation
Kanji Limited by John Mitchell or John Mitchell and Partners Pty Ltd
All memoranda and notes of discussions by or between Malcolm 
Turnbull and/or Neville Wran on the one hand and John Mitchell,
John Mitchell and Partners Pty Ltd or any other person acting on behalf of them or either of them on the other hand brought into existence in January, February or March 1994 referring or relating to dealings by John Mitchell or John Mitchell and
Partners Pty Ltd on shares in Fulcrum Capital Corporation Ltd or Kanji Ltd.
All letters, faxes, memoranda and notes being or recording communications between Malcolm Turnbull or Neville Wran or both of them on the one hand and Stephen Gross, Izzy Asper or any other person acting for CanWest Global
Communications
Corporation or Canwest International Inc on the other hand brought into existence in 1994 referring or relating to shares in Fulcrum Capital Corporation Ltd or Kanji Ltd or any dealing in such shares.
All affidavits and other documents sworn or prepared in 1994 for the purposes of legal proceedings or proposed legal proceedings between Turnbull and Partners Ltd as plaintiff and
John Mitchell, John Mitchell and Partners Pty Ltd and/or CanWest
International Inc or any of them as defendants arising out of or relating to any dealing in shares in Fulcrum Capital
Corporation Ltd or Kanji Ltd.
Deeds, drafts of deeds, letters, faxes, notes of telephone conversations and other communications, minutes and memoranda brought into existence in 1994 for the purpose of settling or attempting to settle disputes between Turnbull and Partners
Ltd on the one hand and John Mitchell, John Mitchell and Partners
Pty Ltd and/or CanWest International Inc or other parties relating to dealings and shares in Fulcrum Capital Corporation
Ltd and/or Kanji Ltd.
 Documents relating or referring to shares held directly or indirectly by: 
Fulcrum Capital Corporation Ltd in Telecasters North Queensland
Ltd
Kanji
Ltd in Fulcrum Capital Corporation Ltd"
The second group consists of two subpoenas, one addressed to John
Mitchell and Partners
Pty Ltd and the other to Mr John Anthony Mitchell. The description of documents required in each of those two subpoenas was in the same terms as in the subpoena addressed to Turnbull and Partners Ltd.
The third group comprises two subpoenas. The first of them is addressed to Hunt and Hunt, Solicitors, who at the relevant time were acting for CanWest
Global Communications Inc. ("Canwest
Inc.") This subpoena seeks documents in six categories. Category 1 is described in the following terms: "All files and documents, including letters, faxes, memoranda, minutes, notes and statements, brought into existence in 1993 or 1994 referring or relating to any purchase, sale, mortgage, charge or other dealing in shares by John Mitchell, John
Mitchell and Partners Pty Ltd,
CanWest Global Communications
Corp. or CanWest International Inc. in 
Fulcrum Capital Corporation Limited; or
Kanji Limited."
Category 2 is almost the same as category 2 in the subpoena addressed to
Turnbull and Partners Ltd. The difference is that it seeks to extend the "dealings" to any by CanWest Corp and by CanWest Inc.
Category 3 is almost the same as category 3 in the subpoena to Turnbull and Partners Ltd. The differences are that this subpoena confines the documents to those brought into existence from 1 November 1993 to 30 April and extends it to dealings by CanWest Corp and CanWest Inc.
Category 4 is "All letters, faxes, memoranda and notes being or recording communications with Malcolm Turnbull or Neville Wran or both of them or any person acting on behalf of them or either of them or Stephen Gross, Izzy Asper or any person acting for CanWest
Global
Communications Corp or CanWest International Inc. brought into existence in the period from 1 November 1993 to 30 April referring or relating to any dealing in shares in Fulcrum
Capital Corporation Ltd or Kanji Ltd by John Mitchell, John
Mitchell and Partners Pty Ltd, CanWest Global Communications
Corp or CanWest International Inc."
Category 5 is in the same terms as category 5 of the subpoena addressed to Turnbull and Partners except that it adds a reference to communications with CanWest Inc.
Category 6 is the same as category 6 in the subpoena addressed to
Turnbull and Partners Ltd.
The second subpoena in this group is addressed to Atanaskovic Hartnell,
Solicitors in these proceedings for Telecasters North Queensland Ltd, the
Fifth
Defendant. Again there are six categories of documents. They are in the same terms as those in the subpoena to Hunt and Hunt.
 .
Some of the documents called for by the first and second groups of subpoenas are most probably the subject of legal professional privilege: others are probably documents brought into existence in the endeavour (ultimately successful) to settle the dispute between
Turnbull and Partners
Ltd and Mitchell. They also would probably be privileged from production, though that branch of the law of privilege is still in its development phase.
Some of the documents in category 5 of the subpoenas in group 3 would also in all probability be the subject of legal professional privilege or, possibly, "without prejudice" privilege (see Rush and Tompkins Ltd versus Greater London
Council <case>; [1989 AC 1280).]
I do not think it necessary for present purposes to rule whether any part of any of those subpoenas as subject to legal professional privilege, or "without prejudice" privilege, because there is, in my opinion, a more fundamental objection to all these subpoenas.
The only issues as pleaded up to and including the Third Further Amended
Summons to which the documents sought in these subpoenas could be relevant are the claims arising out of or depending upon the asserted breaches of the [Broadcasting Services Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/), whether it be the claims for a declaration or the claims in the asserted tort. What is pleaded in support of the claim for these declarations is first a corporate structure which was that Darling Downs TV
Ltd (which was at the inception of these proceedings the first defendant) owned all the shares in Meridian Holdings Ltd, which in turn acquired and now owns all of the shares in Northern
Rivers Television Ltd (Fourth Defendant).
It had a licence to televise in Northern New South Wales. This structure, it is asserted, was put in place by unlawful means, so as to deprive the first plaintiff of the opportunity, which it asserts it had, to acquire the capital of Northern Rivers Television Ltd (or, alternatively, it asserts, the licence, plant and equipment etc of that company).
The "unlawful means" relied upon depend upon the activities of CanWest Corp, the Ninth Defendant. To reduce it to its bare bones the plaintiffs assert that 
The Ten Group Ltd is in a position to exercise control (within the meaning of the [Broadcasting Services Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/)) of the
Television North Queensland Licence because its subsidiary
Network Ten Ltd controls the supply of programs to it.
CanWest Global Communications Corp is in a position to control The Ten Group Ltd - by the means pleaded in paragraphs to 81 (of the Third Further Amended Summons).
Those assertions are fleshed out in paragraphs 75A to 96 of the Third
Further Amended Summons.
Only (a) and (b) raise issues of fact: (c) is a question of law - the proper construction of the [Broadcasting Services Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/).
The share register will show whether (a) is so or not. Whether or not the
Mitchell shares were mortgaged to Canwest or to a nominee of CanWest could not be proved against CanWest otherwise than by the mortgage, if it exists, plus evidence of the trust relationship, if it exists, or by an admission of
CanWest. None of the entities subpoenaed would be likely to be holding any such mortgage, but no subpoena under challenge in fact seeks the production of any such document.
I take my guidance on this question from Waind versus Hill and National
Employers' Mutual General Association Ltd [(1978) 1 NSWLR 372.] Frequently it is necessary to determine, first, whether it is just to require a person not a party to the litigation to produce his documents at all: there may be reasons peculiar to the person served with the subpoena justifying a refusal to order him to produce them. The classical example is that the subpoena is an abuse of process in that it is an attempt to obtain discovery from a nonparty.
See
Burchard versus Macfarlane [(1891) 2 QB 241] at 247-8, and Commissioner for Railways v Small (1938) 38 SR 564 at 574. But that is not the only general exception.
That the documents sought by the descriptions in the subpoena to a stranger to the litigation are incapable of proving or assisting in the proof of facts relevant to the case of the party seeking to call on the subpoena (or of meeting any defence of the other party to the dispute) is also a sufficient justification for setting the subpoena aside. A subpoena going beyond such legitimate requirements is frequently referred to as a "fishing expedition", i.e. it is an endeavour to see if something exists which could conceivably be of some sort of use in the proceedings.
More frequently perhaps this question arises at the second stage namely whether or not inspection should be allowed to the party issuing a subpoena of the documents, or some of them, produced in answer to the subpoena over the objection of the person producing them. The test at that stage is whether or not the documents which the party producing them objects to having to make available for inspection by the party issuing the subpoena have "apparent relevance" to a matter in issue. See
Waind (supra) at p385. That is a somewhat amorphous test. Rogers J in Arhill Pty Ltd versus General Terminal Company Pty Ltd [(1990) 23 NSWLR 545] suggested as a more appropriate test, that the Court needs to have formed the opinion that production is necessary either for disposing fairly of the matter or for saving costs. That was the test applied by Ld
Wilberforce in relation to discovery of confidential reports in Science
Research Council versus Nasse <case>; [1980 AC 1028] at 1066 - admittedly in respect of proceedings concerning industrial relations litigation. Ld Salmon at 1071, Ld
Edmund-Davies at and Ld Fraser at 1086 were of substantially the same view. The present problem is not identical, but the underlying concept is that what is fairly necessary for the just determination of litigation should be available, by compulsory Court process if it be not otherwise available, to both parties. A subpoena is part of the mechanics available to achieve that objective, and it should in my view be subject to the same test. Such a test is not precise: it cannot be. It must depend upon a preliminary assessment by a Court based, at worst, on the pleadings. A judge in the Commercial Division of this Court is usually in a somewhat better position than that, because of this Division's case management procedures.
Applying that test I am not of the view that the material, if it exists, sought in these subpoenas is "necessary" in the above sense for the proper determination of this litigation. Indeed,
I am affirmatively satisfied that it is not so "necessary", substantially because I am of the opinion that the material sought, if it exists, would be irrelevant to any issue in the proceedings. Most of it is between third parties and would not be admissible for or against any party to this litigation: what little of it could be admitted against any party to this litigation appears to me to be most likely to be irrelevant to any issue in the proceedings and would be rejected for that reason.
I accordingly order that each of the subpoenas which I have referred be set aside. further order that the plaintiffs pay the costs of each of the applications to set each of these subpoenas aside. I direct that these costs may be assessed forthwith and that they. be payable upon assessment.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/63.html  
