

Corporate Pension Planning P/L versus Nrg Victory Australia Ltd [1997] NSWSC (8 April 1997) `CORPORATE PENSION PLANNING P/L versus NRG VICTORY AUSTRALIA LTD` ``1963/94 
Tuesday 8 April 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs and the defendant are each involved in the insurance industry. Although there are a stack of documents tendered in the court, it does not precisely appear what is the extent of the business of either party. It may be that in endeavouring to summarize the facts I will make some erroneous assumptions. However, as the basic point is a matter of construction, this will have virtually no consequence.

The key facts in this case are that members of the public are able to obtain cheaper temporary life insurance cover if they insure in bulk. If, instead of each person desiring some cover, taking out his or her own policy for a year, a trustee for 300 or 500 such people takes out a policy, the premium will be less. It would seem that although the defendant is ostensibly a company in the business of reinsurance, it in fact acts as an insurer for bulk term life insurance for a period of 1 June in one year to 31 May in the next and publishes its rate of premiums. The plaintiffs then put together groups of 300 or 500 people, giving those persons a cheaper rate than they could obtain individually, but also making a profit for themselves out of the transaction.
It would seem that the plaintiffs' main business is to manage a series of small superannuation schemes. They then enter into an agreement with the defendant that they will be the trustees of the life insurance policies and they indicate that they have charged the individuals a fee based on the fact that there will be a rebate payable to the plaintiffs from the insurer for providing bulk business. I hope this in fact is the case and is not so many empty words and that the plaintiffs are not obtaining any secret commission. I will proceed on that basis.

The plaintiffs are companies with which a Mr Gresham is strongly connected. It is not necessary to distinguish between the plaintiffs because the defendant says that if anyone is entitled to any money, it is the second plaintiff and the plaintiffs are prepared to accept the judgment in these terms. Again I should note that the quantum of the claim of the second plaintiff against the defendant is also agreed at $58,599.30 plus interest.

As might be expected of a company in the business of the plaintiffs, they "shop around" for the best deal for each year. The first plaintiff was insured with the defendant from 1 June 1986 until 31 May 1988 then it transferred its business to another insurer. In May 1991, Mr Gresham and Mr Caiger, the person in the defendant's organization who has had the most to do with this case, had a conversation following which the first plaintiff requested details of the terms the defendant would offer to establish a group life pool. Mr Caiger indicated that there was a profit sharing arrangement available, the threshold being 300 lives. On 20 May 1991, Mr Caiger sent Mr Gresham a letter enclosing "a Summary of the Terms and Conditions under which the pool will operate".
These terms and conditions contained the following:- "Profit Share 
Providing a minimum of 300 lives are insured at the 
Pool anniversary each year, the amount of profit distributed to the trustees will be 60% of (70% of premiums, minus claims).
When 500 lives are reached, the amount of profit distribution will be increased to % of (70% of premiums, minus claims). Any losses will not be carried forward to the following year.

The payment of the rebate is not dependent on renewal of the Pool in the following year.

In the event of termination of the Pool, an IBNR provision will be included in the calculation of the final rebate (if any) to cater for late reported and emerging TPD claims." 
Mr Ronzani of counsel for the defendant informed me that "IBNR" means "incurred, but not reported". I assume "TPD" means total and permanent disablement.

The plaintiffs accepted the defendant's offer on 28 May 1991 and on 30 May , executed a trust deed. On 14 June 1991, Mr Caiger sent Mr Gresham a document headed "The Victory Reinsurance Company of Australia Limited Group
Life Contract, Contract No: VGL3515". "The Victory Reinsurance Company of
Australia Limited" was the name by which the defendant was known at that particular time: it seems to have had three changes of name in recent years.
The Group Life Contract was marked "Copy" and its terms were markedly different to the Outline sent early the previous month. For instance, under the heading "6. Profit Sharing" the Group Life Contract said, "Provided there are more than 499 Insured Persons on the day immediately prior to an Annual
Review Date, we shall allow you as at that date a profit participation equal to eighty per centum (80%) of the difference between: (a) the total premiums received by us in respect of the prior year plus if required by us a provision for unsettled claims; and (b) claims paid in the prior year plus if required by us a provision for unsettled claims plus an allowance for our expenses calculated at thirty per centum (30%) of the total premiums received by us in respect of the prior year." The clause then went on for a further page which I will not set out.

For the year commencing 1 June 1991, only 250 lives were insured with the defendant. Thus no profit share was payable on any view of the arrangement between the parties. As at 31 May 1993, the end of the next year, there were lives insured, one being Geoffrey Lindley. Mr Lindley in fact died on 2
May 1992 and that was notified to the defendant the next week. Mr Lindley's death meant that the defendant paid out a total of $500,000.

It would seem that by June 1993, some inimical relations had developed between
Messrs Gresham and Caiger. Mr Caiger seemed to consider that Mr Gresham had relied on a legal technicality to avoid paying increased premiums which Mr
Caiger thought Mr Gresham ought to pay. The correspondence shows that Mr
Caiger then took the attitude that if Mr Gresham wished to play the game strictly according to the law, he would too. Another member of the defendant's organization, Judy Flynn, faxed Mr Gresham on 24 June 1993 to the effect that he was due $58,599.30 in commission. However, Mr Caiger sent a fax the next day noting that there were less than 500 lives insured. He claimed regret that "no profit share will be payable for this period." This fax would seem to suggest that Mr Caiger was disregarding the Outline Contract.

However, on 19 July 1993, Mr Caiger wrote a further letter to the effect that as $250,000 was paid in August 1992 in respect of Mr Lindley's death claim, and premiums for the year only totalled just short of $140,000, there was no profit for the year. This, of course, was a different basis for denying liability to pay the plaintiffs' money.

The plaintiffs filed a statement of claim seeking their $58,599.30, or alternatively, remedies by way of damages for breach of contract or under the
Fair Trading or Trade Practices Act. The matter was set down before me for a two day hearing and I was handed a list of 12 issues by the plaintiffs
However, the whole hearing only lasted a little over two hours. In the witness box Mr Caiger conceded that there was a contract between the parties in the form of the Outline of Terms and Conditions which mentioned the 300 lives and in fact he had mentioned 300 lives to Mr Gresham over the telephone.
Accordingly, all issues dealing with whether there was a contractual relationship between the parties before the "formal policy" was delivered became otiose and cases on the list of authorities such as Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] did not have to be considered.

Essentially then, the case became a simple one of construction as to whether the "formal policy" had any relevance at all; and (b) what was meant by profit and claims in the Outline document.

As to (a), the evidence was that when Mr Gresham received the formal policy, he did not read it. He says, and I accept him on this, that he thought it was in accordance with the Outline and merely put it away. Mr Caiger on the other hand, said it was relatively common in the insurance industry for a formal document to be issued (not signed by the proponent) by the insurance company to set out the terms and conditions of the insurance, and that this superseded the preliminary contract contained in the Outline. Unfortunately, Mr Caiger in correspondence appeared, to use the words of Mr O'Loughlin, for the plaintiffs, to have chosen to rely on either the Outline or the policy document as being the contract depending on which suited him for the time being.

Although in one sense this was a transaction between an insured (being the plaintiffs as trustees for the 315 lives) and the insurer, it was much more than that. As between the two trading entities, there was a type of joint venture in which they were to share the profits that were being made from the individual insured who had chosen to have this group insurance. Ordinarily, in such a situation the rule of offer and acceptance apply. A person who sends a "formal contract" to the opposing party with whom he already has a provisional contract, should not expect that that "formal contract" will thereafter be the governing document unless the provisional contract made some special provision for that to happen, or there has been acquiescence by conduct or otherwise in the new contract; see Brogden versus Metropolitan Railway Co [(1877) 2 App Cas ] and see Vroon BV versus Foster's Brewing Group Ltd  <case>; [[1994] 2 VR 32.] 
In the instant case there is no evidence to suggest that the plaintiffs acquiesced at all in the terms of the policy document, and indeed, the evidence clearly is that they didn't appreciate that any formal document was different in terms to the Outline and Summary which they had received earlier in May 1991. Originally I had to consider the question as to whether, if a person in trade or commerce makes a provisional contract and then without warning sends to the other contracting party a document completely different in terms without warning, that person is guilty of false or misleading conduct. However, as on general law principles I can completely disregard the formal document, it is not necessary for me to rule on that matter.

Mr Ronzani points to the fact that in 1986, when the parties had transacted similar business, the procedure had been an Outline followed by entering into contractual relations and then the issuance of a Group Life Contract. Thus, he argues, the plaintiffs should have expected the same to occur in 1991 and it is their own fault if they did not read the formal contract.

I do not consider that the evidence is strong enough to have me hold that the plaintiffs would have expected the same procedure as 1986. Certainly, they would not have expected the formal contract to be completely different from that which the defendant would term the provisional contract on which the plaintiffs made the commercial decision to deal with the defendant. Thus I am not impressed with this argument.

Both parties slid into the error of seeking to use the Group Life Contract to construe the Outline. I cannot see how this can be done. If, as I have held, the Group Life Contract is no part of the contractual arrangement between the parties and as it issued after the contract was made, it can have no bearing on the common intention of the parties to be gleaned from the words they have used in the Outline.

Accordingly, the question comes down to one of construction of the word "profits" and the word "claims" in the provision dealing with profit sharing which I have set out. Before dealing with the actual question of construction
I should note two matters.

The first matter to note is that the policies covered not only life claims but also claims for total and permanent disablement. This is significant because one looks in vain in the life insurance part of Hardy Ivamy's for any mention of the word "claim" because normally a life insurance company pays if it is satisfied of the death of the propositus and has accepted proof of age.
However, with total and permanent disablement insurance there will be a claim made and usually an investigation as to whether the propositus fulfils the conditions set out in the policy. Indeed, the Outline document itself under the heading "Total and Permanent Disablement" speaks of "Any claim for a total and permanent disablement benefit must be made within twelve months of the insured person first becoming absent from work provided the absence gives rise to such claim." It should also be noted that a person is not considered totally and permanently disabled unless he or she has been absent from work through injury or illness for an initial period of six months.

The second point to make is that both sides tendered evidence by actuaries which I provisionally admitted under [s 57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s57.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). The actuaries gave conflicting evidence as to what was the policy in the insurance industry as to off-setting claims experience in these profit sharing deals.

The actuary called on behalf of the plaintiffs said that it was normal for profit to be calculated on an annual basis. Thus the premiums collected are set against the claims made on the policies which were issued in respect of the premiums collected. Thus if one has an annual policy of insurance for a one off premium and a propositus dies during the year, then the claim is charged against those premiums notwithstanding the fact that probate may not be obtained until the following year and the claim actually paid in the following year.

The actuary who gave evidence for the defendant was, I thought, far less impressive. Although an experienced person in the industry he gave all the impressions of a person who had merely given a report to the person who had retained him without really thinking the matter through. He said that there was no custom in the industry, that the word "claim" could mean various things in different parts of the industry, and that indeed some insurance companies tackled their profit sharing arrangements in different ways to others. He instanced that one of the bigger insurance companies in Australia, the AMP
Society, in fact acted differently to the way in which the plaintiffs' expert described.

Although, as I say I was more impressed with the plaintiffs' expert, it does not really seem to me that any of this evidence is of relevance. Both parties appear to have had some experience in the insurance industry, but both appear to be very small operators. There is certainly no reliable way of being assured that even if there was a custom in the industry, either or both of them would have been aware of it and would have conducted themselves according to it. Accordingly, I must just approach the words which they have used in the context of the document in which those words appear and the underlying nature of their contract.

It seems to me that the key phrase in the provision under construction is the words "profit share". If there is no profit, then there can be nothing to share. The words in parenthesis "(70% of premiums, minus claims)" is merely a description of how one assesses the profits. One cannot use the formal document to help construe what the parties have expressed in this provisional document. However, one does get some guidance from the fact that losses are not to be carried forward to the following year and that the payment of the rebate is not dependent on renewal of the Pool in the following year subject to an IBNR provision, in the event of termination, "to cater for late reported and emerging TPD claims".

This sub-clause which applies only on termination is instructive for three reasons. First, it seems to assume that for years when there is to be a continuing of the business relationship to the next year, no IBNR provision is to be made. This could either be because accounting is done on a cash basis, or because in continuing years there is an adjustment made for late liabilities. There is no mention in the document, however, of any such adjustment. Second, events which have given rise to liability are treated as "claims" even though modified by the adjectives "late reported" and "emerging". Third, there is no attempt to deal with the problem that no profit share might be payable in the next year.

Mr Ronzani says that it is wrong to "annualise" the contracts. Although each 1
June a new contract year commenced, the parties anticipated that they would be in a contractual relation for some years and that their contract as to profit sharing was to exist until terminated. That is true up to a point, but it is impossible to escape from the view that the parties were dealing with each other on a state of facts that occurred as at 31 May or 1 June in each year and that what they were doing was to propose and accept insurance on lives for a term of one year commencing on 1 June and ending on 31 May. "Annualisation" accordingly, was one of the key factors of the arrangement, and although the provision re profit sharing does not actually say so, I would have thought that there was to be an annual distribution of profit. This construction is reinforced by the view that (a) losses are not to be carried forward; and (b) that profit rebate is payable notwithstanding that the arrangement is not continued into the following year (less in that case a provision for emerging claims).

The word "profits" as Mr Ronzani submits, usually means net profits: Brandt v WG Tatham Pty Ltd [[1965] NSWR 126], 127. When working out the net profits as at each anniversary day, one would normally work out the amount of money received less the expenses for the year. It may be that some businesses which work purely on a cash basis can conduct their accounting on a basis of cash received as opposed to cash paid, but generally accounting in the community is on an accruals basis; see Henderson v
Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1970) 119 CLR 612.] 
In Lever versus Land Securities Co Ltd [(1891) 8 TLR 94], Kekewich, J had to deal with the concept of what were the "net profits" of a company which was considering paying a dividend. He held that the directors should retain a reserve fund against claims and contingent liabilities, and had to budget for outstanding debts and possible adverse verdicts in pending actions. However, they did not have to make provision for possible depreciation of the company's leasehold assets.

It would seem to me that any member of the community if asked whether a person has made a profit for the year 1991/1992 knowing that say $100,000 in premiums had been collected but a member of the scheme had died which meant a payout of $500,000, would say that there had been no profit, and indeed a loss of close to $400,000. I say "close to" because I suppose one might have to put a slight discount to cover the fact that there might be no claim or that the claim could be resisted. It would seem to me to be quite a misuse of language to say that a profit was made under such circumstances merely because with the time taken to take out probate and to establish proof of age etc, there would be no cash payment until the next year.

Counsel referred me to a series of cases and dictionaries in which the word "claim" was used in insurance law. In Transport Industries Insurance Co Ltd v NSW Medical Defence Union Ltd [(1986) 4 ANZ Insurance Cases 60-736], the Court of Appeal examined the word "claims", said it was ambiguous and that it was of limited utility to examine the meaning ascribed to the word "claims" in other insurance policies for other and different purposes (per Kirby, P at 74,411). In ANZ Bank Ltd versus Colonial & Eagle
Wharves Ltd [1960] 2 Lloyds Reports 241 at 245, McNair, J said that the word "claims" in the policy there under consideration could mean either the right to make a claim or the assertion of that right. This was said by the NSW
Court of Appeal to be an instructive approach.

The prime dictionary meaning of the word "claim" is to demand or assert a right to something. Usually, the mere occurrence of something which gives rise to an action is not in itself a claim, the claim is the demand which again is not the same thing as a cause of action: West Wake Price & Co versus Ching [[1957] 1 WLR 45], 55. A claim usually means assertion of a cause of action:
Shordiche-Churchwood versus Cordle [[1959] 1 WLR 351], 353.
However, often the word "claim" will mean contingent claims so that when one is dealing with executors who are not to distribute without notice of claims, the executor has to allow for liabilities of which he or she knows where a person has the right to make a claim as well as those actually sent in:
Markwell's case [(1872) 21 WR 135.] Another illustration is given by Keates versus Lewis Merthyr Consolidated Collieries
Ltd [[1911] AC 641], where a court had power to adjust claims between employer and employee and was held able to include in the adjustment claims which the employee could have made but had not in fact put forward.

No analysis of previous cases is likely to provide any conclusive answer as to what the word "claims" means in the instant document. The concluding sub- clause, which I have already reviewed, seems to me to be a strong indication that "claims" include contingent claims. If a claim can exist before it is reported, then "claim" does not have the primary meaning of making a demand.
This would also fit in with what I gather to be the way in which the parties operated, that is to charge an annual premium for an annual insurance. Despite
Mr Ronzani's submissions that I should not annualise everything because of the ongoing relations of the parties, it does seem to me that the basic accounting method chosen by the parties was to deal with matters on a year by year basis and to take account as at 31 May. If as at 31 May one knew that a person had died and that the great probabilities were that in due course the payment would have to be made, then it seems to me quite artificial to say this would not be a liability that one would take into account when working out whether there were any profits. Mr Ronzani puts that in fact no claim may ever be made. This is of course theoretically possible, but as a court of common sense, I would think that where a person is entitled as were Mr Lindley's representatives to half a million dollars, the odds of them not asking the insurance company to pay that half a million dollars are close to zero.

I was for a while troubled by the fact that many of the potential claims could be for total and permanent disablement where there would be a formal claim made and the disablement and the injury may not occur at the same time. It was for this reason that I delayed giving judgment and requested further submissions in writing.

In his further submission, Mr O'Loughlin put that it was noteworthy that a TPD claim was not contingent upon the renewal of the agreement. Thus, it was logical to infer that the parties had adopted as their accounting period, the year in which the premiums were paid and the event insured against occurred.

Mr Ronzani in his further submissions repeated that the only day certain was when the claim was paid. This, of course, ignores the possibility that the insurer will not actually pay the claim on the first possible day it could make payment, but within a reasonable time thereafter. However, his basic submission remains that the parties wanted commercial workability in their contract, and the only way this can be achieved is to deal with claims on the basis that they are to be brought to account when paid.

It does not seem to me, with respect, that appeals to "commercial reality" have any substance. For one thing, "commercial reality" is in the eye of the beholder and what one party to an arrangement might consider is within its bounds is outside the pale in the eyes of the other. In any event, the problems really arise because of an inadequate statement between the parties of the details of their contractual arrangements. There is no doubt that the parties were in a contractual relationship, but they used very ambiguous words to map out their profit sharing arrangements.

Mr Ronzani referred me to the decision of the House of Lords in The Fanti` [[1990] 2 Ll LR 191], 197 and 200. I cannot find any assistance from that decision.` 
Although it is obvious that the inclusion of TPD claims raises additional complications, I do not consider that such complications would change the construction of the terms used in the Outline. As Mr Ronzani says, "minus claims" are ambiguous words, but whichever way one interprets the word "claims", complications arise. It seems to me that the solution that one marries annual premiums to an event which gives rise to liability occurring in the same year, is far more commercially practicable than the reverse situation. Indeed, if it were otherwise, one would not know what profits were generated in any particular year for perhaps 12 to 18 months, yet the Outline seems to have the flavour of an immediate rebate calculable on 1 June.

Mr Ronzani submits that the parties' conduct in their earlier association between 1986-1991 was part of the factual matrix. This might ordinarily be so, but the formula used in the 1986 equivalent to the Outline document was different in its terms and expressly mentioned "claims paid" in the preceding year. It could just as easily be argued that the change in expression meant that the insured would think some different arrangement prevailed. Thus, I do not consider that I derive any help from this source.

With an ordinary insurance contract, one would have actuaries work out just what risk of paying claims there was in any year and profit could be worked out with reference to those actuarial calculations. As Mr Ronzani has submitted, the present contract is different, not only because there are annual premiums for annual insurance, but also because the parties themselves have set out a formula by which profit is to be calculated.

Had it not been for the pure chance that no profits were made in the 1991/1992 year due to the claim of Mr Lindley, the parties would have escaped without detriment despite their use of ambiguous words. In the events as they have chanced to happen, the point of construction has considerable significance. If the Lindley claim is included in the 1991/1992 year, then, for all intents and purposes, it has no bearing at all on the profit sharing because there is no carry forward of losses. If on the other hand it is counted in the 1992/1993 year, it would wipe out any claim for commission for that latter year. There is no commercial unreality about this, it is just the chance way in which the losses have fallen which has such a dramatic effect on the way in which the profit sharing formula operates. Whichever formula was chosen, there would be some "swings and roundabouts" gains or losses. The formula which the parties have chosen to my mind means that the Lindley claim is to be taken into account for profits or losses for the 1991/1992 year and not the 1992/1993 year.

Thus, the second plaintiff is entitled as claimed to the amount agreed upon as its share of profits. Mr O'Loughlin has calculated the interest under Schedule
J to the Supreme Court Rules and accordingly, subject to checking the mathematics, there should be a verdict for the second plaintiff for $83,560.06: the defendant must pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings.
The exhibits may be handed out to the party tendering them on the basis that they will be returned to the court should an appeal be lodged.
 * * * 
