

Pasminco Mining Broken Hill versus Zammitt Matter No Ca 40314/96 [1998] NSWSC (4 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
PASMINCO MINING BROKEN HILL versus ZAMMITT 
CA 40314/96; SC 20213/94 August 1998 
Meagher JA, Sheller JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM PARKER J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40314/96; SC 20213/94 
DELIVERED: 4 AUGUST 1998 
HEARING DATE: 4 AUGUST 1998 
PARTIES: PASMINCO MINING BROKEN HILL versus ZAMMITT 
CORAM: MEAGHER JA, SHELLER JA, BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: C E O'CONNOR QC/ T McKENZIE 
Respondent: B GROSS QC 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: AUSTEN BROWN, THOMPSON 
Respondent: DOYLE KINGSTON & SWIFT 
CATCHWORDS: Negligence in the workplace - Contributory negligence 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 4 
PASMINCO MINING BROKEN HILL versus CHARLES ANTHONY ZAMMITT 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: The present appeal arises from a judgment and orders of Mr Justice Patrick Parker in the case of an industrial accident. The plaintiff was working from the bucket of a mechanical loader underground endeavouring to weld pieces of angle iron into position for the purpose of erecting a wall of steel mesh. In bending over in an endeavour to pick up his spirit level, he inadvertently allowed some surface of his welding rod to come into contact with his body, giving him a serious electric shock. The details of the injury are not presently relevant. 
Liability during the course of the trial was admitted by the defendant and ultimately his Honour awarded the plaintiff a verdict of $265,956.20 plus costs.

Originally, there were four grounds of appeal which were taken, three of those grounds have now been abandoned and the only live ground concerns contributory negligence.

The defendant/appellant's ground is in these terms: His Honour failed to find any contributory negligence against the respondent, after having found that the system reducing the risk of injury from electrocution was not followed by the respondent at the time of injury. It is difficult, I find, to understand quite what is meant by this.

His Honour's finding of negligence against the defendant was that it did not provide to the plaintiff a dead man switch which could be operated by him personally. His Honour's words were: "There was an obvious means by which the risk of injury to the plaintiff from electrical shock could have been reduced if not entirely eliminated namely the provision of a dead man switch available to be used by him in a particular location where he worked." 
That was his Honour's finding of negligence and the present appellant's acceptance of negligence must, I would have thought, have carried with it a recognition that his Honour was correct in so finding.

It is true that the defendant, the present appellant, did provide a dead man switch which could be operated by one of the plaintiff's work mates who was standing below him. That meant that whenever the plaintiff wanted to turn off the electricity, he had to yell a request to his workmate to that effect or else nod his cap lamp to his work mate. That is what the appellant means when he says that there was a system in place.

His contention is that there was a system in place that could have been used, that the plaintiff could have signalled to his work mates before he bent down to pick up his spirit level to turn off the electricity either verbally or by nodding his lamp. If he had done that, the electricity would have been turned off and no accident would have occurred. That submission was put to his Honour and rejected by his Honour who said at page 12 of his judgment: "Accepting that there was such a system," 
I interpolate that that means a system alleged by the appellant, "it does not seem to me it was unreasonable for the plaintiff to refrain from calling for the power to be shut off on every occasion and however briefly he paused from his welding nor on every occasion on having paused he needed to carry out some other manoeuvre in the work before resuming." 
That argument is in line with various statements made by the courts every year in comparable positions. For example Lord Wright in Caswell versus Powell Duffryn
Associated Collieries Limited [[1940] AC 152] at 178 - "What is all important is to adapt the standard of what is negligence to the facts and to give due regard to the actual conditions under which men work in a factory or mine, to the long hours and the fatigue, to the slackening of attention which naturally comes from constant repetition of the same operation to the noise and confusion in which the man works to his pre-occupation in what he is actually doing at the cost perhaps of some inattention to his own safety." 
To similar effect the High Court in McLean versus Tedman (1984) 155 CLR at 312 in a joint judgment with Mr Justice Mason, Mr Justice Wilson, Mr Justice Brennan and Mr Justice Lawson their Honours say: "The employer's obligation in this regard cannot be restricted to the provision of a system which safeguards the employee of all foreseeable risks of injury except those which rise from his own inadvertence or negligence.
There are many employment situations in which the risk of injury to the employees is negligible so long as the employee executes his work without inadvertence and takes reasonable care of his own safety. In these situations the possibility an employee will act inadvertently without taking reasonable care may give rise to a foreseeable risk of injury. In accordance with the well settled principle the employer is bound to take care to avoid such a risk." 
Mr O'Connor is, in the circumstances of this case, therefore put in a position where he must simultaneously say that the appellant's system as installed was negligent and negligent precisely because it did not give a person in the plaintiff's position a dead man switch and at the same time the plaintiff is contributorily negligent simply because he did not follow the negligent system which had been installed. As my brother Sheller JA pointed out in the course of the argument, it is not very easy to see the logic of this.

Apart from the logical deficit in the appellant's argument, there is also the consideration which was again raised in argument, that the assistance of the contributory negligence or no contributory negligence was very much a matter in the discretion of the trial judge. And the trial judge's decision in such a matter cannot lightly be interfered with by us. For these reasons I am of the view the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: I agree. 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree. * * * 
