

Ramsay versus Dr Tischler and Anor Matter No 11599/97 [1998] NSWSC 174 (22 May )

Last Updated: 5 June 1998 
RAMSAY versus DR TISCHLER & ANOR /97 May 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 28 May 1997. The plaintiff seeks an order extending the relevant limitation period. The proceedings first came on for hearing on 7 July 1997. The hearing had to be aborted because of evidentiary deficiencies in the plaintiff's case. The second attempt to obtain an order was heard on 14 May 1998. 
The plaintiff now relies on four affidavits. Two have been sworn by the plaintiff herself. One has been sworn by her husband. The other has been sworn by a solicitor in the employ of her solicitors (Gail Margaret Chalmers). There are various annexures (including correspondence and reports). There has been cross-examination of the plaintiff and of her husband.

I shall briefly refer to some of the relevant matters. This is not intended as an exhaustive statement of the relevant material. It should be observed that, at the second hearing, a somewhat different picture emerged.

On 8 September 1993, the plaintiff underwent an exploratory laparoscopy at
Westmead Hospital. The operation was performed by Dr Tischler. Thereafter, she had serious problems. There was further hospitalisation and she underwent further surgery (including remedial surgery).

In late 1994, steps were taken to obtain legal advice concerning her right to claim damages for medical negligence. She contacted The Law Society of New
South Wales. She received a letter dated 16 January 1995. She was given the names of three firms of solicitors able to assist her. On 31 January 1995, she and her husband attended a conference with a solicitor from Gunesekera, Barone & Cavanagh (GBC). She saw another solicitor (Mr Valenti) in early February
After she had instructed Mr Valenti, she received a letter dated 28
February 1995 from GBC. Mr Valenti arranged for her to see Dr Hoult. Dr Hoult was not prepared to provide a medico-legal report on liability under the pro bono scheme. Mr Valenti sent her letters dated 16 July 1996 and 24 September
He was pursuing the course that she approach another pro bono gynaecologist. She says that he did not give her any advice concerning the limitation period. It expired on 8 September 1996. She became unhappy with Mr
Valenti and terminated his retainer (October/November 1996).

On 9 January 1997, she instructed Andrew Fegent and Company. Gail Margaret
Chalmers (GMC) assumed the conduct of the matter. The plaintiff was then advised that the limitation period had expired and that an application for leave was necessary. She says that, when the file was obtained from Mr
Valenti, the clinical notes from Westmead Hospital were missing and that it took some weeks to track them down. The complete file had been obtained by about February 1997.

A report dated 22 April 1997 was obtained from Professor Morris. A copy of that report has been placed in evidence. On 27 May 1997, a report was received from Professor Bennett. A copy of that report is also in evidence.

On 3 September 1997, the plaintiff attended a conference with Counsel and her solicitor. On 4 September 1997, the plaintiff discovered two letters (including the letter dated 28 February 1995 from GBC). Later in that month, the solicitor received the file from GBC.

During early 1998, she underwent an MRI Scan and further medical reports were obtained. In March 1998, GMC changed her employment to Koffels and this firm took over the conduct of the matter.

The process seeks relief pursuant to sections 58 and 60G of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969 (the
Act). The relevant provision is in fact section 60C.

Section 60C is in the following terms:- 
C. (1) This section applies to a cause of action, founded on negligence, nuisance or breach of duty, for damages for personal injury, but does not apply to a cause of action arising under the [Compensation to Relatives Act 1897](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/). 
If an application is made to a court by a person claiming to have a cause of action to which this section applies, the court, after hearing such of the persons likely to be affected by the application as it sees fit, may, if it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so, order that the limitation period for the cause of action be extended for such period, not exceeding 5 years, as it determines. 
In exercising the powers conferred by section 60C, the Act requires the
Court to have regard to all the circumstances of the case (including the matters enumerated in section 60E, to the extent that they are relevant to the circumstances of the case).

If the Court decides that it is just and reasonable to make an order, it has a discretionary power to make that order. The onus rests with the plaintiff to show an entitlement to relief (Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v
Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866]; BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 March 1997) and, inter alia, The Council of the City of Sydney versus Zegarac (Court of Appeal, unreported, 26 February 1998)).

The only issue agitated in opposition to the application relates to delay.
Firstly, it is said that there was unexplained delay prior to the end of 1995.
Secondly, it is said that there is unexplained delay for the period between the end of 1995 and September 1996. Further, it is said that presumptive prejudice arises from the delay.

The letter dated 28 February 1995 from GBC contains the following:- "We note that you maybe consulting other solicitors as well and that our retainer will not start until you give our firm instructions. We confirm our advices to you that the date of the injury would be 8th September, 1993 and as such any contemplated Court proceedings will need to be commenced on or before th September, 1996." 
There is other material (Exhibit 2) which confirms that, during the conference with this firm, the plaintiff and her husband received oral advice as to the limitation period.

Both the plaintiff and her husband have given evidence as to their understanding of the advice received from GBC. It seemed to me that this evidence was lacking in plausibility. I reached this view after having had regard to both demeanour and evidence.

The plaintiff now needs an extension of the limitation period because of her delay. The explanation offered for that delay has its deficiencies and is somewhat lacking in candour.

Whilst reference was made to other matters, the parties gave significance to the matters referred to in (a) and (b) of section 60E(1).

The Summons was filed about eight months after the limitation period had expired. There are reasons which go some way to explain delay. Without intending to be exhaustive, I should mention a couple of matters. The solicitor acting for the plaintiff when the limitation period expired did not take any action to bring it to her attention. At the time of its expiry, she did not have evidence which might be seen as justifying the commencement of proceedings. It may be said that she did not come to that stage until about
April/May 1997. There is no evidence of actual prejudice. There is some presumptive prejudice. I do not see the delay and presumptive prejudice as a real impediment to a fair trial. There may be some dispute as to whether or not she has a viable cause of action against a former solicitor. If she does, the authorities indicate that it is not a matter to which the Court should give much weight. There is material before the Court supportive of the view that she may have an arguable cause of action productive of substantial damages.

The onus rests with the plaintiff. This is not an easy case and I have only come to a determination after some considerable hesitation.

It seems to me that when regard is had to all of the circumstances of this case (including the relevant matters enumerated in section 60E), I should decide that it is just and reasonable to make an order and that an order should be made.

I extend the limitation period for the plaintiff's cause of action up to and including 29 May 1998. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
