

Theodossiou versus Cui (No. 2) Matter No 1654/93 [1998] NSWSC 301 (11 June )

Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
THEODOSSIOU versus CUI (NO. 2) /93 June 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This was a hard fought out case between persons in a de facto relationship which was heard over nine days during 1997 and in which judgment was given with full reasons on 3 December 1997. I ordered that the defendant (woman) pay the plaintiff (man) $220,000. I made some comments about my thinking on costs, published my reasons and stood the matter over for short minutes. 
I am glad to say that the parties then were able to sort most matters out, but they could not agree about costs. This matter was argued before me on 24 April
The argument could not be completed that day because of problems which counsel had and the submissions were finalised in writing.

Mr McCrudden for the plaintiff, put that as the plaintiff had succeeded and there were no applicable special rules as to costs, the ordinary rule should apply. That is, the successful party be awarded costs, and the unsuccessful party pay them. He said that even though the reasons for judgment found both parties unreliable, the plaintiff was forced to sue, because without him suing, the defendant would not have given him anything. Indeed, the defendant fought the case strenuously, and even denied that there was a de facto relationship. The defendant argued that the plaintiff had a relationship for an appreciable period of the relevant time, not with herself but with Yang Li, yet never called Yang Li. Moreover, the way the defendant conducted herself in and about the litigation increased the costs and, on all of these diverting issues, the defendant failed.

The defendant said it was the plaintiff who introduced a lot of distractions into the case and involved the defendant in calling witnesses to answer these.
She also says that one of the reasons why the case had to be adjourned after the first four days was that the plaintiff suddenly produced a series of tape recordings which should have been discovered months beforehand. Had the plaintiff gone about this case in a sensible and proper way, the costs would not nearly have been as much.

The defendant also submits that to a great extent this case was more like a partnership than an emotional relationship. Certainly it is true that the significant joint venture of the parties was operating a flower selling business and that their personal and emotional relationships took second place. The significance of this is that in partnership proceedings people normally expect that the costs of putting an end to their partnership relationship will be ordinary costs of the business and should come out of the business assets.

However, that analogy cannot be pressed too far. In a partnership winding up, the assets may be vested in a receiver who administers them and adjusts the claims of the various parties if need be through an accounting process before the Master. Alternatively, orders are made so as to identify the totality of the partnership assets and what each partner contributed to those assets individually, then one deducts the costs of the whole proceedings and either distributes or claims the balance. In the instant case, all the assets were vested in the defendant and what I have virtually done is to award the credit balance to the plaintiff. However, the defendant's point still has some validity because she has been left with some of the expenses and taxes which are legally payable by her because the assets are in her name. The calculation of how much was to be paid to the plaintiff was made on a fairly broad brush approach of necessity because the reliable information was just not before the court. The defendant, however, says that these factors should be taken into account when considering an order for costs.

Her counsel also reminds me that early on in the proceedings, although costs were reserved, it was indicated that some of the interlocutory motions should result in the plaintiff paying the costs.

In reply, the plaintiff points out that it was open for the defendant to have commenced partnership proceedings, yet she did not; she claimed the whole of the assets as her own and denied any entitlement of the plaintiff at all. She said he was merely her employee. Accordingly, the plaintiff says the case cannot be treated in the same way as an ordinary partnership suit.
Furthermore, he says that the problems with the accounting are mainly caused by the fact that the defendant just has not been forthcoming with reliable evidence. Furthermore, the plaintiff says that he had to put his case as strongly as he did because the defendant would take any avenue available to her to resist his claims including avenues that were not legitimately available to her through perjury and forgery. He also says that the defendant's suggestion that the plaintiff failed in some early motions is simply untrue.

As to the taxes etc which the defendant may have to pay, the plaintiff quite properly says that these have nothing to do with the question of costs and are merely an attempt to reopen matters which were finally dealt with in the reasons for judgment last December.

Essentially I accept the submissions of the plaintiff. In particular, it does not seem to me that any time wasted by reason of the defendant raising red herrings or taking too much time over an issue affects the matter of costs as she was the loser and must pay in any event. As to the alleged excessive time spent on the case by the plaintiff, it does not seem to me that apart from the late disclosure of the tapes, that any shortcomings of the plaintiff are relevant on the question of costs. I have considered the tapes, but bearing in mind the length of the trial generally, again it does not seem to me to be a crucial matter that might displace the ordinary rule as to costs.

Accordingly, I order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
