

Bellevue Crescent Pty Ltd and Anor versus Marland Holdings Pty Ltd and Ors
Matter No 1735/97 [1998] NSWSC 68 (13 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 April 1998 `

BELLEVUE CRESCENT PTY LTD & ANOR versus MARLAND HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ORS` ` 1735/97` `13 February 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `
 `
 `JUDGMENT` `HIS HONOUR: This dispute concerns land between George and York Streets,
Sydney, in the block bounded by King and Market Streets. The relevant title starts with a grant to Samuel Terry on 31 January 1838 of portion 15 of section 26 of the Town of Sydney. Samuel Terry died about a month after the grant was issued, having first made a will which provided for his widow, his son and various other people. His son died later in 1838 and his widow died in
This meant that nine groups of people were entitled, as the heirs of
Samuel Terry, to the land in question and various other parcels of land which were owned by Samuel Terry.` ` The parties entered into a Deed of Partition on 12 June 1860. Under that
Deed, at least at first blush, the parties distributed all the land holdings of Samuel Terry amongst themselves. They did this by conveying to the various heirs who were to take particular parcels that particular parcel and would then, in the case at least of the present land, deal with rights of way.` ` It is always very awkward to have to deal with an 1860 conveyance in 1998 because the modern lawyer's analysis of conveyancing law is very different to the lawyer of 1860. However, there are some very strange things about this
Deed. First, the conveyances are not conveyances "Unto and to the use". They are conveyances which take advantage of the enrolled bargain and sale and a release under Statute. Now, a problem is that before [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s24.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/), unless there was an intervening trustee, one could not convey land to oneself. The
Partition Deed, being an enrolled bargain and sale, actually took advantage of uses being executed by the Statute of Uses and were direct conveyances.` ` The second problem about the Deed is that people have purported to reserve easements over land of which they are both one of nine grantors and also the grantee. This is an extremely difficult thing to do and most attempts would be invalid. The reasons are set out in Mitra Co-ownership & Partition 7th Ed (Eastern Law House Calcutta) (1994) 209 and the Indian Full Court decision in
Kameshwar Narain versus Janardhan Prasad [[1925] AIR Patna 492.] Apart from easements of the Wheeldon versus Burrows type and other easements of necessity, it is very difficult, at least without playing around with uses, to reserve an easement in a Deed of Partition. There are other difficulties with the Deed as well which are not necessary to go into at the present time. Perhaps I should say that it is not a well drawn document, but I hesitate to say that because of the difference between conveyancing practice in 1860 and 1998.` ` It is not too clear just what was the physical layout of this part of George
Street in 1860. I will come back to a closer analysis of a number of the facts later in these reasons. The Court has been assisted by plans of the period (1848 to 1908), photographs of paintings of the area which are still in existence and plans annexed to primary applications which were filed between and 1885. Again there are relevant extracts from Sands Directory and from the maps which are maps of Sydney which were circulating at the time and in particular Dove's Plans of 1879 and 1880. There are also before the Court extracts from the Council's Assessment Books of 1861 and 1863. From these plans it would appear that from at least 1848 almost the whole of the block in question was occupied by buildings but in the 1860s those buildings were being renewed or renovated so that many wooden structures were being replaced by more substantial buildings of brick or stone of two, three or four storeys high. The Council Assessment Books of 1861 show that there were two wooden blacksmiths' shops of one floor which were situated off 389 George Street and that 389 George Street itself was a brick one storey building. By 1863 a three floor brick shop had been erected on 389 George street and the references to the blacksmiths' shops have disappeared.` ` I will attach as an appendix to these reasons the plan which is PX 501 which shows portion 15 of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s26.html) both as it was and as it is today. Today the portion covers 385 to 397 George
Street, Sydney. Number 389 is owned and occupied by Marland Holdings Pty Ltd which is the first defendant in these proceedings. Then there is between 389 and 391/3 what is described on the plan as "reserved lane" which opens out into George Street and goes the full length of 389 and 391/3. At the York
Street side of that strip there is what could be called the bar of a T also marked "reserved lane". This description was used and a plan very similar to this was used in the plan on the Deed of Partition referring to this piece of land. Numbers 391 to 393 George Street are owned by the third defendant Tomark
Pty Ltd and, proceeding towards Market Street, 395 adjoining is owned by the fourth defendant Mod and Disposals Store Pty Ltd. Number 397 is also owned by
Tomark Pty Ltd and 399 is owned by the fifth defendant, The Hospitals
Contribution Fund of Australia Ltd. I should mention that there are associated proceedings which were commenced by the third, fourth and fifth defendants seeking similar relief to the present suit.` ` The question that I am trying at present is the question arising under the second cross-claim which is filed by the second defendant, the Council of the
City of Sydney on 21 October 1997. By that cross-claim the claimant seeks a declaration that the reserved lanes are public roads. If this is decided favourably for the Council it may well be that the other questions in these proceedings and the allied proceedings fall away. If a negative answer is given then those other matters will have to be pursued.` ` At the hearing Mr Armfield of counsel appeared for the plaintiff, Bellevue
Crescent Pty Ltd which owns property at 50-54 York Street, Sydney, whose rear abuts on to the T strip of the reserved lane. Mr Armfield did not present any independent argument supporting Mr Coles QC's argument - Mr Coles QC appearing for the Sydney City Council. Although all parties were represented by counsel or solicitors, the only other substantial argument was presented by Mr
Southwick of counsel who appeared for the third and fourth defendants.
Accordingly we really have but two opposing arguments.` ` Mr Coles QC principally relied on Act 5 of William IV number 20 which is often cited as the Alignment of Streets Act (1834). Section 3 of that Statute is as follows:` `"Provided always and be it further enacted That the curbstone or exterior edge of the said footways shall in no case be placed or formed upon land not hitherto forming part of the street or footway unless with the consent of the proprietor of such land or under and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the said Governor and Council passed in the fourth year of the reign of His said Majesty intituled, 'An Act for making altering and improving the Roads throughout the Colony of New South Wales and for opening and improving the
Streets in the Town thereof'. And provided also that all land which shall have been at the time of the publication of the general objects of this Act in the
New South Wales Government Gazette or shall hereafter be left open and used as a carriageway or footway within the said town as well as all land which has been or shall hereafter be formed into a street within the said town at the public expense shall be deemed and taken to be dedicated to the public and shall not be fenced in or resumed on any pretence whatsoever but shall be subject to all such and the like regulations orders powers authorities and provisions to which land used as a public thoroughfare now is or hereafter shall be subject by law."` `The key words are the last proviso, namely that` `"all land which (as at 1834) or shall hereafter be left open and used as a carriageway or footway within the said town as well as all land which has been or shall hereafter be formed into a street within the said town at the public expense shall be deemed and taken to be dedicated to the public".` `Mr Coles QC submitted that "left open and used" was an expression which had a natural meaning, namely that the street or land concerned was not separated with a gate and people actually used it. However he pointed out that the cases showed that the expression was used in a more restricted form, namely left open and used by the public. Without over-burdening these reasons with authority, the point can be illustrated by referring to what Harvey J said in
Attorney-General versus City Bank Sydney <case>; [(1920) 20 SR 216], "In my judgment the words 'left open and used' mean open to the public". This point is made with more particularity by McHugh JA in the Court of Appeal in
Newington versus Windeyer [(1985) 3 NSWLR 555], 562. In my view I should follow what those learned judges said about the expression.` ` At Common Law a dedication of a street required acts by the owner of the land concerned to give the lands so that the public could pass and re-pass over it and an acceptance of that dedication by the relevant public authority.
This was because in England of yesteryear, as soon as there was a public road, the parish in which that road was established became responsible to maintain it and the law was such that a liability should not be foisted upon the public without acceptance. The same sort of principle exists today though, because of modern procedures of subdivision, it seldom gets called into question.` ` As a general statement, up until section 272 of the Local Government Act which affects different parts of New South Wales from different dates, the fee simple in the road remains vested in the person in whom it was vested before it became a road and the only public right was the right to pass and re-pass over the surface. Under section 272 the fee simple in the land on which there was a public road became vested in the relevant Local Government
Authority.` ` The consequence of the road being impliedly dedicated under section 3 of the
Alignment of Sydney Streets Act was that, when one takes into account the City of Sydney Corporation Act of 1879 and the later effect of section 272 of the Act, the property in the road, not only the right to use but the fee simple, would be in the Council.` ` Apart from the facts that appear from the plan, I had a view of the site last Monday together with counsel and solicitors and some experts. At that view it was commonly agreed that 1879 was the relevant date to look at as to whether the Alignment of Sydney Streets Act applied because it was repealed in that year by the City of Sydney Corporation Act. Looking at the site, all the surface materials placed on the reserved lane and the surrounding buildings appeared to have been made or erected after 1879 and so, apart from understanding some of the evidence and having an idea of the widths involved, there was nothing at the view that could be taken as evidence which would affect the decision.` ` As I have said, Mr Southwick and Mr Coles QC were the only lawyers who presented independent argument. Mr Southwick very helpfully provided an outline of submissions which I will leave with the papers. Essentially he made three points:` ` (A) that his clients had indefeasible rights to appurtenant easements because of their Certificates of Title;` ` (B) his clients succeed under what is nowadays called the middle line rule, formerly cited in Latin as the ad medium filum rule; and` ` (C) that the Council needed to prove dedication of the relevant lane and the evidence was insufficient to enable me to make any favourable finding to the
Council.` ` Before dealing with the arguments and the respective submissions, it is necessary to refer a little further to the documents, the plans and the rest of the evidence. The plan that is the appendix to these reasons is not dissimilar to the plan which is on page 73 of the bundle which was the plan attached to the Deed. It refers to the land in question as "RES lane". It is clear that the abbreviation "RES" is an abbreviation for "reserved" and the word "reserved" has different significance in different branches of land law.
This is well illustrated by the judgment of Windeyer J in Keilor CC v
O'Donohue <case>; [(1971) 126 CLR 353], 367. All the word seems to mean is that the conveyers retain certain rights over the lanes in question. It must be remembered that portion had actually been granted in fee simple by the Crown to Samuel Terry so that we do not here have a situation where there is Crown land which has been reserved for later road purposes. It is clear that, in the instant case, it is private land that somebody has reserved. The word "lane" is a word which does not have any great legal significance. Two Judges in Dabbs versus Seaman <case>; [(1925) 36 CLR 538] dealt with the expression. Isaacs J at 552 to 553 said it was merely a species of the same genesis of street and road, Higgins J, being a little more poetic at page 561. It seemed to be accepted by counsel that the word "lane" is not a word of any semantic significance in this case. However it should be observed that in the City of Sydney a lane usually connotes a narrow passage able to be used by the public: Davey versus Richardson and Wrench <case>; [(1907) 7 SR 189], `
 ` The metes and bounds description of the lands on page 58 of the Deed should be set out in full because of the way in which it is worded. The description is part of the 5th schedule to the Deed of Partition and reads as follows:` `"Commencing at a mark in George Street being the south easternmost corner of the Staffordshire Warehouse and bounded on the north by a line bearing westerly 75 feet 9 inches on the west by a reserved lane being a line bearing southerly 26 feet 6 inches in the south by a reserved lane being a line easterly 73 feet to George Street and on the east by George Street being a line bearing northerly 20 feet 6 inches to the point of commencement being a portion of a certain deed poll or grant from the Crown dated the 31st day of
January 1838 in favour of the said Samuel Terry together with a right of ingress and egress in over and along a reserved road as is more particularly marked out on the plan at the foot of these presents".` ` The significance is that the conveyancer has used points of reference not only to an adjoining warehouse but also to a "reserved road" meaning both the lane that leads on to George Street and the T section of it. This would tend to suggest that those lanes were actually able to be observed on the ground at the date of the conveyance. The blacksmith shop evidence that I referred to earlier tends a little the other way, but the probabilities are that the lanes were there and the blacksmiths' shops either encroached on to them or otherwise did not obstruct traffic on the lane, whatever traffic there was.` ` I turn now to the plans which are in evidence. The Dove Plan appears in two versions on page 156 of the bundle and on page 422 of the supplementary bundle. The plan on page 156, which can be read with the legend that appears elsewhere in the evidence, is coloured so that yellow shows vacant land; blue, wooden buildings; pink, substantial buildings and there is a numeral with the number of storeys of the building. The legend also shows that a turret mark in a line refers to "window or other opening overlooking adjoining buildings" and that a break in a line shows communication. On the coloured plan 389 George
Street is a three storeyed building on which the words "Martin and Payne
Ironmongers" appear in bold capitals. Then there is the right of way and there are two turrets in 389 and four turrets in 391. These are windows of some description at the very least. It may be they are doors or French windows. As
Martin and Payne's building was three storeys and 391, which is described as "The Coffee Palace" of four storeys - ("Coffee Palace" appears to mean a temperance hotel in Victorian times) - the probabilities are that the windows are openings for light. Neither 389 nor 391 (nor for that matter 393, 395 and ) have any gaps in the lines fronting on to George Street though there is a gap between the rear of 397 and the rear of 56 York Street and those two buildings were in the common ownership of Drysdale and Roberts Wholesale
Ironmongers. The right of way at the rear of 389 to 395 has various turrets showing at least windows on the rear of 389 to 395 York Street and also into York Street. There is then a solid line at the rear of 54, 52 and part of York Street all of which seem to have small buildings with a York Street frontage with sheds and the like in the backyard. ` ` Another plan which is in evidence shows that there was a brick wall along the rear boundary of the York Street properties. However page 156 shows a gap in the line at the rear of number 50 York Street. The plan which is on page of the supplemental bundle which is also a Dove Plan again shows the gap in the line between the two Drysdale and Roberts buildings, the numbers of both George and York Streets seem to have slightly changed for this map. The turrets are as I have already described so there are no turrets in The Coffee
Palace wall but there is a continuous line covering the whole of the yard of York Street. Both these plans refer to the lane as right of way. I am not too sure what the significance of this is. There is another right of way shown between the back of 40 York Street and the back of 379 George Street though it does not seem to lead anywhere but otherwise means of ingress from George or
York Street are marked on the map as a passage.` ` It is fairly clear that at least before 1879 the great majority of the buildings in the relevant block were being used for commercial purposes though it may be that there were some residences or offices on the upper floors of the buildings. Across the other side of George Street there were similar developments save that the evidence suggests that there were eleven hotels in the block. With these commercial buildings and hotels and a couple of banks one can infer that, at least for the times, quite a considerable amount of traffic passed along George Street in this block.` ` The paintings that have been placed in evidence are probably no reliable guide to the amount of traffic because I would think that the artists were far more interested in the buildings than they were of painting congested traffic and so the paintings tend to show three or four horsedrawn vehicles on an unmade carriageway. There is one photograph taken at the scene somewhere about the turn of the century where there are a series of stage carriages in George
Street in this particular area and the significant thing about that is that some of them were parked. Generally speaking in the 19th century the law took the view that "The King's highway is not to be used as a stableyard" so that people were not permitted to park on highways: R versus Cross <case>; [(1812) 3 Camp 224], 227; <case>; [170
ER 1362], 1363; [[1880-13] All ER Rep 396], 397.` ` However, whatever may have been the position in England, perhaps parking was not as strictly policed in York Street of 1870 as it was later. Otherwise very little can be gained from the rest of the plans, the assessment books and what have you. Both the Sydney City Council and the clients for whom Mr Southwick appeared endeavoured to put before the Court evidence from local historians.
In each case the witness concerned was a woman who had degrees in arts and who had then taken a keen interest in study, obtained a higher degree and had produced a series of local histories. I have no doubt at all that these ladies are eminently acceptable in the community as being excellent writers of local history and the papers that they have produced tend to show that there is a large number of consumers who wait on their analyses.` ` I did, however, reject considerable part of one historian and virtually all of the other historian's evidence. As far as counsel and I are aware this particular problem - that is, the problem of an alleged expert giving evidence of what life was like a hundred years ago - has not come before the courts for decision before. Indeed there is very little in the textbooks about the admissibility of this sort of evidence though probably the best statement is in Cross on Evidence 5th Australian Edition (Butterworths Sydney 1966) at paragraph 3040. That suggests that the authorities allowed courts to look at reputable histories but points out that courts, particularly ecclesiastical courts, have often gone much further than this (see for instance Read versus Bishop of Lincoln [[1892] AC 644).]` ` McLelland J considered the admissibility of the history of a hotel in Ritz
Hotel Limited versus Charles of the Ritz Limited (Nos 15 & 16) [(1988) 14 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281988%29%2014%20NSWLR%20107 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 112-113. It seems to me that there is a distinction on these authorities between the facts of history and what might be called social history. Whilst courts may obtain the basal facts such as when a particular war broke out or other matters of record from reputable histories, analyses as to why certain things happened and generally how people behaved is not a matter which can be proved by the evidence of people who were not there but have ascertained the historical facts and then have analysed them to work out a conclusion. ` ` It was urged on me that the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) (in particular [section )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) shows that this sort of evidence is now admissible. However, the knowledge of an historian does not seem to me to fit within [section .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) That knowledge is, first of all, based on the hearsay material of the past and then the opinion is not wholly or substantially based upon that knowledge but, rather, is an analysis. Accordingly I rejected this material. I do not really think it made much difference in the result as the primary documents by the historians were before the Court. Moreover, whilst the material was not admitted, there is scope for judicial notice and Judges may inform themselves from details which are open and apparent and of general knowledge to the whole community so long, of course, as they make that known to the parties. Although the material from the historians was not, strictly speaking, admissible I have, of course, read it and it would have been possible, had I thought it be relevant, for me to add it to my general knowledge and take judicial notice.
In the end that was not necessary.` ` One other matter should be noted before I deal with the various submissions.
The cases dealing with public roads often have to be decided fifty or a hundred years after the relevant events. Of necessity this means that the
Court has to rely on material which is less probative than might be relied on in other cases and on various presumptions. There is a presumption which has come through the cases over the years and the flavour of this can be found in the Sydney City Bank case which is expressed by Menzies J in Permanent Trustee
Co of New South Wales Ltd versus Campbelltown MC <case>; [(1960) 105 CLR 401], 415 and is also mentioned by McHugh JA in Newington v
Windeyer (supra) page 559, and that is as Menzies J said:` `"It is realistic to treat roads left in a subdivision which are connecting to a public street as open to all so that, unless access is prevented by fencing or otherwise, roads shown upon a plan of subdivision are proper to be regarded as open to the public."` `So that, where one has a lane or road which connects to a public street and there is very little other material, it is open for the Court to find that, at the relevant time, it was open to the public.` ` With those observations I now turn to the competing submissions.` ` As I have said, Mr Coles QC put that under the 1835 Act the lanes somewhere between 1860 and 1879 were, within the meaning of section 3, open to the public. Accordingly the roads at that stage were deemed to be dedicated and in due course became the property of the Council. Mr Southwick answered that by saying that:` ` (a) his clients' title was indefeasible;` ` (b) the middle of the road rule applied; and` ` (c) that the facts required for dedication have not been proved.` ` Current Certificates of Title of Mr Southwick's clients are in evidence.
They are titles which issued from 1960 or so and they certainly show that the titles have rights of way appurtenant to the land.` ` Mr Southwick relied on Dabbs versus Seaman (supra) as authority that his clients had an indefeasible title because of this. Anyone who relies on Dabbs versus Seaman in the light of its subsequent history is a bold person. From Jobson v
Nankervis (1943) 44 SR 277 onwards it has been considered that Dabbs versus Seaman is a very special case and must be closely confined because it is outside all general principles. The current edition of Baalman "Commentary on the Torrens
System", namely Woodman and Nettle, "The Torrens System in NSW" by Butt &
Ticehurst, [42.300] points out the problems.` ` However, in the instant case these are appurtenant easements. The easements exist over old system lands and it is quite clear from cases such as Cowlishaw v Ponsford (1928) 28 SR 331, 336 that the Dabbs versus Seaman principle, whatever it may mean, cannot apply in such a situation. The lands over which the easement is claimed in the Torrens land has never been brought under the Act and, accordingly, there can be no indefeasible title to it; nor can there be any indefeasible title to any part of the lands. In any event the principle of indefeasibility only applies to matters which limit or qualify the titles set out in the Certificates of Title, not to cases where it is expanded (see PT
Ltd versus Maradona Pty Ltd [(1992) 25 NSWLR 643], 679).
Accordingly, the first argument cannot succeed.` ` The ad medium filum rule or the middle of the road rule is also one which cannot, to my mind, assist Mr Southwick's clients in the instant case. It is very easy to over-simplify this rule. In fact it seems that there are at least two rules. The first is that there is a rule of construction in a Crown grant or a conveyance that, if property is said to be bounded by a road, then the grant or conveyance conveys title to the grantee up to the middle line of the road. However the second rule is that, as a question of fact, Judges can instruct jurors that, if the only evidence is that there is a Certificate of
Title or the like which mentions the boundary as being a road, they are entitled to find as a fact that the boundary is the middle line of the road.
There is no need to elaborate in view of my previous discussion of the rule in
Permanent Trustee Co Ltd versus Pangas [(1992) 75 LGRA 412], 417. My remarks then and the analysis I have given in the present reasons show how one has to treat statements such as that made in City of London Land Tax Division v Central London Roadway [[1913] AC 364] at 371. Probably the best local analysis is by Butt in his Land Law 3rd ed LBC 1996 at page .` ` The construction of the grant part of the rule does not really seem to fit into the instant case. The grant was the Deed of Partition of 1860. It did have the boundaries as the reserved lane but it would seem to me that the construction of the Deed of Partition is quite clear. Lanes were reserved by the grantors. Why, it is not too clear because one would expect to see this sort of scheme in a leasehold building subdivision of the mid-19th century so that the landlord could keep some sort of control over what was happening in private streets inside the subdivision. However, even if one assumes that the conveyancers thought they were effectively creating rights of way, no one is given the power to police what is happening and, apart from the nine sets of tenants in common ground, there is no one who can bring trespass in respect of the lane. It seems very, very difficult indeed to say that, when people have deliberately granted a right of way over a reserved lane, that the true construction of the conveyance is that that is just a waste of words so that the real grant was a grant of half the fee simple of the reserved lane.` ` Although Mr Southwick pressed on me that one must construe the Certificate of Title according to the middle line rule, I did not find that argument particularly attractive. It is true that there are some judgments of Justices of the High Court that consider whenever a Certificate of Title issues, there is virtually a re-grant by the State of the property. I do not really think that one can take that too far and say that one must look at each Certificate of Title as if it were a new Crown grant. Higgins J makes some remarks on this problem in Dabbs versus Seaman at page 570 and see also Breskvar versus Wall (1971) 126
CLR 376.` ` If the rule is that, on seeing the Certificate of Title there is a presumption that the boundary is the middle line of the lane, I do not think that the fact that the right of way is described on the Certificate of Title (and in some cases there is a plan of the right of way) adds to the case presented by Mr Southwick. Indeed it detracts from it because, again, one does not usually have an appurtenant right of way over land one already owns. Thus
I do not consider the middle of the road rule is applicable in the instant case.` ` So far as Mr Southwick's arguments were concerned that there was no evidence of dedication, there was no evidence of constructing the surface of the road at public expense or consent of the owner, I agree with Mr Coles QC that these matters do not really arise. On the proper construction of section 3, if a road is left open and used by the public as a carriageway in the city of
Sydney, then there is a deemed dedication. That is one case dealt with by section 3 of the Alignment of Sydney Streets Act. There are other cases also dealt with in that section such as roads which are formed at public expense.
All that the Council needs to show is that it is more likely than not that the lanes were left open and used by the public before 1879.` ` Accordingly, in my view, the arguments that have been put up by Mr Coles QC have not been answered.` ` It is therefore a matter of looking, as a question of fact, as to whether there is sufficient evidence that the roads were left open and used by the public between 1860 and 1879.` ` As I have said before, this sort of case has to be decided on evidence which is over a hundred years old, is mainly documentary and inferences from documents and without the benefit of people who were actually there.` ` It seems to me more likely than not that -` ` (a) because of the presumption that I have already mentioned in respect of passageways which open up on to the street; ` ` (b) the way in which the passageways are described as "reserved lanes"; ` ` (c) that there was large commercial activity for the time in the relevant buildings with the need to take vehicles off George Street for the purposes of stocking shops et cetera; and` ` (d) the way the plans are constructed -` `for me to say that it is more likely than not that from 1860 or thereabouts to 1879 the rights of way or lanes were left open and used by the public.` ` Accordingly the Sydney City Council is entitled to the relief that it seeks.` ` It would seem to me that in proceedings 1735 of 1997 I should make declaration 1 in the second cross claim but the best thing is probably to stand this suit and also the other three associated suits over to some date next March so that counsel and solicitors can peruse these reasons and work out what is to happen thereafter. I will stand this suit over to 24 March 1998 at 9.30 am for short minutes and the other three associated proceedings to the same time for mention.` * * * 
