

Hendry versus Thiess Contractors P/L and Ors [1996] NSWSC 177 (6 June 1996) 
HENDRY versus THIESS CONTRACTORS PTY LIMITED & ORS /95 
Thursday 6 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff claims damages in respect of an injury which he suffered on 23 August 1993. In his statement of claim he alleges that on 23 August 1993 he was driving an excavator owned by a company Tuggeranong Operator Hire Pty Ltd (TOH) and was engaged in rock crushing work under the direction of one William Robert Firth, a servant of the defendant, Thiess Contractors Pty Ltd (Thiess).

That work was being carried out in connection with the Yass bypass near Yass in the State of New South Wales. It is also alleged that the defendant at all material times had engaged TOH to carry out excavation and rock crushing work in relation to the construction of the bypass. These are the allegations generally made in the statement of claim.

In consequence of the accident, the plaintiff sustained injuries as particularised in the statement of claim. In 1995 he instituted proceedings against Thiess. The conduct of the proceedings was initially conducted by the solicitors for the second cross-defendant, under an insurance policy which I will describe as being a "contract works" policy.

In 1996 some difficulties arose which need not be recounted in connection with the conduct of the proceedings on behalf of the defendant. The difficulty pertained to whether or not in respect of the subject accident the defendant was to be indemnified under the contract works policy or whether the defendant was to be indemnified under an "employer's insurance policy" (workers' compensation policy) that Thiess held with the first cross-defendant.
Subsequently, the defendant, the solicitors for the contract works policy insurer and the solicitors for the employer's insurance policy insurer agreed that the proceedings on behalf of the defendant should be conducted by a new solicitor.

The reason for such decision being made was that there was in issue between the two insurers a question as to which of two policies of insurance would furnish an indemnity to the defendant in respect of any liability it might incur to the plaintiff in consequence of the plaintiff's accident and the proceedings instituted by the plaintiff in respect to that accident.
Subsequently, the new firm of solicitors came on record for the defendant and cross-claims were issued as and against the second cross-defendant, being the contract works insurer, and against the first cross-defendant, being the workers' compensation insurer.

It has been agreed, and there is no need to recount the history, that one of the two insurance policies to which I have made reference is liable to indemnify the defendant in respect of any liability it might incur to the plaintiff for the plaintiff's injuries and in the circumstances which I have briefly recounted. It has also been agreed between the plaintiff and the defendant as well as the two cross-defendants that the action should proceed as one for assessment of damages. No dispute was raised as to the entitlement of the defendant to admit liability and this was done with the consent of both insurers.

When the matter was called on for hearing this morning and after some further consultations took place between the respective parties, the proceedings between the plaintiff and the defendant were settled in the sense that. Not only has there been an admission of liability on the part of the defendant but agreement has now been reached in relation to what was in fact the only issue still extant this morning; namely, what should be the appropriate assessment of damages. All the parties have sensibly reached agreement in relation to this matter. As I understand the situation, terms of settlement are being prepared which will reflect the settlement of the action as and between the plaintiff and the defendant, for the amount agreed upon. This settlement applies not only as and between the plaintiff and the defendant but also is the subject of agreement between the defendant and the two cross-defendants.
It has been reached with their approval. Those terms of settlement will be filed in court in due course. In the meantime it was agreed that the action between the defendant and two cross-defendant insurers should proceed to a hearing.

That still leaves extant the issue that needs to be determined as and between the defendant and the two cross-defendants. That issue may be simply stated as follows: Which of the two policies of insurance is liable to provide and furnish an indemnity to the defendant in respect of its liability to the plaintiff arising from the circumstances to which I have made reference? It has been agreed between the defendant and the two cross-defendant insurers that one of the two policies of insurance is liable to indemnify and fully indemnify the defendant in respect of its liability to pay the agreed sum of damages to the plaintiff.

A number of documents have been tendered by consent for the purposes of determining the single remaining issue of whether the contract works policy is liable to indemnify or whether what I have called the workers' compensation insurance policy is liable to indemnify defendant? The parties have sensibly agreed upon a number of facts, as well as having reached an agreement in respect of a number of documents being tendered to the court to permit a resolution of the single extant question. It is also agreed that this question is one that should be dealt with expeditiously and promptly.

It is appropriate for me to say that the plaintiff is in urgent need of payment of the award of damages. This was a matter that was the subject of some discussion when I called over the matter, prior to coming to Albury.
Hence, this is not the occasion to pause and reserve a judgment on the question of which of the two insurers is liable to furnish the indemnity.

There has been, as I have said, agreement between the parties and more particularly between the defendant and the two cross-defendant insurers in respect of a number of matters. It is agreed that there was at all material times a contract between Thiess, as principal, and TOH, as contractor. The contract was made in the course of or for the purpose of the trade or business of Thiess. The contract called for the execution of work by TOH. The work was the provision of a Sumitomo excavator with driver (the plaintiff) from 26 June at the rate of $85 per hour, confirmed by plant hire order number 25888 from Thiess to TOH dated 26 September 1993. It has also been agreed that the work called for by the contract was part of the work undertaken by Thiess.

The plaintiff was at all material times employed by TOH and suffered the injury in the execution of the work called for by the contract. It has also been agreed, that TOH did not have a policy of insurance as required by <case> of the [Workers' Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).
However, it is also accepted that Thiess did have a policy of insurance as required by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s155.html) of the Act, with the first cross-defendant. It would seem to me that at the time the plaintiff sustained his injury he was not, however, an actual employee of the defendant. His entitlement to receive payments of workers' compensation from the defendant was an entitlement founded upon the provisions of [s .(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s20.html) of [Workers' Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). That provision is in the following terms: "If any person (in this section referred to as 'the principal') in the course of or for the purposes of the person's trade or business, contracts with any other person (in this section referred to as 'the contractor') for the execution by or under the contractor of the whole or any part of any work undertaken by the principal, the principal is, if the contractor does not have a policy of insurance or is not a self-insurer at the time a worker employed in the execution of the work receives an injury, liable to pay any compensation under the Act which the principal would have been liable to pay if that worker had been immediately employed by the principal." 
According to the materials that have been furnished to the court, it is common ground that the contract works insurance policy issued by the second cross- defendant furnished an indemnity to the defendant in respect of its liability to the plaintiff pursuant to the insuring clause, section C of the policy, but subject to other provisions that appeared in the policy. One such other provision was an excess provision so that in the event of the policy being required to furnish an indemnity, then the defendant would be liable to bear an excess for the first $50,000. More significantly for the purposes of the cross-claim proceedings, the contract works policy also contained a clause or condition relating to and headed "Other Insurance". That condition provides that the policy is to be one of excess, over and above any other valid and collectible insurance, and that it shall not respond to any loss until such times as the limit and liability under such other primary and valid insurance has been totally exhausted.

Thus it is accepted, that the contract works policy contains, as I have said, the other insurance provision that I have just described together with the excess provision which I have also just mentioned.

The workers' compensation policy on foot under the [Workers' Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) is a policy in statutory form required by the Act. It is a policy that is required to be in accordance with the statute pursuant to the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s159.html) of the [Workers' Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).

The Workers' Compensation (General) Regulations 1987 contains a regulation dealing with provisions of policies of insurance. It is not necessary for me to set forth in this judgment the provisions of Regulation 19. It is also sufficient for me to say that the worker's compensation insurance policy or the employer's insurance policy is one that has come into existence against the background of a considerable body of law. Indeed, the present form of policy has as its immediate background a policy that came into existence subsequent to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Employer's Mutual Indemnity Association Ltd versus Hutcherson Pty Ltd [(1976) 2 NSWLR 302.] 
The required statutory form of the worker's compensation policy is set forth in Form 7, which form is found in Schedule 1 of the Workers' Compensation
Regulations 1987. That form contains an operative insurance provision or insurance clause which is in the following terms: "NOW THIS POLICY WITNESSES that in consideration of the payment by the
Employer to the Insurer of the premium for this Policy IF, between day of 19 , and 4 p.m. on the day of 19 , and thereafter to 4 p.m. on the last day of any subsequent period in respect of which this Policy is duly renewed, the
Employer becomes liable to pay compensation under the Act to or in respect of any person who is or is deemed by the Act to be a worker of the Employer (including any person to whom the Employer is liable by force of section 20 of the Act to pay compensation) or becomes liable to pay any other amount in respect of the Employer's liability independently of the Act (being a liability under a law of New South Wales) for any injury to any such person (not including liability for damages in respect of a motor accident as defined in the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) or liability in respect of an injury, suffered by a person other than such a worker or deemed worker, arising out of any rescue or attempted rescue.)" 
It is not in dispute that the form of the workers' compensation policy, to which I have made reference, was in accordance with Form 7 and was at all material times on foot or, to put it in another way, that it provided an indemnity to the defendant in the event of the policy being held liable on its proper construction to indemnify the defendant in respect of the plaintiff's accident. As I understand it, the issue that arises is a simple one, or perhaps a not so simple one, namely which of the two policies of insurance is to be held to furnish an indemnity to the defendant in respect of its liability to the plaintiff.

The rival contentions advanced by the respective cross-defendants in relation to the constructions for which they contend have been contentiously advanced in written submissions, and were duly supplemented by oral submissions. I seek to do no injustice to either of the two counsels' submissions if I may perhaps summarise them. Mr Nock SC, on behalf of the first cross-defendant, submits that the defendant, Thiess, was at no time the employer nor was it at any time a deemed employer. At all material times, he submits, that Thiess, in respect of this subject accident, was but a principal within the meaning of <case> of the [Workers' Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). His very simple proposition, as he put it, was that the workers' compensation policy relies upon the term "employer", that Thiess was never an employer required to have a worker's compensation policy and that its liability to pay compensation arose solely under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s20.html), with such liability being limited to payment of workers' compensation under the Act.

Mr Hewitt, on behalf of the second cross-defendant or contract works insurer, submits that the wording of the worker's compensation policy is clear, that
Thiess, in respect of the subject accident, both had a liability under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s20.html) and also at common law to the plaintiff.

In its written submissions, the first cross-defendant insurer submitted that although the words "any such person" to be found in the insurance clause were capable of incorporating the employees of the defendant's subcontractors to whom the employer was liable under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s20.html) of the Act, nevertheless such a literal interpretation did not represent a sensible or sound interpretation of the expression in the context in which it was used, nor was it a sensible commercial construction.

Mr Nock conceded on behalf of the workers' compensation insurer that the way the policy is to be interpreted is by reference to the actual words of the policy itself. Such concession is clearly right. The extent of the insurer's promise to indemnify the defendant is to be found in the words of the policy issued as properly construed: see Sydney Turf Club versus Crowley <case>; [(1972) 126 CLR 420] at 426; Brakespeare versus The Northern Assurance Company
Limited <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 661] at 668; State Mines Control Authority versus Government
Insurance Office of New South Wales and Anor (1964) 65 SR 258 per Walsh J at 260 to 261.

Ultimately, the liability or non-liability of either cross-defendant insurers must be determined upon the construction of the policy by which that cross- defendant insurer became contractually bound. Indeed, as was said in
Brakespeare's case in respect of the workers' compensation policy, whilst there was an obligation to insure, it was left to the employer and the insurer to make the contract and "their rights and duties inter se rest solely on the contract they may have made". As was also said in
Brakespeare (at 668): "The question whether the insurer was obliged to indemnify the employer in respect of the worker who in this case obtained compensation depended wholly upon the term and the validity of the contract of insurance made between the insurer and the employer and not upon the Act. Whether there existed an enforceable contract of indemnity was not a question or matter which arose under the Act. It arose under the policy or perhaps out of the dealings between the two parties." 
What I have said about the matter of indemnity falling to be determined by the true construction of the policy also appears to be supported by the observations of the Privy Council in AMP Fire and General Insurance Co Ltd v Miltenburg [(1982) 1 NSWLR 393] at 398 where their Lordships referred to the view that the true meaning and effect of the workers' compensation policy is capable of being readily ascertained from its express terms. It seems to me that the principles of construction are clear, and really the matter becomes one of their application in the circumstances.

Further it would appear from the facts, that had the plaintiff sought compensation under the Act from Thiess, it would appear that Thiess would have been obliged to pay compensation under the Act. see [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s20.html) of the Act.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s20.html) has as its predecessor an earlier provision, being the former [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s6.html) of the earlier Act. Thiess, in the situation to which I have made reference would have been entitled to be indemnified by the workers' compensation insurer in respect of such liability to pay compensation under the Act.. See the statutory form of policy to which I have earlier made reference.

However, it appears to me that Thiess is also liable to pay damages to the plaintiff for its breach of duties, owed by it both at common law and under statute, there also being statutory counts in the plaintiff's statement of claim. That is to say, Thiess appears to have a liability to the plaintiff independently of the Act, a liability under a law of New South Wales. It seems to me that the wording of the operative provision in the workers' compensation policy or in the insurance clause, in the circumstances, provides upon its proper construction a liability to indemnify Thiess in respect of the Thiess liability to pay the plaintiff in the instant common law proceedings. It would also seem to me, that upon its true construction, the second cross-defendant's contract works policy equally would apply, but for the other insurance provision to also furnish an indemnity to the defendant in respect of its liability to the plaintiff in the instant proceedings.

It is a matter of common ground, that provided the construction of the workers' compensation policy is the one that I have indicated, then in the ordinary course of events both policies would be available to furnish an indemnity to the defendant in respect of its liability to the plaintiff.
However, in the circumstances as stated and as found by me, it is correctly accepted by the cross-defendants, that because of the presence of condition 8 "Other Insurance", as set forth in the second cross-defendant's contract works policy, such a policy therefore does not furnish an indemnity in respect of
Thiess' liability to the plaintiff.

In expressing this view I, of course, have put to one side the fact that even if the contract works policy were to provide an indemnity, there is the excess provision of $50,000, so that were that policy otherwise liable to furnish an indemnity, but for condition 8, the indemnity available under that policy would be less the first $50,000 of any amount that the defendant has become liable to pay to the plaintiff.

To sum up, in my view, in the circumstances outlined, Thiess is entitled to be indemnified by the workers' compensation insurer under the provisions of the workers' compensation policy or employer's insurance policy in respect of its common law liability to the plaintiff and in respect of the costs that it has incurred in the defence of the proceedings by the plaintiff.

In my view, Thiess is not entitled to be indemnified by the second cross- defendant under its contract works insurance policy in respect of the liability on the part of Thiess to the plaintiff and is therefore entitled to a verdict and judgment on its cross-claim. It seems to me that in the circumstances, the question of Thiess having any liability to pay the first $50,000 in the event of the contract works policy providing an indemnity is not one that arises, since I have concluded that by reason of condition 8 "Other Insurance" there is no liability on the part of the contract works policy to furnish an indemnity to Thiess Brothers in respect of its liability to the plaintiff in the circumstances of this case.

It appears to me that in respect of the first cross-claim, being the cross- claim between the defendant and the first cross-defendant, the workers' compensation insurer, there should be a verdict and judgment for the defendant as and against the first cross-defendant for the amount of the agreed damages to be reflected in the settlement between the plaintiff and the defendant together with costs, but with such amount to be stated after the terms of settlement between the plaintiff and the defendant have been brought into court this afternoon.

In respect of the defendant's cross-claim as and against the contract works insurer, being the second cross-defendant, there should be a verdict and judgment for the second cross-defendant together with an appropriate order for costs.

One other matter still remains extant and that is a matter raised by Mr Nock during the course of his submissions as to whether in the circumstances damages to be awarded to the plaintiff had the matter proceeded would have needed to be determined in accordance with the provisions of the [Workers'
Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). It seems to me that in the circumstances of this matter this question does not arise for consideration. There has been an agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant as to the amount of damages to be awarded in relation to that agreement. The first cross-defendant and the second cross-defendant have raised no issue as to the appropriate measure of damages, and further have raised no issue as regards the total sum agreed between the defendant and the plaintiff as being the proper or appropriate assessment of damages.

In such circumstances, it appears to me that the question raised by Mr Nock is not one that needs to be determined by me in these proceedings. It is an academic issue and is, to use the expression, best left for another day.

It is now 1 o'clock. There has been some urgency in dealing with the matter.
The matter has now been substantially dealt with and I have indicated what are the appropriate verdicts and judgments. The plaintiff's terms of settlement are still to be brought in. Final orders are still to be made. In the circumstances, I permit of the parties to bring in final terms of settlement and short minutes of order giving effect to my reasons for judgment after 2 o'clock this afternoon.
 * * * 
