

Regina versus I B Lumsden [1997] NSWSC 371 (3 September 1997) 
REGINA versus IAN BRUCE LUMSDEN /95 60529/95 
Wednesday 31 July 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Meagher JA, Grove J, Levine J 
RESULT: Appeal against conviction dismissed. Appeal against sentence allowed.

CATCHWORDS: ATTEMPTED CARNAL KNOWLEDGE - TRIAL BY JUDGE SITTING ALONE - NO ERROR IN GUILTY VERDICT - SENTENCE FOR THAT AND OTHER SEXUAL OFFENCES INVOLVING DIFFERENT VICTIM - CARNAL KNOWLEDGE - AGGRAVATION FOUND IN BREACH OF TRUST ARISING FROM COACH AND PUPIL RELATIONSHIP - <case> OF CRIMES ACT (AS APPLICABLE AT DATE OF OFFENCE) - THE QUEEN versus DE SIMONI [1981 146 CLR 383] APPLIED - SENTENCES VARIED 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: The Court is in a position to give judgment straight away. I will ask Grove J to give the first judgment.

GROVE J: This is in the first instance an appeal against a verdict of guilty found by her Honour Judge Backhouse QC sitting at Campbelltown District Court in respect of a charge of attempting to have unlawful carnal knowledge of a girl under the age of sixteen years contrary to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) as was applicable at the time of the alleged offence which was between March and October 1978.

The complainant was born on 21 January 1966 and therefore was aged twelve years at the relevant time. The appellant was a swimming coach. The complainant had commenced training under his guidance when she was ten. She was a gifted swimmer and was described as a State and Australian age champion.
The complainant's younger brother also attended the training which took place each morning and afternoon of the school week with apparently lengthier sessions on weekends. There was a friendly relationship between the appellant and the complainant's parents. She was permitted to visit his home which was a flat in Ashfield where he resided with his then de facto wife Beverley.

There was physical contact between the appellant and the complainant at the pool side. On occasions she sat on his knee and he gave her rub downs. She testified however that on a weekend when she was staying with the appellant he commenced to kiss her on the mouth whilst in the garage of the premises. On a later occasion he took her to see an empty house at Greystanes into which the appellant and his wife were going to move. It is alleged that the offence occurred on this occasion. At the time the complainant was wearing tracksuit legs and a t-shirt with a swimming costume underneath. The appellant asked to be permitted to give her a rub down and when he wanted to rub her stomach her costume was taken off. He then asked her if he could put his penis inside her and she saw that his tracksuit trousers were down and the penis was erect. She felt him pushing and trying to get it inside her vagina but he did not fully succeed and she did not recall what happened later.

She did not report the matter until 1994 after receiving a telephone call from a woman whom I will refer to as S who had herself been a swimming pupil of the appellant. By this time the complainant had married and she told her husband about the appellant's conduct although not, apparently, in complete detail.

The Crown case did not include evidence in corroboration of the sworn testimony of the complainant. Four grounds of appeal were filed. The fourth of these contended that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. The balance of the grounds were argued in combination and it is convenient to approach them in that fashion.

It is contended that in arriving at the verdict, the learned trial judge erred in failing properly to have regard to : the absence of corroboration; the delay in complaint; the difficulty confronting the defence from the date of the alleged offence; the evidence of the appellant; and the burden and standard of proof.

In her extensive reasons for decision her Honour expressly recorded that she had directed herself that she should be wary of acting on the uncorroborated evidence of the complainant but ought not to seek corroboration before acting on her evidence. This is an approach consistent with authority: Kelleher v
The Queen <case>; [1974 131 CLR 534.] Her Honour was not, as I understand her, seeking to replicate a jury direction. I detect no error.

The next argument contended that her Honour failed to advert to the emphasis which has been placed upon the need for care when dealing with child sexual assault allegations made many years later such as were mentioned in Longman v
The Queen <case>; [1989 168 CLR 79.] It is obvious that her Honour was not insensitive to that circumstance and she made particular reference to the submission about it made by senior counsel then appearing for the appellant. Her consciousness is amply demonstrated by her explicit reference to consideration of and ultimate acceptance of the complainant's reasons given upon her oath for not complaining at the time.

The assertion concerning inadequate attention to the difficulties confronting the defence is really just another aspect of the matter of delay in complaint.
It was common ground that the appellant and his wife did move to Greystanes and reside there for a period. There was an issue as to whether on the occasion that the appellant took the complainant to the house it was then under construction. The appellant testified that he had never taken her there at all but in any event the house had been rented already constructed although there was a stage during which it was sparsely furnished. There was also a peripheral issue as to whether the appellant had not answered an enquiry from a detective as to whether he was building a house at Greystanes at about that time. The appellant claimed that he had in fact answered the question in the negative.

References to these issues make it plain, if it needed any articulation, that her Honour did not overlook the matters now complained of.

It is contended that her Honour failed to have regard to the evidence of the appellant. In the course of her reasons she stated: "Although it was a one on one case, it was not a case of whom I believe. He (that is senior counsel then appearing) submitted that I must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused had committed the offence." 
At the very conclusion of giving her reasons her Honour stated: "I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the events occurred at Greystanes in the way stated by the complainant in her evidence".

It is true that she did not add that she rejected the evidence of the appellant to the contrary. It would have been tautological of her so to do. It is hardly necessary when stating that one is satisfied of a conclusion to that standard to observe that contradiction is rejected.

It was finally argued that her Honour had made errors in relation to the burden and standard of proof. One of the issues raised on behalf of the defence at the trial was the possibility that consciously or otherwise the complainant was inculpating the appellant because she had transferred to him the responsibility for experiences which she had suffered at the hands of her father. The evidence was that over a span of years including the time at which this offence is alleged to have occurred the complainant's own father had been guilty of criminal sexual molestation of her.

The proof of the occurrence of such a transfer of culpability was not something which lay upon the appellant. To say the least it was unfortunate that her Honour adopted phraseology which included reference to "the defence of transfer". Her Honour expressly found that the complainant impressed her as a truthful witness and this would not as a finding standing alone exclude the possibility that subconsciously there had been a transfer of inculpation of the kind mentioned. However on the reading of the whole of her Honour's reasons and particularly combining that finding as to credit with her satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt that the events occurred at Greystanes in the way stated (my emphasis) it is clear that her Honour had rejected the possibility of the occurrence of some transference as distinct from considering some form of defence not to be made out.

Reference was made to R versus M.P.W. unreported CCA 14 December 1995. Her Honour did not fall into any of the errors canvassed in that decision.

I do not regard any of these arguments in support of the ground as made out.

The other ground is that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. The duty of an appellate court when such a ground is raised is to make its own assessment of the evidence and decide whether a jury - or in this case a judge properly instructing herself - ought to have a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused and does not require restatement: see M versus The Queen [1994 181 CLR 487.] In a case such as the present where complaint is made of sexual molestation obviously in the absence of witnesses there is considerable advantage possessed by the trial judge who can see the complainant (and in this case the appellant as well) and form conclusions as to veracity: c.f.
Chidiac versus The Queen <case>; [1990 CLR 432.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=1990%20171%20CLR%20432 "View LawCiteRecord" ) Her Honour made explicit reference to the lengthy cross examination to which the complainant was subjected. She had regard to demeanour in the witness box and recorded her finding that the complainant was an honest and truthful witness. I have already adverted to her further finding that the events happened at Greystanes as she described. In the light of that finding it was scarcely necessary to incant that she rejected the appellant's denials.

I am unable to conclude upon the whole of the evidence that the trial judge ought to have had a doubt about the guilt of the accused.

The appellant seeks leave to appeal against sentence. This involves not only the conviction after trial but two counts of indecent assault and three counts of unlawful carnal knowledge of a girl under the age of sixteen years brought against the appellant in relation to the woman S to whom I have made earlier reference. In respect of these charges which related to matters in 1972-1974 the appellant pleaded guilty before a magistrate and adhered to his pleas.
These offences had therefore occurred between four and six years prior to the offence which was the subject matter of the trial.

It is plain that the appellant acknowledged his responsibility for his crimes against S well before any charges were laid against him. He had assisted her in obtaining counselling and had even at one juncture attended joint counselling sessions with her conducted by a psychological therapist.

Both in a statement prepared by him which was received by her Honour and in sworn testimony before her he expressed his remorse for what he had done in relation to S. He did not admit culpability in respect of the complainant in the trial matter.

The appellant himself had an unfortunate background which included dysfunction within his family structure and sexual abuse committed upon him by a friend of his mother. Her Honour accepted that this provided an explanation but not an excuse for the offences. At the time of offence the appellant was aged in his late twenties. He is now aged forty seven years and has no other convictions.

Her Honour structured the sentence in the following fashion. On each of the counts of indecent assault to which the appellant pleaded guilty he was sentenced to a fixed term of two years penal servitude and on the count of attempting unlawful carnal knowledge which was the subject of the trial he was also sentenced to a similar fixed term to be served concurrently. On the counts of unlawful carnal knowledge to which the appellant pleaded guilty he was sentenced to total terms of six years which were divided into minimum and additional terms of three years each respectively. The minimum terms were to be served concurrently with each other and with the fixed terms already imposed thus giving an enveloping sentence equivalent to those lastmentioned.

A specific argument was raised on behalf of the appellant that her Honour had breached the principles adumbrated in The Queen versus De Simoni <case>; [1981 147 CLR 383] in that her remarks indicated that she was punishing the appellant for a more serious charge than that for which he stood for sentence.

As I have indicated, the charges were brought appropriately charging conduct contrary to the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) as it stood before extensive changes to the law regarding punishable sexual misconduct introduced in later years. Several times during her remarks on sentence the learned judge referred to breach of trust. When referring to the victim S she noted that the offences were committed upon her when she was between ten and thirteen years of age and "the prisoner was thirteen years older than her and in the circumstances of the relationship of coach and student, a degree of trust had been built up and the prisoner breached that trust." 
Immediately before imposing sentence her Honour returned to this matter and stated: "I have kept in mind in this case that there was a relationship of coach and pupil and that there was at all material times a breach of trust and this is a matter which I should take into account in sentencing the prisoner." 
As I understand the context of her Honour's remarks she was there referring to both victims but even if this impression be incorrect it will not affect the conclusion to be reached concerning the submissions advanced.

The argument advanced in relation to De Simoni is that by taking into account the breach of trust her Honour was virtually punishing the appellant with the more serious form of offence then made available pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s73.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which provided: "Whosoever, being a schoolmaster or other teacher, or a father, or stepfather, unlawfully and carnally knows any girl of or above the age of ten years, and under the age of seventeen years, being his pupil, or daughter, or stepdaughter, shall be liable to penal servitude for fourteen years." 
It is submitted on behalf of the Crown that it may be that the expressions appearing in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s73.html) when there was imposed a liability upon a schoolmaster or other teacher were not intended to apply beyond the classroom and the words were insufficient to impose potential liability upon swimming coaches, riding instructors or music teachers. For my part, I would not apply such a limited construction to the expression in the statute and the examples chosen by the Crown are in fact appropriate illustrations of those who would fill the statutory prescription of "other teacher". It seems to me that the reference to "other teacher" clearly recognizes in Parliament's words that there will be persons who have authority over children educating them in many facets of life and living other than the conventional classroom relationship. Education relates to body as well as mind.

The guidance to be derived from De Simoni is epitomized in the words of
Gibbs CJ @ p 389: "However, the general principle that the sentence imposed on an offender should take account of all the circumstances of the offence is subject to a more fundamental and important principle, that no one should be punished for an offence of which he has not been convicted. ......... the combined effect of these two principles, so far as it is relevant for present purposes, is that a judge, in imposing sentence, is entitled to consider all the conduct of the accused, including that which would aggravate the offence, but cannot take into account circumstances of aggravation which would have warranted a conviction for a more serious offence." 
It seems to me that the breach of trust which her Honour regarded as aggravating the circumstances of the present offence was directly related to the relationship of coach and pupil. She expressly said so. That relationship on the construction that I would give to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s73.html) as it then stood would make the appellant chargeable in respect of and guilty of a more serious offence. He would stand liable to a maximum penalty of fourteen years penal servitude as distinguished from ten years penal servitude.

As counsel have drawn to the attention of this Court, there was obviously exchange between her Honour, counsel for the Crown and counsel then appearing for the appellant concerning the "new regime" of offences and punishment which had been introduced into the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) in subsequent years. It is true that her Honour ultimately came to the conclusion that the prescription of maximum sentences under the new regime were not of significance but recognition that the new provisions were inapplicable to the appellant or to his offences made it entirely irrelevant to conduct that analysis. It would be manifest error to derive from subsequently enacted legislation some estimate of the seriousness with which Parliament regarded offences punishable under the superseded provisions.

The argument on behalf of the appellant that error has been demonstrated in the sentencing process should be upheld. The matter of resentence then arises.

As the structure of sentences imposed in the District Court implies, the three counts of carnal knowledge were the most serious of the offences and I would make the same assessment. There is evidence in respect of the victim S that the appellant had sought to repair the damage which he had done in such fashion as he could. He had assisted her with money when requested and there was no suggestion that this was done for motives of ensuring her silence. He had sought to apologise to this complainant's mother. It is true on the other hand that the consequences to the victim S appear to have been considerable.
The description of her failed career in the air force is a sufficient example of this. I note that in various statements made to police she describes her occupation as journalist, public relations and swimming coach.

The maximum penalty for the offence of carnal knowledge was ten years and the attempt eight years.

Her Honour found that the appellant was remorseful and genuinely so. I see no reason to disagree but neither do I find differently from her conclusion that the appellant was disentitled to leniency on the basis that the five counts charged in respect of the victim S were isolated, as they were part of a wider pattern of sexual activity.

There is a powerful body of opinion evidence from qualified professionals that the risk of further offence by the appellant is negligible. He had in the many years which elapsed since the commission of the offences established himself in employment in a business away from swimming coaching and he resigned that employment in anticipation of sentence. His de facto relationship with
Beverley had ceased but they had two children - a daughter aged seventeen and a son aged fifteen by the time of trial - with whom he maintained appropriate relationships. Indeed it was said that his son desired to move from his mother to reside with him but had been dissuaded from so doing also in anticipation of the expected sentence.

I have taken into account the material tendered today in relation to the current situation of the appellant.

Like her Honour I would pay heed to the question of totality. I would impose fixed terms of eighteen months penal servitude in respect of the charges of attempted carnal knowledge and the two counts of indecent assault. The reason for the fixed terms is that I would propose to impose sentences consisting of a longer minimum term than that in respect of the offences of carnal knowledge upon which I would impose sentences of four years penal servitude to be divided into minimum and additional terms of two years each respectively. The total sentence is divided differently from the formula mentioned in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) by reason of the rehabilitation which the appellant has already demonstrated, the indications from the opinions of professionals and his conduct over recent years which suggest that he would be unlikely to offend again. I find these amount to special circumstances within the meaning of the statutory provision.

I propose the following orders:
The appeal against conviction be dismissed.
Application for leave to appeal against sentence granted and appeal allowed.
Sentences imposed in the District Court quashed and in lieu thereof the appellant sentenced as follows: 
On the count of attempting unlawful carnal knowledge of a girl under sixteen years contrary to <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) the appellant be sentenced to a fixed term of eighteen months penal servitude commencing on 4 September 1995 and expiring on 3 March 1997.

On the counts of indecent assault of a girl under the age of sixteen years contrary to <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) the appellant be sentenced on each of the two counts to fixed terms of eighteen months penal servitude commencing on 4 September 1995 and expiring on 3 March .

On each of the three counts of unlawful carnal knowledge of a girl under the age of sixteen years contrary to <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) the appellant be sentenced to a total term of four years penal servitude divided into a minimum term of two years commencing on 4 September 1995 and expiring on 3 September 1997 together with additional terms of two years.
All sentences to be served concurrently.
The appellant be eligible for release to parole on 3 September 1997.

MEAGHER JA: I agree.

LEVINE J: I also agree.

MEAGHER JA: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Grove J.
 * * * 
