

McKettin versus Australian Telecommunications Commission Matter No 15093/87 [1996] NSWSC 501 (18 October 1996) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 
Donald Warren McKettin versus Australian Telecommunications Commission /87 October 1996 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /87 - DONALD WARREN McKETTIN versus AUSTRALIAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 
DATES OF HEARING: 1-2 October 1996 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 18 October 1996 
NEGLIGENCE - PROVISION OF DEFECTIVE EQUIPMENT BY EMPLOYER - INFERENCE OF
INADEQUATE SERVICING REPAIR AND/OR TESTING - DAMAGES ASSESSED 
A P P E A R A N C E S 
PLAINTIFF: L T Grey 
SOLICITORS: McClellands 
DEFENDANT: P Regattieri 
SOLICITORS: Australian Government Solicitor 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff sustained an injury in the course of his employment with the defendant on 27 May 1980.

On that occasion he was working with a gang of telephone linesmen who had brought an implement called a ditch witch upon a trailer to a location in
Panorama Avenue, Urunga. The trailer upon which the implement was located was parked on a grass verge off the roadway and upon an incline so that the forward end of the machinery was up the hill. The plaintiff needed to move the machine off the trailer. It was equipped with wide wheels which stood upon two mesh ramps. The trailer was apparently purpose built. In order to move the machine it was necessary for it to be started and the plaintiff located himself near the left hand side of the machine in order to institute ignition.
This was done by wrapping a nylon rope around a spool and pulling it after the fashion of the method for starting old outboard or lawn mower motors. He positioned himself between the edge of the trailer and the machine. The space was relatively narrow. On about the fourth application of the rope the engine came to life.

I accept his evidence that he had placed the machine in neutral but nevertheless once the engine started it commenced to move backwards upon him and "ran up his leg". The plaintiff said he thereafter lost consciousness.

He had loosed the security chain before starting the engine and it was not suggested that this was an unreasonable thing to do having regard to the intended removal of the implement from the trailer. It was suggested that he could have reached the petrol tap and switched off in order to inhibit the unwanted progress of the machine but, again, I accept his evidence that he could not reach the switch in any practical sense.

The machine was in my view clearly unsafe by reason of its propensity to slip into gear when it ought remain in neutral. There is unchallenged evidence that after this incident superiors came from Grafton and upon demonstration the machine was seen to manifest the defect. The particular machine was not again used.

The essential case mounted by the defendant tacitly concedes that the plant and equipment supplied by it for the plaintiff to use was unsafe but says that in the absence of direct evidence that the machine had behaved in this fashion prior to the incident it was not foreseeable.

The evidence is that this machine had been located in Dorrigo but that it was sent for repair and thereafter provided for use out of the Bellingen Depot.
The plaintiff was attached to the Bellingen Depot and acquired it from there.
That the repair to the machine was inadequate became manifest in an observable failure of the idler wheel and the chain belt to take up properly. A report to the foreman was met with the response that it would wear in and stretch. I infer that the repair to the machine was undertaken by the defendant - it was not suggested otherwise. I recognize that there is in the plaintiff's case no expert evidence to expose the exact mechanical process whereby this machine malfunctioned although, as I have noted, the machine was taken by the defendant and not used again. This is consistent with a recommendation endorsed upon an accident report form by one of the plaintiff's superiors. The repeat demonstration before the officers who had come from headquarters in
Grafton demonstrates that the occurrence which led to the plaintiff's injuries was not the result of unique aberrant behaviour by the machine. I consider that it is inferable that the repair of the machine was inadequate and, in addition, that it was placed into service without adequate checks and tests being made to ensure that it would operate so as not to expose employees to unnecessary risks of injury. I draw those inferences and I find that the defendant was negligent and is liable to pay the plaintiff's damages accordingly.

The plaintiff was born on 14 March 1935. He was therefore forty five years of age at the date of accident and is now sixty one. He was educated to intermediate certificate standard and worked (after training) as a wool classer, laboratory assistant in a sugar mill and as a hardware store employee and later for a time as a store owner. He joined the defendant (through its predecessor) in August 1974. After the accident the plaintiff was off work - it seems - for about a week. He resumed duty for nearly six years and his last day of work was in July 1986. Whether he performed full duty or selected duty during the 1980-1986 span is not entirely clear. The plaintiff presented as a most unusual individual - cf Dr Shand's observation, 1 September 1995. Being able to appreciate what he was seeking to convey was obstructed by his circumlocutious responses to the majority of questions. I do not intend personal criticism of the plaintiff but I record the nature of the material which I must use as resource.

The medical evidence was presented in what I regret to note has become a common fashion. Each side - no doubt with an eye to covering any eventuality and perhaps encouraged thereto by threats arising impliedly from case management sanctions - presented medical reports in bulk and without any noticeable coordination. I was left to meander through them with minimal reference in address to precisely what parts were relied upon by the protagonists. The general themes were advocated, in the case of the plaintiff that substantially all of his woes were tort induced and that of the defendant, to the contrary.

I refer first to the defendant's material. As I understand it, the case can be epitomized thus. Whatever happened to the plaintiff in the accident concerned his legs and specifically his knees. Insofar as he did seek any treatment or time off over the next six years following it, it was related to the lower limbs to the exclusion of seeking treatment for any back symptoms. The latter did not emerge until 1986. They are not causally related to the incident.
Medical opinion which postulates such causation is erroneously based upon an assumed history that the plaintiff fell in the accident whereas the evidence does not reveal any such fall. The lumbar intervertebral disc prolapse referred in the retirement determination made by the defendant in relation to the plaintiff does not advance any case of causation on behalf of the plaintiff.

In addition, the defendant contended that the plaintiff has not been shown to be hindered in any activity beyond what would be appropriate to his maturity.
He effectively worked as a builder's labourer on his own home construction. He has been actively engaged in an "indian oven" project whilst in the
Philippines. Even to the present time he regularly golfs and he has played table tennis - most unlikely activities for a man with a bad back and/or sore knees. The plaintiff is also active in his workshop fabricating a prototype of his handicapped golfer's invention. He works outdoors from time to time as is manifest in his tree planting achievements.

I turn to the medical reports themselves. Two reports from Dr Dolman a general practitioner relate to visits by the plaintiff between 3 June 1982 and 20
January 1986. The total number of visits was six. The plaintiff apparently complained of arthritic type pains in joints. Dr Dolman expressly stated that he had not during that span treated the plaintiff for a back injury.

Dr Anderson who is a general practitioner in Bellingen and Urunga noted that he had seen the plaintiff in 1979 which would seem to be an erroneous reference to the accident in 1980 but nothing turns on it as the doctor says he knows little of the accident. He reports that the plaintiff's back complaint was not mentioned until February 1987 when the plaintiff asked for a referral letter to a Dr Sheehy in Sydney.

There is a series of reports from Dr Bruce a consultant physician in Coffs
Harbour. He first saw the plaintiff in May 1986, apparently on referral from
Dr Anderson, about a persistent cough. At the consultation, however, he claimed that his main concern was about the after affects of allegedly incompetent anaesthetic which he had some twenty years previously in connection with a hernia operation in Sydney. The symptoms included memory loss, rage, depression, lethargy and lapses into unconsciousness. There was no history concerning the incident of 1980 recorded. Dr Bruce thought at the time that the plaintiff's story suggested temporal lobe epilepsy although he noted some contra-indications of this. In September 1986 he wrote to Dr Anderson again and although he did not exclude diffuse ischaemic brain damage he said that he suspected that the plaintiff may be suffering some kind of chronic psychosis. His observation was that there was something "robot-like about his personality and his endless tales of woe have a paranoid flavour". In the following month Dr Bruce wrote to the Department of Social Security and certified his opinion that the plaintiff was incapacitated to the extent of 85 percent for the purpose of qualification for an invalid pension. This diagnosis did not include any reference to back or knee problems. The plaintiff did in fact commence receiving the invalid pension in about October but this seems to have soon expired. The chronicle is not entirely clear but the plaintiff attempted to return to work for a brief time in January 1987 and in March 1987 the plaintiff was retired. In April 1987 there was a determination that the plaintiff would receive worker's compensation (under the Commonwealth legislative scheme) which payments continued until January .

Returning to the series of reports from Dr Bruce, the next is dated 8 December which commences with the proposition that he does not seek to comment upon symptoms in the lower back, knees and chest since those are outside the area of his claimed expertise. He repeated his opinion that the findings he did make were consistent with a mild dementia. He thought psychometric testing might be useful.

There is a single report obtained as a result of an examination on 13
September 1990 by Dr D.G. Seaton an orthopaedic consultant. He was unable to find the plaintiff orthopaedically disabled by examination of lower back and left knee and he opined that the plaintiff was a fifty five year old man with the back of a fifty five year old labourer.

Next the defendant presented three reports from Dr Lorentz a consultant neurologist. He first saw the plaintiff on 13 September 1990 which was, of course, the day upon which the plaintiff had also seen Dr Seaton. Dr Lorentz thought from the history - which included detail of the incident with the ditch witch - that it was possible that the plaintiff may have aggravated degenerative changes to his lumbar spine but he could at that time find no evidence of any nerve root injury or sciatica. Dr Lorentz thought claimed present disabilities were consistent with degenerative changes of the lumbar spine and he expressed the view that the single incident complained of was not then acting as an aggravating factor. He expressed the same view in his report of 15 July 1992 after a further consultation with the plaintiff. It is hardly surprising that he repeated his views again in April 1996. By that time Dr
Lorentz, in addition to other material, had read reports as specified from Dr
Shand and Dr Parker.

In September 1990 Dr Shand reported that the plaintiff was complaining of pain in the low back and down both legs to the heels as well as in the knees but that he denied nervous disorder and exhibited none at interview. Dr Shand did not think that physical examination supported serious or significant disorder of the low back or spine and he found no evidence of nerve root irritation in the lower limbs. He noted inconsistent responses to testing. He found no evidence that psychological factors played any primary role. In September 1995 he repeated the view that the plaintiff did not need any psychiatric treatment and he made the observation which I have earlier noted. The defendant tendered three reports from Dr Parker, a surgeon. In 1992 he first saw the plaintiff.
He had reports of earlier x-rays and CT scanning. He did not think radiological abnormalities were significant particularly as there was an absence of neurological abnormality and the plaintiff's responses to light touch and pinprick were non dermal and non organic. He thought the plaintiff was fit to work as a linesman which was his category in the employment of the defendant. In August 1995 he conducted further examination. There was some partial loss of ability to flex but Dr Parker considered this appropriate to a man then aged sixty. He related nothing to the incident of May 27, 1980. The plaintiff had brought with him a pair of crutches which he apparently told Dr
Parker he kept "just in case". I should note that the plaintiff brought a pair of crutches into the witness box which he left propped behind it during his evidence. He did not use them for mobilization in and about the courtroom although, again as I understood what he was seeking to convey, he kept them for outdoor use "just in case". Dr Parker's views remained unchanged when he finally saw the plaintiff in April 1996 save that he noted that as described by the plaintiff some of the symptoms had improved.

Dr Lloyd Hughes, an orthopaedic consultant saw the plaintiff on 18 November
The history given to him is set out in his report and includes a description of the incident in 1980 and an assertion that the plaintiff fell to the floor of the trailer. Dr Hughes opined that the plaintiff was suffering from degenerative disc disease in his lumbar spine and that any back symptoms which he has are due to this condition and not any injury which may have occurred twelve or fourteen years previously.

Finally, the defendant tendered a report from Dr Schutz whose stationery reveals him to be a consultant surgeon and a member of societies interested in occupational medicine and ergonomics. So far as is directly relevant I note that Dr Schutz thought that there had been symptoms associated with various activities at work including, inter alia, the 1980 incident but he thought that it would be likely to have done no more than precipitate symptoms in relation to underlying degeneration. I infer that he does not regard such aggravation as continuing. He detected minor crepitus in both knees but no other abnormality. He referred to a bowel problem but regarded this as not work related. He observed that there appeared to be an obsessive and probably neurotic component to the complaints/symptoms.

I turn to the material tendered on behalf of the plaintiff. The first report is dated 24 October 1983 and written by Dr Bettison, a general practitioner in
Coffs Harbour. It is significant that the plaintiff was apparently complaining to him of symptoms in the lumbar spine and knees at that date. The reference to the lumbar spine is contradictory of the defendant's claim that back symptoms did not emerge until 1986. From apparently 1985 the plaintiff was seeing another general practitioner in Coffs Harbour Dr Dolman. He was also seen on one occasion in 1987 by Dr Dolman's partner or locum Dr Ellis who said that he could not determine whether the pain complained of by the plaintiff was related to an accident in 1980. In the circumstances of the contact between him and the plaintiff, that is hardly surprising. In the same year, however, Dr Dolman wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors and commented that there was little information concerning a back injury and that the original consultation (with him) concerned left and right knees and subsequent consultations concerned "serologically negative rheumatoid" condition. He wrote "no discussion concerning a back injury has been noted".

The bundle of documents also contains a series of what would appear to be photocopies of clinical cards. I find them indecipherable and illegible.

A somewhat cryptic document entitled "medical examination for continued employment or retirement on invalidity grounds" is included also. It refers to a previous unidentified report by a CMO (Commonwealth Medical Officer). It sets out a history but whether this was obtained from the plaintiff is not clear. There is mention of a request for a report from Dr Bruce. The author has endorsed the document (bearing date stamps in September 1996) "he is considered fit for duties not requiring use of jackhammer and ditcher". That recommendation has the endorsed concurrence, apparently, of a Dr Preswick who appears to have been located in the Department of Health at Sydney. Presumably he has never actually seen the plaintiff.

The papers also contain some radiological reports. Next of significance is a series of reports from Dr Alan Jones orthopaedic surgeon of Coffs Harbour.
Much of the material is repetitive in that various reports of his seem to have been copied and included irrespective of their original destination. A summary of the situation as at July 1987 appears in his report to the plaintiff's solicitors. For the reasons set out therein Dr Jones concludes that there was a genuine lumbar intervertebral disc prolapse causing the symptoms in the back. He added "such a finding could be consistent with a severe flexion injury or fall". As noted already, it was submitted on behalf of the defendant that there was no evidence of a fall at the time of accident and I consider that this is correct. On the other hand, the description of the event is eloquent of a twisting or flexion injury. Dr Jones could find no abnormality on inspection of the plaintiff's knees but thought that at the time he might have had some patello-femoral arthritis.

In December 1989 Dr Jones wrote to the defendant's solicitor and observed that he would consider the plaintiff fit for very selected light physical duties and sedentary type work from a physical point of view. He added that he thought this situation was permanent.

There is a letter from Dr Anderson (from whom there is also a letter in the defendant's bundle) negativing any diagnosis being offered by that doctor concerning the back prior to May 1986.

Dr Sheehy wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors in 1987 and noted that CT scanning demonstrated prominence of the L4-5 disc and that he advised the plaintiff to attend myelography. There, the information from Dr Sheehy concludes.

There are reports from Professor Ehrlich following examinations in 1987 and
He obtained a history that back pain started within a fortnight or a little more of the injury and thought that it seemed to have been related to the twisting of the trunk at the time. At the most recent examination
Professor Ehrlich found evidence of degenerative changes in the spine which he said was consistent with the consequences of an old back injury.

There is a long report dated 31 August 1988 by Dr Marshman which seems to have been obtained as a result of reference from the State Manager of the defendant (in its then current corporate identity). At page 11 of his report Dr Marshman observed: "Mr McKettin has broad based posterior protrusion at L4-5 and also of L5-S1 intervertebral discs with degenerative changes more so at the L5-S1 level, some nerve root involvement: - traction injuries to sacral plexus nerve roots with resulting problems of sensation in the sacral plexus distribution, faecal continence, slight alteration of urinary function, and probability of association with testicular atrophy; - injuries to both knees which have given persistent laxity of lateral ligament of right knee joint, medial ligament of left knee joint direct compression injury to medial aspect of right knee joint with consequent early degenerative osteo arthritic changes medial compartment right knee." 
In relation to those injuries Dr Marshman said that they were consistent with and have been caused by the accident on 27 May 1980. He observed "no other cause has been found". And later he opined that the plaintiff was unfit for all work other than sedentary occupations - "this unfitness results from the effects of his injuries on 27 May 1980".

Two reports from Dr P. Endrey-Walder relate to examinations in September 1990 and July 1992. The doctor's stationery shows that he is a Fellow of the Royal and the Royal Australasian Colleges of Surgeons (and he has a degree in Arts).
I presume he is a general surgeon. On both consultations he noted the plaintiff's complaints of chronic back symptoms and he confirmed the definite radiological evidence of a damaged lumbo sacral vertebral column. He observed that he did not expect that the plaintiff's symptoms were sufficiently pervasive at the moment (1992) to seriously consider any kind of surgical intervention.

Finally there was tendered on behalf of the plaintiff a single report dated 30
June 1995 from Dr Kevin Bleasel, a neurosurgeon. The history and symptoms are set out in the report. The latter included consistent low back pain variable in severity. The plaintiff also spoke of painful knees and a sensation (or lack of it) wherein his thighs go numb "walking, standing or if he is tired".

Dr Bleasel's report includes the following: "The symptoms he complains of at the present time are perfectly consistent with the description of his injury, in particular, the rapid 180 degree rotation movement of his trunk with his legs trapped.

I believe that his present condition was caused by the accident on 27 May
I do not believe there is any need to postulate a pre-existing spondylotic condition.

I believe he has a serious degree of disability that would make it impossible for him to do his original work even though he did try to manage full duties for six years and I think he shows admirable motivation in wanting to keep involved in physical activities now. " 
Later Dr Bleasel concluded his report with these remarks: "The prognosis for the future is not good, there will be further deterioration with age. I doubt that he will be able to keep up his present range of activity for more than another five years." 
I am conscious of the tedious quality of the foregoing recitation. It is intended to highlight the disjointed resources into which I must delve for the purpose of making findings. As I have mentioned two prominent factors in the defendant's final submission have been contradicted. It was said that the plaintiff must be reliant upon medical evidence as to causation which assumes a fall took place in the incident whereas there is no evidence that he did so.
There is however opinion as to causation based, not upon a fall, but upon twist or flexion and that is what the plaintiff has described. Second, to borrow counsel's phrase "the back picture" did not first appear as recently as as there had been a complaint to Dr Bettison at least as early as 1983.
Of course, the plaintiff has subsequently given histories (for example to Dr
Bleasel) of very early onset of symptoms after the accident. On balance, I have come to the conclusion that I should accord the plaintiff credibility on that aspect of his testimony and the histories which he has given. I do not ignore his responsibility to discharge the onus of proof but the circumstances include corroboration by radiology of a likely source of pain and attribution to the accident in 1980 is not inconsistent with the payment of compensation by the defendant to the plaintiff between 1987 and 1995. I do not treat the latter as an admission but find it somewhat fortifying to my preference for opinion which favours the conclusion that the necessary causal nexus has been established.

Both Dr Marshman and Dr Bleasel appear to have given appropriate focus to the issues with which I have to deal and to have conducted thorough investigation in the light of the available material and I would broadly adopt their opinions. In those circumstances the plaintiff would be regarded as substantially disabled as a result of the accident from the time of his cessation of work. I shall make some further comment during my assessment of the individual ingredients of damage to which I now turn.

The out of pocket expenses are agreed in the sum of $2,263. No interest is sought upon this sum.

As is conventional I will deal with economic loss in two stages. Exhibit G is an agreed calculation of probable earnings if the plaintiff had remained employed with the defendant between the date of his termination in 1986 and the end of this financial year. It was agreed that to bring the matter up to date the figure should be increased (from $232,782.08) to $238,000. That figure takes into account some $1,400 earned by the plaintiff in July 1986 and for two days in 1987.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff has been out of work during the whole of the period between 1986 and the present substantially as the result of the consequences of injury. The question arises as to whether I should assume uninterrupted attendance at work during the last ten years. Paying attention to opinions expressed by Dr Bruce there is reason to conclude that some allowance should be made for the potential of non tort induced incapacity being likely to have occurred in any event during some part of that span of time. The plaintiff's excursions to the Philippines may not have occurred if he had remained at work, on the other hand his marriage had apparently broken down and he had in a second marriage been wed to a filipina.

I consider that it will take into account the likelihood that the plaintiff would not have uninterruptedly remained in employment throughout the ten year period by discounting the calculated sum of $238,000 by 12%. I propose to award the plaintiff $208,250 therefor for economic loss to date.

Interest is claimed. For that purpose I have been informed that in the relevant period the plaintiff has received subventions as follows: compensation $63,295; superannuation $117,000 and social security $2,187; a total of $182,482. The difference between that sum and the amount of the ingredient in this award is $25,768. That loss has accrued over the past ten years and I propose to award interest at the rate of 14% which I select as an appropriate figure to cover fluctuations during that time but which I have halved to 7% in order to accommodate the gradual accrual of loss. The equation therefore is $25,768 for 10 years at 7% = $18,038. That amount will be included in the damages.

It is agreed between the parties that there should be included in any award the sum of $22,148 to avoid the detriment identified by the High Court in Fox v Wood.

I turn to future economic loss. The current comparable rate of pay of an employee with the defendant is $526.89 per week. The plaintiff will attain sixty two years of age in March next. I propose to make an award for economic loss using the figure mentioned as a guide which projected over three years at the authorized rate capitalizes at $78,928. Against such calculation I propose to make a discount of 15% to allow for adverse vicissitudes during that period. I recognize that the period is comparatively short and that 15% is the conventional figure but in the present case having regard to matters to which
I have referred in dealing with economic loss to date I regard such a discount as appropriate. $67,089 will be included in the damages.

Finally I turn to general damages. These are necessarily matters of impression. I take into account the plaintiff's age when he sustained the injury and the circumstance that its seriousness might be gauged as against medical opinion that surgical intervention is not warranted. I propose to include in the award $60,000 as a solatium. For the purpose of interest I specify $40,000, part of that sum as having accrued to date. Interest should be applied at the rate of 2% for 15.5 years resulting an enhancement of $12,400.

For ease of reference I will tabulate the ingredients of damage.

Out of pocket expenses $2,263.00 
Economic loss to date $208,250.00 
Interest on past economic loss $18,038.00 
Fox versus Wood $2,148.00 
Future economic loss $67,089.00 
General damages $60,000.00 
Interest on general damages $12,400.00 
Total: $390,188.00 
I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $390,188.00. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
