

Regina versus Baartman (No. 4) Matter No 70368/93 [1998] NSWSC 656 (26 October )

Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
REGINA versus JON LESLIE BAARTMAN (NO. 4) /93 October 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT: (On admissibility of three pieces of evidence in the statement of Yvonne Johnson. See page 191 of the transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: Objection is taken to three pieces of evidence in the statement of Yvonne Johnson, namely: 
That after receiving an injection of intramuscular Narcan, the accused said, "Has anyone else been called?"
That shortly afterwards he stood up by himself and moved to the area where
Officer McKay had found the pistol, bent down and picked up a small black calculator, looked at it, threw it on the floor and went over to the western wall of the lounge room and picked up a black jacket.
That he kept saying, "You can leave, I'll be all right".

I have been referred to the judgment of Abadee J of 13 October 1994 where his
Honour rejected each of those pieces of evidence in the exercise of his discretion. I, of course, have to exercise my discretion afresh.

As to the first piece, "Has anyone else been called?", the evidence is admissible as capable of showing a consciousness of guilt, in that the accused was in possession of a murder weapon and did not want the police called.
However, he was at the time suffering from a heroin overdose and I have already excluded evidence relating to that overdose.

It seems to me there are two possible reasons why he would not want the police called: 
That he was in possession of a murder weapon 
That he might be charged with self administer heroin.

In the exercise of my discretion, this evidence could be prejudicial and the prejudicial effect of this evidence could outweigh the probative value. It is excluded under s136.

The second piece of evidence is, in my view, admissible. It is part of a circumstantial case that a time when he had apparently regained consciousness, he goes to where the officer has found the pistol, picks up a small black calculator, looks at it and then throws it on the floor. This is consistent with thinking it may have been the pistol until he had a closer look at it.

His actions were apparently quite conscious and in a circumstantial case it is a matter for submission as to what, if any, inference should be drawn from such actions. I will not exercise my discretion to exclude this evidence.

The third piece of evidence is the statement, "You can leave, I'll be all right". This is consistent with a person being in possession of a murder weapon wanting everyone, including ambulance officers, out of the premises as quickly as possible. I do not consider that its prejudicial effect is out of proportion to its probative value and I will admit it.
 * * * 
