

V Taleski versus J de Jesus [1996] NSWSC 296 (24 July 1996) 
VESELIN TALESKI V JOHN DE JESUS /91 
WEDNESDAY 24 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff claims damages pursuant to the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) for personal injuries allegedly suffered by him on 20 April 1990 when the truck in which he was a passenger collided with a stationary train at a level crossing within the steel works of Australian Iron & Steel Ltd at Port Kembla. Liability has been admitted and the matter has proceeded for assessment of damages only.

The plaintiff, who is now aged thirty-nine years, was born on 15 April 1957 in
Yugoslav, Macedonia and migrated to this country in 1979. He married in 1980 and he and his wife have three children, aged thirteen and twins of twelve, and for ten years prior to the accident he had been employed at the steel works.

He has no memory of the accident and his next recollection is of waking up in hospital with blood from a cut on his right forehead and a lump on the back right hand side of his head, pain in his back, neck, right upper arm and right knee. He appears to have suffered a haematoma of the right calf, bruising of the right shoulder and hip, fracture of the spinous process of L5, a posterior disc protrusion of the L4/5 disc, and a musculo-ligamentous injury of the cervical spine. It was also later established that he had suffered a fracture of the right humerus.

Although the notes on admission purport to record a prior history of chronic back pain, reports from his previous general practitioners indicate that this note was incorrect. He was in hospital for about ten days and was discharged on 1 May on crutches. He subsequently had physiotherapy and hydrotherapy.

In about July he transferred from crutches to a walking stick, but his progress was slow and he was still using a walking stick when seen by Dr
Panjratan in November 1991. By 29 October 1990 the back was not hurting as much and the headaches had also decreased. Although still using a walking stick, his treating surgeon, Dr Panjratan, cleared him for light duties from 1
November 1990. However, by November he was complaining of dizziness, which Dr
Manohar diagnosed as post-traumatic vertigo.

In addition, Dr Dragutinovich, psychologist, diagnosed post-traumatic stress disorder manifesting itself in sleep disturbance, reduced frustration, irritability and anger threshold, and Dr Manohar also referred to this condition as a post-traumatic stress syndrome manifesting itself in poor concentration, irritability, depression and loss of confidence.

A number of cerebral CT scans were conducted and the results interpreted differently by different doctors, some reporting that they showed no abnormality, but Dr Marinovic, presumably reading from a report of 2 July , described an area of focal atrophy of the left Sylvian fissure due to trauma and on 26 March 1991 Dr Manohar referred to a clinical diagnosis of left temporal lobe atrophy.

Dr Davies whose opinion I accept, was satisfied that the plaintiff suffers from organic brain damage and although he initially had reservations whether it was due to the accident, by comparing a series of CT scans he came to the conclusion that these changes were the result of the motor vehicle accident.
He felt this brain damage had primarily affected the plaintiff's rehabilitation as it diminished his motivation and determination.

The plaintiff says that at present he has headaches almost every day, lasting one to two hours, which go away after he takes tablets. He also feels dizzy if he looks down or moves sharply. He says he has a sore neck all the time, aggravated by movement, and his low back is very painful, as it has been since the accident, but it is getting worse. He also complains of pain in his right humerus on use, which is getting better now, and also pain in the right knee, particularly when he walks a long time, and also that his hearing has been affected.

All of these conditions, he says, have been present since the accident. Whilst in examination in chief he said the headaches, dizziness, neck and back were getting worse, he agreed in cross-examination that, with the exception of some bad days, they are generally better since he ceased work in July 1995.

Before the accident he had a number of sporting and social activities and, although he did not say so, it appears I am expected to infer that those activities are no longer open to him, or at least only on a reduced basis. He can drive a car for up to two hours, but sometimes it hurts.

A report was tendered from Dr Stanley Stylis, an ear nose and throat specialist, describing a bi-aural hearing handicap of 53.3 per cent, but there was no detailed evidence about it from either the plaintiff or his wife and he appeared to have no difficulty in hearing when giving evidence. I am not satisfied that his hearing loss due to the accident is significant, at least in the light of his other disabilities.

A vast number of medical reports were tendered and they are largely repetitious. Some are of little help and they express a wide range of views and I see no point in dealing with each of them individually.

A number of doctors have described the plaintiff as having a gross functional overlay in respect of his physical symptoms and some have, by comparing his restricted movements on clinical examination with his freer movements when dressing and undressing and unaware that he was being observed, concluded that he has been deliberately fabricating or exaggerating his symptoms.

However, in the light of all the evidence I consider the position is accurately summed-up by Dr Zeeman in his report dated 18 June 1996, part of the documents from Vocational Capacity Centre Pty Ltd as follows: "His examination is also consistent with abnormal illness behaviour, both on my assessment and that of others. There are frequent reports of a marked discrepancy in his ability to move on request and what he did without thinking, along with other inconsistencies and occasional positive signs of exaggeration. Various terms are used to describe this behaviour but it is not possible for me to determine if he is deliberately malingering. On the balance of probabilities, however, in my opinion he has unconscious behavioural exaggeration also known as abnormal illness behaviour, where the degree of functional impairment is greater than what one would expect from the underlying organic pathology. The prolonged treatments and investigations aimed at finding a treatable cause as well as the various medico-legal assessments have probably exacerbated this behaviour ..." 
That was from one of the reports tendered on behalf of the defendant and is consistent with what Dr Ronald Rivett described as a "slightly low pain threshold but mainly an anxiety over-reaction during examination" and is consistent with what Dr Davies has described as organic brain damage affecting his motivation and determination. I accept Dr Zeeman's opinion as set out above.

To the extent that there is a functional overlay, some although not complete alleviation of symptoms may be expected after the conclusion of proceedings. I am satisfied the plaintiff's ability to lead a normal life has been significantly impaired and I assess his non-economic loss at 35 per cent of a most severe case and award $82,250 under this head.

Out of pocket expenses have been agreed at $30,476 and the tax paid on workers' compensation payments at $1,900.

As to future out of pocket expenses, the cost of continuing pharmaceutical expenses has been said by the plaintiff to be presently $6 a week, but it is not clear whether that expense is actually being incurred each week or will be continued to be incurred in the future. As a cushion for future expenses of this nature, I allow $2500.

The plaintiff worked for Australian Iron & Steel Ltd at the steel works as a machinist for some ten years prior to the accident and was at the time undergoing training with a view to becoming a forklift driver. He was off work until November or December 1990, when he went back to work on light duties, initially for two hours a day, and later extending his hours by stages up to eight hours a day doing cleaning and similar work, including mopping and sweeping.

Gradually further duties of a light nature were added, until the end of July , when the plaintiff claimed more additional duties were added and he was required to do too much in a shorter time and resigned. He said that prior to this he had been taking time off, including sick leave, because of the pain he was suffering due to the work.

In August 1994 the plaintiff told Dr Davies that he was able to do his light duties cleaning job relatively satisfactorily, but his employer was unhappy because of the large number of days he was taking off for headaches and dizziness. It was the view of Dr Davies that from a neuro-psychiatric point of view he was fit only for light duties but should be able to cope with those.

I am also satisfied that because of his back pain, headaches and dizziness he was not and is not fit for work involving excessive bending or lifting, or standing for long periods, or working with his head bent down or above shoulder level, a view expressed by Dr Manohar as long ago as June 1992.

Reports from different doctors contained somewhat different accounts from the plaintiff of the circumstances in which he gave up work, but a picture emerges from the different accounts that the employer considered he could do more than the plaintiff was doing, and tried to load on to him additional duties, whereupon the plaintiff resigned. No evidence was called on behalf of the defendant from the employer to suggest otherwise.

I am not unaware that at the time he resigned there was little motivation for him to continue working because, as it has turned out, he has continued to receive workers compensation and his wife to receive social security, and they no longer have the mortgage to pay off as they did before.

In this confused state of the evidence I have come to the conclusion that, on account of his injuries, including the psychiatric sequelae and functional overlay involved, he was not capable of doing the work required by his employer in July 1995 and was accordingly justified in resigning.

He has not worked since. He says he has been looking for light work but his efforts have been minimal. I am satisfied that the plaintiff remains unfit for heavy work but is fit for light work not involving heavy lifting, bending, standing, or working with his head down or above shoulder level, but is fit for general light work, such as cleaning, including sweeping and mopping, car park attendant, ticket collector, or suchlike.

The difficulty is that whereas he was formerly working for his pre-accident employer in what might be regarded as a form of rehabilitative employment, he now has to compete on the open labour market for light duties, and with a limited command of English. I believe he will find it extremely difficult to obtain work within his capabilities no matter how hard he tries and if he finds another job it is likely to be only part time work, possibly through a friend as some kind of office cleaner, and the work may not be continuous.

It would appear from Exhibit V that up until the end of the financial year ended 30 June 1994 he had no loss of income measured against the comparable employees, Messrs Psalia and de Jesus. During the year ended 30 June 1995 and up to 27 July 1995, when he apparently ceased work, he averaged $447 net per week compared with the average by the two comparables of $518.50 per week, a difference of $71.50 per week, and I allow this amount for the period 1 July to 27 July 1995, fifty-six weeks; namely, $4,004.

In respect of the period 27 July 1995 to date, I allow $518.50 per week for 52 weeks, making $26,962.

A complication is that I was informed by agreement between counsel that the plaintiff has received weekly payments of compensation in the sum of $63,030, which are repayable pursuant to <case> of the Workers Compensation Act. No one can proffer any explanation as to what period these moneys related to or how the sum was made up. I therefore infer that part of the moneys shown in
Exhibit U as earnings of the plaintiff was in fact compensation, probably in respect of the earlier period following his accident, and if that is so, the only way that justice can be done to the plaintiff is to treat this amount as constituting part of his loss of income to date.

Therefore, in respect of loss of income to date I allow the three amounts of $4004, $26,962 and $63,030, making $93,966.

As regards the future, I have already indicated what I regard as the plaintiff's very limited employment prospects, which I regard as permanent.
The average current wage for comparable employees is $518.15 per week and it was suggested by the plaintiff's counsel that I should regard his work capacity as cut in half, but I do not see the plaintiff as capable of earning $259 a week on a regular basis in view of his limitations, language disability, and need to compete on the open labour market. In my view, he is not capable of earning more than $200, if that, on a regular basis and, accordingly, I assess his loss of capacity at $320 per week.

He is presently aged thirty-nine years and could expect a further working life of twenty-six years. It was suggested by his counsel that I should only allow twenty years, but no reason was advanced for this extraordinary approach. I accordingly consider it proper to allow the loss of future earning capacity based on a working life to age sixty-five, a period of twenty-six years.

I therefore allow $320 per week, capitalised at five per cent for twenty-six years, namely $245,984, less 15 per cent for vicissitudes, which comes to $209,086.

These various heads of damage may therefore be summarised as follows: 
Non-economic loss $82,250 
Out of pocket expenses to date 30,476 
Future out of pocket expenses 2,500 
Tax on workers' compensation 9,100 
Loss of income to date 93,996 
Loss of future earning capacity 209,086 
Total: $427,408 
There is a claim for interest in respect of past economic loss. In respect of the component of $63,030, the plaintiff has already received that money and I allow no interest on that part of it.

In respect of the balance, this relates to two very disproportionate amounts for each of the two years involved. In these circumstances, I think the fairest way is to allow interest on a sum slightly in excess of $26,962 for the last year, namely $27,000 for one year at 12 per cent, which is $3,240, a total of $430,648.

Because no one has appeared for the delivery of judgment on behalf of the defendant, the matter is stood down to 2 pm. I have indicated I will direct entry of judgment in accordance with those reasons unless someone wishes to put something to me at 2 pm.

STOOD DOWN TO 2 PM 
RESUMPTION (after discussion) 
HIS HONOUR: It has been submitted that interest should not be allowed, for a number of reasons, but I consider it an appropriate case to allow interest, but for the reasons I gave this morning only on $27,000. However, the interest rate should not have been 12 per cent, but 4.5 per cent, being half of three-quarters of the rate fixed, by the Rules of Court. Accordingly $1,215 for interest on past economic loss is substituted for the amount of $3,240 which I indicated earlier. That makes a total judgment of $428,623. I therefore direct the entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $428,623. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs.

I grant a stay of proceedings for 28 days on the usual terms, provided $200,000 is paid to the plaintiff within fourteen days of the issue of the appropriate certificate under the [Health and Other Services (Compensation)
Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/haosa1995370/) .
 * * * 
