

Regina versus Gary James Field [1997] NSWSC 420 (19 September 1997) 
REGINA versus Gary James FIELD /95 
Thursday 2 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, ALLEN J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a Crown appeal against sentences imposed by his Honour Judge Moore in the District Court at Wollongong in November last year.

The respondent pleaded guilty to two charges. The first was a charge that between a date in September and a date in November 1994 at Bulli Tops he cultivated 395 cannabis plants which was not less than the commercial quantity applicable to that prohibited plant. The second was a charge that between the same dates in September and November 1994 he cultivated cannabis at Corrimal.
It was common ground that the number of plants the subject of the cultivation referred to in the second count was 219.

At the time of those offences the respondent was the subject of a good behaviour bond that had been imposed in August 1992 in respect of an offence of stealing. That, as his Honour observed in his remarks on sentence, was an aggravating feature.

When the respondent appeared for sentencing he asked the sentencing judge to take into account, under the Criminal Procedure Act, and his Honour took into account, a further offence of cultivating 48 cannabis plants at Attunga in August and September 1995. At the time of that further offence the respondent was on bail in respect of the first two offences. That was a further and serious aggravating feature of the case.

His Honour noted two matters of relevance to the mechanics of sentencing the respondent. The first was that the respondent had served a period of approximately one month custody in relation to these offences before being released on bail in 1994. The second was that, following his arrest in relation to the Attunga matter, the respondent had been taken back into custody and had been in custody since 19 September 1995. The sentencing proceedings came to an end on 14 November 1995. Accordingly, and appropriately, his Honour made the sentences that he imposed commence on 19
September 1995.

His Honour sentenced the respondent in respect of each of the two counts to concurrent sentences involving a minimum term of three months to commence on September 1995 and to expire on 18 December 1995, and an additional term of months. His Honour regarded this as a case involving special circumstances.
He explained his reasoning in that respect as follows: "... Therefore what I propose is a sentence of two years' imprisonment in total for all of the offences but I propose a substantial alteration to the normal fashion in the additional and minimum terms in view of the fact of the prisoner's present age and the fact that I believe that it is unlikely that there will be any further commission of the offences and that he will need a substantial period under supervision in company with his family on release ..." 
I will return to his Honour's process of reasoning in that respect a little later. As to the prisoner's age it should be mentioned that at the time of sentencing he was 41.

There were subjective features which his Honour properly took into account in favour of the respondent. Character witnesses spoke up on his behalf. His previous criminal history was relatively minor. He was, according to his
Honour, a civic-minded man who was generous to other members of the community.
A reading of the transcript of the proceedings at first instance makes it plain that he was well represented and his subjective case on the sentencing proceedings was put at its highest.

The Crown submits that the sentences imposed were manifestly inadequate. The
Crown also mounts a strong challenge to certain findings of fact made by the sentencing judge. In order to explain the context of those findings it is necessary to make some further observations about the circumstances of the case and about what emerged as an issue of fact at the sentencing proceedings.

The discovery by the police of the Bulli Tops and Corrimal cultivations came about in the following circumstances. In September 1994 police began a surveillance operation in respect of a Water Board catchment area at Bulli
Tops. Police who were observing the location followed a dirt track to an area where they found, in thick scrub, a wire enclosure. There they saw about 100 bags of composting mixture covered with hessian cloth and sticks. There was a quantity of black hosing and two rolls of chicken wire painted in drab green paint. There was a small reservoir (5 metres x 2 metres, and approximately 1 metre deep) lined with black plastic and spanned with branches, which was covered with hessian. There was tubing in and around the reservoir. There were fresh diggings nearby and a chicken wire enclosure nearly 30 metres in diameter.

When the police first came upon this location there were pots, but no plants in the pots. Several weeks later the police returned to the same place and found that there had been some horticultural development. Planted in the enclosure were about 300 green plants.

One evening in November 1994 police waited concealed near the area and at about 10.45 the respondent's four wheel drive vehicle was seen to drive along a dirt track, returning shortly after midnight. When the police apprehended the respondent he was in the company of another man. The police claimed that they overheard a conversation between the two men in which they made remarks about their entrepreneurial objectives. In the light of certain contradictory evidence given by the respondent, whom the sentencing judge was prepared to accept on the point, his Honour was unwilling to accept the police evidence about these statements. That aspect of his Honour's findings has been subject to challenge by the Crown but, in my view, that challenge has not been made good. I am prepared to deal with the matter upon the basis that his Honour's rejection of that aspect of the police evidence has not been shown to be in error.

The respondent and his companion were arrested when they returned to the vehicle, and a thorough search of the area showed that there were three enclosures which in total contained 395 cannabis plants. After interviewing the respondent, police went to his residence at Corrimal. Pursuant to a search warrant they searched the premises. They were taken to a small room in a garage on the property. The room contained a number of shelves over which there were lights. Under the lights there were a number of foam trays containing cannabis plants. There was an air conditioner in the room. The number of plants at Corrimal was found to be 219.

The matter concerning the Attunga cultivation, which arose in September 1995, involved a search of a property at Attunga which revealed a plantation of cannabis growing in 48 planter boxes. The boxes were watered from a small dam which gravity fed a drip watering system. The boxes were empty. A man who was located on the property told police he and the respondent had removed the plants the day before and buried them. Police recovered 48 plants from the property.

There was a lively contest at the sentencing procedures about the nature and extent of any commercial purposes which the respondent may have had especially in relation to the cultivations in Bulli Tops and Corrimal.

Ultimately Moore DCJ came to the following conclusion in that respect: "...Not without reservation, I have come to the view that the most that has occurred is, to adopt his own words from the record of interview, that this was an experimental thing and it didn't work out. I believe that applies both to and in conjunction with the cultivation of the Corrimal garage and in the bush at Bulli Tops. I believe it was his intention to raise the produce himself. He has been a user for the last 15-20 years and that he would make a generous supply to his friends but not of a commercial nature ..." 
The respondent pleaded guilty in relation to the first count to cultivating not less than the commercial quantity. The objective facts as to the number of plants under cultivation are such that the respondent had the option to please himself in a number of respects as to what he would do with the amount of cannabis that he produced. If, as his Honour found, he intended generously to supply a substantial quantity of the cannabis in question to his friends, who knows what the terms and conditions of that supply might have been? In a sense there is a degree of artificiality involved in paying close attention to the question of exactly what the respondent might have intended to do with this quantity of cannabis. Obviously he did not intend to smoke all of it himself, and his Honour found he must have intended at least to give a substantial part of it away.

In reaching the finding under challenge his Honour engaged in some reasoning which has been contested by the Crown in this appeal. His Honour said: "The plants which were found at Bulli Tops were for the most part, and this goes to his favour, in early stages of development with some moderately advanced and were very, very small ..." 
Why it was in favour of the respondent that the police came upon these plants at an early rather than a late stage of cultivation is far from clear. Then his Honour said: "... The overall impression which one gains is one that the prisoner is an amateur ..." 
That may be true but the impression that one also gains is that he was an enthusiastic amateur. His Honour said: "When police carried out their search back at his garage as well as the search conducted at Bulli Tops, there was no paraphernalia found to indicate any capacity of the growing of plants in any commercial quantity ..." 
The respondent had pleaded guilty to growing plants in not less than the commercial quantity and that was the basis upon which he stood to be sentenced. Furthermore, the nature of the equipment and horticultural arrangements observed by the police at Bulli Tops and Corrimal well justified the description of "paraphernalia". Somewhat inconsistently his Honour immediately went on to observe in relation to the garage at Corrimal: " ... It is quite well set up as a horticultural nursery for the plants with many seedlings and numerous plants about a foot high, all of which are of healthy colour, with not particularly exuberant leaves ..." 
A puzzling aspect of his Honour's reasoning is what he said in relation to the
Attunga plants. His Honour said: "... In a paradoxical fashion the fact of the second cultivation although blatantly in breach of the law was clearly only for his own use. There is a real measure of support to his assertion that the first cultivation was only for his own use. The fact that he was prepared, then being released on bail and awaiting sentence on the first matter, to enter into another cultivation in plain breach of his bail and that he then limited himself, on the face of opportunity to grow a much larger crop, to the growth of one which would only be for his own personal use is one which, as I say, gives a paradoxical support to his assertion that the Bulli Tops crops, with his nursery at
Corrimal, was only for his own personal use ..." 
I am bound to say that I have found myself unable to penetrate the paradox.

In my view the Crown has made good its challenge to his Honour's finding as to the intention of the respondent in relation to the cultivations at Bulli Tops and Corrimal. Even so, as earlier indicated, for my part I attach more significance to the objective number of plants that were produced, in addition to the evidence as to their condition, on the basis that, by producing such a quantity of cannabis, the respondent gave himself the opportunity to deal with the cannabis, as and when the time arrived as he chose.

As was mentioned earlier, the Crown also challenges his Honour's conclusion that this was a case involving special circumstances. The reasoning of his
Honour in that respect has been set out above. Reference has been made in argument to the judgment of this Court in R versus Farroukh CCA (unreported), 29
March 1996 and in particular to the observations that were made on p5 where the following was said: "... It is well established by law that when [s.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) speaks of special circumstances it is referring to circumstances relevant to the sentencing exercise which has been addressed by that part of the legislation.
The question in issue is a question of the relationship between minimum and additional terms and in particular the question of the need or justification for an additional term which bears to the minimum term or to the total sentence a relationship different from the relationship referred to in the statute. When a sentencing judicial officer finds special circumstances he or she does so in a context involving this that there is nothing about the case that warrants a longer than usual additional term by comparison with the minimum term .." 
It is true, as counsel for the respondent has pointed out, that we are here dealing with a discretionary exercise and that there must be a measure of flexibility left available to the sentencing judge. Even so, in my view the
Crown is correct to contend in the present case that the circumstances referred to by his Honour as justifying the relationship which he fixed by way of minimum and additional terms in the present case were not such as, in the proper exercise of a sentencing discretion, amounted to justification.

Quite apart from these specific challenges to the reasoning of his Honour, I am also of the view that the Crown has made good its submission that the sentences imposed were manifestly inadequate especially in relation to the length of the minimum term.

It is important to bear in mind the objective features of the case. In that regard I refer in particular to the number of plants involved, and to the aggravating circumstances, that is to say, that at the time of the Corrimal and Bulli Tops cultivations the respondent was on a recognisance to be of good behaviour, and at the time of the Attunga cultivation he was on bail in respect of the Bulli Tops and Corrimal offences.

The Court should take into account, as has been urged by counsel for the respondent, that this is a case in which there was a plea of guilty. It should take into account the strong character evidence that was called in support of the respondent and we should also take into account the considerations of double jeopardy. Those considerations have a particular significance in the present case by reason of the circumstance that the respondent has now been released to parole since 18 December of last year. In my view, notwithstanding those considerations, this is a proper case for appellate intervention, bearing in mind the principles enunciated by the High Court in such cases as
Griffiths versus The Queen (1977) 137 CLR 293 and Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295]. The principles according to which the Court intervenes in a case such as the present are not in dispute. In resentencing the respondent this Court should take into account two matters in addition to the matters I have already mentioned. We should take into account the presentence custody of about a month that he served back in 1994 and we should also take into account that he has been at liberty on parole since 18 December 1995.

The sentences that I intend to propose will date from 19 September 1995 and they will be imposed in full awareness of the fact that, over a substantial part of that time, the respondent has been at liberty. In that connection it should be mentioned that when this court allows a Crown appeal and resentencing the respondent it ordinarily imposes upon him the least sentence that could properly have been imposed at first instance to take account of double jeopardy.

I am of the view that the court should make the following orders. The appeal against sentence should be allowed, the sentence made by Moore DCJ should be quashed. In lieu thereof the respondent should be sentenced in respect of each count to concurrent terms of imprisonment involving a minimum term of two years to commence on 19 September 1995 and to end on 18 September 1997 together with an additional term of eight months to commence on 19 September .

ALLEN J: I agree.

JAMES J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed.

I am reminded by counsel that we should state, as is the fact, that on sentencing for the first count we have taken into consideration the matter in
Form 2, that is the Attunga matter. I repeat that, in imposing those sentences, we have fixed the dates well knowing that the respondent went into custody for a time from 19 September 1995 and has been at liberty since 18
December 1995 and all of that counts towards his sentence; both the period when he was in custody and the period when he was at liberty. The respondent is to be released to parole on 18 September 1997.
 
SENTENCING - CROWN APPEAL - CANNABIS CULTIVATION 
The respondent pleaded guilty to two charges of cultivating cannabis; the first involving 395 plants and the second involving 219 plants. He also asked to be taken into account a third offence of cultivating 48 plants. At the time of the first two offences he was on a good behaviour bond. At the time of the third offence he was on bail. He was sentenced on each count to imprisonment for concurrent terms involving a minimum term of three months and an additional term of twenty months, there being one month's presentence custody - HELD - The case was not one of special circumstances and the ratio of minimum to additional terms was wrong.
 The sentences were manifestly excessive.
 The Crown had demonstrated factual error.

O R D E R S Appeal allowed.
 Sentences quashed.
 In lieu thereof the respondent sentenced in respect of each count to concurrent sentences involving a minimum term of two years (of which four and a half months had been spent at liberty) and an additional term of eight months.
 * * * 
