

Regina versus Wade Matter No Cca 60147/97 [1997] NSWSC 461 (7 October 1997) 
Regina versus Paul William Wade /97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Studdert J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Paul William WADE 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In February this year the appellant came to trial before his Honour Judge Ducker and a jury at the Lismore District Court charged with two offences. The first charge was that on 25 July 1996 at Lismore he assaulted the complainant and at the time of the assault committed an act of indecency upon her. The second charge was that on 25 July 1996 at Lismore he had sexual intercourse with the complainant without her consent, knowing that she was not consenting. The appellant was convicted on both counts. In respect of the first offence he was sentenced to imprisonment for a fixed term of six months to commence on 7 March 1997. In respect of the second offence he was sentenced to a term of penal servitude involving a minimum term of twelve months, also to commence on 7 March 1997 and to expire on 6 March 1998 and an additional term of two years and three months to commence on 7 March 1998 and to expire on 6 June 2000. The appellant appeals against the convictions and seeks leave to appeal against the sentences. 
The appellant, although legally represented at his trial, has not been legally represented on this appeal. We have before us extensive written submissions that were prepared by the appellant together with some written submissions that were prepared by a barrister. In addition, the appellant has filed an affidavit which the court has read.

One of the grounds of appeal upon which the appellant relies is that the convictions should be regarded as unsafe or unsatisfactory. It is convenient to deal first with that ground of appeal, because a consideration of it requires an examination of the principal aspects of the evidence in the case.

A number of aspects of the events giving rise to the charges against the appellant were not in dispute at the trial and they may be summarised as follows.

The complainant was a young woman who was sharing a residence with her boyfriend and a male tenant. The complainant and her boyfriend used to sleep in a particular room of the residence on a mattress on the floor. The mattress was located against one of the walls of the room. On the evening of Thursday, July 1996 there were gathered together in the residence to which I have referred the complainant, her boyfriend, the tenant and two other males, one of whom was the appellant. The appellant and the complainant had been strangers to one another before this evening. The evidence showed that the people to whom I have referred had consumed significant quantities of alcohol and had also been smoking marijuana. On the other hand, descriptions of the appellant's condition on the evening did not indicate that he was extremely intoxicated. He appears to have been capable of carrying on sensible conversations and of getting himself to where he wanted to go.

At about 10.15 in the evening the complainant stated that she was going to bed. She said good night to the men who were present, including her boyfriend, and a remark was made to the effect that he would be joining her before very long. The bedroom that I have mentioned was located opposite a toilet. The complainant went to the bedroom and took off all her clothes except a white silk shirt. She lay down on the mattress wearing only the shirt, which she said was unbuttoned. She lay on her left side facing the wall. She expected that her boyfriend would soon be joining her. So far the facts as I have described them were not in contest.

The other thing that was not in contest was that after about 45 minutes, during which time the men had been continuing their conversation and the complainant's boyfriend had remained with the others, the appellant informed his companions that he wanted to go to the toilet. He asked the way. He left the other men and walked in the direction of the toilet. At a time variously described as one minute, two minutes or a few minutes later there was a major fuss. Loud screams came from the room that was occupied by the complainant.
She emerged in a state of distress and extreme agitation, accusing the appellant of sexual misconduct towards her. Her agitation escalated. The boyfriend challenged the appellant as to what he had been doing. The appellant made certain statements to the boyfriend and to others present and not long afterwards the complainant complained to the police. All of what I have said so far was common ground at the trial.

The dispute at the trial was as to what happened in the period of one, two or a few minutes to which I have earlier referred. As to that matter, there were two competing versions of the facts. There was the evidence of the complainant and the evidence of the appellant. The evidence of the complainant was that she was lying on her side facing the wall, with her eyes closed, dozing, and she heard somebody use the toilet. Shortly afterwards she heard the bedroom door creak as it opened. The room was in darkness. She remained facing the wall. She felt someone get in bed beside her. She assumed it was her boyfriend. She felt a hand touch her back, then move over to her left breast and cup it underneath her unbuttoned shirt. This act was the subject of the first charge. The hand then moved from her breast down the front of her stomach to around her bottom, which was bare. Two or three fingers were felt moving in her vagina. The complainant said that she rolled onto her back with her eyes shut. The fingers continued to move inside her vagina. Still with her eyes shut, the complainant, assuming it was her boyfriend, said, "I love you".
A male voice replied, "You don't have to love me, I just want to suck and lick and kiss you". It was the insertion of the fingers into the vagina that constituted the charge the subject of the second count in the indictment. When the complainant heard the words just mentioned, she realised that it was not her boyfriend. She sat up, saw the appellant and pushed him away. She said, "What's going on?" and she then started screaming and told the appellant to get out.

The appellant's version of what happened was as follows. He said that he never made it to the toilet. As a result of the darkness and a mistake, instead of going into the toilet, he found himself in the bedroom that was occupied by the appellant. He quickly realised that he must be in the wrong place, but as he turned to leave the room, he caught his foot on something and fell over, landing on a body. A voice said, "You are on the sheet", the appellant said, "Hold on, I'm stuck". The voice said, "Who are you?". The appellant said, "It's Paul. Calm down, there's no problem". The complainant then began to scream and pushed the appellant out through the door.

The only other substantial area of dispute in the trial related to one of the statements said to have been made following this event by the appellant.
According to one of the male witnesses, the appellant following these events said, "I'm a cunt, I got it wrong". According to the appellant, what he said was, "It's a cunt of a night. It's all wrong". The judge ultimately directed the jury that statements allegedly made by the appellant following the screaming of the complainant were so equivocal that they could not be taken into account against the appellant.

Plainly, the critical question for the jury to consider was the reliability of the complainant. There were aspects of her evidence which involved some inconsistencies, upon which emphasis was placed at the trial and in this appeal. For example, at one stage in her evidence the complainant said that she was lying without any sheet on top of her. At another stage in her evidence she said that she was lying on a sheet with another sheet on top of her. The evidence of the appellant was that she was lying with a sheet on top of her. There were some differences, argued by counsel to be significant, between the account of events given by the complainant to the police when they interviewed her and the evidence that she gave at the trial. The jury had to assess the significance of these inconsistencies. However, the essential facts as described by the complainant to the police and at the trial remained the same.

The defence case as put to the complainant in cross-examination, and as advanced in the appellant's evidence, was that, whilst there might have been some accidental encounter with the complainant's breast by the appellant when he tripped over and fell on top of her, nothing occurred, in relation to the insertion of fingers into her vagina, of the kind described by the complainant. The most the appellant was prepared to accept was the possibility that in the course of the fall his hand might have touched a part of the sheet covering the appellant in the area of her groin. In other words, there was a very substantial difference between the essential facts as described by the complainant and the essential facts as described by the appellant.

The evidence of the complainant was unshaken in cross-examination. This court, of course, has not seen her. We have read the transcript of her evidence and of the evidence of the appellant and the other witnesses. The inconsistencies relied upon by the appellant are not of such a character that the jury, acting reasonably, must have regarded them as reflecting seriously upon the reliability of the complainant. There is no doubt that, whatever went on in that room during the relevantly brief period of time involved, it resulted in immediate and vociferous protests from the complainant, and in an allegation by her to the other men in the house, and soon afterwards to the police, that the appellant had sexually interfered with her by touching her on the breasts and the vagina.

It is convenient at this point to mention a matter that has given rise to another ground of appeal. It is obvious from the terms of the summing-up that defence counsel, who, of course, addressed the jury after the Crown
Prosecutor, developed an argument concerning the possible motivation of the complainant and the appellant respectively. In other words, counsel, in argument, confronted the question that often hovers over cases of alleged sexual abuse but is sometimes not addressed explicitly. The question to which
I refer is the question as to why a complainant would be making allegations of this character if they were not true. At the same time, counsel put an argument questioning why the appellant would have behaved as he was alleged to have behaved.

As to the question why the complainant would have made allegations of this kind if they were not true, it seems that counsel put as one of a number of alternative arguments the possibility that the complainant might have retired on that evening and dozed off to sleep, or half sleep, in the expectation that within a relatively short period of time she might be engaging in welcome sexual activity with her boyfriend. This, it was apparently suggested, might have put her in such a frame of mind that she would have placed a sexual interpretation upon the arrival and behaviour of the appellant. Counsel also apparently argued to the jury that it was difficult to understand why the appellant would have behaved as he allegedly did. He was almost a complete stranger to the complainant. There was no suggestion that she had given him any encouragement. Her boyfriend was nearby, and likely to come to bed before very long. The appellant, it was apparently argued, would have been a major risk taker if he had set out to engage in sexual activity in circumstances where he had no reason to believe that the response would be other than it ultimately turned out to be.

Considerations of that kind were legitimate for counsel to put to the jury, and were legitimately made the subject of comment by the trial judge. I will come to one of those comments further in due course, but the further background to the case which was also important for the jury to consider was the consumption of alcohol and marijuana by the various people involved in these activities. The jury were entitled to think that this may well have affected their judgment and their inhibitions. Of course, consumption of alcohol and ingestion of drugs can be a two-edged sword for the defence. In extreme cases it can give rise to a viable defence, but more commonly it simply serves to explain why a person might engage in behaviour of a kind from which he would otherwise shrink. In the present case, the jury might well have thought that alcohol and drugs provided at least part of the explanation of the appellant's alleged conduct.

To return to the argument that the verdict of the jury was unsafe or unsatisfactory, in my view there was ample material upon which the jury acting reasonably could conclude that they accepted the evidence of the complainant beyond reasonable doubt. This ground of appeal must fail.

I have already foreshadowed a matter that was the subject of another ground of appeal. In the course of dealing in his summing-up with the arguments that were put to the jury as to the likelihood that the appellant would behave in the manner attributed to him, or why it might be thought that the complainant would behave as she did unless she had indeed been sexually assaulted by the appellant, Ducker DCJ made a reference to a possibility which the jury might or might not care to take into account in considering and evaluating those somewhat speculative arguments. In this respect it should be noted that at an early stage of his summing-up the judge gave the jury the standard direction that the facts in the case were for them and that any view of the facts that he might indicate should be disregarded by the jury unless it coincided with their own view of the facts. In the course of reminding the jury of and commenting upon the arguments of counsel for the accused that, if the Crown case were true, this was an extremely strange way for the appellant to behave,
Ducker DCJ said, "Of course, the Crown would suggest, I take it, and I do not know that the
Crown actually put this submission, but you are entitled to consider this, that the accused's judgment may have been affected by what he had ingested, drugs and alcohol, and that may have lowered his inhibitions and made him more ready to take a chance. He might have even deluded himself that he might receive a favourable reception. That was never put to him in cross- examination, however, so perhaps you had best not place any great reliance on that. 
What has not been adverted to and what I think should be adverted to - and before saying this I wish to emphasise there is no special importance because
I say this, if you do not accept this as a possibility, then you must reject it, I put it forward not as something that you necessarily will accept but merely as something that you might wish to consider - do you believe that there is any possibility that the accused might have entered that room and perhaps remained in that room after entering in the belief that the complainant was still asleep, bearing in her mind her evidence that she did not move her position, that she was face up against the wall, that she did not say anything and that he may have felt that she might not wake up if he touched her in the ways in which she said he did? Now that is something you are at liberty to consider. It has no particular importance because I refer to it and unless you believe it is a matter that might have some credence, then dismiss it from mind. He might have thought that he would be taking a fair sort of risk nonetheless." 
Those observations of the trial judge resulted in an application for a discharge of the jury. That application was refused. The making of the comments and the refusal of the application to discharge the jury is a ground of appeal relied upon by the appellant.

It is important to bear in mind the context in which those observations were made. They were observations made in the context of discussing an argument put by counsel for the accused to the effect that the Crown case bore an aspect of inherent improbability because it depended upon attributing to the appellant behaviour that might be thought to have been extremely odd or unlikely. It was not something that cut across the defence case. The defence case, from beginning to end was that the appellant had never engaged in conduct that could even have been misinterpreted as conduct of the kind the subject of the second charge, and that in relation to any touching on the breast that had occurred, that was completely accidental. There was no defence case based on consent of the complainant, or on belief on the part of the appellant that the complainant was consenting to anything. Indeed, in the affidavit which he filed in these proceedings, the appellant made it clear that he instructed those conducting the trial that they should not raise any such case.

In my view it was legitimate for the trial judge, in discussing the comments made by defence counsel about what was said to be the improbability of the
Crown case, to advert to possible explanations of the conduct of the appellant, reminding the jury at the same time that they were the sole judges of the facts. The background of consumption of alcohol and ingestion of drugs was a significant part of the factual circumstances in which the alleged conduct of the appellant fell to be evaluated by the jury. There was nothing improper, or inappropriate, or unfair about the trial judge, in the context that I have mentioned, raising considerations for the attention of the jury, even though they had not been mentioned by the Crown. It is not as though the appellant could or should have been cross-examined about matters of that kind.
The appellant was saying that what was alleged by the complainant did not occur. The appellant was making no concessions of any kind to which considerations of the kind mentioned by the trial judge in the context just described could have been relevant. In my view there was no error on the part of the trial judge in the directions just quoted or in failing to discharge the jury on the application of trial counsel for the appellant.

The next ground of appeal was expressed in the following terms: "The trial judge erred in his directions on intoxication and intent." 
The relevant directions were given in the following terms: "The accused, of course, does not say that he believed there was consent, he does not say that there was consent. He does not say that he touched the woman accidentally on the breast. His case is that it simply did not happen.
Nonetheless, I feel it appropriate to give you that direction.

I should also give you this direction. So far as intoxication, be it by alcoholic liquor or by drug is concerned, it really does not matter unless the person, the accused, was so grossly intoxicated that his acts were involuntary, that is the physical acts were not the product of his conscious mind, or he was so intoxicated that he had not formed the necessary intent, that is the intent to derive sexual gratification or cause sexual humiliation by touching the person in the way in which she was. Now nobody has suggested in this case that the accused was that intoxicated. He does not suggest that he did not know what he was doing, indeed, he has given you an account of what he did. He has suggested his memory was incomplete and that he was intoxicated, but intoxication does not relieve a person of responsibility unless it is so gross that the acts in question were done involuntarily or without the intent that I described.

Alcohol or intoxication by drugs, of course, may have other effects and it may disinhibit people, sometimes to the extent that they will do something whilst so affected that they would not do sober. That is something which a jury is also entitled to take into account. A drunken intent or intoxicated intent is still an intent. The only circumstances where intoxication, therefore, is relevant is if the act was involuntary or the person was just so intoxicated that he was incapable of, and therefore does not form the necessary intent. Nobody has suggested here that that happened.

I just give you that direction for more abundant caution. I do not want to complicate the case unnecessarily, but I feel that since so much emphasis has been placed on the evidence about people's degrees of intoxication and so forth, that I should tell you what the law is.

So far as witnesses are concerned, their intoxication, be it by drug or alcohol, is relevant when it comes to the question of their credibility, memory and conduct and so forth." 
Similarly again in relation to the second charge the judge reminded the jury: "Now again the accused does not seek to say that there was consent or any belief of consent, his defence simply is that there was no intrusion of one or more of his fingers into the genitalia of the complainant." 
The argument advanced in written submissions on behalf of the appellant was that the judge should have directed the jury that intoxication by alcohol or drugs would have been relevant to the question of consent or belief in consent. That argument, however, is completely removed from the issues as they were fought at the trial and from the defence case. The defence case was not one either of consent or of belief of consent. It was that the acts alleged did not occur. If the acts occurred in the way the complainant alleged, then consent or belief in consent was not a viable defence. On the complainant's account she had her back to the door of the bedroom and she could not have seen who got into bed with her. On her account she was interfered with from behind. There was no account of the events in question which raised an issue either of consent or belief in consent. If the jury accepted the complainant's account of the facts, consent or belief in consent had nothing to do with it.
She was not given an opportunity to decide whether she would consent or whether she would not consent. If, on the other hand, the jury were minded to consider the possibility of the appellant's version of the facts, then consent did not come into it either. He accidentally stumbled and fell on the complainant. The repeated statements by the trial judge to the jury that there was no issue or no defence case based on either consent or belief in consent was not the subject of any complaint made by trial counsel. The point the subject of this ground of appeal was not taken at the trial. The appellant should not have leave to raise it on this appeal and, as I have indicated, the point is completely divorced from the way in which the trial was conducted.

In relation to one of the passages from the summing-up earlier quote, it is argued that the trial judge was in error when he directed the jury to the effect that the appellant would still be guilty of the offence if he had deluded himself that he might receive a favourable reception. Once again this ground of appeal is divorced from the way in which the issues in the case were conducted. On the complainant's version of the facts the appellant did what he did before she had the opportunity to realise that it was the appellant and not the boyfriend who was in bed with her. On the appellant's version of the facts, he did no such thing. The judge made the comments in question in the context of considering a defence challenge to the Crown case to the effect that the allegations were inherently improbable. What the judge said in that connection was perfectly appropriate. There is no substance in that ground of appeal.

Complaint is made of the way in which the trial judge dealt with the Crown argument that statements made immediately following the events in question by the appellant to other males at the premises could be relied upon as admissions. The trial judge reminded the jury of the evidence in that respect and reminded the jury of the Crown argument. It is difficult to see how he could have avoided doing that. The jury had heard the evidence and they had heard the addresses of counsel in which these arguments were advanced.
Ultimately he said, however, "I will direct that you must not use that evidence as admissions on the part of the accused that he did touch the complainant in the ways that have been claimed. They are just too equivocal and it is too dangerous to use them as admissions." 
That direction may well have been unduly favourable to the appellant. In any event, the appellant has not at this stage any ground to complain about that direction. There is no reason to doubt that the jury understood it and were capable of acting in accordance with it. As I have indicated, this was a subject the trial judge could not avoid because it had been dealt with in evidence and in argument by counsel.

One of the factual matters relied upon by the appellant as going to the reliability of the evidence of the complainant was what were said to be discrepancies in her evidence as to her state of wakefulness at the critical time. This court has not had the benefit of observing the complainant give her evidence, but my reading of the transcript of the evidence does not suggest to me that there were significant discrepancies or inconsistencies in relation to this subject which the jury ought to have regarded as reflecting seriously upon the reliability of the complainant. She used different terms and different figures of speech to describe a matter which common experience tells us can often be difficult to describe accurately, that is to say, the state of perception of a person who has recently dozed off to sleep and has then been disturbed.

As indicated in dealing with the first ground of appeal, although the appellant has raised in his written submissions various matters of detail relating to what is said to be contradictions and inherent inconsistencies in the evidence of the complainant and in the Crown case, I am of the view that it was well open to the jury acting reasonably to be convinced by the account of events given by the complainant. In my view the appeal against conviction must be dismissed.

As far as the application for leave to appeal against sentence is concerned, the sentence is a substantial one and the applicant should have leave to argue his case in that regard. As the trial judge pointed out, the appellant is a person who has a criminal history, but not of what would be described as a serious kind. The judge mentioned that it is the sort of history that might be consistent with overindulgence in alcohol and drugs.

The trial judge gave careful consideration to the subjective circumstances of the appellant. He is a carer of two young children. He has had for many years before these events a trouble free history. He was at the time a student and was following a course of study aimed at furthering his personal career. There is no error in any finding of fact made by the trial judge. He rightly characterised the objective features of the case as serious, although the level of seriousness that he ascribed to the matter was not unfavourable to the appellant. He treated the disinhibiting effects of alcohol and drugs as the most probable explanation of the conduct of the appellant, which he was prepared to accept was out of character. Even allowing for that, however, the offence, which quite obviously caused the most serious alarm and affront to the complainant, involved an invasion of the physical integrity of a woman of a kind which the law treats as very serious.

In his written submissions the appellant has made it clear that he is concerned about the fact that because the head sentence is slightly more than three years, he will depend upon a favourable decision of the authorities in relation to his release to parole. However, this court does not sit for the purpose of sentencing the appellant afresh. Our duty is to consider whether there has been shown to be error on the part of the sentencing judge. In the absence of any error justifying appellant intervention, then the sentence must stand, even though it may not be precisely the same sentence as we would have imposed if we had been considering the matter afresh.

I am unable to see any error either of principle or of fact in the remarks on sentence of Ducker DCJ. The sentence that was imposed appears to me to be well within the range of a proper exercise of sentencing discretion. I would propose, therefore, that the application for leave to appeal against sentence should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.
 
STUDDERT J: I agree with the Chief Justice.
 
BARR J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the court will be that the appeal against conviction is dismissed. Leave to appeal against the sentence is granted but the appeal is dismissed.

REGINA versus Paul William WADE 
CRIMINAL LAW - Sexual Intercourse without consent - appellant convicted of offences against a female acquaintance - alleged misdirections to jury - verdicts claimed to be unsafe and unsatisfactory - HELD - the trial judge did not misdirect the jury and the verdicts were not unsafe or unsatisfactory.

SENTENCING - a sentence involving a minimum term of one year and an additional term of two years three months was held not to be excessive. 
O R D E R S Appeal against conviction dismissed.  Leave to appeal against sentence granted; appeal dismissed.
 * * * 
