

Regina versus De Hesselle Matter No 60569/96 [1997] NSWSC 351 (29 August 1997) 
Regina versus De Hesselle /96 August 1997 
Smart J, Grove J, Studdert J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus MARK RENE DE HESSELLE 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The appellant Mark Rene de Hesselle stood trial before his Honour Judge Shadbolt and jury in the District Court in June 1996 charged with an offence against <case>(ca) of the Customs Act. The substance of the charge was that he had in his possession without reasonable excuse a prohibited import, namely a quantity of cocaine being not less than the traffickable quantity reasonably suspected of having been imported into Australia in breach of the statute. 
The jury found the appellant guilty as charged and he was sentenced to eight years imprisonment to commence on 8 April 1995 and to expire on 7 April 2003.
A non parole period of five years expiring on 7 April 2000 was fixed.

The appellant has appealed against his conviction and he also seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence imposed.

The case for the prosecution can be briefly summarised: in January 1995 the appellant spoke to a man named Peter Wood concerning the proposed sale of cocaine which he would provide for Wood. According to Wood the appellant provided a sample of cocaine and thereafter he met with him on a number of occasions prior to April 1995 and was before that date provided with cocaine which Wood sold. Then on 7 April 1995 Wood met the appellant at a reserve at
Dee Why and gave him a large amount of money from sales of cocaine which the appellant had provided for him. That meeting was observed by Federal agents and part of the conversation between the appellant and Wood was recorded on a listening device that had been fitted in Wood's rental car. The two men arranged to meet the following day so that Wood could give a final accounting for the proceeds of the earlier sales of cocaine and so that the appellant could provide him with a further supply of the drug.

The appellant and Wood met again on the following day at the same reserve and again observations were made of their activities and part of their conversation in a motor vehicle was recorded by means of a listening device.
Wood gave the appellant a further amount of cash and the appellant gave Wood .3 kilograms of powder that contained 1.93 kilograms of pure cocaine. Wood then took the drug to premises he had rented at Booth Street, Annandale. He weighed the drug there and divided it up into a number of packages. Some cocaine he placed behind a piano and some he delivered to a man named Adams.
He had a further quantity of cocaine in his possession when he was arrested.
On the prosecution case all of the cocaine that the appellant had provided to
Wood on 8 April 1995 was seized by police.

The appellant's business premises were searched and $15,700 in cash was located in a filing cabinet in a red Grace Bros bag. (Wood had been observed to hand over a red Grace Bros bag to the appellant on 8 April.) Of that sum of money, some $6900 had the same serial numbers as those that had been recorded by Federal police when they entered Wood's motel room in his absence on the previous night. The police found a further $33,300 in cash at the appellant's home.

The defence case can be summarised as follows: The appellant, who gave sworn evidence at the trial, denied that he had ever been in possession of cocaine.
He admitted to having meetings and an association with Wood. He said that he spoke to him in January 1995, but his interest in Wood was as a prospective purchaser of a wooden kit home which the appellant was endeavouring to sell in the course of a business which the appellant was hoping to develop importing kit homes from Brazil. According to the appellant, the meeting on 7 April 1995 which he admitted took place was to discuss the purchase and to receive part of the deposit for such a home from Wood. The further meeting on 8 April 1995, which again the appellant admitted, was to receive a further payment of deposit and to provide Wood with plans and brochures and samples of wood, all to do with the wooden kit home. The appellant said these were provided to Wood in the same bag that Wood had provided the appellant with on the previous day when part of the deposit was paid by Wood.

The appellant said that money found in the filing cabinet in his business premises was part of the money that Wood had handed over by way of deposit.
The money found in the appellant's home was cash that he was keeping there to buy a truck. The appellant said that he would make a better deal in buying a truck if he paid cash. The appellant presented in evidence as being a legitimate businessman of good character and he said he did not know Wood was a cocaine dealer.

He said that the reserve where the two men met had been selected by Wood, although coincidentally that reserve was within 150 yards of a street in which the appellant had gone to school. The reserve was relatively isolated and anyone approaching it could be seen fairly easily.

Against the above background I turn to consider the various grounds of appeal.

Ground 1 raises a number of matters which the appellant says amounted to misdirections of fact in the summing-up, misdirections which the appellant contended were critical to his case, and I shall deal with these matters in sub-paragraphs (i) to (vii). 
That the judge erred in his summing-up in regard to Wood renting a property at Booth Street and in regard to his trip to Melbourne 
In the course of his summing up the trial judge made a detailed review of the evidence of the man Wood and in the course of that review he referred extensively to Wood's cross-examination. His Honour said: "Now he said that he took - that cross-examination was whether or not - it was about whether or not he had taken Booth Street and paid rent on it even before he had met Wood in January and you recall that it appears that he went down to Melbourne and he had been observed going down to Melbourne. He was seen getting off the flight on 31 January 1995 and he had told a magistrate in the committal proceedings that he got the keys to Booth Street on 8 January 1995. Now what this amounts to is it was put to him that in fact he had taken Booth Street before he had even met Wood and that is that he had taken it for the purposes of dividing up cocaine. He denied that and he said, no he only took it when he had need of it, that is Booth Street."  (Emphasis added) 
The references to Wood above emphasised were erroneous. Plainly when his
Honour referred to Wood he intended to refer to the appellant.

Where in the course of his summing-up a trial judge misstates the evidence in such a setting and in such circumstances as could affect the jury's verdict, a miscarriage of justice may result: see Simic <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 319] and Jiminez [(1991) 53 A Crim R 56.] 
The appellant, who has appeared in person, has prepared thorough written submissions addressing each of the grounds in the amended grounds of appeal and I have considered these closely. The appellant has also in a very articulate way expanded on his various written submissions on the hearing of this appeal.

The erroneous references to Wood in the above extract from the summing-up have to be considered in context. The review of Wood's evidence began at p 21 of the summing-up and in that review the jury was reminded of Wood's evidence that he met the appellant early in 1995. Considered in context, it seems to me that there was no risk of the jury being misled by the erroneous references to
Wood. Plainly they were intended as references to the appellant. Indeed, there was no evidence anywhere in the trial to suggest that it was the appellant who rented Booth Street or that the appellant travelled to Melbourne. Later in the summing-up, commencing at p 36, the judge reviewed the defence case and in the course of that review he made reference to Wood as being the person who rented
Booth Street and he made reference to Wood's trip to Melbourne.

The appellant was represented at the trial by a very experienced criminal lawyer and no request was made to the judge to correct the slip which he had made. The reason for this seems to me to be clear and that is that it was not the perception of the experienced solicitor who appeared for the appellant that the slip gave rise to any risk that the jury might have been misled. For my part I can see no risk that the jury would have been misled when the appellant was not linked with Booth Street or Melbourne in the evidence, and when the jury was otherwise reminded in the course of the summing-up of Wood's involvement with Booth Street.

The first challenge to the summing-up fails.

His Honour erred in regards to the purpose of Wood renting the property in Booth Street 
Once again this ground stems from what the judge said in the passage above set out. The defence had cross-examined Wood endeavouring to establish that Wood had rented the premises at Booth Street for the purposes of his illicit dealing in cocaine before his first meeting with the appellant in 1995.

In the course of his evidence Wood referred to his use of the premises at
Booth Street. He said it was obtained for the purpose of dealing in cocaine but he said that he started dealing in cocaine only after his meeting with the appellant. That meeting he placed in the middle or after the middle of January
He also said that he did not see the appellant until after he (Wood) returned from Melbourne on a trip that extended from 24 January 1995 to 31
January 1995. He was reminded of evidence that he had given in committal proceedings that he had rented Booth Street from 8 January 1995. Wood nevertheless maintained that he had not rented Booth Street until after he had spoken to the appellant.

There was apparent inconsistency in that evidence. However, it was made clear to the jury that it was for it to decide whether it accepted Wood's evidence and it was given an appropriate warning as to the manner in which it should approach that assessment. As I indicated earlier, the second reference to Wood in the passage of the summing-up was clearly intended as a reference to the appellant and the jury would have understood this to be so. In my opinion the direction given properly reminded the jury of the particular topic of the cross-examination to which it was directed.

That his Honour erred in regards to the appellant saying `another stash' 
This ground relates to a transcript of the taped conversation which on the
Crown case recorded what the appellant and Wood said in the car on the occasion of their meeting on 8 April 1995. The jury heard played the tape which was tendered as an exhibit. When the trial judge permitted the provision to the jury of a transcript, he did so whilst directing the jury that the transcript was only an aid and that it was not an exhibit. He directed the jury that what it heard on the tapes was the evidence in the case. The direction recorded at p 111 of the transcript was correct and adequate.

However this ground picks up an error which the judge made in the course of his summing-up at p 20 when he attributed to the appellant the utterance of the words "get another stash". The transcript attributes those words to the man Wood. The passage in which the trial judge wrongly attributed to the appellant what Wood had said, at least according to the transcript of the tape, commenced at the foot of p 28 of the summing-up: "The Crown as far as these aide-memoirs are concerned or as far as the record of what was said in the cars is concerned, would rely on part of them, particularly for instance where he said, `have a look at the wrappers', `yeah
I know very sweet, everything's sweet', `these people here are jealous'. And in the one of the 8th, `are you going to drop off some?' `Yeah that's right.' `Just drop that money up.' `Yeah'. `Just so that I can have - so that I don't have to cart it back home', this is Wood talking, `or leave it stashed.' `Following what?' `The Saturday after Easter, Easter is weeks, two weeks away'. And the accused saying, `yeah, no, inaudible, house, trapped, get another stash, wait around'. And him saying, `yeah just go down there about nine and I'll come and cause you're just going to slip me some dough'. `Yeah that's right'. `And tell me what you want?' "Yeah no worries mate'." (Emphasis added) 
The trial judge was not asked to correct what he had said or to remind the jury that the transcript of the tape attributed the words "get another stash" to Wood. It was, of course, the appellant's case, as the jury would plainly have appreciated, that nothing that was said between the two men, regardless of who was speaking, concerned any drug dealings and the conversations were innocuous. At p 33 of the summing-up the judge reminded the jury that the appellant, when cross-examined about the taped conversations, had denied that the tape conversations referred to cocaine.

I do not consider that the attribution of the words emphasised in the extract from the summing-up to the appellant instead of to Wood occasioned any possibly risk of a miscarriage occurring.

His Honour erred in regards to testimony given by the appellant regarding the source of the money found at the residence 
This ground concerns the following passage in the summing-up. The passage appears in the context of a review of the cross-examination of the appellant.
His Honour said: "He was cross-examined about the money which he had taken from Wood and he was also cross-examined about the $33,300 which he had in the house in jackets. He cannot say how long it had been to accumulate that amount of money nor why he kept it at the house, except to say that it was much safer at the house and he again said that he wanted to buy a truck and he wanted the money handy. He denied that it was to do drug deals with." 
The appellant contends that that passage is factually erroneous. It did emerge in cross-examination that he had some knowledge as to how long it had taken to accumulate the money and the Court has been referred by the appellant to passages of the transcript at pp 427-428. It seems to me, however, that the summary statement by the judge that the appellant could not say how long it had taken to accumulate that amount of money accords with the thrust of the answers in cross-examination. Certainly an explanation was given in cross- examination for the money being in the house but the judge did refer to that explanation in the summary, namely that the appellant regarded it as much safer at the house and that he wanted the money handy to buy a truck. Those features of the appellant's evidence the jury was reminded of by his Honour.
Then his Honour went on at p 30 to remind the jury not only that the money had been kept in the house, having accumulated from cash sales at the warehouse, but that he was going to buy a truck with it and he wanted cash so that he would be able to get a better deal.

In my opinion the appellant was not disadvantaged by the review undertaken by the judge in the above passage.

His Honour erred in referring to the cash drawer account 
The passage in point from the summing-up reads (in the context again of reviewing the appellant's evidence): "He had a bank account with Westpac at Brookvale and he produced a deposit book of that account and he said that there were cash sales when they opened to sell directly to the public and they only got a receipt if they wanted one and there was something called a cash drawn account" 
The appellant rightly points out that the evidence identified an account known as a cash drawer account. Whether his Honour had misheard what the appellant said or whether what appears at p 30 of the summing-up is a typing error is not clear but the appellant complains that what he had done in his evidence was to place before the court all records that showed the movement of monies through his business but there had been no accounting for a cash drawn account. As I understand it, it is put that in some way the jury might have thought that transactions referring to this cash drawn account might not have been disclosed.

Once again the judge was not asked to correct what he had said but the reference in the summing-up to the cash drawn account followed the sequence of the appellant's evidence describing his business records and it seems to me that the review in the summing-up concerning evidence in point fairly addressed the thrust of the appellant's evidence that he was conducting and legitimate business for which appropriate records were kept and that there was an innocent explanation for the cash in the house.

His Honour erred in regard to the appellant's evidence and the knowledge of the appellant of what was prescribed in the aide memoir of the taped conversations 
The taped conversations are those which I referred to earlier when considering
Ground (iii). The appellant submits that the relevant error for Ground (vi) is contained in the following passage (again in the context of a review of the appellant's evidence). His Honour was reminding the jury as to what the appellant had to say about one of the meetings that took place in April: "He did not talk to him about cocaine and didn't take 90,000 or 100,000...

As far as the listening device tape is concerned, he's not sure what it was about but it was certainly not about cocaine..." 
The appellant says that that passage does not reflect the evidence. He has referred to part of his evidence given at p 407 in which he was asked about the transcript of the tape, previously referred to, where the words "Get another stash" appear. He said that what he heard was Wood saying "Got another social dinner tonight?" The appellant said that if one looks at the evidence that followed the appellant gave the best of his memory as to the contents of the tape. However, it seems to me that when one looks at the evidence to which the appellant has directed attention, what he was being asked to do and what he in fact did was to refer to what he contended was to be heard on the tape. He was not giving the jury in that context an account of what he remembered being said.

In like vein when he was being cross-examined about the tape and in particular part of the conversation as recorded on the transcript of it (T 495): "I don't have a direct memory of what he was talking about at that time but when I listened to it previously there's obvious talking about social dinners, going out with his friends and Maria, it's all disjointed and for me to put in together is like a jigsaw puzzle without half the pieces" 
Later on in cross-examination, again at T 495, the appellant said when it was put to him that arrangements had been made for Wood to deliver money to him from cocaine sales: "No sir, there is no cocaine involved here, there is no cocaine involved with
Wood and I, nor with I and any other person." 
It seems to me that the passage from the summing-up complained of under this ground fairly reminded the jury of the appellant's evidence on the topic that was being addressed and I would add that no redirection was sought on this point. There is no substance in this ground.

His Honour erred in his application of the word `ludicrous' and in regard to the response of the appellant while under examination and cross-examination 
This ground refers to the judge's directions to the jury in the course of summarising the evidence given by the appellant under cross-examination. At p his Honour said: "He was cross-examined, you will recall, on the ludicrousness of the meeting place to conduct business of this nature and it was put to him that it had good approaches and people could be seen as they approached it but this he denied. He said it was Wood's choice and he just went there." 
The language chosen by his Honour was doubtless prompted by the following questions and answers in cross-examination of the appellant at T 414: "Q. You had deliberately not taken them [a reference to objects concerned with the building kit] to this meeting at Quirk Street? 
A. It was not appropriate to take it at that time.

Q. The whole meeting place wasn't appropriate? 
A. I agree.

Q. It wasn't appropriate for a commercial business transaction was it? 
A. No.

Q. It was ludicrous wasn't it? 
A. You can use that term.

Q. You would agree with it, wouldn't you? 
A. I would agree with that." 
Whilst the appellant has referred to further questions and answers in this same context, I see no justifiable cause for complaint in the passage to which this ground draws attention.

Having considered the various passages of the summing-up to which grounds (i) to (vii) relate, it does not seem to me either individually or collectively that they could be regarded as carrying any real risk that the jury's consideration of the evidence and of the issues might have been affected by error. I conclude that none of those grounds warrants any intervention by this
Court.

Ground 2: That the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory 
The next ground relied upon by the appellant is that the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The appellant has made thorough written submissions advancing reasons as to why the jury's verdict should be regarded as unsafe and unsatisfactory. This
Court must approach the consideration of that ground having regard to the criteria expressed in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] 
The appellant in his oral submissions today has protested his innocence of the charge, but he must understand of course that the appeal to this Court is not by way of re-hearing. This Court is here to correct errors of law.

There is one further matter I should refer to before considering the various aspects of the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground. The appellant has referred this Court to what occurred at his first trial, a trial which took place early in 1996, at which the presiding judge was Judge Shillington.

After many days the judge took the view that it was necessary to discharge the jury and an order was made to that effect on 27 February 1996. The reason for the discharge stemmed from information that belatedly became available in the course of the trial which would have afforded to the appellant valuable leads in seeking out material that could have affected the credibility of the man
Wood but as the information had come to knowledge too late, the trial had to be aborted.

The appellant relies upon that history as emphasising that the man Wood was not a man whose testimony was credible. However, of course, the jury at the second trial had to determine its outcome on the evidence that was adduced at the second trial.

The appellant urges consideration of the following features of the case in support of the submission that the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory, and I summarise: his prior good character, he being a man with no criminal convictions.
There was no evidence that he led other than a frugal lifestyle; no drugs or paraphernalia normally associated with drugs were found in the possession of the appellant even though he was arrested shortly after his most recent meeting with Wood; no drugs or materials normally associated with drugs were found either at the appellant's residence or at his business premises; there was nothing to link the importation of drugs with the appellant's import business; records showed that the appellant's wholesale furniture business was a genuine one and there was an explanation for the $33,000 found at his residence; there was evidence that supported the existence of the kit homes and which was consistent with the appellant's stated purpose for his meetings with
Wood; the appellant gave sworn evidence and was tested extensively in cross- examination.

I have summarised above the appellant's submissions closely developed by him in writing and elaborated upon in his oral submissions today. The appellant of course also relies upon the various matters addressed in Grounds (i) to (vii) and he does complain that the trial judge did not comprehensively review his case in the course of the summing-up, but he complains in particular that the judge did not place adequate emphasis upon the fact that the appellant was a man of good character.

I would observe in relation to the summing-up that the solicitor who appeared for the appellant sought only one further direction before the jury retired, the judge having completed his summing-up. That direction concerned the witness Wood. His Honour gave the jury further direction in response to that request. No complaint was made at the trial that the judge had failed fairly to put the appellant's case and on my assessment of the evidence and having considered the summing-up, I do not consider that there is any substance in the complaint now made in that regard.

It seems to me that the Crown case was a strong one. True it is that at the centre of that case was a confessed participant in the drug trade whose evidence had to be approached with great care, but the jury was given appropriate direction about that and there was much corroboration for his evidence. There were the taped conversations and there was a considerable quantity of evidence concerning the observations made of the appellant and
Wood together. Their meetings took place at a location which the jury was entitled to regard as being a strange place for a businessman to be effecting a transaction of the type described by the appellant. There was evidence of the monies handed over by Wood to the appellant which I read out when dealing with the case for the Crown.

This Court must recognise the advantage which the jury at the trial had in observing the various witnesses as well as hearing their testimony. My assessment of this case is that there was ample evidence to support the jury's verdict and that, accordingly, it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as its verdict indicates that it was. I see no reason for concluding that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.

For the above reasons, I consider that the appeal against conviction fails.

Sentence 
The maximum penalty for this category of offence, as provided for in s (2)(d)(i) is a fine not exceeding $100,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding twenty-five years or both.

The quantity of cocaine was 2.54 kilograms with a purity of 1.93 kilograms.
The cocaine was said to have a value of $848,000. The sentencing judge rightly observed that this was a very serious offence. His Honour found that the appellant's level of involvement was higher than that of Wood and it seems to me that that was an appropriate finding since the evidence was that he sold to
Wood and Wood sold to others in lesser quantities. His Honour expressly refrained from finding, although the appellant had an import business, that he was the person who had imported the cocaine.

The sentencing judge had regard to the fact that the appellant had no previous convictions. He specifically referred to the appellant's family ties, being a wife and three children, two of whom were children by a former marriage. He also had regard to the sentence imposed on Wood who received a five year sentence with a non-parole period of three years. Of course Wood had to be given some credit for the assistance to police in their case against the appellant, and he was lower in the distribution chain than the appellant.

The courts have repeatedly emphasised the gravity of this type of offence and the need for sentences to be imposed which properly recognise the element of deterrence.

The sentencing remarks disclose no error of approach by the sentencing judge and in my opinion the sentence imposed is not to be regarded as excessive but, on the contrary, as altogether appropriate. Indeed, when the hearing of the appeal came on today, the appellant did not seek to address this Court on the application for leave to appeal against severity of the sentence. I therefore propose orders as follows:
That the appeal against conviction be dismissed; and
That leave to appeal against sentence be granted but that that appeal be dismissed.

SMART J: I agree. 
GROVE J: I also agree. 
SMART J: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Studdert J. * * * 
