

South West Slopes Credit Union Limited versus Dawes and Anor Matter No Ca /95 [1998] NSWSC 258 (11 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 August 1998 ` SOUTH WEST SLOPES CREDIT UNION LIMITED versus CRAIG STEPHEN DAWES & ANOR` `CA 40770/95` `11 February 1998` `Priestley JA, Meagher JA, Sheller JA` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal` 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I will ask Meagher JA to give his reasons first. 
MEAGHER JA: In this somewhat unusual appeal the case brought by the plaintiffs was that they had a contract with the appellant pursuant to which the appellant would, amongst other things, provide that the motor vehicle which they were purchasing would be insured for the period of the loan on that vehicle, which was for four years. They relied on a discussion which they said they had in early August 1989 with Mr Elsley of the appellant about arranging for the loan. 
Mr Elsley did not contradict that there was such a discussion, although understandably he could not remember any details about it.

It is not disputed by anyone that during the plaintiffs' discussion with Mr
Elsley the question of insurance was mentioned.

The facts are that after the discussion, presumably as a result of it, two insurance policies came into existence. One was a loan protection insurance which was to run for forty-eight months, being the same term as the term of the loan which was to be repaid. The second policy was a policy of comprehensive motor vehicle insurance on the car which ran until 4 August ; that is, twelve months after the plaintiffs purchased the car with the aid of the defendant's loan. That policy lapsed after 4 August 1990 as no premium was paid for its renewal.

There was an accident, which was the fault of one of the plaintiffs, on 23
December 1990 and the plaintiffs, to their consternation, discovered that the vehicle was not insured. They then sued the current appellant in effect for breach of contract of its contractual duty, according to the plaintiffs, to effect insurance for the period of the loan even if that meant passing on to the plaintiffs the liability to pay the extra premiums.

Evidence given by the two plaintiffs on the critical conversation is not in all respects satisfactory. Each of the plaintiffs gave several versions of what the conversation was and I think it would be fair to say that the account of one plaintiff did not tally at all with the account of the other plaintiff.
As far as the appellant was concerned, they had no account of the conversation at all.

Basically what his Honour did was find that there was a conversation between the plaintiffs and the defendant whereby the defendant agreed, whether it meant to or not, to effect motor vehicle insurance on the vehicle for the whole of the period of the loan. This the defendant did not do.

The relevant evidence almost consists of one question and answer which is as follows: "Q. What were the conversations, if any, about the insurance? 
A. We were asked if - I asked if I could have it in the loan. I said it had to be insured throughout the whole loan and they said yes it would be." 
That is the evidence of Mr Dawes. It is not the only evidence of Mr Dawes but it is one portion of the evidence of Mr Dawes.

The word "it" when Mr Dawes said, "I said it had to be insured" fairly obviously is the motor vehicle, not the loan.

His Honour believed that evidence of Mr Dawes and he was entitled to. It is not to the point that there was other evidence coming both from Mr Dawes and from Miss Bosworth.

Mr Confos presented us with an elaborate and very able argument pointing out to us the manifest difficulties of placing great credence on the answer of Mr
Dawes, which I have just read out.

At the end of the day it is a matter for his Honour to believe what evidence he thought was plausible and that is the evidence which his Honour did believe. Once one reaches that point the end of the appeal is inevitable, the appeal must be dismissed with costs and those are the orders I propose.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree. 
SHELLER JA: I also agree. 
PRIESTLEY JA: The result is that the appeal is dismissed with costs. * * * 
