

Regina versus Rps Matter No Cca 60583/96 [1997] NSWSC 305 (13 August 1997) 
Regina versus R P S /96 August 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Hunt CJ at CL, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Ducker DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60583 of 1996 
HEARING DATE/S: 6 March 1997 
DELIVERED: 13 August 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus R P S 
JUDGMENT OF: GLEESON CJ, HUNT CJ at CL, HIDDEN J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - AJ Bellanto QC/JH Bryson 
RESPONDENT - RD Cogswell 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - James Fuggle, Lismore 
RESPONDENT - SE O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Appeal against conviction dismissed; leave to appeal against sentence refused 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s 103](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s103.html) - definition of substantial probative value" in [s 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s3.html) Dictionary does not apply - Interference with cross-examination of principal Crown witness. 
No. of pages: 46 
REGINA versus R P S 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of the Chief Judge at Common Law. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders. 
REGINA versus R P S 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The appellant (RPS) stood trial in the District Court at Lismore on eight charges of sexual assault upon his daughter (ISW), spread over many years.[1] The charges fall into two groups, which I list together with the jury's verdicts in relation to each: 
Count Period Age Nature of Charge Verdict 
The offences at Uki 
Feb-Dec 1983 4 Carnal knowledge* Not Guilty 
May 1985-Mar 1986 6-7 Carnal knowledge* Not Guilty 
Mar-July 1986 7 Sexual intercourse (penile) Not Guilty 
The offences at Sphinx Rock 
Mar-July 1987 8 Sexual intercourse (penile) Guilty 
Sept-Oct 1988 9 Sexual intercourse (penile) Not Guilty+ 
May-Sept 1989 10 Sexual intercourse (digital)[daggerdbl] Guilty 
May-Dec 1992 13 Sexual intercourse (digital)[daggerdbl] Guilty 
Mar-July 1993 14 Sexual intercourse (digital)[daggerdbl] Guilty * The carnal knowledge in the first and second counts was alleged to have consisted of penile intercourse. \+ This verdict was by direction.
 [daggerdbl] In accordance with the change in the legislation, each of the sixth, seventh and eighth counts alleged as a matter of aggravation that, at the time of the offences, the complainant was under the authority of the appellant.

Judge Ducker imposed sentences which effectively totalled penal servitude for eight years, consisting of a minimum term of six years and an additional term of two years.

Uki is a small town south-west of Murwillumbah. The appellant lived in a caravan on a property owned by friends by the name of Raphael. The caravan was situated about 500 metres from the Raphaels' house, but vision of the caravan from the house was obscured by trees. The appellant subsequently lived at
Sphinx Rock, half way between Uki and Nimbin to the south, where he had a block on communal property. He lived in a garden shed, which was the only building on the block. The complainant lived with her mother nearby at Sphinx
Rock.

The appellant and the complainant's mother had lived in a de facto relationship until the complainant was twenty months old. Upon the separation, the complainant stayed with her mother, who subsequently married another man.
The appellant spent a large part of the year away at sea on a fishing trawler.
When he was not at sea, he had frequent access to the complainant, and she often stayed with him overnight. This arrangement continued until the complainant was fourteen years old, when she complained to her mother that the appellant had been sexually assaulting her. Her age when giving evidence at the trial was seventeen years.

The Crown case depended upon the jury's acceptance of the complainant's evidence. As she had refused to undergo a medical examination, there was no medical evidence to support her allegations. The only direct support for her evidence was a partial admission by the appellant, the interpretation of which is challenged. On the Crown case, the appellant had admitted to the complainant's mother the allegations made by the complainant except for the penile intercourse.

Evidence was given of complaint, although the complainant conceded that she had never told anyone about the three incidents upon which the Uki charges were based. When she was eight, she told MM (a school friend) that her father had been "oofing" her, a word which they used for sexual intercourse. On the
Crown case, this complaint was made following the event which led to the fourth count. When she was fourteen, the complainant told her mother that her father had been "fingering" her and that he had made her have intercourse with him. Her mother gave evidence that the complainant had told her that the "touching up" and penile penetration by the appellant had been happening ever since she could remember.

The complainant agreed in cross-examination that she had said to the police that she had told her mother "Dad fingered me and he used his penis as well".
This was apparently put to her as an inconsistent prior statement. The appellant also called evidence from Ms Sandra Freriechs, a social worker with the Department of Community Services, that the complainant had told her that the appellant had penetrated her with his penis when she was ten years old but, after she had commenced to menstruate at ten and a half years old, he had only fondled her breasts and her genital area. That too was apparently led as a prior inconsistent statement.

The judge directed the jury to give a verdict of not guilty upon the fifth count at the conclusion of the Crown case, following the Crown's concession that it could not establish beyond reasonable doubt that the penile penetration took place between the dates nominated in the count and following the judge's refusal - because of prejudice to the appellant - to permit the
Crown to amend the count to accord with the period which the complainant had identified in her evidence (some four or five months earlier).

The appellant did not give evidence, but the Crown led evidence from the police officer in charge of the investigation that, following his refusal on legal advice to say anything, the appellant made a written statement: "I, Robert Peter Smith have never at any time or in any way vaginally penetrated my daughter [ISW]." 
The complainant was cross-examined to suggest that she was jealous of a relationship which the appellant had formed with a woman with two children, and that she was maintaining her allegations in order to pursue a compensation claim in accordance with the relevant victim's compensation legislation.
Arguments were also put that her evidence was internally inconsistent. It was put to her mother in cross-examination that the partial admission upon which the Crown relied had not been made.

Seven grounds of appeal were filed in relation to the convictions, and leave to appeal has been sought in relation to the sentences imposed. It is convenient to deal with the grounds of appeal in a different order to that in which they appear in the Notice of Appeal. As there is also some confusion in their numbering between the Notice of Appeal and the written submissions filed, I propose to refer to them by the order in which I deal with them.

The first ground to be dealt with is that which asserts that the judge erred in leaving to the jury as evidence of a partial admission a statement alleged to have been made by the appellant: "I never had intercourse with her but everything else she said is true".

This is an issue of substantial importance to another ground of appeal - that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The judge directed the jury that, if they interpreted the reference to "intercourse" in what was alleged to have been said as a reference to the ordinarily accepted sense of a male penetrating a female's vagina with his penis, and the statement as drawing a distinction between that particular form and other forms of sexual assault, then they could accept the statement as an admission that he had committed the last three offences charged (which related only to digital penetration - all the others alleging penile penetration).

The capacity of that evidence to amount to a partial admission depended upon the evidence as to what the appellant knew, at the time when he is alleged to have made the statement, of the detail of the allegations made against him by the complainant. The evidence of the complainant's mother was that, prior to that statement being made to her by the appellant, she had said to him: "You've been abusing her for the last ten years." 
She said that she had probably said "sexually abusing her". He had replied "Oh, come off it". She had gone on to say that the complainant had given her "a lot of detail, and I believe her". The appellant had replied "Look, I'm just a father who loves his daughter". The complainant's grandmother had then said to the appellant: "Are you saying that you've never touched her with your hands or fondled her or put your penis inside here?" 
The complainant's mother had originally recounted the statement in slightly different terms before an objection interrupted her: "Are you saying that you have never, never touched her or never fondled her with your fingers or never used ... ." 
The appellant had replied "That's right" to the grandmother's question. The complainant's mother had then told the appellant to leave the area within a week and to stay away for some months whilst the complainant sorted through her own feelings. There was an agreement reached for the payment of maintenance into a deposit account. She had telephoned him twice during the following week in order to ensure that he was carrying out what had been agreed. During the second call, she had said to the appellant: "Can't you just admit what you've done, or are you really calling your daughter a liar?" 
There was a pause, and then the appellant is alleged to have said: "I never had intercourse with her but everything else she said is true." 
The evidence that such a statement had been made was challenged in cross- examination, in that it was put to the complainant's mother that the appellant had not said this, but she had repeated that he had. The appellant did not give evidence; reliance was simply placed upon the written statement which he had given the police denying any form of vaginal penetration of the complainant. The judge directed the jury that the question asked in cross- examination - that the appellant had not made that statement to the complainant's mother - provided no evidence that he had not done so. There was no complaint in relation to that direction, which was (in my opinion) correctly given.

Objection was, however, taken to the direction that the statement, if made, amounted to an admission of the digital penetration alleged in the last three counts. The bases of the objections were that it had not been put to the appellant at that stage that he had digitally penetrated the complainant, and the judge had not specifically referred at that stage of the summing up to the appellant's written statement to the police as a denial even of digital penetration. The second part of that objection was not persisted with in the appeal. The judge had made it abundantly clear to the jury elsewhere in his summing up that the appellant had denied his guilt by the written statement which he made to the police. The point which the judge was making at this stage of the summing up - to which the general denial was only indirectly relevant - was that the appellant had never denied this particular telephone conversation with the complainant's mother, nor had he asserted that his understanding of the word "intercourse" was other than the ordinarily accepted one of a man penetrating a girl's vagina with his penis.

The argument on appeal conceded that it was open to the jury to accept that what the complainant's grandmother said to the appellant would have been understood by him as having been based upon the allegations which had been made by the complainant against him. What was submitted was that "fondled" meant no more than "cuddled" and that, as there was evidence that the appellant had cuddled the complainant in the appropriate manner, it was unreasonable to interpret it in any inappropriate sense. That submission cannot stand in the light of the context in which the word "fondled" (as well as the words "touched her with your hands") was used. That context (of putting his penis inside her) was clearly capable of conveying the suggestion that both the fondling and the touching were of an inappropriate sexual nature. It was a jury question whether, in the absence of any explanation from the appellant (sworn or otherwise), he had understood it in that sense, and thus whether the statement which he is alleged to have made to the complainant's mother constituted the partial admission in question.

It was in any event open to the jury to understand the words "fondled her" as meaning "fondled her with your fingers", as the evidence of the grandmother's question came out before objection was taken to it - even though the additional words "with your fingers" were replaced (in a slightly different position in the sentence) with the words "with your hands" in the evidence of that question as it ultimately came out. That disposes of the further submission made on appeal (although not the subject of either objection at the trial or a ground of appeal), that the judge misquoted the relevant evidence in his summing up. When outlining the evidence which the complainant's mother had given, the judge told the jury that she had said that the grandmother asked the appellant: "Are you saying that you've never touched her with your hand or fondled her or put your fingers inside her?" 
I should make it clear that this six day trial was conducted without a daily transcript. The absence of such a transcript placed an extraordinary burden upon everyone in this trial. Obviously enough, the evidence was not correctly quoted by the judge, but no complaint was made. The suggestion which arises from the absence of any complaint, that what was conveyed to the jury by the judge was the sense in which the evidence had been understood at the time, is confirmed by the fact that the judge specifically checked his note of this particular evidence with counsel immediately before commencing his summing up.

In my opinion, the judge did not err in leaving it to the jury to treat the statement alleged to have been made by the appellant to the complainant's mother as a partial admission that he had committed the three offences of digital penetration. I would reject this ground of appeal.

The second ground of appeal to be dealt with is that the evidence of complaint was "improperly" admitted. This is also an issue of some importance to the ground that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory. There was no objection taken to the admission of the evidence of complaint, so the description of its admission as improper is unjustified and it should not have been used. Nor was it a ground of appeal filed with the rest of the grounds.
It appears to have occurred to the appellant's legal representatives only recently as a result of reading this Court's judgment in Regina versus Geoffrey
Arthur Hall.2 Leave was granted to file the ground of appeal, but (because no objection was taken at the trial) leave must still be given to rely upon it.[3] Leave will only be granted to do so if the appellant can show that the error led to a miscarriage of justice.[4] 
The trial took place during September last year, so that the provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) applied to it, a fact which was referred to on a number of occasions during the trial.
The appellant's argument is that, as there was no express evidence that the events were fresh in the complainant's memory at the time when she made her complaint to her school friend (MM), and even less so when she made her complaint to her mother, the evidence was not admissible as evidence of the truth of what was said as "first hand hearsay" pursuant to [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) And, as it could only have been relevant to her credit, the evidence was inadmissible in accordance with [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s102.html)
Alternatively, if it was nevertheless admissible upon either basis, an order should have been made either excluding it as unfairly prejudicial [(ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html), [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html)) or limiting its use as misleading or confusing [(s ).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html) 
The admissibility of evidence of complaint was recently considered by this
Court in Regina versus BD.5 It is unnecessary to repeat what was said in that case, which took into account the submissions which had been made in the present case. Serious questions may well have arisen as to the admissibility of this evidence pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) if the issue had been raised at the trial. There is a necessary distinction between what is "fresh" in the memory of a person and what is merely remembered by that person. The requirement of freshness is to ensure reliability,[6] but it is difficult to see how statements made so long after the events could fairly be described as having been made when the events were "fresh" in the complainant's mind.

It is, however, unnecessary to explore that issue in the present appeal, because the evidence was clearly admissible upon the issue of the complainant's credit pursuant to [s (3)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s108.html), in that it was going to be suggested to her that her evidence had been fabricated. If objection had been taken, counsel then appearing for the appellant (who appeared as junior counsel on the appeal) would have been obliged to concede that such was the case, and leave would necessarily have had to be granted to the Crown to adduce the evidence in the evidence in chief of the complainant, her mother and her school friend.[7] It would in any event have been admissible in re-examination of the complainant pursuant to [s (3)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s108.html), and then in the evidence in chief of her mother and her school friend, as soon as her prior statements which were said to be inconsistent with her evidence had been put to her.[8] 
It was suggested in argument on the appeal that, if the complaint evidence had not been admitted, the inconsistent statements would not have been put to her, but almost the whole of the extraordinarily long cross-examination of the complainant consisted of an attack upon her credit, and this would have permitted the admission into evidence of the prior consistent statements pursuant to [s (3)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s108.html)
I do not accept that, if the issue had been raised, counsel would not also have wished to put to the complainant what were said to have been her prior inconsistent statements. It was of considerable forensic advantage to the appellant's case that they be used in that way.

As to the alternative submissions, no application was made to exclude the evidence of complaint in the exercise of any discretion to do so - statutory or otherwise. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) does not depart from the "Christie" discretion at common law.[9] [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) is but a stronger version of that discretion. It has not been (and it could not be) claimed that counsel's ignorance of the provisions of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) explains his failure to make such an application. No explanation is put forward at all. In the light of the attack which was to be made upon the complainant's credit, I see no basis upon which the evidence should have been excluded completely. As the judge firmly directed the jury that the evidence of complaint was relevant only to the complainant's credit, and was not evidence that the offences to which the complaint referred had been committed, the use to which that evidence could be put was strictly limited, and there was no unfair prejudice to the appellant's case arising from that restricted use.

I would accordingly refuse leave to rely upon this ground of appeal.

The third ground to be dealt with is that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory, as success upon this ground leads to a judgment of acquittal rather than a new trial.[10] The appellant must persuade this Court that - notwithstanding that, as a matter of law, there was evidence to sustain those verdicts - it was not open to the jury upon the whole of the evidence to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. This
Court must make its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of all of the evidence and, if it concludes that the jury ought to have had experienced a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant, or if it experiences for itself a reasonable doubt based upon the quality of the evidence as to the safety of the guilty verdicts, or if it concludes that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, the relevant conviction will be set aside.[11] 
The complainant agreed that the effect of her evidence was that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with her on hundreds of occasions, from the age of four years. She had never sought any medical treatment, and she was never medically examined. She refused a medical examination when the police commenced to investigate her allegations. She made no complaint until after the event which led to the fourth count (which involved penile intercourse) and when she was eight years old.

There was a dispute as to whether this first complaint (made to a school friend) referred to that particular event. According to the complainant herself, she told her friend that the appellant had made her "sleep with him and do it". She also said that she had told her friend that he had been "fingering" her. The school friend said that the complainant told her that he had been "oofing" her, a word which she said was used at school for "having sex". In her police statement, the friend had interpreted it as "sleeps" with her, and she agreed in cross-examination that it meant "sexual intercourse" although she had only had a vague idea at the time what that phrase entailed beyond "a male and a female doing something together". It was clearly open to the jury to conclude that this complaint referred to the event which led to the fourth count which, she said, had happened not long before.

The complainant made no complaint to her mother until she was fourteen years old. As stated earlier, that complaint referred to both "fingering" (or "touching me up") and penile sexual intercourse, and the complainant said that this had been happening ever since she could remember. The complaint was made in circumstances where the complainant had had an argument with her stepfather and had retired to her room in tears. Her mother had gone to her room to talk to her about her relationship with her stepfather. The complainant explained that the source of her distress was the conduct of the appellant rather than that of her stepfather.

This complaint was to some extent inconsistent with the history which the complainant gave to Ms Freriechs (the social worker) shortly afterwards, but it was not inconsistent with her statement to the police some months later.
The complainant told the social worker that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with her at the age of ten years (that is, four years earlier), but following the commencement of menstruation (when she was ten and a half years old) he had merely fondled her breasts and genital area but had done so over the last four years. The complainant had been crying and very distressed when giving the history, and she had "shut down" to such an extent that the interview had been terminated. So far as her statement to the police was disclosed in evidence, the complainant told them that the appellant had "fingered me and he used his penis as well", which she explained in cross- examination was the same as intercourse. No reference was made in the evidence to the period over which this was alleged in the statement to have occurred.

The inconsistency produced by the history given to the social worker was not so much in the description of what had happened as in the timing of the penile intercourse. If, as the complainant told the social worker, there had only been such sexual intercourse when she was between the ages of ten and ten and a half years, this excluded the fourth count upon which the appellant was found guilty, which was founded upon an event which happened when the complainant was only eight years old. In my view, it was open to the jury to discount this inconsistency in the light of the circumstances in which the history was taken by the social worker. The complainant explained the absence of any earlier complaint by reference to the appellant's "power" over her. He had told her that it was their secret, and she had believed him. She had thought that every child growing up had to go through "the same thing" as part of growing up, and that it was normal, not unusual. She came to understand that it was not normal when she realised that no-one else talked about it. She said that "it just didn't feel right".

The appellant pointed to various inconsistencies in the complainant's evidence. Her clothing was always sent back to her mother for washing after she had stayed with the appellant, yet her mother had noticed no blood on that clothing which would have been expected if there had been penile intercourse at a very young age. (The complainant herself never claimed that she saw blood on her clothing.) She initially gave evidence that, in relation to the fourth count, the appellant had penetrated her vagina with his penis when lying on his side from behind her. In cross-examination, she said that she had no recollection of this happening from behind. She told the police that the appellant had not been wearing any clothes on this occasion, but she conceded in cross-examination that she had only been guessing about this because she knew that he never wore any night attire in bed.

I do not regard those inconsistencies as demonstrating that there is any significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. They were no more than peripheral matters,[12] and I am unpersuaded that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt. I experience no such doubt myself based upon the quality of the complainant's evidence. I would therefore reject this ground of appeal that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The fourth ground to be dealt with is that the first four verdicts were inconsistent as a result of a jury compromise. The appellant must persuade this Court that the verdict of guilty on the fourth count cannot stand together with the verdicts of not guilty on the first three counts - in the sense that no reasonable jury applying their mind properly to the facts of the case could have reached the conclusion that he was guilty of the offence charged in the fourth count if he were not guilty on the first three counts.[13] 
In considering this issue of inconsistency, it is not the role of this Court to substitute its view of the facts for that view which was open to the jury.
Juries cannot always be expected to act in accordance with strictly logical considerations and with the strict principles of law which have been explained to them. This Court could in an appropriate case conclude that the verdicts of not guilty on the first three counts resulted from the jury's "merciful" view of the facts in relation to those counts, applying their innate sense of fairness and justice in place of the strict principles of law. Sometimes, it may appear to a jury that, although a number of counts have been technically established, justice is sufficiently met by convictions for less than the full number. Appellate courts should not be too ready to conclude that, because different verdicts cannot be reconciled as a matter of strict logic, the jury had acted unreasonably in arriving at the verdict of guilty. Where, however, the different verdicts represent an affront to logic and common sense which is unacceptable and which strongly suggests a compromise of the performance of the jury's duty, and where intervention becomes necessary to prevent a possible injustice, the relevant conviction will be set aside.[14] Success upon this ground of appeal ordinarily leads to a new trial of the count upon which the appellant was found guilty as a result of the compromise, although the relief which is appropriate in the particular case will depend upon the facts of that case.[15] 
It was conceded on appeal that the partial admission (the subject of the first ground dealt with) provides a reasonable explanation for the verdicts of guilty of the last three counts. It was nevertheless argued that, once the jury rejected the complainant's evidence in relation to the first three counts, there could be no reasonable explanation for finding him guilty of the fourth count as well. In seeking to fulfil his obligation to demonstrate that this was so, the appellant discounted the complainant's age, as she was only one year older when the event which was alleged to have led to the fourth count occurred than she was when that which was alleged to have led to the third count. It was also argued that the internal inconsistencies in her evidence relating to the fourth count were greater than her evidence relating to the first three counts. To some extent, however, this only reflected the fact that far more evidence was given in relation to the fourth count than was given in relation to the other three.

The principal issues which arose in relation to this ground of appeal were three in number: (1) the different locations where the events leading to the first three counts and where that leading to the fourth count took place; (2) the absence of any complaint until after the fourth of those events took place; and (3) the circumstances in which the jury's verdicts were reached.

Not much can be said about the first of those issues. It was open to the jury to conclude that there was less privacy available at the appellant's premises at Uki (which were close to another residence) than at his premises at Sphinx
Rock, so that it was less likely that the offences alleged to have occurred there would have occurred in such a situation. The absence of any complaint until after the offence alleged in the fourth count is of greater significance, and (as already stated) it was open to the jury to discount the inconsistency provided by the history given to the social worker which would have excluded the offence alleged in the fourth count. It was argued that the complaint made to the school friend was non-specific to any particular count, but it is the fact that complaint was not made until that time which is significant in distinguishing the different verdicts.

More emphasis was placed by the appellant upon the third of those issues, the circumstances in which the jury's verdicts were reached. The jury retired to consider their verdicts at 1.55 pm on the Monday of the second week of the trial. At some time after 4.00 pm, the jury asked whether their decision needed to be unanimous and what would happen if they were split so that "on any of the counts" some found the appellant guilty and others found him not guilty. The judge directed them that their verdict on each count had to be unanimous, but he went on to say: "Now, it is implicit, as I say, from this that you have been unable to reach a verdict so far on at least some of these counts, if not all of them. I do have the power to discharge you from giving a verdict but I can only do that after a certain time limit has elapsed and I should only do so if I am satisfied that there is no likelihood of a genuine agreement being reached after further deliberation." 
A "Black" direction followed.[16] In the course of that direction, the judge said: "So, in the light of what I have already said, I have to ask you to again retire and see if you can reach a verdict. If you would wish to bring your deliberations to an end for today, you can come back tomorrow morning, any time after 9.30 but there is quite some time to go yet before the necessary period has elapsed before I could discharge you." 
The jury retired again at 4.33 pm. At 5.27 pm, they returned to court, and the judge said: "Members of the jury it is now nearly half past five, I could not release you before ten to eight this evening. I think perhaps it is better that you come back tomorrow morning.
 ...

May I ask you Mr Foreman, I do not want to know any particulars, but has the jury reached any verdicts on any count?" 
The word "release" would probably have been interpreted (as intended) as meaning "discharge". The foreman replied: "Yes, we've reached verdicts on four counts." 
As there had already been one verdict by direction, this left three counts upon which they had yet to reach agreement.

The jury were released for the evening, but they sent a note to the judge before they left: "We have reached a verdict on four counts, if we do not reach a verdict on all counts do all counts get discharged, or just the ones we have not reached a verdict on?" 
The judge directed them at 9.00 the next morning that he would take the verdicts which had been agreed, and that those verdicts would stand. He continued: "If you cannot reach agreement on the verdict on any of the remaining charges after the expiration of the required time, if there is no prospect of agreement at that time, your disagreement will be recorded. It will then be up to the Director of Public Prosecutions to decide whether to have that charge, or those charges, upon which you have not agreed re-tried before another jury.
You should not be influenced by that, or feel that there is any compulsion upon you to reach a verdict. However, if your discussions are fruitful and conducted in the way in which I indicated to you yesterday, if you can reach a verdict so much the better. But I do remind you again that you must consider each charge separately on its own merits. Thank you members of the jury. That time will expire during the course of the morning."[17] 
The jury retired again at 9.21 am and they brought in their verdicts at 11.23 am.

Before turning to the appellant's argument based upon these circumstances, it should be pointed out that the restriction that a jury which is unlikely to agree cannot be discharged until they have been retired for more than six hours was deleted from [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s56.html) of the [Jury Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/) in .[18] The appellant's argument nevertheless proceeded (correctly) upon the assumption that the jury would have understood from those directions that there was "a certain time limit" imposed before a particular course could be followed. The appellant says that, by a simple mathematical calculation based upon what they were told in the third of the passages which I have quoted, the jury would have known that that limit was six hours. The appellant then says that the verdicts were delivered just within that time limit, and thus the jury had compromised in relation to the verdict of guilty on the fourth count (or perhaps on other counts as well) so as to avoid being discharged at the expiration of that time limit.

Assuming (without necessarily accepting) the appellant's mathematics that the verdicts were delivered just within that time limit, this argument nevertheless falls down in relation to the further assumption which it requires, that the jury would have believed that they would be discharged if they had not reached their verdicts within that period of six hours. On the contrary, the judge said no more than that, if they were unable to agree at the time when the first question was asked, he could not discharge them until the required period had elapsed, and even then only if he were satisfied that there was no likelihood of a genuine agreement being reached after further deliberation. He repeated that on a number of occasions. He did not say that he must discharge them as soon as that time had elapsed, and in my view it is reading far too much into the suggested timing of the verdicts to make the further assumption required by the appellant's argument, that the jury had mistakenly believed that that is what must happen to them if they had not by then reached agreement.

There is another problem with the appellant's argument. It is sheer speculation that the four counts upon which the jury said that they had agreed by the end of the Monday included the three verdicts of not guilty which they subsequently delivered. This would have meant that they had also agreed upon one of the verdicts of guilty. If this were so, it is unlikely to have been only one of the three counts covered by the partial admission, and it would therefore have to have been upon the fourth count. That is even more unlikely but, if it were so, the appellant's argument is necessarily destroyed.

In my view, it would be far more likely that the jury had by that time agreed upon the four verdicts of guilty, and the three counts upon which they had yet to agree were those upon which they subsequently found the appellant not guilty. It is, of course, unnecessary for me to go that far. It is sufficient for me to say that the appellant has not persuaded me that the guilty verdict on the fourth count was the result of a compromise - whether forced upon them by the directions which the judge gave or otherwise.

I would reject this ground of appeal that the verdicts on the first four counts are inconsistent.

The fifth ground of appeal to be dealt with asserts that the judge erred by making a comment in the presence of the jury at the conclusion of the Crown case which suggested that the appellant would or should give evidence, thereby (it is said) infringing [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s20.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). That subsection states that, when commenting upon the failure of an accused person to give evidence, a judge must not suggest that he failed to give evidence because he was guilty, or because he believed that he was guilty, of the offence charged.

What happened was this. At the conclusion of the Crown case, and after the verdict by direction on the fifth count had been taken, counsel for the appellant announced that he was calling Ms Freriechs, the social worker. The judge replied: "You must call your client before you can call any other witness. ... That is what the law says. It is customary, and the accused must be called first." 
Counsel for the appellant asked to make submissions in the absence of the jury, and the jury left the court for their morning break. The judge was then told that the appellant would not be giving evidence, and he immediately accepted that Ms Freriechs could therefore be called. The court adjourned for the morning break. Upon resumption, there was some discussion with counsel about the judge's right to comment under the new [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) that there had been no denial by the appellant of the partial admission made to the complainant's mother (which was the subject of the first ground of appeal dealt with). Counsel for the appellant obtained instructions and announced that his client still would not be giving evidence. The jury returned to court and they were informed by the judge - no doubt because of the longer than usual break - that he had been dealing with "a few other matters not related to the trial". The judge sought and obtained confirmation from the Crown prosecutor that the Crown case was complete, and Ms Freriechs was then called in the appellant's case. That was on the Friday morning.

The summing up commenced first thing on the Monday. The judge directed the jury that the appellant bore no onus of proof, and that he had no onus to present any evidence. He was entitled to put the Crown to proof of its case.
The judge gave extensive directions of the consequences of the appellant's exercise of his right not to give evidence. He drew the jury's attention to the written denial which the appellant had given to the police. He directed the jury that they must not conclude that the appellant had elected not to give evidence because he was guilty of the offences charged against him, or that he had by not giving evidence admitted his guilt. He also directed the jury that they could nevertheless take that election into account in judging the weight to be given to the evidence of the complainant's mother as to the partial admission, although he reminded them again of the written denial. All of this was extensively elaborated by the judge, in a way concerning which there has not been (and there could not be) any complaint.

Before turning to the appellant's argument based upon these circumstances, it should be pointed out that the law does not say that the accused person must be called to give evidence before any other witnesses. It has often been said that it is desirable that he be called first, as he perforce will be present when other witnesses give evidence before him and the comment may be made that he has tailored his own evidence to fit in with theirs.[19] The judge was correct when he said that it is customary to call the accused first (if he is to be called at all), but he was wrong to say that he must be.

The appellant's argument on appeal was that the jury would have inferred from the judge's comments at the time when the issue arose that: 
The judge thought that: the appellant would be giving evidence; he should have given evidence: and he had not given evidence because he was guilty.

The appellant's failure to give evidence was an irregularity.

He had not given evidence because he was guilty, or because he believed that he was guilty, of the offences charged.

Complaint was also made on appeal that no attempt had been made by the judge to explain to the jury at that time that the appellant had a right not to give evidence, and that the judge "misrepresented" the issue which had been discussed when he told the jury upon their return to court by saying that he had been dealing with matters unrelated to the trial. It was submitted that the prejudicial effect of what the judge said was in any event incurable.

I accept that the jury would have concluded from what was said that an accused person usually does give evidence, that the judge thought that the appellant would be giving evidence, and that the appellant's failure to do so was a departure from what is normally done, but I do not accept that there is any real prospect that the jury drew the other conclusions enumerated. We were not invited to listen to the sound recording taken of the proceedings to judge the tone of voice with which the judge made the comment. We do, however, have the affidavit of the appellant's solicitor in support of an application for the transcript to be taken out of this particular incident.[20] After saying that he was in a position to observe the judge's demeanour and to hear his tone of voice, the solicitor says: "I formed the view and gained the specific impression from his Honour's demeanour and tone that the remarks conveyed a suggestion that Mr Bryson was unaware of proper procedure." 
I accept that such an impression would also have been conveyed to the jury. It is nevertheless significant that the solicitor does not suggest that any other impression may well have been conveyed to the jury (even though it may not have been conveyed to himself as a lawyer). That would have been an important matter to put forward in support of the application for the transcript to be taken out.

It is even more significant that counsel made no complaint at the time that the jury may well have understood the judge as conveying those other impressions (although he thought it necessary for the jury to be out of court whilst he made submissions), and he did not ask the judge to give an explanation to the jury then and there of the appellant's right not to give evidence. Nor did he suggest that the prejudice created was incurable except by the discharge of the jury. On appeal, the absence of a request for either the discharge of the jury or an explanation to be given to the jury was sought to be explained by the degree of antipathy which, it was said, had been generated between counsel and the judge during the course of the Crown case (an issue raised by the remaining grounds of appeal yet to be dealt with).
Counsel had not been so overborne by the judge at other places in the trial, and he appears to have had no difficulty on those other occasions in forcefully putting his arguments to the judge. The significance of his failure to seek any relief at the time, coupled with what is said in the solicitor's affidavit, is that counsel also does not appear himself to have thought that these other impressions would have been conveyed to the jury.

It was argued that the suggestion asserted to have been conveyed by the judge's comment, that the appellant had not given evidence because he was guilty (or because he believed that he was guilty) of the offences charged, would have had the practical effect of negating the elaborate directions which the judge gave in his summing up on the next day of the trial that no such conclusion could be reached.[21] That argument must be rejected. I do not accept that such a suggestion was ever conveyed to the jury. Even if it were, the argument is (with respect) a completely fanciful one in the light of the extensive directions which were given.

The submission that what was said was in any event incurable must also be rejected. If requested to do so, the judge could have said to the jury at the time that he had mistakenly thought that the appellant would be called to give evidence, and that his intention had been only to point out to his counsel that it was customary to call the accused first so that no suggestion could be made that the accused had tailored his evidence to that given by other witnesses called by him. If this had been said by the judge, coupled with short directions as to the appellant's right not to give evidence and the unavailability of any inference of guilt from his exercise of that right, there could have been no unfavourable inferences at all drawn against the appellant. The allegation that the judge "misrepresented" the issue which had been discussed in the absence of the jury is without foundation, and the allegation should not have been made.

I am satisfied that there was no miscarriage of justice resulting from what was said. I would therefore reject this ground of appeal.

The two remaining grounds of appeal may be dealt with together. They assert that the trial miscarried because of what are said to have been the continuous interjections by the judge "directed towards defence counsel" and because the judge had demonstrated, or had given the appearance, that he had (or might have had) a prejudice against the defence case. The judge is alleged to have displayed bias (both in the presence and absence of the jury) and to have given to the jury the perception that he was biased.

Before turning to the material upon which these grounds of appeal are based, it is only fair to repeat the fact that this six day trial was conducted without a daily transcript, and to point out that the absence of such a transcript placed an extraordinary burden upon everyone in this trial.
Unfortunately, this was not an isolated example of the lack of adequate resources supplied to the District Court for trials of this length (at least in some country areas), and steps must be taken to ensure that transcripts are supplied in such cases. What this Court is initially concerned with, however, is not the cause of what happened but rather its effect upon the fair minded and informed observer, and whether it gave rise to a reasonable apprehension or suspicion on the part of that observer that the judge had a prejudice or a bias against the defence case.[22] 
A report from the trial judge to this Court[23] stated that, from his experience of counsel appearing for the appellant at the trial both in a previous trial and in this trial, he had reached the reluctant conclusion that his misquotations of the evidence in the present case were deliberate, and that the continued transgressions of counsel had required him to interrupt the trial in order to ensure that the witnesses were not unfairly treated and the jury not misled. The judge denied any prejudice or bias. There is authority supporting the drawing of a distinction in relation to the course which a judge may take to cure the effects of an error or misconduct on the part of counsel, depending upon whether counsel has acted deliberately or innocently.[24] It was no doubt the conclusion which the judge had reached in relation to the conduct of counsel which led him to act in the way he did.
Once again, however, these particular grounds of appeal are not concerned with the issue as to whether that conclusion was correct but rather with the issue as I have already stated it - whether what happened gave rise to a suspicion on the part of the fair minded and informed observer that the judge had a prejudice or a bias against the defence case.

The problems arose very early in the cross-examination of the complainant.
Counsel asked her whether she called her stepfather "Dad", and she said that she sometimes did. She was asked to give an example of when she would do so.
An objection by the Crown prosecutor as to the relevance was overruled. She agreed that she may have referred to him as "Dad" at one time or another when speaking to her friends, but she denied that, if she had when she was younger told a person that she had gone "to the beach with Dad", she had been referring to her stepfather. She was asked: "So when you said before you may have referred to him as Dad previously, it wouldn't have been on one of those occasions?" 
The judge intervened, describing the question as "very ambiguous", because it may mean calling her stepfather "Dad" when she spoke to him or when she was speaking of him to someone else.

In my view, the intervention was not warranted upon the basis that the question was ambiguous. It used the phrase "referred to him as Dad", and it was directed to an assumed statement made by her referring to her stepfather as "Dad" when she spoke to someone else. In other circumstances, the intervention may perhaps have been warranted upon the issue of relevance to either the issues in the case or to the credit of the witness. We have not been referred to any evidence in the case that the complainant had ever told a friend that she had been to the beach with "Dad". There appears to have been a somewhat remote issue as to the complainant's relationship with her stepfather, so that the name by which she either called him or referred to him was relevant, but this was an example of stretching a point to its limit. Even so, an intervention upon this basis would not have been warranted so early in the cross-examination.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s103.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) limits cross-examination as to credit to adducing evidence which has "substantial probative value". The "probative value" of evidence is defined in the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s3.html)
Dictionary as meaning "the extent to which the evidence could rationally affect the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue", but both the context in which that phrase appears and the subject matter of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s103.html) indicate that that definition does not apply.[25] That is made clear by the terms of subs (2), which demonstrate that the evidence must have probative value in relation to the credit of the witness. Evidence adduced in cross- examination must therefore have substantial probative value in the sense that it could rationally affect the assessment of the credit of the witness.[26]
Such an interpretation accords with the intention of the Law Reform
Commission.[27] The addition of the word "substantial" nevertheless imposes a limitation upon the common law, when almost anything was allowed upon the issue of credit unless it clearly had no material weight whatsoever upon that issue.[28] That limitation is an important one.

Counsel must, however, be given some freedom in cross-examination - whether it relates to a fact in issue or to credit. They are not obliged to come directly to the point; they are entitled to start a little distance from the point and to work up to it. Some counsel are more succinct than others. Some will put the point quickly and clearly. Others will worry the point, like a dog with a bone, and will set the teeth of everyone (including the jury) on edge. Trial judges are expected to have the patience (but, hopefully, not the poverty) of
Job.[29] That is not always an easy role to perform. Counsel will sometimes - either through incompetence or quite deliberately - stretch a trial judge's patience to the extent that it will produce an adverse reaction. These are things which we have all faced at one time or another, and no doubt we have all succumbed to that temptation or lost our patience at times. That is only human nature, but if the consequence is unfairly to influence the jury's verdict then a miscarriage of justice may well result.

There is, of course, nothing wrong with an intervention by the judge in order to clarify some ambiguity in the question or the answer. Otherwise, the judge is treading on dangerous ground if it is counsel for the accused who is being challenged and if there has been no objection by the Crown prosecutor. Where the problem arises in relation to a perceived misquotation of the evidence, the same danger arises.

A persistent failure by counsel - again, either through incompetence or quite deliberately - to quote the evidence correctly, either in cross-examination or in address, poses a particularly acute problem for the trial judge. There is a practical limitation upon the obligation of the Crown prosecutor to object every time, in that repeated breaches by counsel for the accused are usually calculated to make the prosecutor appear to be obstructive in the eyes of the jury. The best course is to warn counsel for the accused in the absence of the jury to take more care and then, if that warning is disregarded, to repeat it in the presence of the jury. But such an approach is not always practical. If the judge feels obliged to intervene, extreme care must be taken to give the appearance that the interaction is intended to be helpful rather than of a disciplinary nature. Again, the consequence of repeated interventions may otherwise be a miscarriage of justice. Whenever the judge interrupts counsel for the accused in the absence of an objection, the impression may be conveyed that the judge was on the side of the prosecution and did not think that the accused had any defence The trial judge's entitlement to intervene is extensively examined in Regina versus Lars,30 and it is unnecessary to repeat what was said there.

I have spent a little time upon this first incident in order to show its very minor nature. It was unfortunate that it arose so soon in the cross- examination. Nevertheless, the fair minded observer - that hypothetical figure whose apprehension or suspicion of prejudice or bias is the touchstone - is informed in the sense that there is attributed to him or her a broad knowledge of the material facts as ascertained by the appellate court, which include any explanation which the judge may give and which is acceptable to that appellate court.[31] I would accept the statement of the trial judge in the present case that he had previously had problems with counsel appearing for the appellant at the trial. This would explain why the judge unfortunately had to interrupt so soon in the cross-examination. Many of the other incidents were of a similarly minor nature; others were of a more significant nature. Many interruptions by the judge have been shown to have been justified.

Shortly after this first incident, the complainant agreed that she had changed her surname by deed poll from that of her father. She said that she would have started using that name late in 1994, but she disagreed that it was as early as February 1994. She was then shown a letter from a named doctor (said to have been dated 17 February 1995) and asked whether, having read it, it suggested that she had been using the new surname as early as February 1995.
That question was clearly inadmissible. On appeal, it was sought to be justified on the basis of [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s44.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), which permits the cross-examiner to ask a witness whether, having looked at a particular document (which must not be identified), he or she stands by the evidence which had been given by that witness.[32] That section expressly does not permit the cross-examiner to put directly into evidence the contents of someone else's document unless the fact asserted in it is itself admissible.
Counsel had not satisfied the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s106.html) in order to make it admissible pursuant to [s (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s44.html) 
The judge, however, appears to have confused the date of the letter (February ) with the date at which the letter suggested that the complainant had been using her new surname. This, too, was a very minor incident.

The third incident of which complaint is made on appeal (I leave to one side a harmless question which the judge himself asked of the witness) arose when counsel for the appellant was endeavouring to make something of the inconsistency between the evidence of the complainant (that the appellant had had intercourse with her) and her statement to the police (that he had used his penis). When the witness said that her statement had been made three years earlier, counsel asked: "Well, in '94 it had been how many years since you'd had intercourse with your father. Five, hadn't it?" 
The judge said: "That's not really a fair question. It's a question of what she was saying in doesn't relate back to the first time he had intercourse with her." 
The question asked by counsel appears to have been directed to her memory of the event itself rather than the language by which she described it. As such, it was irrelevant unless it assumed some significance in the different terminology used. The judge was entitled to describe the question as unfair upon that basis.

The fourth incident of which complaint is made on appeal arose when counsel had obtained agreement from the complainant that she had told her mother "He's been touching me up and he used his penis too", and then asked her: "I'll just stop there at that point Miss [W] and ask you, when you gave evidence earlier on today where you said, `Dad has fingered me and made me have intercourse with him', is that the point at which you say you agree with what you said in your mother's conversation?" 
The judge said that he did not understand the question. He was clearly entitled to do so. The fact that the witness had not complained when he did so does not mean that she would not have done so if asked.

The fifth incident arose following a series of questions - extending over more than a page of transcript - as to the number of students at the school which the complainant had attended. The judge queried the relevance of the detail into which the cross-examination was descending. Counsel replied that, as the fact that she went to school had been led in chief (that was done in order to give some idea of the year in which one of the sexual assaults was alleged to have taken place), he was "exploring" that fact. A trial judge is entitled to impose reasonable limits upon the extent of such an exploration when no discernible relevance had been demonstrated after a reasonable time. That limit had been more than exceeded in this case. On appeal, it was suggested that there was a "forensic purpose of contextualising lack of complaint". No such response was forthcoming at the trial, but the suggestion now made does not justify the unproductive time spent on this line of cross-examination.

The sixth incident arose during the cross-examination of the complainant as to the time during which the appellant was away on a trawler during the year. She had earlier stated that he had quit working on the trawlers for a year, which she said (she was "pretty sure") was 1990. She agreed that he could be away in total eight to ten months a year. This agreement took some time to achieve, though not through any difficulty counsel had with the witness. He asked her: "Apart from 1990, what years wasn't he away for those months?" 
The witness replied "sometimes he'd come back halfway through it". Counsel said: "I didn't ask you when he came back, I'm just asking when he was away, not when he came back?" 
He asserted that the answer was unresponsive. The judge pointed out that counsel had asked how long the appellant had been away, and that the witness was entitled to answer by reference to when he went away and when he came back. It may be that the witness was endeavouring to answer in that way, although the transcript does not suggest that counsel had interrupted her. In my view, counsel was in strictness entitled to have the witness merely nominate a year rather than think aloud, but the whole incident was again a minor one.

The seventh incident arose out of cross-examination directed to the second count. The complainant said that this sexual assault had occurred in 1986, and that it had been during the school holidays. She was reminded that she had agreed that it was after Christmas. Counsel asked whether she meant Christmas , coming into 1987, or Christmas 1985, coming into 1986. Following an objection, counsel asked: "Is it the case that your evidence is that it was after Christmas 1986?" 
The judge pointed out that that was not her evidence and that, as she had said it was in 1986 and after Christmas, it was obviously at the beginning of 1986.
(There was some confusion by reference to 1995 and 1996, but the meaning was clear.) On appeal, it was asserted that counsel was entitled to pinpoint precisely which Christmas she was referring to, before cross-examining her as to what she had said to the police in her statement - that it had been after
Christmas and during the school holidays at the beginning of 1987. In my view, counsel was entitled to do so, and that the judge was wrong to have imposed upon counsel the conclusion which he had himself drawn from the evidence. As it happened, the statement of that conclusion highlighted the inconsistency, and no harm was done.

The eighth incident arose out of the same line of cross-examination. The complainant had agreed in chief that she was six or seven years old when the offence pleaded in the second count took place. Counsel then appearing for the appellant asked her again how old she was. The judge said: "Six or seven was the evidence." There was no complaint made at the time. It is now said that he was answering the question for the witness. Counsel was not, of course, bound by the answer given in chief, and this may have been an attempt to obtain from the witness a different answer to that which she had earlier given. If so, it was an extraordinarily inept way of going about it. Nevertheless, the incident shows the wisdom of a judge remaining silent however irritating the manner in which the cross-examination is being conducted.

The ninth incident arose out of cross-examination upon the third count. The complainant was reminded of evidence which it was said that she had given earlier - that the appellant had been lying on top of her and moving, and then that the appellant had removed her night attire. She was asked: "Do you still say in light of what I've just put to you that he was having intercourse at that time?" 
The judge pointed out that the witness had merely answered two questions asked by the Crown prosecutor in the order in which he had asked them without necessarily saying that the two events had happened in that sequence. This question was justified on appeal as "clarifying the order in which these events occurred". The evidence in chief had been: "Q. You said that your father had intercourse with you in the barn? A. Yes.

Q. Are you able to just describe what position you were in at the time that that happened? A. I was laying on the bed, he was laying on top of me.

Q. And he was moving was he? A. Yes.

Q. Before that occurred you said you had some form of clothing on, what clothes did you have? A. A nightie and undies.

Q. Did something happen with those clothes? A. He took them off." 
The previous day, she had said that, when she got into bed - "I lay down under the covers, he pulled my undies and nightie off and then he penetrated me with his penis ... he penetrated my vagina [with] his penis." 
There was no basis for the suggestion implicit in the question which led to the judge's intervention that she had given contradictory evidence. The intervention was justified.

The tenth incident of which complaint is made on appeal arose during the cross-examination of the complainant in relation to the long absence of any complaint by her. In her evidence in chief, she had given as a reason for not complaining earlier the appellant's statement to her that "this is our secret". In cross-examination, she agreed that she specifically, clearly and vividly remembered him saying those words to her and that they had stuck in her memory. After an initial doubt, she said that she had said in her statement to the police that it had been a secret. The Crown prosecutor drew counsel's attention to par 11 of her statement, which was read to her and which said "I didn't tell anyone because he told me not to tell anyone." The complainant agreed that this passage did not suggest that she had told the police that the appellant had said "It's our secret". Counsel then asked: "Would you accept that there's nothing in your statement to the police that uses those words `It's our secret' or similar words." 
The judge asked what was meant by "or similar words", and that phrase was withdrawn. The judge asked whether those words were not "somewhat similar".
The reference would have been understood as being to the words "he told me not to tell anyone". Counsel disagreed. He then asked the complainant whether she had used the word "secret" to the police, and she replied that she was not sure. On appeal, it was argued that the judge should not have expressed his conclusion that the words were similar. The point made in the cross- examination was - as were so many of the points sought to be made - a very minute one. Whether she had said that she had been told to say nothing or that it was their secret provides nothing of substantial probative value to the credit of the witness, as [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s103.html) requires. The judge's comment was not unjustified. Whether or not it should have been expressed just at that time is less certain, but by then the judge was entitled to conclude that the cross-examination was needlessly long and that it was often failing to comply with [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s103.html) 
There are over forty such incidents detailed in the written submissions.
Despite a direction by this Court that specific page references be given to those passages where it is suggested the basis for the judge's intervention would be demonstrated to have been unjustified, in most cases the references have not been given. The appellant's success rate so far does not suggest that the considerable time involved in tracing these matters through the transcript will assist in demonstrating the apprehended prejudice and bias claimed by him. I have nevertheless considered with care the remaining written submissions and the oral arguments put during the hearing of the appeal. It is, in my view, unnecessary to deal with each of these further in detail. None of them - taken singly or together with those which I have already dealt with - persuade me that the fairminded and informed observer would have had a reasonable apprehension or suspicion that the judge had a prejudice or a bias against the defence case. Far more likely, in my opinion, such an observer would have gained the strong impression that the judge was attempting with some difficulty to keep within bounds a barrister who was determined to cross- examine the complainant in a manner calculated (deliberately or otherwise) to destroy her credit as a witness by fair means or foul.

A random example of such behaviour, taken from one of the remaining incidents of which complaint is made on appeal, arose on the second day of the cross- examination. Counsel was asking the complainant about the clothing worn by the appellant when a sexual assault occurred in Queensland. Because of its location, that assault was not the subject of a charge in this trial. The complainant agreed that she was "quite sure" that the appellant was wearing what was described as his Whitsunday jumper and jeans. Counsel obtained a further assent from her that she was "quite sure", and asked: "You don't just think that, you're quite sure of it?" to which the complainant replied "I'm sure". Counsel then drew her attention to the statement which she had made to the police in February 1994, in which she had said "I think he was wearing his Whitsunday jumper and jeans", and asked: "Is there any reason why you would think in February 1994 what he was wearing yet today be so sure?" to which she replied "Sorry, I don't know how to answer that". The judge asked the complainant whether she understood the distinction being made in the question between "think" (as indicating that she was not sure) and "sure", and she said "I'm pretty sure". Counsel asked "Not quite sure, pretty sure?" and she said "Yes". Counsel then asked: "See, I put it to you again Miss [W] that you're forgetting your script, your statement being your script, what do you say to that?" 
The following interchange took place: "HIS HONOUR: Well, I don't really think that's a fair question because a witness ...

BRYSON: Well ... (not transcribable) .. being put, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: ... but a witness is not expected to memorise the whole of a statement like an actor learning a script ...

BRYSON: With respect, your Honour, I was putting that to her ...

HIS HONOUR: ... a witness comes to court to describe things not necessarily in exactly the same words but to give evidence of what actually happened, not to recite a previous statement like a script.

BRYSON: But none the less, with respect your Honour, it's open to me to put to this witness that she's forgetting her script, if indeed inconsistencies in which she said in the statement and here at trial are raised.

HIS HONOUR: Well, you can put to her she's forgetting what she said in the statement.

BRYSON Well, if I can't call it a script, I'll call it a statement."[33] 
The judge was entitled to be strongly critical of counsel who claimed to use as interchangeable terms a police statement and a script (with all of the offensive undertones which that term conveys).

There is one other incident of which complaint is made on appeal to which I should refer as an example of what the judge had to deal with. It was put forward on appeal as part of the most extreme example of interference. The complainant had been asked in chief her recollection of anything which happened during 1991: "Q. Do you have any recollection - was there any incident or were there any incidents that took place during 1991? A. Sorry, I can't remember." (None of the counts asserted an offence during 1991). In cross-examination, and well into it, counsel referred to that question and answer, and then asked: "Q. But you see you did remember incidents really, didn't you? A. When? 
Q. For 1990 and 1991? A. No specific ones." 
The judge intervened, and the following long interchange took place: "HIS HONOUR: Are you putting to the witness that she did actually remember incidents? 
BRYSON: I'm just about to, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: Well, don't you mean to be putting that she has said on some other occasion that she did remember them, not that she actually remembers them.
Surely you're not putting on behalf of your own client who denies these matters that this witness has a genuine recollection of them? 
BRYSON: No, I'm putting, your Honour ...

HIS HONOUR: Well, that's the import of the question.

BRYSON: Well, if that's the import of the question to your Honour, then it's certainly not the import suggested by the Defence, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: No, that's the literal meaning of what you put to the witness.

BRYSON: Well, with respect your Honour, it's your literal meaning and ...

HIS HONOUR: No, it's what you put to the witness, I'm sure you didn't do it deliberately, but it is what you put to the witness.

BRYSON: Well, what would your Honour have me ...

HIS HONOUR: ... you put to her that she does remember actual incidents, that was what you put to her ...

BRYSON: Yes, and I'm just about to ask ...

HIS HONOUR: ... if it's your instructions that the incidents did not occur, on what basis do you put that question? 
BRYSON: No your Honour, it was put on the basis, and the next couple of questions would've disclosed this, it was put on the ...

HIS HONOUR: No, it's not a question of going on to a couple of questions, I mean how is the witness supposed to answer that question? 
BRYSON: Well, with respect your Honour, if I could encapsulate every issue in one question I would, but I can't unfortunately.

HIS HONOUR: I'm not suggesting you try to do that Mr Bryson, I'm suggesting that you put clear questions based upon the evidence [and] your instructions.

BRYSON: Well, it is based upon the evidence, your Honour. I was just about to take the witness to her statement, it would've revealed all.

HIS HONOUR: What you should've put to the witness is, if you are suggesting that she said on a previous occasion that she remembered incidents, that is what you should put, not that the incidents actually occurred, unless you want to get - because that's not your case ...

BRYSON: No it's not our case at all, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: ... your case is that they did not occur.

BRYSON: It's not our case at all.

HIS HONOUR: Well you shouldn't put it then.

BRYSON: Well it wasn't put in that way, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: It was, that's the very point.

BRYSON: It gets us no further, your Honour, me responding so, with respect your Honour, I'll get along with cross-examination.

HIS HONOUR: Look, I'll have it played, if you have any difficulty about it,
I'll have the tape rewound and you can listen to your own question.

BRYSON: I have no difficulty with it, your Honour, I'll proceed with the cross-examination, if needs be, if your Honour doesn't mind.

HIS HONOUR: All right, I've not the slightest objection to you continuing with your cross-examination if you stick by the rules."[34] 
Counsel then proceeded to read from the complainant's statement to the police that the appellant had continued to put his fingers into her vagina over a period which included 1991. She explained that she had tried to block these things out of her mind.

The complaint on appeal was that the judge should not have intervened.
However, counsel for the appellant appeared to be following the somewhat curious (and highly dangerous) course of adducing evidence from the principal
Crown witness that she was able previously to remember matters which were not charged (but which were nevertheless prejudicial to his client), of which she said that she had no recollection of at the time of giving her evidence, and of adducing that evidence merely in order to produce a prior inconsistent statement which then (pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s60.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)) became evidence of what had previously been stated. A trial judge is entitled to ask counsel whether that is what he is really intending to do. It is unfortunate that this interchange went on for so long, but that is a result solely of the extraordinarily stubborn refusal of counsel to see the danger to his own client of what he was doing.

I would reject these two remaining grounds of appeal. It was also submitted, notwithstanding the absence of any specific ground of appeal directed to the issue, that the judge's interventions deterred the appellant from giving evidence. It was, so it was said on appeal, "like going into the boxing ring knowing that you are going to be hit by the referee as well as your opponent".
There is no evidence that that was a reason for the appellant's election not to give evidence. I would not be prepared to draw an inference to that effect in this case, when such evidence could so easily have been given.[35] 
I propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed. The only submission made in support of the application for leave to appeal against sentence is that the sentences imposed were outside the range.

The maximum sentence for the offence of sexual intercourse with the complainant when she was under ten years of age (the one which involved penile penetration) was penal servitude for twenty years. The maximum sentence for each of the other three counts upon which the appellant was found guilty, where the complainant was between ten and sixteen years old and under the authority of the appellant (the ones which involved digital penetration), was penal servitude for ten years. The judge found that these were not isolated offences; the appellant was therefore not entitled to the leniency sometimes afforded where an offence is an isolated one. Nor was he entitled to the leniency afforded upon a plea of guilty. The judge disregarded a prior conviction for a serious drug offence of which the appellant had been convicted more than twenty years earlier. The judge regarded these four offences as gravely serious. As the natural father, the appellant was the very person to whom the complainant should have been able to look for protection and guidance against such offences. Instead, the judge said, the appellant had used his daughter quite ruthlessly as a vehicle for the satisfaction of his own sexual desires. The judge took into account the principle of totality.

Various statistics were provided but no further submissions were made. I have read through the statistics, but I remain unpersuaded that the effective total sentence of penal servitude for eight years was outside the range. On the contrary, it was well within the range. There was no attack made upon the judge's decision that there were no special circumstances warranting a variation of the statutory ratio imposed by [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). Nor could there have been. I propose that leave to appeal against sentence be refused.

PROPOSED ORDERS
The appeal against conviction is dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence is refused.
 ----------------- 
REGINA versus R P S 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Hunt CJ at CL. ------- [1] The [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/), by <case>, prohibits the publication of any report of the proceedings which leads to the identification of any child to whom the proceedings relate or who is mentioned or otherwise involved in those proceedings. As the judgments of this Court are now published on the Internet, without editing, it is necessary to use pseudonyms so as to ensure that there will be no breach of <case>.
 (CCA, 28 February 1997, unreported).
 [3] [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), r 4.
 [4] Regina versus Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] at 536.
 (CCA, 28 July 1997, unreported).
 [6] Regina versus Geoffrey Arthur Hall, per Hunt CJ at CL (at 6-7).
 [7] Regina versus BD per Hunt CJ at CL (at 18-19); Smart J (at 7).
 [8] Ibid per Hunt CJ at CL (at 17).
 [9] ALRC 26, vol 1, par 643; Regina versus Constantine Carusi (CCA, 17 January , unreported) at 4 (f/n 5).
 [10] Regina versus Clough [(1992) 28 NSWLR 396] at -408.
 [11] M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at -495; Regina versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333] at -339.
 [12] Regina versus Dellapatrona [(1993) 31 NSWLR 123] at 141;
Regina versus McKnoulty (at 339); Regina versus RMM (CCA, 19 June 1996, unreported) per Mahoney P (at 12-13), with whom McInerney J agreed.
 <case>; [(1996) 141 ALR 70] at 83-84.
 [14] Ibid (at 83-85).
 [15] Regina versus Kerry James Watson (CCA, 17 October 1990, unreported) at -5; Regina versus Shane Franz Hauke (CCA, 27 March 1995, unreported), per Hunt
CJ at CL (at 2-3) [SLAR 15 March 1996]; cf Mackenzie versus The Queen (at -85).
 <case>; [(1993) 179 CLR 44] at 51-52.
 [17] Punctuation has been added to assist the reading of this passage.
 [18] Act 286 of 1987, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s3.html), Sched (12).
 [19] Rex versus Richards [[1981] SALR 315] at 316-317;
Rex versus Hughes (1921) 21 SR 288 at 289-290; Regina versus Lister [[1981] 1
NSWLR 110] at 113-114.
 <case>; <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 41] at 47-53, 57, 67-74, 87-88.
 [23] (furnished in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s11.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/)).
 [24] Taylor versus Edwards (1967) 85 WN [(Pt )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s1.html) 386 at 390; Morgan versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd [(1988) 13 NSWLR 208] at 212; cf Steele versus Mirror Newspapers Ltd [[1975] 2 NSWLR 48] at 57.
 [25] [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/), [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s6.html) [26] Abboud versus Neville (Hunter J, 13 February 1996, unreported) at 3-4.
 [27] 26 ALRC, vol 1, pars 817-820.
 [28] See, for example, Regina versus Aldridge [(1990) 20 NSWLR 737] at 742;
Regina versus Maslen & Shaw [(1995) 79 A Crim R 199] at .
 [29] Epistle of James, Ch 5, 11; cf "Henry IV [Pt "](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/index.html#p2),
Shakespeare, I, ii, 145.
 [(1994) 73 A Crim R 91] at -126; see also Regina versus Hsing [(1984) 12 A Crim R 196] at -200, and "Judicial Intervention in the Trial Process", Ipp J, [(1995) 69
ALR 365](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2069%20ALR%20365 "View LawCiteRecord" ), where it is suggested (at 371-373) that the rule is otherwise in civil cases, and that it is arguable that, even in criminal cases, a judge may intervene "within proper bounds, for the purpose of achieving justice", as "representing the public interest".
 [31] Webb versus The Queen, per Deane J (at 73-74) dissenting only as to the application of the test; Bannister versus Walton (Court of Appeal, 1 April , unreported) at 8-9, where the test stated by Deane J is accepted as the appropriate one.
 [32] [Section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s44.html) replaces the common law as it is stated in Regina versus Hawes [(1994) 35 NSWLR ]
at 302-303.
 [33] Punctuation has been added to assist in the reading of this passage.
 [34] Again, punctuation has been added to assist in the reading of this passage.
 [35] Regina versus Beserick [(1990) 30 NSWLR 510] at 532.
 * * * 
