

Regina versus David Kirikian [1996] NSWSC 317 (1 August 1996) 
REGINA versus DAVID KIRIKIAN /96 
THURSDAY 1 AUGUST 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SULLY J, LEVINE J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Sully J to give the first judgment.

SULLY J: On 28 August 1995 Mr David Kirikian, the present applicant, and a Mr Albert Merza were presented for trial upon an indictment before his Honour Judge Wall of Queen's Counsel in the District Court. 
The indictment contained four counts of which the first three related to the applicant and the fourth to Mr Merza. Each of the first three counts in the indictment charged the applicant with having supplied a prohibited drug: cannabis leaf in the case of the first and the second counts, and cocaine in respect of the third. The fourth count charged Mr Merza with having supplied cannabis leaf. Both the applicant and Mr Merza pleaded not guilty and they were put upon their trial accordingly.

The result of the trial was that the applicant was found guilty on count one, and no verdict could be agreed in relation to counts two and three. Mr Merza was found guilty of count 4.

The applicant was sentenced subsequently to imprisonment for a total term of four years, divided between a minimum term of two years, and an additional term of two years. Mr Merza was sentenced to imprisonment for a total of two years divided between a minimum term of one year and an additional term of one year.

The point of the present application, put shortly, is what is conventionally described in these matters as a parity point.

The learned sentencing Judge dealt with the applicant in respect of one incident in particular. It is described by his Honour in his remarks on sentence in the following terms: "In November 1990 Leaney received a telephone call from Kirikian informing her that he had something that she might be interested in and for her to go to meet him at his video store in Brennan Street, Fairfield. She went to the store in response to his telephone call and there met Kirikian and Merza.
Kirikian asked Merza to take her to premises at 19 Hedges Street, Fairfield to show her a quantity of cannabis heads that he was offering her for sale.
Leaney went with Merza to this address which was owned and occupied by
Kirikian's parents-in-law. Merza took Leaney through the house and to the back yard and then into a shed which was located at the ear of the yard. In the shed Merza showed her a quantity of cannabis heads placed on a plastic sheet on the concrete floor of the shed. Leaney inspected the cannabis, considered it not to be of good quality and for that reason stated that she would take only five pounds, the price negotiated and agreed for this supply was $2600 per pound making a total sale price for the supply of this quantity of the prohibited drug $13,000. The price fixed for this transaction was less than what was the usual price for good quality cannabis which on the evidence in relation to this transaction between the parties was normally $4000 per pound.
Merza weighed a five pound quantity of cannabis in the shed and this was placed in the boot of Leaney's car and the two of them then left the premises." 
The way in which the learned sentencing Judge dealt with the two persons who stood before him for sentence was predicated upon a finding made by his Honour that the applicant had been not only a principal in the incident above described, - a finding which was, I would have thought, beyond question on the evidence before the learned sentencing Judge - but that the applicant was, as between himself and Mr Merza, the principal in the enterprise: the "mastermind", as his Honour described the relative positions of the two men.

It is contended by learned counsel for the applicant that it was not open to his Honour to find, as having been established beyond reasonable doubt, that
Mr Merza was in effect subservient to the applicant as the principal in the enterprise, so as to provide a rational basis for the obvious disparity between the sentences imposed upon the two men.

It seems to me that the correct starting point is to ask, simply, whether the sentence imposed by his Honour upon the applicant was a sentence which, standing alone, was justifiable on the material before his Honour. In my opinion it was. As I have said, I think it is beyond question that the present applicant was, at the very least, a principal, and in every sense an active moving party, in the criminal enterprise earlier described.

In absolute terms, if I may put it that way, a sentence of the kind imposed seems to me to have been well within the range of a proper sentencing discretion.

I am prepared to assume for present purposes that the findings of fact made by his Honour with regard to the relative position in the enterprise of Mr Merza are open to attack. Does it follow, it then has to be asked, that the principles of parity, correctly understood and correctly applied, entail that there must be some downward revision of the sentence imposed on the present applicant.

Assistance as to the definition of the relevant principles is, I think, to be found in the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal of Queensland in the matter of Dale Cox [(1991) 55 ACR 396.]
Thomas J, delivering the principal judgment of the Court in that matter, looks in some detail at the problem that confronts this Court in the present matter.
Relevantly for present purposes his Honour says, at page 401, this: "It by no means follows that an appeal court will interfere, especially if the consequence of reducing the higher sentence will be to an inappropriately low sentence instead of, as the authorities show, it may sometimes be necessary for an appeal court to take that undesirable course in order to avoid a greater evil but it is very much the province of the appeal courts to perceive a sufficiently good reason to take such a course." 
His Honour goes on later in his judgment, and speaking of the decision of the
High Court in Lowe, to make the following observations about the various expressions of opinion that can be derived from various of the individual judgments of particular members of the Bench that decided that matter. His
Honour says in that regard as follows: "It is true that even a real sense of grievance is to be borne by an offender if the disparity between his sentence and that of his co-offender is justified ...

Disparity alone does not of itself require the intervention of an appeal court. It is difficult to identify the touchstone which calls for such intervention. Gibbs CJ described it as lying very much within the discretion of the Court of Appeal ...

Dawson J described intervention as 'not warranted unless the disparity is such that sentence under appeal cannot be allowed to stand without it appearing that justice is not seen to be done' ...

Mason J thought intervention justified 'when there is a manifest discrepancy such as to engender a justifiable sense of grievance'. Grievance in the applicant with an appearance of injustice to the objective bystander in the community ... " 
It seems to me that in the present case a sound approach is that summarised by
Thomas J in the first of the two paragraphs which I have quoted from his
Honour's judgment in Cox. That is to say, it is to be asked whether this is one of those cases where there has been demonstrated "a sufficiently good reason" to justify compounding an error in the case of Merza, - (if it be assumed, as I am doing for present purposes, but without deciding that such an error is fairly to be found) - by piling upon that error a second manifest error entailed by a reduction in the sentence imposed upon the present applicant.

It seems to me that there is no point in trying to answer such a question by all-embracing formulae, still less by some method of forensic mathematics.
What has to be done, and the best that can be done, is to strive for a result which satisfies the appellate Court that, in a real sense, justice is done by either allowing a reduction, on the one hand or by reducing it, on the other.

It seems to me that in a case of the present kind, once it is conceded, - as has been done, - or found positively - as for myself I would unhesitatingly have found, - that the sentence imposed upon the present applicant is in absolute terms unappellable; - then the fact that Mr Merza might have had, to speak colloquially, an undeserved windfall, doesn't seem to me to establish "a sufficiently good reason" for giving the applicant what would be, to extend the same colloquial description, a further and undeserved windfall.

In those circumstances, I have not been persuaded that this is one of those cases in which this Court would be justified, as a matter of discretion, in intervening. Because of the importance of the principles involved, I would grant the applicant leave to appeal; but in my own view the substantive appeal should be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree with the orders proposed by Sully J. I would, however, express my reasons in one or two respects slightly differently as follows. First, I do not accept that a successful attack has been made upon the factual findings of the sentencing judge which were favourable to the co-offender Merza. Those findings, it should be noted, were based, or were said to have been based, amongst other things, upon the learned judge's observations during the course of the trial of the two individuals involved and his appreciation of their respective personalities. 
The findings were also based upon the relationship of employer and employee that existed in respect of another business that the applicant was carrying on. His Honour also had before him a substantial body of character evidence in relation to Merza. He ultimately came to the conclusion that he was justified in sentencing Merza upon the basis that Merza was a mere subordinate in the activity of drug dealing in which both Merza and the applicant engaged.

This finding of fact, it is to be noted, was not a finding of fact that aggravated the criminality of the present applicant. It merely mitigated the criminality of Merza. Nobody suggests that the present applicant was other than a principal. The question was whether or not he was the sole principal and whether Merza's role was merely that of a subordinate.

As I have indicated, I do not accept that a successful challenge has been made to his Honour's appreciation of the role of Merza. However, in any event in my view it would not ordinarily be the case that an argument based on considerations of parity can successfully be mounted in circumstances where a co-offender's sentence is explicable on the basis that the co-offender has had the benefit of an unduly favourable finding of fact.

The Courts in the past have had difficulty coming to terms with the operation of the principle of parity in cases where the sentence which has been compared with that of an appellant has been affected by manifest error. As I have indicated, I do not accept that this is such a case. However, where the error in question is alleged to be an error in a finding of fact concerning the criminality of the conduct of a co-offender, there is additional difficulty in applying principles of parity in order to reduce what is otherwise accepted to be a perfectly appropriate sentence.

I agree that the application for leave to appeal should be allowed but the appeal should be dismissed.

LEVINE J: I agree with the orders proposed by Sully J. I would merely state that I do myself have some reservations in relation to the correctness of the findings of the learned sentence judge in relation to the co-offender Merza. Be that as it may, I am of the view that the status of this applicant as a principal being not in dispute the sentence imposed upon him being viewed discretely, being one which is unappellable, the resolution of the correctness of finding of facts in relation to the co-offender generally is not a matter on which anything of substance ultimately would turn to affect in the context of this appeal the sentence imposed upon Mr Kirikian.

I agree with the orders proposed.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court will be that the applicant should have leave to appeal but the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
