

Regina versus Thomas James Paul Donovan [1997] NSWSC 68 (4 March 1997) 
REGINA versus THOMAS JAMES PAUL DONOVAN /97 
WEDNESDAY 19 FEBRUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HUNT CJ AT CL (VIDEO LINK TO METROPOLITAN REMAND CENTRE) 
JUDGMENT - On application for bail 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by Thomas James Paul Donovan for bail, pending the hearing in the Penrith Local Court on 4 March 1997 of two charges of breaching an apprehended violence order, two charges of assault, assault Police and offensive language. They relate to an incident on 12 December 1996, the applicant was then the respondent to an apprehended violence order which was for the protection of the victim who was his previous de facto for a very long period of time.

Apparently the victim, somewhat foolishly I would think, set out to meet with the applicant so that the children could see each other, some children living with the applicant and some with the victim. They returned to the applicant's premises where according to the statement made by the victim to the Police, the applicant king hit her and punched her about her face, her back and her sides and grabbed her by the hair. She called the Police and made those statements to them.

This is the sort of case where normally one would have prime regard to the protection of the victim, however 
Ms Morgan, the victim, has come along to give evidence saying that she was drunk at the time, she has no recollection of what she told the Police or of the events themselves. She says that she has no fear of the applicant if he were to be released on bail. I frankly do not accept her evidence. It seems to me to be motivated by a wish to ensure that the applicant does not lose his
Housing Commission premises so that the children will be affected rather than any wish to tell the truth. However it would, in my view, be wrong to refuse bail on some paternalistic view that notwithstanding her assertions that she has no fear, that she should have a fear of him and therefore bail is refused on the basis of her protection.

There will of course be cases where it may be necessary for the bail to be refused on that basis, even when as so often happens in these domestic situations, the parties are reconciled and therefore regret having called the processes of the law into operation. But that is not the only basis upon which
I have to consider this application for bail.

I am required by the [Bail
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/) to consider also the likelihood of whether the applicant will commit offences whilst at liberty on bail and that is the issue which in my view will determine this application for bail.

The applicant who is not yet thirty years of age has a criminal history of some seventeen pages. It is redolent with crimes of violence and he also has a history of violence towards the victim. The inevitable inference to be drawn that if he is granted bail, he will commit further assaults upon her. I am therefore satisfied the applicant is likely to commit further such offences if granted bail, I am satisfied that they are serious offences and I am also satisfied with that likelihood, together with the likely consequences of the commission of such further offences outweighs the applicant's general right to be at liberty.

Bail is refused on that basis.
 * * * 
