

The Application of Russell John Cox [2004] NSWSC 1341 (8 December 2004) 
THE APPLICATION OF RUSSELL JOHN COX /94 
FRIDAY 13 DECEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J 
BADGERY-PARKER, J: This is an application by Russell John Cox, pursuant to [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) for the determination of a minimum term and an additional term for a life sentence imposed upon him in this court on 4 July 1977. On that day, Taylor, CJ. at CL. sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for life after he was convicted by the jury of a charge under s.33 of the Crimes Act of the maliciously shooting at a person with intent to avoid lawful apprehension. In respect of six other convictions (to the details of which I shall later return) his Honour imposed determinate sentences totalling penal servitude for 15 years to be served concurrently with the life sentence. All sentences were expressed to date from 8 August 1975. His Honour declined to set a non-parole period.

Section 13A provides that a person serving an existing life sentence may apply to the court for the determination of a minimum term and an additional term for the sentence (subsection (2)), but "is not eligible to make an application unless the person has served at least eight years of the sentence concerned" (subsection (3)). The Crown has raised a preliminary objection to the competency of this application, contending that the applicant has not "served at least eight years of the sentence concerned". The Crown contends that that proposition is true whether the relevant date before which the applicant must serve eight years of the sentence is taken to be the date of filing of the application (in the present case, 11 July 1994), the date of hearing of the application (in the present case, 23 February 1996) or the date of judgment.
On the Crown's argument, even if the latest of those three dates be regarded as the relevant one, the applicant has served, from the date of commencement of the life sentence, no more than five years, seven months and some days. The competency objection having been raised, the Crown has submitted, and counsel for the applicant did not seriously contest, and I hold, that the onus is on the applicant to show that the application is indeed competent; that is, in the circumstances, that he had by the relevant date, whichever date it was, served at least eight years of the life sentence.

The circumstances which give rise to the possibility that, as the Crown contends, the application is incompetent are complex, unusual, and hopefully unique. To state them adequately, it is necessary to go back to 24 July 1974.
On that date, the applicant was arrested and charged with four offences, two charges of robbery being armed and two charges of larceny of a motor vehicle, in respect of which on 8 April 1975 he was sentenced to various terms of penal servitude totalling 14 years dated back to 27 July 1974. A non-parole period of seven years and six months was fixed in respect of that total sentence.
Given the limited system of remissions then in operation, he could at the time of imposition of that sentence have anticipated his ultimate release by remission towards the middle of 1983 but his release on parole not until
January 1982. He was serving those sentences in a prison in the Long Bay complex at Malabar when he committed the offences in respect of which ultimately Taylor, CJ. at CL. imposed sentence. He was indicted before Taylor,
CJ. at CL. jointly with one Marko Motric; a third man MacDougall was charged with connected offences but dealt with separately and subsequently. Upon an indictment charging 11 offences (including four charged as alternatives) Cox was convicted upon three counts under s.33 of the Crimes Act of maliciously shooting at a person with intent to prevent his lawful apprehension; one count of maliciously wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm (also under s.33); one count of armed robbery (s.97); one count of "kidnapping" (Crimes
Act, s.90A) and one count of escape from lawful custody (Prisons Act, s.34).

The circumstances of the offences are conveniently described in the remarks on sentence of the trial judge. Some of the facts as found by his Honour are denied by the applicant; after hearing the submissions of counsel I ruled that
I would not allow the applicant to give evidence as to the facts of the crime whether or not the subject of an express finding by the sentencing judge. The situation may, of course, be different in a case where the imposition of a life sentence was mandatory, because in such a case it is unlikely (although possible) that the sentencing judge would be called upon to make findings of fact. In such a case it would be open to the court on an application under s.13A to receive evidence from the applicant which would not have been relevant at the original sentencing proceedings, as to the facts of the matter, provided, of course, that no attempt was made to challenge any matter of fact essential to the jury's finding of guilt. In the present case the imposition of a sentence of imprisonment for life was not mandatory; it was therefore open to the prisoner to place before the original sentencing judge evidence in mitigation, including evidence which, although not given before the jury, may have been relevant to illuminate the true facts as to the applicant's participation in a joint criminal enterprise; if, as was here the case, the applicant chose not to give evidence before the sentencing judge, he must, in my view, be regarded as bound by such findings of fact as the sentencing judge made at the time; so too, if findings of fact were made by the sentencing judge, involving rejection of evidence given by the applicant.
Taylor, CJ. at CL. stated the facts in the following terms:- "Marko Motric and Russell Cox, on 8 August 1975, you with a man named
MacDougall, attempted to escape and in fact escaped from the Metropolitan
Remand Centre in a vehicle belonging to the Prisons Department. The escape was planned. You Motric at the time had in your possession a Barretta pistol that was fully loaded. In accordance with a pre-arranged plan, you, with
MacDougall, followed a truck through what I might call the inter-gate into the complex. There, by threats, by menaces, by firing shots from this pistol at warders, by forcing prison officers to lie on the ground in the office, by threatening to shoot them, you attempted to gain possession of the keys to the cabinet in which the pistols of the warders were kept.

You took one of the warders hostage and threatened to shoot him and one of those whom you had on the floor was the gate keeper, a man named Pavich. You ultimately obtained possession of these keys, not from Pavich directly but at a time when your attention was directed to other matters he was endeavouring to open the cupboard to get a pistol for himself. You then became possessed of two Smith & Wesson .38 calibre revolvers. Armed with those and with the hostage in the vehicle, you forced Pavich, under threat that you would shoot him, to open the outer gate, and you proceeded outside the gate with the hostage on the bonnet of the vehicle, the windscreen having been shot out; you headed in the direction of the boom gate, from which you hoped, no doubt, to escape.

As well as driving, you, Cox, were shooting out of one side of the vehicle and menacing those warders who may have come and endeavoured to prevent your escape. You, Motric, still at the Barretta or one of the other pistols, and you and MacDougall were both at times firing out of the front or side of the vehicle. The hostage was constantly menaced and put in a position where it was difficult for warders to shoot at you in the vehicle lest he be shot.

The plan, although it was well conceived, was poorly executed. You, Cox, drove at a very slow speed which permitted the truck in which you were to be rammed by a bread van and by a truck loaded with sand. You then abandoned the vehicle and proceeded, still holding the hostage in a tight grip, down towards the boom gate. By this time warders had been armed and shots were exchanged between Cox and one of the warders and you, Motric, fired shots and I have no doubt MacDougall did also.

When you got to the vicinity of the boom gates you were eventually rushed by the warders and both of you were shot. At that time, when you had no chance of escape, when it was virtually certain that you would be recaptured you,
Motric, I am satisfied shot this hostage twice in the leg. This was done quite deliberately and apparently when you realised that you plan had been frustrated.

This shoot out, if I might so describe it, took place at a time when members of the public were in the area, some were on business, some were there to see prisoners in the room where that is permitted. Many shots were fired and the scene must have been one of terror and confusion. That you were desperate men who threatened to shoot and to kill was quite apparent and I can well understand that those to whom you made these threats and saw you believed that you would carry them out." 
After conviction, the applicant was being held (as he had been for all or most of his pre-trial incarceration) in the Katingal Special Security Unit, also contained within the same complex. On 3 November 1977, he absented himself from that unit. A layman would say that he "escaped"; but when many years later he stood trial on a charge that he had escaped from lawful custody, the trial judge directed the jury to acquit because the Crown was unable to prove that he had been lawfully in custody at Katingal which, remarkably, had not been gazetted as a prison, and for his transfer to which, there was no lawful warrant.

After leaving Katingal, the applicant was at large until 22 July 1988. The period during which he was at liberty between his (to use a neutral term) departure from Katingal and his arrest in Victoria was 10 years, eight months and 19 days.

Following his arrest in Victoria on 22 July 1988, the applicant was convicted of offences described in the papers before me as one count of using a firearm to prevent arrest, and two counts of reckless conduct endangering life. On 16
August 1989, he was sentenced in respect of those matters to a total of five years imprisonment. Whilst he was serving that sentence, on 22 March 1991, he was convicted of a number of firearms offences in respect of which he incurred a sentence of two years imprisonment concurrent with the sentences then being served.

On 25 October 1991, by which date he had served in a Victorian prison a total of three years, three months and three days, he was extradited to Queensland in relation to a charge of assault upon a police officer allegedly committed in 1983. He was convicted of that offence and on 27 October 1993 in the
Brisbane District Court he was sentenced to imprisonment for three years, dated back to 24 October 1991. Immediately after that sentence was imposed, indeed on 28 October 1993, he was extradited to New South Wales having, at that date served in Queensland gaols a period of two years and three days.

He has remained in custody in New South Wales since 28 October 1993. During the period from 24 July 1974 to the date of the hearing of this application on February 1996 (a period of 21 years and seven months), the prisoner was in custody for 10 years, 10 months and 12 days and was at large for 10 years, eight months and 19 days. Of that period in custody, a total of five years, seven months and five days was in New South Wales prisons, and the balance, five years, three months and seven days in prisons in Victoria or Queensland.

His custody between 24 July 1974 and 8 August 1975 related only to the 1974 offences; but his custody from 8 August 1975 to 3 November 1977 is properly to be regarded as attributable to the life sentence although he was during that period subject also to the sentence imposed for the 1974 offences. His custody between 28 October 1993 and the date of this judgment is solely attributable to the life sentence. As noted earlier, the total of those "attributable" periods of imprisonment falls far short of eight years.

It is that fact which founds the Crown's objection to the competence of this application.

The Crown contended that the question is one only of the interpretation of [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). The
Crown submitted that it was the obvious intention of the legislature that before a prisoner might seek to have a minimum and additional term determined, the prisoner must have undergone at least eight years punishment, to ensure that the public interest in retribution, denunciation and deterrence has been taken into account. In effect, in the Crown's submission the intention of the
Parliament was to restrict the discretion of a judge before whom an application came under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html), depriving the court of any power to make an order which could permit the release of the prisoner until he had undergone at least eight years punishment. Such a view might be thought to be consistent with the objects of the Act as stated in [s.3:](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s3.html)- "The objects of this Act are:- to promote truth in sentencing by requiring convicted offenders to serve in prison (without any reduction) the minimum or fixed term of imprisonment set by the court; and to provide that prisoners who have served their minimum terms of imprisonment may be considered for release on parole for the residue of their sentences." 
Consistently with that view of the intention of the legislature in the enactment of [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html), the Crown submits that the word "served" in [s.13A(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) is to be construed as a reference to serving a sentence in prison - that the word denotes that the prisoner has actually undertaken or worked out eight years of the life sentence. Counsel for the Crown pointed out that the section does not refer, as it might have done, to the period of the sentence having run or having expired. He referred to cases which indicate a distinction between serving a sentence, and a sentence running though not being served.
For example:- - a sentence can expire although the person sentenced never commenced to serve the sentence: Whan v. McConaghy <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 631] at 635-636; and at 641; - where a person escapes, the sentence will continue to run at common law while the person is an escapee, but at common law he is not regarded as serving the sentence during the period when he is at large: to avoid the consequence that an escapee is relieved of the obligation to serve the sentence, which would have been the position at common law (Whan v.
McConaghy, supra, at 641), s.447A of the Crimes Act was enacted to provide for "a wholly independent penal consequence measured by the length of the time that the prisoner was at large": Regina v. Walsh [(1984) 3 NSWLR ]
at 590; Gibbs v. State of New South Wales [(1990) 21 NSWLR 416] at -419; Regina v. Carrion [(1993) 69 A. Crim. R. 230] at ;
 - a person who is released on licence is not then serving the sentence: rather, the sentence continues to run and the person is relieved of the incidents of the sentence: Haley v. Commission of Corrective Services [(1975) 1 NSWLR 118] at 121; - it is only by reason of the explicit terms of [s.30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s30.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) that a person released on parole is taken to be serving the sentence; under the
Parole of Prisoners Act 1983 (s.6) the position was different: see Kelleher v. Parole Board <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 364] at 373; Smith v. Corrective Services Commission <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 134] at 138.

If the matter is to be looked at purely as a matter of interpretation of s.13A, then there is indeed much to be said for the Crown's construction which seems to be the only way to give effect to the evident intention of the legislature manifested by the provisions of s.3 and to make sense of its requirement that the person "serve" at least eight years of the sentence. The use of the word "serve" throughout the Act is arguably intended to refer to the serving of a sentence in prison. Thus, the minimum term of imprisonment which a court sets is a term that the person "must serve" and the intention is that any such minimum or fixed term be served in prison - s.3. Certainly the use of the word "serve" and grammatical variants of it elsewhere in the Act is consistent with such a meaning: cf. s.3, s.5(1)(a), s.6(1), s.8(a), s.13A(4), s.14(2)(b), s.24(4) and especially s.30 which distinguishes between the serving of a minimum term that forms part of a sentence and the deemed serving of the balance of the sentence after release on parole.

Counsel for the applicant contended for a different meaning of the word "serve" which may mean no more than "to go through" the sentence or "be subject to" the sentence, which continues to run from the time of its imposition regardless of the location of the person upon whom it was imposed:
Whan v. McConaghy (supra) was cited. The applicant submitted that at the least the word "serve" used in s.13A(3) is ambiguous, and, because the construction of it may impact upon the liberty of the prisoner, it is to be construed, in accordance with known principle, in a sense most favourable to the protection of the liberty of the subject. That principle is well known, see, for example: Smith v. Commissioner of Corrective Services <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 134] at 139; Gibbs v. State of New South Wales (supra, at 420 per Gleeson, CJ., at 424 per Kirby, P.); Haley v. Commissioner of Corrective
Services (supra at 120). In Watson v. Marshall & Cade [(1971) 124
CLR 521], Walsh, J. said (at 629):- "I do not think that I should disregard the warnings which their Honours gave in McLaughlin's case <case>; [(1904) 1 CLR 546], 559 that in the interpretation of an Act which affects personal liberty, supposition as to the intention of the legislature has no place and that the function of the court is limited to interpreting and giving effect to its will as expressed in the statute".

I was referred also to Marcotte v. Deputy Attorney General of Canada [(1974) 51 DLR (3d) 259] at 264:- "It is unnecessary to emphasise the importance of clarity and certainty when freedom is at stake. No authority is needed for the proposition that if real ambiguities are found, or doubts of substance arise, in the construction and application of a statute affecting the liberty of a subject, then that statute should be applied in such a manner as to favour the person against whom it is sought to be enforced. If one is to be incarcerated, one should at least know that some Act of Parliament requires it in express terms, and not, at most, by implication." 
The rule has, however, some limit to its application. The adoption of the approach established by the cases to which reference has been made does not justify departure from the words of the statute; it does mean that the courts will not extend the statute to cover a particular situation merely because it appears that the legislature has acted inadvertently. The true position appears to be that:- "Should there be any ambiguity in the statute, the court must endeavour to resolve the ambiguity by the application of the various aids to construction that are applicable to all statutes. Then, and only then, if a doubt still remains as to the meaning of the penal provision should the issue be resolved in favour of the defendant.": per D.C. Pearce, Statutory Interpretation in
Australia (2nd ed. (1981) p.139, para.190) (citing R. v. Adams <case>; [(1935) 53 CLR 563] at 567-568 and Beckwith v. R. <case>; [(1976) 12 ALR 333] at 339 per Gibbs, J. who referred to the rule as "perhaps one of last resort").

It follows that the solution of the problem, if it were a problem to be solved by reference only to s.13A and other provisions of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/), would not be reached merely by concluding that the word "served" in [s.13A(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) is capable of bearing a meaning other than served in prison. The application of the principle on which the applicant relies, properly understood, requires one first to consider the word in the context of the whole Act, to see whether the ambiguity is capable of being resolved by reference to other provisions in the Act, and applying other canons of construction, including the proposition that the same word ought ordinarily be accorded the same meaning wherever it appears in the same statute unless the context makes clear that some other meaning is intended. (In s.30, for example, the context makes clear that the word "serving" is used, firstly, in the sense of being in prison and, secondly, in the sense of discharging the obligation imposed upon the person by the sentence even though not in prison.) The clear indication that comes from s.3 is that Parliament intended the word "serve" throughout the Act to refer to serving in prison. Were I persuaded that the question is, as the
Crown contended, no more than a question of the construction of s.13A, I would, I think, accede to the Crown's argument.

However, as counsel for the applicant has submitted, s.13A and such other provisions of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) as may be thought to bear upon its interpretation do not stand alone. In particular, it was submitted that the question is concluded against the Crown by the provisions of s.29B of the Prisons Act 1934 which provides as follows:- "While a prisoner is absent from a prison:- otherwise than by reason of having escaped from lawful custody; and whether or not the prisoner is, pursuant to any provision of this Act, deemed to be in the custody of the governor of the prison during the period of absence, the prisoner shall, for the purpose only of calculating the length of time for which the prisoner has served any sentence of imprisonment, penal servitude or detention to which the prisoner is subject during that period of absence, be deemed to be serving in prison so much of any such sentence as corresponds to that period of absence." 
It is submitted on behalf of the applicant that inasmuch as he was acquitted of a charge of having escaped from lawful custody, which acquittal cannot thereafter be called in question, he has to be understood to have been, between 3 November 1977 and (at least) 22 July 1988, "a prisoner ... absent from a prison ... otherwise than by reason of having escaped from lawful custody". It was submitted that the question which arises for the purpose of s.13A(3) is a question of "calculating the length of time for which the prisoner has served any sentence of imprisonment, penal servitude ... to which the prisoner is subject during that period of absence", and is to be answered by applying s.29B of the Prisons Act.

There is nothing in the Prisons Act, and in particular nothing in s.29B thereof, to limit the operation of s.29B to cases where the calculation of the length of time which the prisoner has served is a calculation to be made for some purpose arising out of the Prisons Act. The section is expressed entirely generally, as though it is intended to apply wherever any such calculation is to be made.

It is true, as counsel for the Crown pointed out and as appears from the
Hansard report of the Second Reading debate upon the Prisons (Amendment) Act , that the mischief to which the enactment of s.29B was directed was the doubt as to the position of a person who was, by mistake, released from prison before the expiration of his sentence. There was no statutory power to return him to prison to require him to serve the balance. The Crimes (Powers of
Arrest) Amendment Act 1985 inserted in the Crimes Act s.352AA, creating a power to arrest a person reasonably suspected of being a prisoner unlawfully at large; and s.29B was inserted at the same time, the Prisons (Amendment)
Bill being described as legislation cognate with the Crimes (Power of Arrest)
Amendment Bill. However, although regard is to be had to the mischief to which an enactment is directed, it by no means follows that the enactment which ensues is to be taken, in the absence of express limitation in its language, to be limited in its operation to the correction of the particular mischief.
In the present case it may be accepted that the purpose of the enactment of s.29B included the purpose of clarifying the position of a person who was returned to gaol in the circumstances contemplated by s.352AA of the Crimes
Act; but it is in its terms in no way limited to that situation. Parliament may well have perceived the need to provide for the calculation of the period which a prisoner has served where that prisoner had been absent in circumstances other than that which brought the problem to notice, even though those circumstances could not precisely be foreseen at the time. The "mischief rule" is applicable only in the case of ambiguity; and while it may comfortably be used to give an expanded meaning to legislation if a more limited and literal meaning would not achieve the obvious object which the legislature had in mind, to deal with the mischief in question, it is not the practice of the courts to make use of the mischief rule to limit the application of clear words.

Mr. Howie, QC. (as he then was) submitted that s.29B was a deeming provision enacted for a specific purpose "and when you have a deeming provision you look at the specific purpose the deeming provision is serving and you don't give it an extended reach beyond the term in which it is used and the purpose for which it is used"; a distinction is to be drawn between what is referred to as fictional deeming, where the draftsman gives to a word a meaning which is not its ordinary meaning and a use of the word "deemed" otherwise than in the fictional sense, giving it its meaning of "judge" or "conclude": see
Pearce (supra, paras.61-62). The Crown sought to characterise s.29B as a "fictional deeming provision" extending the ordinary meaning of the words "served" and "serving". It was argued accordingly that, as Griffiths, CJ.
pointed out in Muller v. Dalgety & Co. Limited <case>; [(1909) 9 CLR 693] at 696, it is "very important to consider the purpose for which the statutory fiction is introduced" and that while taking care to observe that the extended meaning of the word is applied, the person interpreting the statute must be aware that it is a fictitious use of the word and is only applicable in its particular context.

The principle on which the Crown relies may be accepted, but it begs the question, what was the purpose for which the deeming was introduced? The Crown says that the purpose was to protect the right of a prisoner "unlawfully at large" to his entitlement for remissions; but I cannot understand the section to be so limited. It is not so limited in its terms. It has an obvious application, even after the abolition of the remission system, to enable it to be determined when a prisoner is entitled to release, not by way of remission but at the expiration of his minimum term or fixed term of imprisonment, if it should have occurred, in any circumstances whatsoever, that he was unlawfully at large during some part of that term. The purpose for which the deeming is made is the purpose stated in the section:- "For the purpose only of calculating the length of time for which the prisoner has served any sentence ..." 
The purpose is not to be derived only and entirely from statements in
Parliament as to what was sought to be achieved, any more than the proper construction of a statute according to the "mischief rule" is to be limited to what was stated in Parliament to be the mischief occasioning its enactment.

In my view, the question at issue is simply resolved by the application of s.29B of the Prisons Act. The failure of the legislature to place any limit upon the use of that section when it enacted the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) or added [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) (Sentencing (Life Sentences) Amendment Act 1989) makes it clear, in my view, that although elsewhere in the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) the word "serve" is intended to refer to service of a sentence in a prison, it was not intended to have that meaning in every provision of the Act, and particularly was not intended to have that meaning where the question to be answered was, as in s.13A(3), the question whether a prisoner has or has not served a particular period of time. So, although in s.5(1)(a) and s.6(1), the Act requires the sentencing judge to specify a minimum term as a term which is to be served in prison, and in s.13A(4) the judge is similarly required to set a minimum term which must be served in prison, the question whether in fact any such term has been served, for the purpose of determining when the prisoner is entitled to be released (eg. a question under s.13A, or a question under s.30 as to whether a person has served a minimum term that forms part of a sentence) is to be determined by the application of s.29B of the Prisons Act.

For those reasons I am persuaded that the application is competent in that, notwithstanding his having absented himself from Katingal on 3 November 1977, the prisoner has in law served more than eight years of his life sentence, and indeed he has been in that position ever since 8 August 1983. It follows that the application is competent and I proceed to deal with it on its merits.

The principles according to which s.13A is to be applied may be regarded as reasonably well settled following many decisions by judges in this court at first instance and a small number of decisions of the Court of Criminal
Appeal. They were conveniently summarised in a form particularly appropriate for the circumstances of the present case by James, J. in Regina v.
Hatziathanasiou (unreported 25 October 1995). His Honour said:- "Without attempting to state all of the relevant principles to be gleaned from these and other cases, I will simply note that:- 
The fresh sentencing exercise required by s.13A is in essence no different to that which would have been undertaken at the time of the original proceedings on sentence, had the penalty to be imposed then been wholly at the discretion of the sentencing judge, save that the judge on the application under s.13A has the advantage of a great deal of hindsight.

The refusal of an application under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) is tantamount to confirming the sentence of penal servitude for life originally imposed. Hence an application under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) should not (at least normally) be refused, unless the appropriate sentence, by virtue of the application of ordinary sentencing principles to all of the material available to the court is one for the life of the prisoner. Such a sentence will be the appropriate sentence only if the applicant's case falls within the worst category of cases. ...

If a judge decides to set a minimum term, then in setting a minimum term the judge fixes the minimum period which the prisoner must serve in prison. On the expiration of the minimum term set by the judge the offender will be eligible for release on parole but he will not be entitled to be released on parole unless a parole order is made by the Offenders Review Board*, and the
Board is not to make parole order unless the Board has, inter alia, determined that the release of the offender is appropriate, having regard to the principle that the public interest is of primary importance. [* now once more called, the Parole Board] 
By virtue of the provisions of [s.13A(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) it is not possible to impose cumulative sentences on an application under [s.13A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html)
Consequently, where, as in the present case, more than one sentence was imposed by the original sentencing judge, then, if the application is granted, the longest of the sentences imposed by the judge hearing the [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) application must reflect the totality of the criminality in all of the offences committed by the offender including the offences for which determinate sentences were originally imposed." 
In relation to paragraph (i) of the passage, I would add that the hindsight to which James, J. referred is the opportunity afforded to the judge sentencing under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html), which was not available to the original sentencing judge, of knowledge of all that has happened in the prisoner's life in the intervening years. The court is enabled, instead of merely attempting to predict on inadequate materials, actually to know what progress the prisoner has made for his rehabilitation.
Further, as I pointed out in Johnstone (unreported 20 December 1991):- "At an original sentencing (except, of course, in a case where the sentence of life imprisonment was mandatory) the court must form a conclusion as to whether, at some remote future date when he is released, the prisoner will present a risk to the community. The two Veen cases demonstrate the difficulty of such predictions and the awful consequences of error. ... In an application under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html), the same conclusion must be made but on much more satisfactory and complete materials and in respect of a possible future release date very much closer to the date of the determination.

For the most part these differences must work to the advantage of the prisoner." 
Necessarily it is the case that the judge determining a minimum term and an additional term under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) is in the position of a judge sentencing for "a stale crime" (Todd [(1982) NSWLR 517)] and the principles always applicable in a late sentencing apply, so that, as Street, CJ. said in Todd, "fairness to the prisoner requires weight to be given to the progress of his rehabilitation during the term of his earlier sentence"; and "sentencing for a stale crime, long after the committing of the offences, calls for a considerable measure of understanding and flexibility of approach" (at p.519). That principle was affirmed by the Court of Criminal Appeal in Regina v. Kukunoski (unreported 17 August 1989): Hunt, J., with whom Mahoney, JA. and I agreed, reiterated the importance of flexibility in approach when sentencing for a stale crime, even if that approach involved "what might otherwise be regarded as a quite undue degree of leniency" (p.3). However he emphasised the importance of applying this to the particular facts of the case. Whereas in
Todd (supra) the offender had no control over the delay, in Kukunoski it was the offender's own action that caused the delay. Kukunoski (supra) is analogous to the instant case. Hunt, J. observed that:- "It is a matter for the sentencing judge in each case to determine the part played by the particular offender in creating the delay. If an offender fled the State following the grant of bail and was only apprehended years later when he returned here, it would be quite wrong to afford him leniency by reason of the delay for which he alone was responsible." (p.4) 
The flexibility of approach called for in sentencing long after the commission of the relevant crime may be achieved by modifying the totality of the sentence so that the sentence, although within the range appropriate to reflect the total criminality of the applicant, is reduced in his favour by a due consideration given to the delay and the events which have occurred in the interim.

I would add this to what was stated by James, J. in the fourth paragraph of the passage extracted above. As Hunt, CJ. at CL. pointed out in Regina v.
Purdey (unreported 5 November 1992) the sentence determined under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) must reflect the criminality involved not only in all of the offences for which the applicant was sentenced at the time when the life sentence was imposed, but also in any other crimes which he had committed and in respect of which either he had time still to serve under a sentence previously imposed or in respect of which he had not yet come to be sentenced at the time when the life sentence was imposed. In the present case, where the applicant was serving a sentence incomplete at the time of imposition of the life sentence and also was convicted of and has served sentences in respect of crimes subsequently to the imposition of that sentence, the criminality involved in all of those must also be taken into account in making a determination under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html), because of the inevitable concurrency between the sentence now to be fixed pursuant to that section and those other sentences. The principle of totality and its relevance to a re-sentencing under [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) was explained by Hunt, CJ. at CL. in Purdey (supra) (in a passage which was expressly approved by Carruthers, J. in the Court of Criminal Appeal:
Regina v. Purdey [(1993) 31 NSWLR 668] at 680).
Hunt, CJ. at CL. said:- "In the ordinary course of events, a judge called upon to sentence a prisoner for murder where he has already been sentenced for nine armed robberies and an escape from lawful custody would usually make the sentence for the murder cumulative upon those sentences already imposed, except in relation to those offences which were committed as part of a connected and roughly contemporaneous series of offences. However, before accumulating the sentence for murder upon those already imposed for the other crimes, the judge would be obliged to consider whether the simple addition of two or more sentences which may individually be appropriate has nevertheless produced a total figure which is excessive having regard to the totality of the criminality involved: R.
v. Glenister [(1980) 2 NSWLR 597] at 612;
R. v. Holder & Johnston [(1983) 3 NSWLR 245] at -261. Indeed, that principle of totality is not restricted to sentences imposed for offences committed as part of a connected and roughly contemporaneous series of offences: R. v. Harrison [(1990) 48 A. Crim. R.
] at 198-199.

Such a cumulative sentence, however, is not permitted when imposed a fresh sentence pursuant to [s.13A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html)
Subsection (5) provides that the minimum term must commence on the date on which the original life sentence commenced or, if the prisoner was remanded in custody for the offence, the date on which the first such remand commenced. (I shall have to return to that provision shortly.) It would appear that the draftsman of [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) unfortunately never contemplated the by no means uncommon situation where a life sentence was imposed upon a prisoner who was already serving a sentence.

It has always been the law that, where a judge has to impose sentences in relation to a number of offences, it does not matter very much whether he or she accumulates reduced sentences (so as to take the principle of totality into account) or makes longer sentences concurrent - provided of course that each individual sentence remains proportionate to the crime to which it relates. It has never been the law that, when the sentences are made concurrent, the longest of the sentences imposed must be determined without reference to the crimes to which the other concurrent sentences relate. For example, in R. v. Hayes [(1984) 1 NSWLR 740], the prisoner has pleaded guilty to four charges of break enter and steal, and he asked the sentencing judge in relation to the first of them to take into account a further 30 similar offences. He was sentenced to penal servitude for years on the first charge and to penal servitude for four years for each of the others, to be served concurrently. It was held (at 742) that the precise manner in which the aggregate of 13 years was reached did not matter; what had to be looked at was the ultimate practical effect of the sentencing order having regard to the totality of the criminality involved. To hold otherwise would effectively mean that the prisoner would not be punished for those other crimes.

As the judge re-sentencing pursuant to [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) is precluded from making the fresh sentence cumulative upon others which the prisoner was serving when the original life sentence was imposed - or would have been serving when sentenced for the murder in the ordinary course of events - he or she must therefore make the sentence for murder longer to take those other crimes into account, provided that the sentence imposed for the murder remains individually proportionate to the crime for which it is imposed. Again to hold otherwise would effectively mean that the applicant would not be punished for those other crimes." 
In the present case, the sentence must be derived in accordance with ordinary sentencing principles applicable and by reference to the considerations relevant in every case, including, in particular, the objective criminality involved in each relevant offence and relevant subjective considerations. In the present case, matters which must particularly be borne in mind are:-
The criminality involved in that group of offences for which the applicant had been sentenced on 8 April 1975, which may be regarded as appropriately reflected by the total sentences imposed in respect of them, but not completed at the time when the life sentence was imposed.
That at the time when the life sentence was imposed the applicant was still serving that sentence, imposed on 8 April 1975, dated back to 27 July and subject to a non-parole period due to expire on 26 January 1982. The life sentence was made in part concurrent with that non-parole period. When the applicant left Katingal on 3 November 1977, he was still liable to serve in respect of the original 14 year sentence, at least four years, two months and 24 days.
The criminality involved in the group of offences committed on 8 August and in respect of which, presumably applying the principle of totality in relation to those offences and the 1974 offences, Taylor, CJ. at CL. imposed one life sentence and a collection of determinate sentences.
The criminality involved in the Victorian offences, which may be regarded as indicated by the term in fact served in relation to those, totalling three years, three months and three days.
The criminality involved in the Queensland offence, the criminality in which may be regarded as indicated by the term in fact served in respect of that, two years and three days.
The period of 10 years, eight months and 19 days during which the prisoner remained at large after his departure from Katingal (in all its aspects).

The recitation of those circumstances demonstrates that the sentence now to be determined must necessarily involve a very substantial minimum term. It is to be modified in favour of the prisoner by regard to considerations arising from the delay including, in particular, the quite remarkable evidence of his progress towards rehabilitation since his return to custody, and including the considerations referred to above arising from the long period of delay.
Because the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) requires that the term to be imposed be dated back to the commencement of the life sentence, a minimum term which merely reflected the sum of the sentence period appropriate to the criminality involved and the period when the applicant was at large may turn out to be disproportionately long, of a nature to crush the spirit of the applicant and impede rather than foster his further progress towards rehabilitation into the community. A sentence which was of that nature would defeat one of the prime purposes of the sentencing process.

The criminality involved in the offences for which the applicant has previously been sentenced, other than those dealt with by Taylor, CJ. at CL., can, as I have indicated, be appropriately measured by the length of the time which he in fact served and, in respect of the 1974 offences, the length of the time which had yet to serve at the time when he left Katingal. Those periods total, as matter of mathematics, nine years and six months.

To comprehend the criminality involved in the offences for which he was sentenced on 4 July 1977, it is convenient to turn again to the remarks made by the sentencing judge. Indeed, by [s.13A(9)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html)
I am expressly required to have regard to those remarks. His Honour noted the past criminal records of both prisoners then before him and concluded that Cox was not as dangerous a criminal as Motric and that he had been to an extent disadvantaged in life, but he continued:- "I can see no reason for making any distinction in the sentences for each one of you. It was a joint crime, jointly planned and jointly carried out, and each one of you is responsible for the acts of the other in furtherance of the pre-concert out of which this series of crimes arose. ... I have taken into account in your case, Cox, your perhaps unfortunate life that you led, but, as
I said, the Parliament has said that escaping or shooting at prison officers with intent to escape from lawful custody is an offence that carries life imprisonment. I have been informed that this has never happened before in respect of the Long Bay Penitentiary. This is the first time there has been an attempt by armed prisoners to, in effect, shoot their way out of the gaol. It is a matter which must cause great public concern and which requires me to inflict the sentences that I have." 
I would understand his Honour, although his words have been transcribed in the way that I have produced him, as having corrected himself, so that he should be understood as though the words I have italicised, "escaping or" have been omitted, that is to say, withdrawn and replaced by "shooting at prison officers".

Taylor, CJ. at CL, in imposing sentence would have been aware of the operation of the system of release on licence pursuant to s.463 of the Crimes Act, and the section requires me to take that knowledge into account (s.13A(9)(a)). I do so in this sense, that I can assume that although he imposed a sentence of imprisonment for life, Taylor, CJ. at CL. would have been well aware of the probability that, subject to good behaviour while in custody, the applicant was likely to be released on licence perhaps 12 to 15 years after the commencement of the sentence. He would also have been aware, of course, that under the system of remissions which operated at that time, the determinate sentences would have been reduced by remission so that the longest of them (15 years) would expire by remission at the end of about nine and a half years.
That is not a matter which the section expressly requires me to take into account but it is "another relevant matter" within the meaning of s.13A(9).
That is to say, although as he was bound to do, his Honour took a very serious view of the criminality involved in the whole group of offences, it was almost certainly not in his contemplation that the prisoner would remain in prison for the whole of his natural life except in the event that, after release on licence, he should re-offend or otherwise break the conditions of his licence.
Nevertheless, his Honour's choice of the indeterminate maximum sentence is of considerable significance. It emphasizes the very great criminality of the offence, as assessed by a judge far better placed than I to make such assessment.

In Purdey (supra, p.4), Hunt, CJ. at CL. commented on the relevance of the remarks made by the sentencing judge to the exercise which the court must perform under s.13A in that they serve to show how the offence was viewed at the time when it was committed or, more precisely, at the time when the offender first came for sentence in respect of it:- "Any comment of the trial judge, as referred to in paragraph (c), may also be of significance because such a contemporaneous reaction to the crime which was committed is a valuable guide to the true nature of that crime which may not appear so clearly from a perusal of the transcript so long after the event.
For example, a suggestion by the trial judge that the papers should be marked `never to be released' would be of considerable weight - although clearly it would not be binding." 
It is important in my view, that the remarks of the sentencing judge be looked at for that purpose because it must never be forgotten that one element of the sentencing task is to determine a sentence which will reasonably satisfy the community's need for the vindication of the law and the appropriate exaction of retribution upon offenders.

Furthermore the judge imposed this sentence after consideration of the subjective aspects of the applicant's case. He was presented with the applicant's criminal history, which commenced in 1958 when he was seven years old, and at the date of sentencing included 18 convictions, relating mostly to property offences. The judge was made aware of the harshness of the applicant's upbringing and referred to it in his judgement. Nevertheless the objective criminality involved in the escape bid was considered overwhelming.

The Crown submitted that the shoot-out was "the worst case scenario". The escape had been planned. The group had in their possession a pistol, which
Taylor, CJ. at CL. found to be a "serious and disturbing thing" (p3). Also in their possession was a wooden replica which that sentencing judge concluded by inference had been secreted in the applicant's cell. Taylor, CJ. at CL.
regarded that issue (the presence of the gun within the prison complex, in which prison officers were unarmed) to be of such great importance that he delayed the sentencing to give the prisoners an opportunity to provide information on its acquisition. Such information was not supplied. An armed break-out had not occurred before this incident and the judge believed that the information was of paramount importance in ensuring there was no repeat.
The Crown submitted that public policy considerations put this into the worst case category.

I do not accept that submission. Serious as they were, and bringing to account all of the other relevant considerations, it does not appear to me that the case is one of such gravity as to warrant imprisonment for life and I deem it appropriate to proceed to determine a minimum term and an additional term.

It is always relevant, in a s.13A application, to consider whether the applicant is likely to be a danger to the community if the Offenders Review
Board releases him once the minimum term expired.

The report of Dr. Lucas concluded that there was no evidence of a psychiatric disorder, nor was there a history of psychotic disorder. In view of the ability of the applicant to form relationships and to be engaged in employment in custody and at large, despite the psychosocial stressors he has endured,
Dr. Lucas was unwilling to diagnose antisocial personality disorder. Indeed
Dr. Lucas went so far as to describe the applicant as already rehabilitated.
Whilst the applicant has demonstrated substantial maturation, I am not prepared to accept that the applicant could be so described, given the constraints of the life at large and in custody. In addition the weight of Dr.
Lucas' opinion must be discounted by the apparent poverty of information supplied about his criminal activity whilst at large.

The applicant has given evidence of his prospects for both living arrangements and employment, as well as community participation upon release. He seems to have an array of both personal and professional contacts in the community around which to base his life.

The applicant's life at large is relevant to a consideration of his personal development and its impact on an assessment of his ongoing dangerousness to the community (as well as to a determination of the extent to which the length of that period of freedom is to be reflected in the minimum term). It seems that he was able to a very large extent to conduct his life in what would be regarded as a normal way. After he left Katingal he spent time in Melbourne and Sydney. The applicant worked for most of this period, about six months of it, as a storeman in New South Wales. For some of the remaining time, he managed to receive unemployment benefits. Whilst in Victoria, he formed a defacto relationship which continued, intermittently, throughout his period of freedom. In June or July 1978 he left Australia by yacht and travelled to
England where he remained for about two years. He was employed as a seaman during this period and was not charged with or convicted of any offences. In about 1980 he travelled to Germany and stayed there until some time in 1982 when he returned to Australia, again travelling by yacht.

The applicant went to live in Melbourne and survived on savings, and perhaps unemployment benefits but did not work during this period. He rented a house from a friend called Ian Carroll. In about January 1983, an incident occurred between the applicant and Carroll which resulted in the applicant shooting the other man; the applicant himself was wounded. The applicant was in possession of a gun. He says it had been given to him in order to protect himself since he states that he felt his life was in dangers from unspecified 'criminal elements'. Carroll was found dead at the house and the police discovered crates under the house containing nine machine guns. It was this episode that led eventually to the applicant's arrest, conviction and imprisonment in
Victoria to which reference has already been made. As a result it, the applicant left Victoria and travelled up through New South Wales to
Queensland.

Whilst in Queensland he survived on his savings for about five or six months and then was once again able to receive unemployment benefits. At this stage he was again involved in a defacto relationship.

In November 1983 the applicant became involved in a incident with the
Queensland police. Whilst driving he was pulled over by the police. He claims that because he was uncertain as to the authenticity of their identification he proceeded to disarm the police and he drove away. He claims that once he established that they had indeed been police he left the guns, together with a briefcase belonging to the police in his car, which he abandoned about two miles from the scene of the encounter. It was this incident that led eventually to his conviction and sentence in Queensland to which I have already referred.

He left Queensland the next month, travelling to New South Wales where he remained briefly before returning to England. He stayed in England until some time in 1987 when he returned to Australia. He stayed in New South Wales for a couple of weeks before travelling to Victoria in about mid-1987. He worked for a builder and continued his defacto relationship. He was captured by the
Victorian police in July 1988.

The applicant said in evidence that during these 11 years at large the prospect of his recapture played on his mind. He still met people socially and form friendships, but nobody was aware of his status. In his interview with
Dr. Lucas he described it as a constant concern, if not consciously then subconsciously.

The applicant's maturation seems to have commenced sometime in he period -1988, and continues to date. Indeed the view of the Serious Offenders
Review Council (SORC, formerly the Serious Offenders Review Board) is that he has not been a management problem for prison authorities (whether in New South
Wales, Queensland or Victoria) since his capture in 1988. Their conclusion was that the applicant has made "a significant contribution as a core prisoner and is a positive influence among the difficult inmates".

Immediately upon his extradition to New South Wales on 28 October 1993, the applicant was given A1 security classification at Goulburn Correctional
Centre, and placement in the Special Management Support Programme Stage II, designed to facilitate the transition of dangerous or difficult prisoners into the regular prison environment. Almost at once, on 1 November 1993, the applicant sought a review of the decision to put him in the programme.

Accordingly he was interviewed by a Visiting Committee of the Serious
Offenders Review Board (SORB). His claims of placement in regular discipline in Queensland were investigated. A report received from the Queensland
Corrective Services Commission (Annexures F1-2 of Exhibit C) was favourable to the applicant, with no reports of breaches of discipline. He had been on a strict regime throughout the period of detention in Queensland, a situation he sought to renegotiate, although he never abused the process. His attitude was recorded as positive and his co-operation good. Other terms used to describe the applicant were cooperative, organised, punctual, industrious, clean and with an overall excellent attitude to both staff and inmates.

Whilst in the Queensland prison system the applicant sought actively to improve his levels of education and personal development, through specific courses as well as general prison activities.

The Queensland Corrective Services Commission Report concluded that the applicant's time at the Sir David Longland Correctional Centre was "without incident" and that he "used his time at the centre constructively to undertake activities and programmes which fostered his personal development and provided him with favourable skills for his eventual return to the community".

Shortly after receipt of the Queensland report, on 20 December 1993, the SORB recommended the substitution of an A2 security classification and the removal of the applicant from the SMISP. They also recommended the transfer of the applicant to the Maitland Correctional Centre. These recommendations were approved by the Commissioner three days later.

On 30 December 1993, SORB received documentation from the Department of
Justice, Victoria relating to his conduct whilst in custody within that State (Annexures I1-2 of Exhibit C). The Acting Superintendent of Classification reported that during the period of custody, between 23 July 1988 and October , the applicant was "considered a well behaved, compliant prisoner who was generally easily managed" with competent self-advocacy skills. He was at all times in "High Security Units" and managed well in the small, well supervised environments. The major issue for the authorities was security (understandably in view of his record).

The applicant has remained at Goulburn Correctional Centre with an A2 classification to date. This has been reviewed by SORC periodically. He has been in employment throughout his time at Goulburn, initially as sweeper and then as laundryman/storeman, a position he currently holds. Reports of his conduct in these positions are extremely favourable (Annexures N1-2 Exhibit
C). An assessment made for SORC in August 1994 reports that in his educational pursuits he was consistent, self-directed and careful, and that his unit supervisor commented that he was well behaved and polite (Annexures N1-2
Exhibit C).

Much of his time is spent on the Young Offenders Programme, in which a prison officer invited him to participate soon after his arrival at Goulburn.
Briefly, the programme is conducted jointly by prison officers and inmates, with the greatest input from the latter. The applicant is in fact the head facilitator of the programme. In evidence he said that he utilises the notoriety attached to him to attract the attention of the young offenders in order to tell them the reality of life in prison. His involvement in the programme is intense and his dedication so great that he remains at Goulburn despite classification for Maitland. The prison officer who conducts the programme had asked the applicant to remain in order to continue working with the young offenders. The applicant said in evidence that he was "more than happy" to do this.

The applicant has amassed a considerable array of educational achievements, the pinnacle of which is his recent acceptance in to the Bachelor of Arts
Communication degree at the University of Technology, Sydney. Other areas of achievement include health and fitness, computing and personal development.

As to the additional term, the Crown argued that it should be for the rest of the applicant's natural life. The applicant was born on 14 September 1949 and is now 47 years old. The foundation to this argument was that the life sentence was not mandatory yet the sentencing judge deemed it the appropriate sentence for the objective gravity of the offence, despite the recognition of some unfortunate aspects of the applicant's life history. The Crown further submitted that the additional term does not represent a period of supervision but allowance for mitigating circumstances.

Counsel for the applicant disputed the need for the additional term to be for the rest of his natural life. However they conceded that a significant period would be justifiable.

I am persuaded that the additional term ought be a term for the balance of the prisoner's natural life. In that regard I pay considerable attention to the opinion of Mr. Justice Taylor that a life sentence was appropriate. It is to be remembered that this was not a situation where the imposition of such a sentence was mandatory. The determination that that was the appropriate sentence resulted from his Honour's consideration of all of the circumstances of the case including, as I would take it, his perception at that time of the need for deterrence.

The total sentence, comprising the minimum term and additional term, must appropriately serve all the purposes of the criminal law. The basic principles of sentencing were re-affirmed by the Court of Criminal Appeal in Regina v.
Camilleri (unreported 8 July 1990) where Allen, J. (with whom the Chief
Justice and Finlay, J. agreed) said:- "In seeking to determine in any case the sentence appropriate to a particular crime, it is always of importance to have regard to the gravity of the offence viewed objectively. Unless that is done, the other factors requiring consideration in order to arrive at the proper sentence cannot be given their rightful place. A sentence imposed must be commensurate with the seriousness of the crime in the sense that it should, having regard to all the proved circumstances, accord with the general moral sense of the community. It should also serve as a sufficient deterrent both to the offender and to others. The purpose of that deterrence is to prevent the commission of such offences and whilst justice and humanity require that the previous character and conduct and the probable future life and conduct of the individual offender should be given the most careful consideration, those are factors which are necessarily subsidiary to the main consideration which determines the appropriate amount of punishment, that is the protection of the public. The fundamental purpose of punishment is the protection of society. Unless those basic principles of sentencing are adhered to, errors will occur." 
Taylor, CJ. at CL. saw the need for a life sentence to reflect the seriousness of the offence, the totality of the criminality involved, and the need for deterrence. That need remains and indeed, is reinforced by the fact that the applicant had committed further very serious offences since the date when
Taylor, CJ. at CL. dealt with him.

Therefore, I intend to determine an additional term during which the applicant may be released on parole which will be "for the remainder of the [prisoner's] natural life": s.13A(4)(a)(ii).

The Act requires that the minimum term is to commence on 8 August 1975: s.13A(4). It must be such as to result in actual imprisonment of the application for a period appropriate to the principles of criminal punishment and such as will "accord with the general moral sense of the community". That in my view dictates that the period of actual imprisonment be a relatively long on; and that the minimum term must comprise not only that appropriately long period of actual imprisonment, but also a factor adequately although not precisely reflecting the long time during which the applicant was free to live a relatively normal life.

I set a minimum term of 29 years and four months which, having commenced on 8
August 1975 will expire on 7 December 2004. I set an additional term which commencing on 8 December 2004 will extend for the remainder of the prisoner's natural life.

The earliest date on which the prisoner will be eligible for release on parole will be 7 December 2004.

This is an application by Russell Cox for a determination of a life sentence pursuant to [s13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). On 4
July 1977 Taylor CJ at CL sentenced the applicant to life for maliciously shooting at a prison officer with intent to avoid lawful apprehension. He was also sentenced to a total of 15 years for a number of convictions arising out of the same circumstances.

The Crown has raised a preliminary objection to the competency of this application and it is that issue which I address first. For convenience, the facts of the offence should initially be presented .

On 8 August 1975 the applicant, together with two other men, Marko Motric and
Allan MacDougall, effected an escape from the Metropolitan Remand Centre at
Long Bay Prison. Taylor CJ at CL found that the it was a pre-arranged plan, although the applicant denies this. The escape bid commenced with all three offenders trailed a truck through the inner gates of the complex . Once through the gates, threats and menaces were made against the prison officers in order to obtain the keys to the cabinet in which the prison officers stored their firearms. The threats were extremely serious in that a fully loaded pistol was in Motric's possession and threats were made to use the pistol on the prison officers. The applicant was in possession of a replica weapon with which he threatened prison officers.

The applicant and Motric menaced the gatekeeper Pavich to the gatehouse in which weapons were kept in a safe. In the DPP statement of facts the applicant then directed Pavich to open the safe but the prison officer stated that he did not have the correct keys, although they were in his pocket. The applicant denies this.

The applicant then left the gatehouse whilst Motric remained to menace Pavich and two other prison officers. Meanwhile the applicant rounded up a prison officer, Cafe, as a hostage. The two offenders then left the gatehouse with
Cafe. Upon hearing Pavich then open the safe Motric and MacDougall ran back in and were able to get hold of two revolvers. MacDougall kept one and gave the other to the applicant. Pavich was then menaced outside and made to open the main gate. Meanwhile the prison officers had armed themselves.

All three offenders then got into the truck, keeping Cafe with them. The applicant was driving and one of the three shot out the windscreen. The applicant proceeded to drive slowly through the main gate into an area called 'the avenue' which was still within the prions boundaries. The applicant told
Motric to put Cafe in a position were he could be seen by the prison officers, and he was duly put through the broken windscreen so that his upper torso was on the bonnet. The applicant continued to drive with both he and MacDougall firing shots, one ricocheting onto a prison officer.

The truck was soon immobilised by being rammed by two other prison vehicles.
The tree continued the escape bid on foot, bringing Cafe with them. The applicant fired two shot at prison officer Cook, although he denies this. Cook heard the applicant say to him as he stepped towards the group "If you come any closer we'll kill the bastard", although this is also denied. The applicant then fired a shot in the direction of Cook, who continued to move towards the applicant. Cook fired a shot, which hit the applicant causing him to tumble and lose his hold of Cafe. Motric fired two shots at Cafe's legs and was then himself struck by a shot from Cook. The offenders were then overpowered.

After conviction the applicant was sent to Katingal Special Security Unit at the Long Bay Prison complex. He lodged an appeal against conviction and sentence to the Court on Criminal Appeal on 10 July 1977. On 3 November 1977 the applicant executed what in layman's terms would be an escape. He remained at large until he was apprehended in Victoria on 22 July 1988.

In Victoria he was convicted of 'use of firearm' and 'endanger life' for which he received a 5 year sentence in August 1989. In March 1991 he was convicted of 'possess weapon' and sentenced to 2 years, to run concurrently.

On 25 October 1991 he was extradited to Queensland. he was convicted of * and Served a sentence of *.

On 28 October 1993 the applicant was extradited to NSW and stood trial on the charge of escape from lawful custody in relation to Katingal in November 1977.
However the jury found the applicant not guilty by direction from the trial judge. This curious result was due to the fact that Katingal had not been gazetted as a prison at the time the applicant absented himself.
 [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) applications have a prerequisite for the application to be competent.
[Subsection ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s3.html) requires that a person serving an existing life sentence within the meaning of [s13A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) "is not eligible to make an application unless the person has served at least years of the sentence concerned. The 8 years must be accounted for at the time of the [s13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) application, which in this case was 11 July 1994. It is on this basis that the
Crown objects to the application. Having raised this preliminary issue the
Crown has made the submission, with which I agree, that the onus is on the applicant to show that the application is indeed competent.

The competency objection raised by the Crown is a matter of simple mathematics. On 4 July 1977 Taylor CJ at CL sentenced the applicant to a life sentence, with other sentences totalling 15 years and to be served concurrently. The sentences were backdated to 8 August 1975. The applicant was at Katingal until he went missing on 3 November 1977, and remained at large until 22 July 1988. He returned to the NSW prison system on 28 October
Accordingly the applicant has been in NSW prisons in relation to the life sentence for a period totalling 4 years, 6 months and 21 days, a figure little over half of the requisite 8 years.

However the applicant submits that the 8 years is not to be calculated in such a literal fashion. Time spent in custody in NSW prisons in relation to the life sentence is not the correct gauge, but rather the time which has elapsed during the currency of the sentence should be considered. The crux of the issue is the interpretation of the word "serve", which the applicant submits is ambiguous in [s13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html), and accordingly should be constructed in a way which favours the applicant since it is a term within a penal statute. This being in accordance with the demands of fairness in our criminal justice system. See Smith versus The
Commissioner for Corrective Services NSW <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 134:] Gibbs versus the State of NSW [(1990) 21 NSWLR 416] at 420 per Gleeson CJ and Kirby P at 424..
 [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) does not expressly state that the sentence is to be served in prison or in custody. It merely states that the sentence is to be served. Therefore counsel for the applicant has directed my attention to the dictionary meaning of "serve", and submitted that any definition therein which favours the applicant ought to be utilised.

Counsel conceded that ordinarily the meaning accorded to the term would involve custody, but situations can arise which challenge that orthodox understanding and reveal alternative interpretations. It was submitted that by including the terms gaol or custody in association with the term serve elsewhere in the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) the legislature has indicated by such exclusion in [s13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) that alternative interpretations are available.

The alternatives suggested were that serve means 'to go through' or 'be subject to' the sentence, which continues to run from the time of its imposition, regardless of the location of the person upon whom it was imposed:
Whan versus McConaghy [[1983-1984] 158 CLR 631] .
Accordingly, the applicant's sentence continued to run throughout the time he was at large and therefore he was subject to the sentence and continued to serve it. Under this argument the applicant has fulfilled the 8 year prerequisite, since 8 years from 8 August 1975 elapsed on 8 August 1983.

In response, the Crown has submitted that use of phrases such as 'to go through' in relation to a sentence is not helpful and devoid of rationale. The normal usage of serve is what should be applied in its construction in [s13A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html)
Furthermore, as [s13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) was introduced into the Act after its initial enactment, it ought to be considered in the context of the Act and the use of the word serve thought the rest of the Act, that is, to serve in prison without reduction. This is a cogent argument. The Crown did not accept that serving a sentence equated with the sentence continuing to run and therefore an escapee is not serving the sentence. This is the understanding which generated the introduction of s.447A of the Crimes Act, with the imposition of a separate penal consequence, equivalent to the time spent away from custody: per Street CJ in r versus Wash [[1984] 3 NSWLR 584] at 590; per Gleeson CJ in Gibbs versus State of NSW [(1990) 21
NSWLR 416] 417-418.

However the application os s.447A is to prisoners who escape from lawful custody, a charge of which the applicant was acquitted and the Crown did not demonstrate an alternative legal source of the unlawfulness, and indeed to do so would raise the spectre of double jeopardy.

The applicant proposed an alternative argument with which to demonstrate competency. Benefit is due to the applicant from the meaning of the word serve in s.29B of the Prisons Act, that is, he is deemed to have served the time he was at large in prison.

The logical conclusion of such an argument is that convicted criminals could avoid penalty for escapes from custody, which would be anathema to our criminal justice system. However, notionally the sentence continues to run and the current exercise is one of statutory interpretation rather than an analysis of the social value of the policy behind the legislation.

Section 29B of the Prisons Act relates to the specific charge of escape from lawful custody rather than what might be termed a common sense understanding of the term escape. The applicant was found not guilty of the charge of escape from lawful custody, by direction on 10 May 1995. At the time the applicant left custody Katingal had not been gazetted as a prison, and there were no warrants issued. Consequently the applicant could not be found to be in lawful custody in order to escape from it. Therefore the applicant was absent from
Katingal by means other than escape. Since he was acquitted he should receive the benefit of the deeming provision in s.29B of the Prisons Act.

Moreover the legislature retained s.29B following the introduction of the s13A provisions, which may be interpreted as benefiting the applicant and his unique circumstances.

The Crown drew my attention to the evolution of s.29B, it being sourced in the unfortunate occurrence of release of a prisoner by error. The foundation to the section was release of a prisoner through no fault of the prisoner.
Accordingly the section had a specific purpose and deeming provisions should be looked at with the specific purpose in mind. The Crown suggested that I ought to read in the word "actually" to make the meaning of the deeming provisions clear.

It is the peculiarities of this case that lead me to be persuaded by submissions made on behalf of the applicant. I am persuaded to accord the applicant the requisite 8 years by means of deeming him to have served the sentence throughout the time at large. The combination of [s13A(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) and s.29B of the Prisons Act when introduced into the factual matrix of this applicant produce a peculiar loophole, but one which, given the ambiguities, ought to grant benefit to the applicant. However in order to obviate the ludicrous situation of ignoring the time at large, the nature of the time spent serving the sentence will factor significantly into any determination I should make. I make this decision together with the consideration that the applicant has been serving custodial sentences since 22 July 1988 albeit outside NSW, which would bring the total of regular serving to 8 years.

I turn now to the substance of the application.
 * * * 
