

Regina versus John Reginald Mayne [1998] NSWSC 1049 (20 November 1998) 
REGINA versus JOHN REGINALD MAYNE /96 
FRIDAY 20 DECEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
JAMES J, BELL AJ 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: John Reginald Mayne has applied for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him in the District Court on 31 May 1996 by his Honour Judge Twigg following pleas of guilty to a charge of entering land with intent to commit a felony, an offence under <case> (1) d of the Crimes Act, and a charge of breaking, entering and stealing, an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act.

On the charge of entering with intent his Honour imposed a sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude for 2 years commencing on 20 November 1995, the date from which the Applicant had been in custody. On the charge of breaking entering and stealing his Honour imposed a sentence of penal servitude for 8 years, consisting of a minimum term of 6 years commencing on 20 November 1995 and an additional term of 2 years.

Under <case> of the Crimes Act the maximum penalty for the offence of entering with intent is penal servitude for 7 years. Under <case> of the Crimes Act the maximum penalty for the offence of breaking, entering and stealing is penal servitude for 14 years.

The notice of application for leave to appeal against sentence was filed out of time, on 19 July 1996, but as the delay in filing the notice was slight, and as the Crown has not raised any opposition, I would extend the time for lodging the notice of application for leave to appeal against sentence.

On the hearing of this application there has been no complaint about the statement of the objective facts of the offences contained in the sentencing judge's remarks on sentence, which was itself taken from a facts sheet prepared by police which was admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence. Both offences were committed at a property named Delmar near
Tamworth, which was owned by a man named Bourke.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge stated that on the morning of November 1995 the Applicant had gone to Delmar. The sentencing judge continued: "he drove onto the property and parked close to the homestead. He surveyed the premises by walking around the homestead making observations.

At about 11.30am on the following Friday 17 November 1995 the prisoner entered the property Delmar in the company of a 16 year old named J. The prisoner parked his vehicle approximately a kilometre from the home and then with J walked through paddocks to the house. They gained entry by removing a flyscreen from an exterior window and climbed through an opening. Inside the prisoner and J spent some time ransacking the premises and removed a Canon camera, a carry bag and a number of wooden bowls containing cash. The prisoner was wearing socks over his hands and subsequently both he and J left".

The police had had the Applicant under surveillance for some time and had installed a hidden video camera inside the house at Delmar. A video film was taken of the Applicant and the co-offender inside the house on 17 November and this video film was shown to the sentencing judge in the proceedings on sentence.

A fact not stated in his Honour's statement of the facts of the offence of breaking entering and stealing but which was stated in the facts sheet, is that the value of the property stolen was approximately a thousand dollars.

The Applicant was interviewed by police in an electronically recorded interview on 21 November 1995. In this interview the Applicant, while admitting that he had entered Delmar on 17 November 1995, claimed that he had done so pursuant to an arrangement he had made with Mr Bourke that he should enter the house at Delmar and take $40,000 worth of jewellery, so that Mr
Bourke could make a fraudulent insurance claim, but that the Applicant had not been able to find any jewellery inside the house. Mr Bourke told police that he had never had any conversation with the Applicant and did not know the
Applicant. By the time of the proceedings on sentence the Applicant had resiled from this explanation of why he had entered the property.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge, after setting out the objective facts of the offences, noted that the Applicant had been on bail on a charge of entering land without lawful excuse at the time of committing the offences. His Honour referred to a submission made on behalf of the Applicant that the two offences should be viewed as part of the same criminal enterprise, the entry on 10 November being for the purpose of preparing for the breaking, entering and stealing, and his Honour would appear to have accepted this submission, which was clearly well founded.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge referred to the explanation offered by the Applicant for his having entered the property, which the
Applicant had subsequently abandoned. His Honour found, unsurprisingly, that the explanation was not true and had been made up by the Applicant in an attempt to extricate himself from blame for a premeditated, planned offence of breaking, entering and stealing.

The Applicant had pleaded guilty to both offences. His Honour found that the early admissions by the Applicant made when he was interviewed on 21 November , were tainted by the spurious explanation he had offered for having entered the property. His Honour also found that, in view of the strength of the Crown case, the pleas of guilty were largely a recognition on the
Applicant's part that if he had stood trial he would inevitably have been convicted. Nevertheless, his Honour found that the Applicant was entitled to some credit for his pleas of guilty, in that the cost of a trial had been saved and witnesses had been relieved of the need to attend court and give evidence denying that there had been any fraudulent conspiracy as initially alleged by the Applicant.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge noted that the Applicant had been born in June 1959 and he was accordingly 36 years old, almost 37, at the time he was sentenced. He was married with one child. The Applicant had a number of previous criminal convictions, including two convictions in 1983 for breaking entering and stealing for which he had served prison sentences and other convictions for other offences for which he had received sentences of imprisonment.

In the proceedings on sentence the Applicant's legal representative handed up schedules prepared by the Director of Public Prosecutions giving particulars of certain sentences passed in 1993 and 1994 for the offences of breaking entering and stealing. Reference was also made to sentencing statistics prepared by the Judicial Commission. It was submitted on behalf of the
Applicant that an inspection of this material showed that sentences containing minimum terms of more than 3 years penal servitude had usually been reserved for cases of breaking entering and stealing in which there were circumstances of aggravation not present in the instant case, for example, multiple offences of breaking entering and stealing or possession by the offender of a firearm or the offender being on parole at the time of committing the offence or offences.

In his remarks on sentence his Honour gave short shrift to the submission that he should take into account statistics or sentencing information prepared by the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Judicial Commission. His Honour said: "I regard such an exercise as of limited use and perhaps even a barren exercise of judicial time in order to produce a false and misleading guide. In my view each case is dependent upon its own facts." 
His Honour then referred to the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
R versus Hayes, [11 A Crim R 187] in which the members of the Court denounced the offence of breaking entering and stealing and expatiated on the need for judges to impose more severe sentences for the offence.

His Honour then referred to some other decisions of the Court of Criminal
Appeal: R versus Jones (unreported 30 June 1994); R versus Williams (unreported May 1994); and R versus Brookes (unreported 14 September 1994); in which his
Honour said the principles and policies of sentencing expounded in Hayes had been re-emphasised by the Court of Criminal Appeal.

His Honour concluded that there was a need for him to impose on the Applicant a sentence which would operate as a strong general deterrent and he proceeded to impose a principal sentence of penal servitude for 8 years.

On the hearing of this application only one ground of appeal has really been relied on, that is, that the sentences imposed by the sentencing judge were manifestly excessive. As I have already indicated, his Honour accepted, as was clearly the case, that the two offences were to be regarded as part of the same criminal enterprise and the criminality for which the sentencing judge sentenced the Applicant consisted, in substance, of a single, premeditated and planned breaking, entering and stealing at the property Delmar.

In sentencing the Applicant for the offence of breaking, entering and stealing his Honour was clearly correct in taking into account what the Court of
Criminal Appeal had said in Hayes and later similar cases about sentencing for an offence of breaking, entering and stealing and it was necessary that the sentence imposed by his Honour should operate as a general deterrent. However, with respect to his Honour, his Honour should not in my opinion have been so dismissive of the information about sentences imposed for the offence of breaking entering and stealing which had been prepared by the Judicial
Commission or the Director of Public Prosecutions.

It is of course true that the sentence to be imposed in any particular case depends on the facts of that case. It is also true that care needs to be exercised in using sentencing statistics or information about sentences imposed in other cases. However, it is not the case that consulting statistics of sentences or information about sentences which have recently been passed for the same kind of offence as the judge is sentencing for, is always, or even usually, a barren exercise or a waste of judicial time. Consulting such statistics or information can be useful to a sentencing judge.

Counsel for the Applicant referred the Court to a judgment of my own in R v
Yavuz, (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 20 April 1995), in which, in deciding to uphold an appeal against the severity of a sentence on the ground that it was manifestly excessive, I relied to some extent on statistics prepared by the Judicial Commission. The other member of the bench agreed with my judgment.

I would not withdraw anything that I said in Yavuz. However, as Yavuz was a decision of a bench comprised of only two judges, and in case it is suggested that the views I expressed in Yavuz are idiosyncratic, I would refer to the decision of a bench of three judges of this Court in R versus H [(1994) 74 A
Crim R 41] at 43. In R versus H the Chief Justice, with whom the other members of the Court (Mahoney J A and Sully J) agreed, said at page 43: "In the end the argument comes down to the contention that the total sentence was manifestly excessive. That contention was developed by reference to a detailed comparison of the sentences imposed in other reasonably similar cases.

The undertaking of such a comparison is a legitimate and potentially useful exercise. In the interests of promoting consistency in sentencing, the
Judicial Commission of New South Wales now maintains statistical records which are available for use by all judicial officers in this State. Furthermore, the
Court of Criminal Appeal, which is routinely called upon to review sentences, thereby accumulates a substantial amount of information as to sentencing patterns. As we have seen in this and other appeals the director of Public
Prosecutions keeps tables which record the decisions in comparable cases, and it is reasonable to expect that where appropriate these could also be made available to sentencing judges.

For the purposes of this appeal we have considered a substantial amount of information, some of which comes from the Sentencing Information System, and some from our own records and past decisions." 
An inspection of the sentencing statistics prepared by the Judicial Commission of sentences for the offence of breaking entering and stealing passed between
January 1990 and December 1995, which contain a large number of cases, and a consideration of a number of decisions of this Court demonstrate to my satisfaction that a sentence of penal servitude for 8 years for what was in substance a single offence of breaking entering and stealing, in which the value of the property stolen was only a thousand dollars, where the Applicant did not have a long history of previous convictions for breaking entering and stealing, and no other offences of breaking, entering and stealing were to be taken into account and where the Applicant had pleaded guilty and the sentencing judge had held that the Applicant was entitled to some credit for his plea of guilty, and even allowing for the circumstances of aggravation which were present, was outside the range of sentences within a sound exercise of his Honour's sentencing discretion.

I am fortified in my conclusion by an examination of the cases the sentencing judge referred to in his remarks on sentence, which upon examination do not support a sentence of the magnitude passed by his Honour. The actual sentences passed in Hayes, consisting of a total head sentence of 13 years with an effective non-parole period of 8 years 4 months, are of very limited assistance, because the sentences were imposed before the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) and at a time when the nominal length of both head sentences and non-parole periods was substantially reduced by remissions. However, it is instructive to note that
Hayes pleaded guilty to four charges of breaking entering and stealing and asked that no fewer than thirty other offences of breaking entering and stealing be taken into account.

In Jones, the Court of Criminal Appeal dismissed an appeal against the severity of a sentence of five years four months, that is, much less than the sentence imposed on the present Applicant, for a single offence of breaking entering and stealing, with three other offences, including a charge of possessing implements being taken into account, with the circumstance of aggravation that the Applicant was on parole at the time of committing the offence. Finlay J, who delivered the principal judgment in Jones, while holding that the appeal should be dismissed, regarded the sentence imposed on
Jones as "very high". Carruthers J regarded the sentence imposed on Jones as correcting any tendency to underrate the degree of criminality involved in the offence of breaking entering and stealing.

In Brookes the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge, which was not disturbed on appeal, was a sentence of four years penal servitude. Brookes had pleaded guilty to two charges of breaking entering and stealing involving the stealing of goods worth more than $8,000 and the sentencing judge took into account nine other offences, consisting of seven offences of breaking entering and stealing, one offence of breaking and entering with intent and one offence of receiving.

In Williams the Court of Criminal Appeal dismissed an appeal against the severity of a sentence of 8 years. However, Williams was being sentenced for no fewer than eight offences of breaking, entering and stealing, one offence of breaking and entering with intent and one offence of larceny. There were also a number of other offences taken into account.

In my opinion leave to appeal against sentence should be granted and the appeal against sentence should be upheld. This Court is accordingly required to resentence. I have already referred to the objective facts of the offence and the subjective circumstances. I have taken into account the further evidence which was admitted by the Court as being available for use in the event of the Court resentencing. I consider that an appropriate total sentence would be 4 years, and I do not consider that I should find special circumstances.

Accordingly, I propose that the sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Twigg on May 1996 on the charge of breaking entering and stealing be quashed and that in lieu thereof the Applicant be sentenced to a sentence of penal servitude for 4 years, consisting of a minimum term of 3 years commencing on November 1995 and expiring on 19 November 1998, and an additional term of 1 year. The earliest date on which the Applicant will be eligible for release on parole will be 20 November 1998.

BELL AJ: I agree with the orders proposed and, in general with the reasons.

I wish to say two things: It is not submitted, and not decided that an 8 year term could never be appropriate to a single count of break enter and steal.
The other is that I would not wish to be taken to agreeing, and I don't think it follows from what his Honour says that this is the case, that a sentencing judge must always subordinate his or her views as to the appropriateness of a sentence to the material that is generated by the computers of the Judicial
Commission.
 * * * 
