

Ruta Ona Schmutz and Ricardo Schmutz versus Vytantas Aras and Galina Aras [1996] NSWSC 340 (7 August 1996) 
RUTA ONA SCHMUTZ & RICCARDO SCHMUTZ v.VYTAUTAS ARAS & GALINA ARAS /94 
THURSDAY 8 AUGUST 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
BRYSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs in these proceedings claim equitable relief on the basis that they were entitled to a beneficial interest or to be treated as if they had a beneficial interest in the house property at 54 Prince Street, Mosman, or that they are entitled to a constructive trust remedy over the proceeds of its sale. The first defendant was formerly its registered proprietor, but he has sold it and used the greater part of the proceeds to buy another house in the names of both defendants.

Relationships between the parties.

The parties are closely related. The first plaintiff Mrs Ruta Ona Schmutz (called Ruth) is the daughter of the first defendant Mr Vytautas Aras (whose first name is usually pronounced "Vytas") of his first marriage to Mrs Ona Aras (sometimes called Anna). Vytas Aras and Ona Aras were born in Lithuania, he on 11 February 1923 and she on 21 October 1922. They came to Australia as migrants within one or two years after 1945; they were then married. Ruth Schmutz is the only child of their marriage and she was born on 24 July 1955. She married the second plaintiff Mr Riccardo Schmutz in Europe on 5 January 1980. He is of Swiss origin but at some time lived and worked in Italy, and studied at Turin. 
Ona Aras died on 10 September 1988. Vytas Aras married the second defendant
Mrs Galina Aras on 25 August 1990.

The house at 54 Prince Street, Mosman was acquired by Vytas Aras and Ona Aras as joint tenants in 1964. There were various mortgages on the title but by , when the most significant events began, the property was unencumbered.
Vytas Aras was then a Taxi Proprietor and driver and worked very long hours.
Ona Aras was employed at the Mater Hospital and worked full time.

Ruth Schmutz after completing school qualified as a Draftsman/Tracer at Sydney
Technical College, so that she was able to work in architectural offices. She went overseas about December 1976, and while in Europe worked in a hotel in
Switzerland. In Switzerland she met her husband. She returned to Australia early in 1979, returned to Italy late that year, and married on 5 January
It seems that Riccardo Schmutz had not ever visited Australia and had not met her parents. They came to Australia on 23 May 1980 and have always lived here since then, apart from short absences.

The gift to Mrs Ona Aras.

Leo J. Rodgers was an uncle of Ona Aras; he lived in California until the last months of his life, when he came to reside with her at Mosman. He died on 31 December 1978 leaving property in California (including an interest in the estate of another deceased relative) which passed to her. She received several distributions from his estate; evidence does not establish what became of all of them but the one now significant was represented by a deposit of $A59,830.02 which she made to an account in her name in (what is now) the Advance Bank on 20 February 1981. With a small sum she already had in the account this brought her credit to a little over $60,000, spoken of in evidence as if it were exactly $60,000. (She probably received a further and smaller distribution later). When the plaintiffs came to Australia it was known that Ona Aras was to receive a significant sum from her late uncle's estate, but this had not yet happened.

Before the plaintiffs arrived Ruth Schmutz's parents had invited them to stay at the Prince Street house so that they could save up for their own home and so that Riccardo Schmutz could finish his architectural studies. Vytas Aras and Ona Aras met the plaintiffs at the airport when they arrived. During the journey from the airport to Mosman Ona Aras said to the effect that she had inherited some money from her uncle and said "I don't know how much I am going to receive but I want to give you the money to help you and Riccardo settle in
Australia." Either during that journey or very soon afterwards Vytas Aras suggested that there could be an extension on the top of the Prince Street house and that Riccardo Schmutz could do the design. No clear arrangement was made straight away. The plaintiffs took up residence. Riccardo Schmutz began to study architecture at the University of Sydney; he got some credits for earlier studies at Turin, where he had qualified as an Engineering Draftsman but not as an Architect.

At some time probably within a few weeks or months of their arrival, Ona Aras showed Ruth Schmutz a letter from American lawyers who handled the estate referring to approximately $US68,000 being paid to her. The letter itself cannot be found and its exact date is not established. There was a discussion about what could be done with the money and Ona Aras said "I want to help you and Riccardo get started. I want to make your life easier. I don't want your life to be a struggle like your father's and my life has been." Ruth Schmutz and her mother then discussed the possibility of buying a house, using some of the money to come from the estate as a deposit, and of the plaintiffs' borrowing the balance. Ruth Schmutz and her mother looked at some houses in
Mosman which they regarded as too expensive and at some houses in Balgowlah which were considered to be more affordable.

After a number of houses had been inspected a house at Balgowlah was identified which the plaintiffs and Ona Aras liked and was within the price range regarded as affordable. Then there was discussion among all four. Ruth
Schmutz said "We have found a house that we can afford to buy for ourselves."
Vytas Aras said "I don't want you (referring to Ona Aras) to put the money into another house. I want to build another storey on this house for Ruta and
Riccardo to live in for as long as they like. This house will eventually be
Ruta's house as she is our only child." In the course of discussion about this he also said to Ona Aras "If you give them the money I will divorce you." In the discussion Ruth Schmutz said "I don't think it's a good idea to put all the money into one property" and Vytas Aras said "Let Riccardo do the design and we will see how much it will cost." 
Vytas Aras took a very strong, indeed a domineering position in putting forward his view about what Ona Aras should do with the money she had inherited. The threat to divorce Ona Aras if she gave the money to the plaintiffs was not said lightly. In fact he moved out of the matrimonial bedroom and used the third bedroom in the house for a few weeks, and peace was only restored when the project of using the money as a deposit for a house for the plaintiffs to buy was no longer being considered and all concerned were prepared to spend the money on an extension. On one occasion he contended to
Ona Aras that half of her inheritance was his. There could be no basis for this. Vytas Aras was prepared to make very seriously disruptive trouble within the family if he did not get his way in this matter, and he made this intention quite clear by what he said and by his behaviour. This brought about the result, which it is quite clear that he intended, that none of the inheritance was spent towards buying a house or any other asset in the names of the plaintiffs, and Ona Aras' wish to spend her money that way was overborne.

The plaintiffs were not in an economic position to do other than abide by
Vytas Aras' wishes. Riccardo Schmutz was a student and did not have any opportunity to make significant earnings. Ruth Schmutz was in full-time employment as a draftsman and tracer. It was not a practical possibility for them to attempt to buy a house without any gift from Ona Aras, and in the circumstances they had to join in the arrangement for extending the house. In many respects it was a good and suitable arrangement and generous to them, although it did involve them in some inconveniences and some burdens.

The extensions to the Prince Street house.

Riccardo Schmutz started to do design drawings in 1981. There was a series of discussions and changes. Riccardo Schmutz initially designed a relatively simple upstairs extension which was not acceptable to Vytas Aras. Vytas Aras engaged another architect who prepared drawings which he rejected. Then he discussed the proposed work with the plaintiffs again and introduced into the planning the idea of a large upper storey extension which, as Riccardo Schmutz pointed out, would cost a lot of money, more than would be available from the estate, and there would have to be borrowing. Vytas Aras said "That's ok. That's my business. Don't worry about that" and "Instead of having a house at Balgowlah you can have your own home on top of ours. Eventually this house will be yours anyway." He also said to Riccardo Schmutz "You build what you like because you will be living there." There was discussion about the plaintiffs' fear that this would cost too much money and Vytas Aras said to Ruth Schmutz "That's not a problem, I will pay for it." A design was prepared which in Riccardo Schmutz' opinion, as he told those concerned, would cost approximately $160,000 to $180,000. 
Building work started in 1982 and took about a year to complete; the plaintiffs moved in to occupy the upstairs extension on 6 May 1993. The $60,000 was drawn out by a number of different withdrawals from April 1981 to
August 1982 and Vytas Aras acknowledged that the whole $60,000 was used for the extension. Vytas Aras became licensed as an owner-builder for the purpose.
He continued to work driving his taxi, but he was often able to attend during building work, join in some work and supervise contractors.

The additions, which are illustrated by the plan Exhibit B, were very extensive and transformed the house from a relatively small one-level
Federation house with a small flat at the rear to two large dwellings, being the lower storey greatly extended and the upper storey extension containing two bedrooms, one of which was constructed with a bathroom and a dressing room en suite, a third room referred to as the playroom but useable as a bedroom, a full bathroom and a large living area including space for a kitchen and working space which could be used by a student.

Explaining under cross-examination why such a big extension was made Vytas
Aras said that he did it because he liked his daughter and he wanted his daughter to stay with him and his wife and to bring up their children if they had any in that family environment. He wanted them with their children to live with him and his wife as long as they wanted; he confirmed that he told Ruth
Schmutz that on many occasions. What made him change and sell Prince Street was that he and Riccardo Schmutz had never got on together.

It was the plaintiffs' evidence that they helped to do some of the building work. The work they did included cleaning bricks and varnishing timber panelling, as well as Riccardo Schmutz' contributions to the design work.
Vytas Aras in his evidence disputed that they did building work and deprecated
Riccardo Schmutz' design work, but I am quite satisfied that they did work as they have stated and that Riccardo Schmutz's design work was well considered and was of some use, although it was difficult to achieve a design which satisfied Vytas Aras, whose thinking went through several changes. Riccardo
Schmutz made other contributions to the work; he had some understanding and insight into architecture and construction. He checked contractor's prices and made recommendations, made arrangements for them to attend and took part in managing construction work. Not all of Riccardo Schmutz' ideas were followed.
Vytas Aras had air conditioning installed upstairs although Riccardo Schmutz did not regard it as necessary, having regard to his design. Ruth Schmutz also contributed by spending time contacting suppliers to obtain prices and ordering materials; she had access to trade discounts through her then employer. She also contributed by checking building materials as delivered.
Their work of supervision was not done to the exclusion of Vytas Aras.

Vytas Aras made some extravagant and foolish claims in his evidence, to the effect that Riccardo Schmutz' participation of the building work was not wanted by him and was disruptive and not of assistance. I regard this evidence as quite unreliable, and bringing forward such matter is injurious to his credit generally. I regard the plaintiffs as much more reliable in their evidence than Vytas Aras. His behaviour as testified to, and also his demeanour while giving evidence showed signs of his use of overbearing methods and obstinacy, and of his readiness to adhere to unreasonable positions to maintain his perceived interest.

All four continued to live in the house while the building work proceeded; there was much inconvenience. Although the upper storey was habitable when the plaintiffs moved in, the lower storey was not well finished for some years.
There was no proper kitchen upstairs for some years and for that time the plaintiffs used the ground floor kitchen. The approval by Mosman Council for the extension did not include permission to install a kitchen upstairs. The evening meals were prepared in the kitchen downstairs and shared by all four or those who were present. When speaking about her wishes for her inheritance
Ona Aras said to the effect that all she wanted for herself was a new kitchen, but it does not seem that she ever achieved this.

Vytas Aras' claim is that the total cost of the extension was $164,961.45. In detail, the schedule supporting $164,961.45 contains many items to which should not be rightly be seen as costs of the extension, or are only indirectly related to it such as home and home contents insurance, expenses incurred years after the extension was completed, and expenses incurred in relation to attempts to sell the house. However notwithstanding these elements of exaggeration, it is clear that the extension was very expensive, in the order of $150,000 at least.

Monetary contributions and offers to contribute by the plaintiff.

About October 1982 Vytas Aras told Ruth Schmutz that he was going to get a loan for the work; she said "We will pay money towards the loan" and he said "You can put your money towards other things because I can do it." Considerable sums were borrowed for the extension; the borrowers were Vytas Aras and Ona Aras, who gave mortgages in various financing arrangements and incurred personal liability as well as mortgaging their house. In 1982 there was a borrowing secured by a mortgage from CBFC Ltd; in 1983 from National Commercial Banking Corporation of Australia Ltd and in 1984 from private mortgagees. All these were discharged by December 1987. The plaintiffs did not join in as borrowers, although they were willing to do so, as they told both Vytas Aras and Ona Aras. The plaintiffs made offers to Vytas Aras to contribute to repayment of the loan; these offers were made on a number of occasions, and he always declined them. Ruth Schmutz told her mother "You needn't worry (about the loan) because Riccardo and I will take on responsibility for the loan if something happens to either of you. We are here to help." Riccardo Schmutz proposed that the plaintiffs pay something towards loan repayments and Vytas Aras declined this offer. Fairly late in the financing of the extensions the plaintiffs gave a guarantee by deed dated 31 August 1987 to a private borrowing by Vytas Aras and Ona Aras of $20,000. They were not ever called on to make any payment under this guarantee. 
The plaintiffs paid $4,060 for carpeting the upstairs extension. They lived in the upstairs extension for some years, at later times with their children, and the carpet which they paid for was still in position when they left the house and it was sold. By that time its contribution to value must have been much less than its original cost. In April 1985 the plaintiffs had the kitchen upstairs completed at their expense and spent $3,300 on this. They continued to use the oven in the kitchen downstairs occasionally. In 1989 the plaintiffs paid $1200 for the installation of bifold doors upstairs.

Riccardo Schmutz produced a summary of payments made by the plaintiffs for building work and otherwise to Vytas Aras and his late wife; this summary would show that the plaintiffs paid $32,333.23, but many items which produced this figure cannot fairly be regarded as expenditures on improvements to the
Prince Street house or as giving support to a claim for a constructive trust in respect of its disposal. Moneys paid in respect of rent, and other recurring living expenses over the years including electricity, gas, water and telephone do not support the plaintiffs' claim. However it is clear that the plaintiffs did pay significant additional sums which did directly go to improving the structure; these, as given by Riccardo Schmutz include a total of $14,210.97 spent on the extension of the building, $3,060 spent on the carpet, $3,300 on the kitchen and $1,200 for the bifold doors. They received some reimbursement, but they incurred significant sums in the order of $12,000, and this should be regarded among the contributions they made to the venture.

There were not separately metered electricity services for the lower storey and the upper storey as originally installed; the plaintiffs asked Vytas Aras about arrangements to be made for a new electricity meters when the whole house was rewired and he said, about the meters "There is no need to do that as this is a family home and when you can afford to pay, you can pay half the electricity." On a number of occasions when they offered to pay he said "Keep your money, I will pay." 
Evidence of and reliance on the agreement to provide a house for the plaintiffs.

Ona Aras continued in employment until her death. Ona Aras spoke freely to friends and associates about her intention to benefit Ruth Schmutz and to provide a family home for the plaintiffs and their children as well as for herself and her husband. It is likely that by continuing in employment and earning income she made some contribution, direct or indirect, to repayments of the mortgage debts incurred for the extension. Having regard to the nature of Vytas Aras' occupation and the relatively short period during which the financing, the amount of which is not clearly established but which at one time amounted to $80,000 was repaid, it is probable that her income made a direct or indirect contribution to repayment. Vytas Aras denied that her money was applied towards the loan - see t.96 - but the availability of her earnings probably enhanced his capacity to repay the loan.. 
Ona Aras told Diana Bernhardt that after the lives of her husband and herself the whole house would be for the plaintiffs. She also told her that she was only working to pay the debts for Ruth Schmutz. Ona Aras made statements to similar effect to several friends and associates.

Vytas Aras explained his opposition to Ona Aras' providing her inheritance to the plaintiffs for a house by saying that he believed that it would be cheaper to build an extension onto the Prince Street property in which the plaintiffs could live. This explanation like other evidence given by him confirms that the purpose of the venture of extending the house was to provide a home for the plaintiffs. Both Vytas Aras and Ona Aras made and concurred in statements to the effect that the plaintiffs could live in the house for as long as they wished. No other purpose can be seen for extending the house in the way it was extended than to provide a home in which all four, and the plaintiffs' later family, could live together for an indefinite period, and no other purpose was suggested. The extension, with the availability of internal access and the absence of a laundry and completed kitchen upstairs is very unlikely to have been undertaken to create an investment. It is significant however that realisation of Vytas Aras' wish to build an extension because it would be cheaper involved the benefit of the inheritance passing into an asset of which he was a joint owner, and not into any asset over which the plaintiffs had title. Comparison of which venture is cheaper could only be undertaken on the assumption that the interests of all family members were to be taken together.

For the remainder of Ona Aras' life the two households ran fairly smoothly in the same building and relationships were good on the whole. Ruth Schmutz had her parents' assurances that the property would eventually be hers, and the plaintiffs had participated in arrangements extending over some years to build and improve the upstairs extension for the express purpose of their living in it. The statements to the effect that the house would eventually be Ruth
Schmutz's conveyed the clear meaning that in the meantime the upper storey was to be their home indefinitely and certainly for the remainder of the lives of her parents. For some years Ruth Schmutz continued to work, and her husband did not have any reliable source of income. At most times he was a student but at times he earned some money. Their lives were formed around reliance on these arrangements for housing themselves and their family, and they did not for some years pursue or even look for opportunities to establish a separate household or to embark on the task of acquiring a dwelling and paying for it.
The arrangement was advantageous to them in significant ways, but they also incurred significant burdens and detriments and made contributions to the arrangements for all concerned to be housed. As well as their practical contributions to the design work and construction, they incurred expenses, and these were not nominal sums; indeed in view of their circumstances the sums which they incurred were quite significant. While there were marked advantages to them in having a dwelling for which they had not paid and for which they did not incur rent, and in Vytas Aras' meeting some significant expenses, and in shared arrangements for the kitchen and preparation of meals, these took place in a context of family relationships in which their presence and continuing occupation of the upper storey was desired by her parents and was advantageous to the parents in familial, social and human terms. The arrangement enabled Riccardo Schmutz to pursue his studies for some years, complete them and qualify as an architect, and also ensured that he would do so and that he would not pursue any other opportunity which his talents might present, and that he would not earn significant income early in life or be thereby enabled to make savings and acquisitions.

On several occasions the plaintiffs visited Europe. There were two or three journeys to Europe each of some weeks. In counsel's submissions this was put forward as if it had been a very irresponsible thing to do, but to my mind the days are far in the past when it was reasonable, in Australia, to think of overseas travel as a great extravagance. As the plaintiffs had met and married in Europe and Riccardo Schmutz had always lived there until 1980, it was unremarkable that they spent several holidays there. This does demonstrate the extent of their reliance on the venture and on the assurances given to them, and on the indications which they had that they were not faced with a strong need to accumulate capital and set about acquiring their own housing. Counsel also dwelt on their having lived without paying rent for a number of years.
Indeed they did, but they were invited by Vytas Aras and his late wife to do so; the plaintiffs said they were willing to pay rent and this was declined.
The plaintiffs were not asked to pay rent; there was no arrangement about rent and none to the effect that rent was postponed or would be paid at some future time. The only rental arrangement was made some years later and related to space used by Riccardo Schmutz as an office. Their staying without any arrangement for rent demonstrates the extent of their reliance on the venture and, if it has any effect, it has a tendency to enhance their claim for relief.

If Vytas Aras and his then wife had not repeatedly told the plaintiffs that the extension was being built for them to live in and eventually to own, but had told them that they could only live in the extension for a few years, the plaintiffs would have taken a completely different course, saved money and acquired their own house. Ruth Schmutz articulated this in her evidence (t23), and it is highly probable of hard working and energetic young people contemplating family responsibilities, as they were.

Time passed and events developed in ways which should have been within the contemplation of all concerned from the beginning. The plaintiffs had three children, Francesca born 13 June 1986, Daniella born 11 March 1989 and Marco born 11 August 1991. Riccardo Schmutz continued his studies, and graduated as
Bachelor of Architecture on 10 May 1988. He obtained employment in architectural offices; he was employed by James Thiessen & Associates from about September 1986, although he was not so employed full-time, particularly while studying. He was retrenched from that position in March 1990 and soon afterwards started employment elsewhere; that employment ended in June 1990 and he was out of work for several months.

Events following the death of Mrs Ona Aras.

Events began to leave their contemplated course with the death of Ona Aras on 10 September 1988. Her death at 65 years was unexpected and sudden; she in no way appeared to be ill and died at the end of an evening's tennis. Ruth Schmutz had a relationship of trust and respect with her father. His long absences from the home caused by his work gave their relationship a somewhat cooler character than her relationship with her mother, but emotions in the relationship were strong, as the behaviour referred to in evidence in this case well demonstrates. Ruth Schmutz, who by then had a young child, attended to shopping for Vytas Aras and cooked his meals, which she left for him to warm when he arrived home in the early hours of the morning at the end of his taxi shift. The family usually had dinner together on Sunday nights. Vytas Aras expressed to a family friend his view that she looked after the home and cooked for him very well and that he was very happy that she was living with him. After several months he suggested to her that the house be sold and that as a venture, two properties be bought, one to live in and the other to renovate and sell. This conversation is most significant because of the terms in which Vytas Aras opened his observations. He said "I've been thinking. Why don't we sell the house because half belongs to you. That's what your mother would have wanted." He went on to outline what he had in mind. She asked him to leave the proposal for a year or so and see what happened, saying that there was no need to sell. As she did not take up this proposal, it went no further. Vytas Aras began to work on renovation of the lower storey again and completed it, stripping wood work, varnishing timber and repainting walls and ceilings. He got friends and contractors to assist him. Riccardo Schmutz used the second bedroom downstairs as his office, for which he paid rent, for a time after Ona Aras died. This ended when Galina Aras came to live in the house.

Vytas Aras met the second defendant Galina Aras a year or so after Ona Aras died. She was a widow and lived at Ryde with her grandson in a townhouse which she owned. Vytas Aras brought her to visit the Prince Street house and introduced her to the plaintiffs; he brought her again from time to time. They were married on 25 August 1990, about 8 months after the first visit. At about the time of the marriage Galina Aras moved in to live in the lower storey. Her grandson David Hawkes also lived there. After some months there began to be signs of deterioration in the family relationships over various small matters.
One aspect is that relationships between Riccardo Schmutz and Vytas Aras deteriorated; they are both strong personalities and there seem to have been abrasive exchanges. Small differences arose over a number of matters which were not inherently important. Vytas Aras had separate electricity meters installed, bringing the sharing arrangement to an end. The internal access door to the downstairs area was locked from the inside and the lock on the front door was changed, so that the plaintiffs could no longer gain access through the front door of the house; they had separate access. Ruth Schmutz was required to pay to use the washing machine, and later she was prevented from using the downstairs laundry. The arrangement for Riccardo Schmutz to use an area downstairs was brought to an end.

By about a year after the defendants' marriage relationships had markedly deteriorated. Galina Aras told Ruth Schmutz "I am going to ask your father to sell the house because I don't like living downstairs and there is too much friction and too many arguments. It will be better for all of us if we are living separately. Maybe then we will get on better." Ruth Schmutz said "It seems to be the only alternative." This does seem to have been right.

Soon after this Vytas Aras told Ruth Schmutz "If we are going to sell the house you needn't worry. I'll look after you. I'll give you $50,000 as a deposit on a house." She said "That's not enough. We would have to borrow too much. No bank will lend us that amount of money." He said something to the effect that the banks would lend them enough money to buy a house and "$50,000 is all I will give you." Not long afterwards Galina Aras told Ruth Schmutz "Don't worry, I am working on your father to give you $100,000 and if he doesn't give you that amount I will sell my townhouse and give you the money.
That will make your father give you the money. My townhouse is valued at $350,000." By August 1991 the plaintiffs had three children, and the need for housing if they had to leave Prince Street had become a very serious concern.

In a later conversation when Ruth Schmutz spoke to Vytas Aras about giving her money out of the sale of the house he said "I will give you $100,000 or more depending on the sale of the house and what I buy." There were further conversations, and she was given further assurances that she would be looked after.

Vytas Aras became the sole registered proprietor of the Prince Street house by survivorship. He placed the property on the market for sale in 1991, and the plaintiffs began looking for houses; their target was houses in the price bracket of $200,000 to $250,000 in the Balgowlah area. They located a house; an unattractive proposition, a two-bedroom fibro house in very poor condition for $200,000. Ruth Schmutz took Vytas Aras to see this and others, and told him that the bank would only give the plaintiffs $65,000 finance because their incomes were low and they had no proof that they could pay a mortgage. He said "$100,000 is all I am going to give you." Galina Aras suggested that a solicitor named Chris Taylor could arrange finance and that they could borrow what they liked; Ruth Schmutz referred to Mr Taylor but decided that the interest rate he wished to lend at was too high and that they could not afford to repay the loan; she reported this to Vytas Aras who said "It depends on the sale of the house. Maybe I can give you a bit more. It also depends on the house we buy." 
The plaintiffs continued to consider purchasing housing. They took Vytas Aras to inspect a house at Brookvale which was on the market for about $260,000. He made no definite arrangement and said "I will see how much I give you after I find my house. In the meantime you will just have to find somewhere to rent."
The plaintiffs then located a rental property, in which they live now, at 38
Mandalong Road, Mosman. They made a residential tenancy agreement for that property in May 1992, and they have occupied it as tenants ever since, at a rent which was initially $320 per week, and must be regarded as full economic rent. At some time their rent rose to $330 per week. Ruth Schmutz calculated the rent paid to 30 March 1996 at $64,770, demonstrating dramatically the disadvantages under which the plaintiffs labour by not having initial capital to form a deposit on the purchase of a house, and in being unable to make corresponding payments in reduction of a mortgage debt.

In the meanwhile Vytas Aras had agreed to sell the property at Prince Street; the sale was settled and he transferred the property on 19 June 1992 for $620,000. This was three or four weeks after the plaintiffs moved to their rented property. It was of course necessary for Vytas Aras to have vacant possession to complete the sale, and when the plaintiffs gave up possession, they had been given a series of assurances that they would receive provision out of the proceeds of sale. Their moving out of the Prince Street house was certainly not an abdication or recognition that they had no rights; quite to the contrary, they acted on continued assurances that they would receive provision.

It even seemed to be contended that the fact that in May 1992 the plaintiffs had just entered into a six-month lease of the house at Mandalong Road,
Balmoral, meant that during the six months they were not in a position to ask for or to receive any payment, apparently because they had other housing. I see no substance in this suggestion.

At a visit to Prince Street on Sunday 31 May 1992 Ruth Schmutz was accompanied by Helen Roland. In Ms Roland's hearing Vytas Aras told Ruth Schmutz, quite unreservedly, that he would give her a cheque, that she could come and collect a cheque after the settlement of the sale of the house. He named a place and a time for this event. In the last days before the settlement Vytas Aras told
Ruth Schmutz, on another occasion when she was at the Prince Street house "Come around next week and collect the cheque." She said "When?" He said "Monday, any time." 
On 19 June 1992 the defendants took title as joint tenants to the house in which they now live at 19 Scales Parade, Balgowlah Heights; the purchase price in the transfer is $450,000 and the whole price was provided by Vytas Aras out of the proceeds of sale of the Prince Street house. Galina Aras did not make any financial contribution. It must be taken in the absence of any evidence to the contrary that Vytas Aras intended that Galina Aras should be beneficial owner of her joint interest. Vytas Aras' evidence was that he received $115,888.28 over and above the expenses of the sale and of his purchase of
Scales Parade, Balgowlah Heights.

Ruth Schmutz called at the house at Scales Parade on the Monday Vytas Aras had indicated, which was 22 June 1992. No one was present, she left a note asking him to telephone and he did not. She went back later in the day and Galina
Aras showed her through the new house. Then she spoke to Vytas Aras and he said "I've changed my mind. You'll just have to get a mortgage like everyone else. All those years of not paying rent, you should have saved up and got a house yourself. It's your fault that Prince Street was sold." 
Ruth Schmutz disputed this and said that it was Galina Aras' fault and the trouble started when she moved in. She also criticised the house which they bought, and suggested that the defendants should have moved into the townhouse until a suitable house could be bought. She then said "You built upstairs for us and told us it was our house forever. You stopped us buying a house twelve years ago. We wanted to get a mortgage when we had no children and now you want us to save up and get a mortgage with three children." Galina Aras then took part in the conversation and said "Your mother is dead and didn't leave a will so your father can do what he likes with his money." Ruth Schmutz remonstrated and said "How can you break your promise. How are we supposed to get a start? It's not fair." Vytas Aras said "If you divorce Riccardo I'll give you the money." The exchanges seem to have become markedly irrational.
Ruth Schmutz said "Would you divorce Galina if I divorce Riccardo?" and Vytas
Aras said "Don't talk about her like that. Why should I give you the money?
Riccardo will leave you and go back to Switzerland and leave you with the children. You'll get the money when I am dead." Ruth Schmutz said "You are now saying I'll get the money when you're dead, how can I trust you when you already said I would get $100,000 when the house was sold. I have no alternative but to take you to court." Vytas Aras said "Go ahead. You won't win and you'll get nothing in the end." Ruth Schmutz said "How can I trust you now?" and there were remonstrations.

The plaintiffs both visited the house at Scales Parade again later that evening, this time with a concealed tape recorder, and a conversation took place in which Vytas Aras made very frank statements showing his full awareness of how wrong his position was. When he realised that there was a tape recorder there he seized it and smashed the tape.

There are differences in the evidence about the events in which the tape recorder was discovered and the struggle for its possession which ended when
Vytas Aras destroyed the tape. There are assertions that Riccardo Schmutz was the aggressor against Vytas Aras but I disbelieve this. In any event, the merits with respect to a claim against the house were already fixed and would not be altered by misconduct of the kind asserted. The events show that the plaintiffs, in particular Riccardo Schmutz are capable of very determined action with a touch of ruthlessness in the maintenance of their position. An even clearer conclusion from the events is Vytas Aras' consciousness that his conduct was wrong and that what he had said in the conversation recorded was very adverse to his interest. Riccardo Schmutz explained why he arranged to record the discussion by saying that he did so "Because I wanted the honest truth out of him to see what his reaction would have been." I do not approve of Riccardo Schmutz' method but it does seem clear that it got something of the truth out of Vytas Aras. The tape itself is not available and cannot be transcribed but Riccardo Schmutz made notes within a short while after the conversation and the conversation as recorded in those notes has not been disputed. In the conversation Vytas Aras confirmed that he had told Ruth
Schmutz that he would give her $100,000 if she divorced Riccardo Schmutz, he confirmed that he had said at the beginning to those concerned with building the extension that the plaintiffs could live there for as long as they wanted without having to pay rent, that after Galina Aras moved in, both of them assured the plaintiffs that nothing would change and all would live there, that there had been promises to give the plaintiffs money, first $50,000 then $100,000, then a refusal. Vytas Aras said "That is right, I've changed my mind and was only going to give you the money if you bought the house." 
All persons taking part in the conversation behaved in ways which are not to their credit and said things which in retrospect do not seem well. Galina Aras said some foolish things such as "I never gave any money to my children why should he, Vytas, give any money to you" and "you do not have anything in writing, you can't prove anything." Vytas Aras also raised a claim for moneys which he had, over many years, lent or advanced for the benefit of the plaintiffs; he said that the amount claimed was $10,700. The time had arrived for the plaintiffs to take a firm position, as Vytas Aras' responses to requests for payment had been no more than prevarications, indicating that he was disposed to evade carrying out what up to then had always been treated as his unquestioned course. His own evidence confirms that before the house was sold he told the plaintiffs that upon the sale he would give them $100,000, but after the sale he introduced a condition that he would only do so when they found a house.

Conditions on the use of the money.

Vytas Aras maintained that when he first told Ruth Schmutz that he would give her money one or other of them said expressly that it would be used as a deposit on a house. In my finding there was no condition on the promised payment to the effect that it would be a deposit on a house. The contemplated use of the money as a deposit on a house was referred to; it could hardly be avoided. A supposed concern to ensure that any money given to the plaintiffs be spent on a house is an insubstantial and fabricated concern. In the circumstances, their motivations to use any such money appropriately for their housing are extremely strong, and it is very unlikely that they would not use that money for housing. There is no real or practical need for any controls to be imposed by the court, still less by Vytas Aras, on how they use the money. If they should use the money foolishly that is their concern and not that of anybody else. The suggestion that the payment to the plaintiffs was conditional on the money being used for a deposit on purchase of a house is a gloss which did not emerge until after the Prince Street house had been sold, the plaintiffs and the children had moved out and the occasion arose for a payment actually to be made. The late introduction of this requirement is in truth an indication of Vytas Aras' fraudulence and intention to evade any payment at all.

Vytas Aras also said (t104) that the reason why he did not ever make a payment to the plaintiffs was because he changed his mind on the last occasion when there was a fight over the tape recording. In his evidence he acknowledged fully that he promised his daughter that he would give her $100,000 or perhaps more out of the proceeds of the sale in connection with the plaintiffs and their children leaving the Prince Street house to enable the sale to take place. However in giving this evidence he made two ludicrous overstatements which showed that he had difficulty in bringing his mind to bear calmly on the subject. One overstatement was to the effect (t105) that he did not need to have their agreement to leave, and he did not expect any legal trouble if they did not agree to leave because it would be easy to get them out by calling the police and taking them out. He said that he was not willing to give them $100,000 while they were saving up for a bigger deposit because they might throw the money in the street (t.107). These answers showed his difficulty in dealing with the events with calm realism. His evidence also showed that at present he is altogether unwilling to pay the plaintiffs $100,000 for a deposit on a house, or for any purpose or in any conditions.

All in all the events show and I find that Vytas Aras was perfectly conscious that for many years, 12 years, he had been a party to an arrangement with the plaintiffs which they had relied on and had shaped their lives around. He had given assurances that they would receive money so that they could buy a house out of the proceeds of sale. He had winkled them out of the Prince Street house at a time when he was continuing these assurances and giving no indication that they would not be met or that the new conditions would be imposed. Immediately after the time had arrived to fulfil all the expectations he had created he began to impose new requirements, or nominally to do so although his true position was that he would not pay any money at all. He accompanied this with overbearing behaviour and with the statement that he would provide benefits if the plaintiffs were divorced, which was an altogether ridiculous suggestion. The plaintiffs had been married for 12 years and had three small children; the suggestion could only have been made out of mischief.

Claims of the plaintiffs.

In the Statement of Claim the first claim is for a declaration that Vytas Aras held the Prince Street property on trust for the plaintiffs and himself "in such shares as determined by the Court". The allegations which are put forward to support this claim are set out extensively; it is said that the arrangements made among the parties constitute (para 15) an agreement that in consideration that Ona Aras' inheritance from her uncle would not be made over to them as a gift, the Prince Street property would be extended and renovated in order that the plaintiffs could continue to reside in the extended and renovated property, that (para 16) it was a term of the agreement that the plaintiffs could remain in occupation indefinitely and (para 17) that one-half of the Prince Street property belonged to the plaintiff. It is alleged alternatively (para 18) that if there was not an agreement, representations were made by Vytas Aras and Ona Aras to the plaintiffs in such terms. Later in the Statement of Claim acts and conduct at various times (which have been proved) are alleged which would constitute the conduct in reliance upon the agreement or upon the representation, leading to an allegation (para 25) that at the time of the marriage of the defendants the defendants made representations to the plaintiffs to the effect that the then existing arrangement would remain unaltered. This too has been proved. It is also alleged (para 27) that the defendants made representations about benefits which the plaintiffs would receive after the sale of Prince Street house in order to induce the plaintiffs to co-operate; these too have been proved. Then it is alleged (para 28) that the plaintiffs acted in reliance on the representations in vacating the property.

Facts relating to the establishment of a trust.

Allegations in support of the trust were put in broad ways and in several forms. 
The facts as I have found them should in my view be understood to show that in the period from the plaintiffs' arrival in Australia to the commencement of the work of extensions, the plaintiffs, Vytas Aras and Ona Aras formed and expressed common intentions to the effect that the extensions would be carried out, that each would make contributions of various kinds, in particular that
Ona Aras would contribute the money which she received from her late uncle's estate to the extension project instead of giving it to the plaintiffs for the plaintiffs to buy a house, that Vytas Aras and Ona Aras would contribute by raising other moneys necessary to carry out the extensions, and that the plaintiffs would make contributions according to their ability. There was a common intention, which the parties expressed to each other on numerous occasions, and which all of them held and understood, that the property so extended would be occupied as their home by all concerned for the rest of the lives of Vytas Aras and Ona Aras, and that thereafter the plaintiffs would be the owner of the property.

The parties did not use and are unlikely even to have known formal language which would unmistakably express the intention to create enforceable equitable interests, but in my opinion the meaning and effect of what they expressed and intended was that there should be property rights, that all concerned should be entitled to live in the Prince Street house when it was extended, in particular that the plaintiffs should be entitled to live in the upper storey and that Vytas Aras and Ona Aras should be entitled to live in the lower storey floor for the rest of their lives, and that the passage of ownership to the plaintiffs after their lifetimes would be a matter of right. In a matter of such seriousness as the housing of all concerned, involving such large commitments of resources, time and attention, the only reasonable and correct interpretation of what they intended is, in my view, that the plaintiffs should be the owners of the upper storey and also should be the owners of the whole property subject to life interests of Vytas Aras and Ona Aras.

The lack of precision and formal expression, and of written expression of this arrangement is unfortunate, but it is not remarkable in an arrangement among close family members, and it does not impede the court's perceiving the substance of what was intended in such an important matter. The plaintiffs would not have committed themselves to such a far-reaching arrangement over a number of years, and Vytas Aras and Ona Aras would not have expected them to do so unless the intention and expectation of all four that the arrangements would be carried out was so firm and clear that they must be interpreted as arrangements about enforceable rights. It would as a matter of fact be an error to suppose that people would act in these ways for so long and in such a serious matter on the basis that the plaintiffs hoped that a gift would be made to them in the future, or that Vytas Aras and Ona Aras had an intention to go on conferring benefits on the plaintiffs but regarded themselves as free to stop doing so if their intentions ever changed.

The arrangement and the benefits conferred under it on the plaintiffs should not be regarded as a voluntary arrangement or one without valuable consideration or, in terminology appropriate for benefits conferred on children by parents, without meritorious consideration. Because Ruth Schmutz is her daughter the plaintiffs are entitled to point to value contributed by
Ona Aras in the same way as they would be able to point to value contributed by themselves.

Although courts have frequently concluded that agreements and arrangements among family members are not intended to be binding and hence do not give rise to contractual or other legal obligations, the key to the question whether they give rise to contractual obligations is the intention of the parties.
(The traditional approach of courts is expressed in Balfour v. Balfour [[1919] 2 KB 571] at 578-9, noted in the judgment of Sheller JA in Cudgegong
Soaring Pty Ltd v. Haras, CA unreported, 1 May 1996 at p10.) When arrangements are made among family members, the nature of the arrangements, the value of the property affected by them or the extent and nature of the participation required and the period over which it is required may indicate an intention to create obligations. This is true whether the arrangement is susceptible of being analysed as a contract under the Common Law or whether its true meaning is that there was an intention to create a trust, which could well occur in an arrangement which could not be analysed as a contract. In particular a person who in contract law could not be said to have given consideration may, for the purposes of trust law, not be a volunteer but be entitled to rely on meritorious consideration, although the consideration was actually furnished by a parent. In the present case the trust was not completely constituted in that it was not created or evidenced in writing under [s.23C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/). The plaintiffs are not under the disability of being volunteers for the purpose of trust law in that they themselves participated in the arrangement in which they were to make and made contributions which, although not all capable of being measured in money, were real and were of benefit to Vytas Aras and Ona
Aras. However they are in my opinion also entitled to point to the contributions by Ona Aras and particularly to the $60,000 from her inheritance as meritorious consideration. I do not know of any Australian authority which deals in a full way with the concept of meritorious consideration. The subject is noted briefly and obliquely in the judgment of Dixon J in Birmingham v.
Renfrew <case>; [(1937) 57 CLR 666] at 687, and in Schofield v. Jones, 31 March 1995 unreported, I considered that dictum and the authorities which underlie it.
The clearest expression known to me is in an Irish case, Ellis v. Nimmo
Lloyd & Goold 333, a decision of Sugden LC who said of the enforcement of a settlement made by a parent to make provision for his child, where the parent and not the child gave value, at 349 "The consideration is such as would enable the court to remedy even a defective settlement, where there is no contract. I think it a fortiori sufficient to sustain an actual contract, and I shall therefore decree a specific performance of the agreement." 
In my opinion, if the plaintiffs were not otherwise entitled to enforce the arrangement for the creation of trust interests for their benefit, they would be entitled to rely on the consideration furnished by Ona Aras as meritorious consideration within this principle.

Although the trust was not perfectly constituted because of the lack of writing, but in my opinion it had by 1992, and indeed long before, become enforceable having regard to equities arising out of the conduct of the parties, and in particular of the plaintiffs, in reliance on it.

When he came to sell the Prince Street house Vytas Aras must be treated as having been in the position of a trustee of the property for himself and the plaintiffs as co-owners, he having an entitlement as co-owner to occupy the lower floor as a dwelling and the plaintiffs having an entitlement as co- owners to occupy the upper floor of the dwelling. As there is no other basis on which to act, their co-ownership in respects other than entitlement to occupy parts of the building should be regarded as tenancy-in-common in two equal shares. The co-ownership interests were to last for his own lifetime, and the plaintiffs were the beneficial owners in remainder. These interests were defeated by the sale of the property, and the proceeds of the sale and the property into which they can be traced are charged with payment to the plaintiffs of equitable compensation in respect of the defeat of their interest in the Prince Street house. It is not practical to give them any equitable remedy for their right of occupation during Vytas Aras' life other than compensation, as a right of occupation of the house in Scales Parade,
Balgowlah to the same effect would not be a practicable outcome; there cannot be shared occupation of the Scales Parade house because of the present relationship among the parties and because of the limited accommodation available in the house. It is I think quite clear that the amount of compensation for the defeat of this right of occupation, assessed as of June , would exceed $100,000 and the conduct of the parties at that time shows that they then understood this. It is in my opinion appropriate to require the defendants to pay that amount, with interest accrued from 19 June 1992, forthwith. There should however be no other remedy in respect of their loss of housing during Vytas Aras' lifetime; the only other remedy which they should have is a remainder interest in the Scales Parade house expectant on his death.

Constructive Trust.

An alternative claim was put for a constructive trust remedy of the kind described by Mr Justice Deane in Muschinski v. Dodds <case>; [(1985) 160 CLR 583] If I had not found that a trust had been created, I would have awarded a remedy of that kind, and I would have paid regard not only to the contributions made by the plaintiffs in terms of economic value, but also to contribution made by Ona Aras, and to non-economic contributions of various kinds made by the plaintiffs.

In the period up to the death of Ona Aras, the situation had characteristics which from time to time give rise to constructive trust claims where persons with a family relationship or other personal associations work together in a venture, typically not a well-defined venture and not a contractual one, in which each makes contributions of kinds which, not necessarily in an economic sense, are advantageous to others. The most commonly recurring instance is the "Granny Flat" case in which an elderly relative pays for the construction of a flat or extension to a house owned by another family member, and the contemplation is that the elderly relative will use it for the rest of his life or as long as is practical for him to do so. For as long as such arrangements and ventures work well they give rise to no contractual rights and to no legal or equitable interests in property. The arrangements are often poorly defined so that, without resorting to fiction, an intention to create any recognisable and enforceable category of interest in property cannot be attributed to the parties. Where the continuance of the venture is defeated by circumstances, leaving one party more or less fortuitously in possession of advantages associated with title to the property used in it, the courts have from time to time found it appropriate to impose a constructive trust on the property or on the proceeds of it.

In Muschinski v. Dodds <case>; [(1985) 160 CLR 583] Deane J in a passage which has been repeatedly acted on in the Equity Division, by myself and other judges, set out the principles under which equitable relief is granted where the substratum of a joint relationship or endeavour is removed without attributable blame and the benefit of money or other property contributed by one party passes to a party who was not specifically intended to have that benefit. This articulated and furnished additional authority for the view expressed and acted on in Morris v.
Morris. I see Baumgartner v. Baumgartner <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 137] as an application of these principles; see pp147 and 148.

A constructive trust of this kind is imposed, in Deane J's expression in
Muschinski v. Doods, where the venture comes to an end "without attributable blame," but no great severity is in my opinion appropriate in applying the concept of attributable blame. In particular where family relationships break down and the continued association of closely related persons becomes intolerable and impractical, it is in my opinion not appropriate for courts to seek to attribute blame, as such breakdowns are a human phenomenon which sometimes occurs, cannot really be avoided, was objectively foreseeable but was not actually contemplated by the parties when they entered the venture, and does not alter the claims in conscience to redress the situation by imposing a constructive trust where reliance on what would otherwise be the party's legal or equitable rights is unconscionable. See the observations of
Young J in Knox v. Knox,unreported 16 December 1994 at pp 9 and 10 and my own observations in Bennett v. Horgan, unreported, 30 June 1994 at p7 and following, particularly at pp10 to 12.

A significant aspect of the events and the approach which should be taken to the plaintiffs' claim is that $60,000 which at least in the early stages was the whole of the funds contemplated to be used in the extension, was contributed by Ona Aras with the intention of thereby conferring a benefit on the plaintiffs and, very clearly, not with the intention of enabling Vytas
Aras to derive for himself the whole advantage of the extension. Her first project was to make all or substantially all she received from the estate available as a deposit for a house for the plaintiffs, and she gave up this project under the influence of Vytas Aras' wishes and overbearing conduct, in favour of another project which would benefit the plaintiffs in another way by providing them with housing, in the contemplation that eventually ownership of the property would pass to Ruth Schmutz. It would completely defeat her expectations if the improved house including the extension and the proceeds of its sale all went for the benefit of Vytas Aras and in no way went towards provision of housing for the plaintiffs. Clearly enough, Ona Aras did not make a gift of $60,000 to the plaintiffs, and did not create any trust of that money. Equally clearly she did not part with the money for the benefit solely of Vytas Aras. In a field where reasoning by analogy is important, and recognising that in their nature analogies are imperfect, the analogy between the events which took place and an express creation by Ona Aras of a trust in favour of the plaintiffs of the value produced by the expenditure of her money is quite strong.

Another useful and strong analogy with the view taken in trust law relates to the imposition of a constructive trust over the Scales Parade property of which Galina Aras is a co-owner. Galina Aras like Vytas Aras knew full well the nature of the plaintiffs' claim, association with and interest in the
Prince Street house, and knew full well of his assurances that provision would be made for them out of the proceeds of the house, and also the circumstances which gave rise to those assurances; and she had herself reinforced the assurances. In the circumstances there are no reasons, in my opinion, why her position with respect to any constructive trust over the proceeds of sale in so far as represented by the Scales Parade house should be any better than his.

It cannot be said, using the words literally, that the venture came to an end "without attributable blame". There are very strong grounds of blame and they are attributable firmly to the defendants. Bearing in mind all the circumstances, particularly his own assurances and the circumstances in which he had obtained the benefit of money which his late wife wished to give to the plaintiffs, Vytas Aras behaved with cold fraud and great deceit. He joined in arrangements which gave the plaintiffs the assurance that their housing was provided for, continued to join in them over many years, and he renewed and continued them when he wanted to sell the house, even carrying his assurances to naming specific sums of money. He got the benefit of their packing up and leaving the house, and then almost immediately after he had collected the proceeds and spent money on a new dwelling for himself, he repudiated his own course of conduct and the assurances that he had held out to them, inventing what were supposedly new conditions when in truth not intending to carry out his assurances at all. In terms of ordinary community standards of behaviour and common honesty, his behaviour was very dishonest and dishonourable and calls loudly for the exercise of the court's powers to control unconscionable reliance on legal rights.

A number of difficulties which from time to time present themselves in constructive trust claims have been resolved by the conduct of the parties themselves. It is sometimes quite difficult to discern what is an appropriate remedy where a shared venture for provision of housing has failed; inquiries can sometimes be quite elaborate by reference to endeavours to establish amounts of money contributed by parties to ventures, including amounts which there appeared no particular reason to record when they were spent, or by reference to value attributable to contributions which are difficult to value in economic terms or were made indirectly. This case does not present those difficulties because Vytas Aras clearly identified what it was appropriate for the plaintiffs to receive forthwith by nominating $100,000 and possibly more as the sum which they were to be paid out of the proceeds of sale. To my mind this sum was in no way excessive. It is a relatively small part of the total sale price of $620,000, and there is no inadequacy in its recognition of the far greater contribution, in terms of economic value, which had been made by
Vytas Aras than had been made by the plaintiffs. Vytas Aras brought into the venture the Prince Street house of which he was a joint owner (and not the sole owner) when the venture began in 1980. (Perhaps it should be viewed as beginning in 1982 when the construction of the extensions began.) He also had a claim as the surviving joint tenant to the interest of his late wife.
However what the plaintiffs should receive should recognise their expectation of living for the remainder of his life in the upper storey, without paying rent, the contribution they made by participating in the family life, the more direct economic contributions which they made and their social and familial contribution, and what they forewent by not pursuing other opportunities which life might have presented and committing their lives (and also the lives of their children) to the venture. The contributions made by the various members of the venture were different in kind but it was suitable to all of them to have the others present and to have the others' contributions made. It was suitable to Ona Aras to have her daughter, her only child, with her husband and later her family living in the same dwelling. Vytas Aras also to some degree perceived this as an advantage. I have to treat what a person perceives as an advantage as an advantage. When the Prince Street house was sold it provided quite enough money to furnish the defendants with a dwelling of their choosing, with ample surplus to make an appropriate provision for the plaintiffs. (The conduct of the parties also demonstrates that $50,000 would be a very inadequate recognition of the plaintiffs' position.) 
If I have erred in making too concrete an interpretation of the arrangements which the parties made and in finding that in substance they intended to create trust interests there would I think be no doubt that a constructive trust should be imposed under those principles. In view of the length of time and extent of the conduct of the plaintiffs in reliance on the venture, the minimum equity to redress the unconscionability would be the imposition of the same interests as I have attributed to the parties' intention; that is, a right of the plaintiffs to have premises in which to live during Mr Vytas
Aras' lifetime and to have the remainder interest in the Prince Street property or the asset into which its proceeds are traced.

As the appropriate time, established by the conduct of the parties, to pay the $100,000 was 19 June 1992, it should in my view bear interest at court rates from that time onwards. In my view it is appropriate to order payment of that sum with interest, and to make no further attempt to compensate the plaintiffs for their not having living space during Mr Vytas Aras' lifetime. As the balance of the proceeds of the sale can be clearly and immediately traced into the property as Scales Parade, Balgowlah Heights, the plaintiffs in my opinion ought also to be declared to have a remainder interest in that property after his lifetime.

In some way it was suggested that the fact that the plaintiffs moved out of the Prince Street house before it was sold and moved into a rented house was adverse to their claims. No clear demonstration of why this should be so was ever made. Their moving out could not reasonably be understood as an acknowledgment that they had no claim or were not entitled to expect any part of the proceeds of sale of Prince Street, as it was a practical necessity that they should move somewhere, and funds could not be available to give to them until possession of Prince Street had been given up. Ruth Schmutz articulated in evidence that she did this because she trusted her father: "Why should I doubt my father when he said `Look, I'm going to give you the money for a deposit on a house.' There was no reason to doubt his words. No reason at all." (t41) 
Cross-claim.

The cross-claim is for moneys allegedly lent to the plaintiffs. It was brought in the names of Vytas Aras and Galina Aras, but it is clear that Galina Aras was not a lender in any of the transactions. Most of the items claimed are admitted. The loans alleged are as follows: 
DISPUTED ITEMS
Bankcard Account $2,600
Stereo $2,350
Blinds deposit $ 300
Blinds $1,005
Video $1,100
Bankcard Account $1,500 
Total $8,855 
ADMITTED ITEMS 
Numbers 6, 8 to 16 inclusive $ 6,553 
Total $15,408 
The Cross-claim admits payments totalling $5,065 and claims $10341 (but arithmetic suggests $10,343).

The Defence to Cross-claim admits loans totalling $6,553, and contends that $400 of the payments should be set against them. It denies loans totalling $8,855. It alleges that the balance outstanding is $6,153. The Defence alleges that the disputed transactions were gifts, not loans. The Cross-Defendants' position seems to be that $4,665 of what the Cross-claim treats as payments on account of loans were payments relating to transactions which were gifts.

The affidavit evidence on either side did not really establish the character of the disputed transactions; the affidavits did not carry the position beyond assertions as to the character of the transactions. Mr Vytas Aras did not go any further in his oral evidence to establish what was the substance of the transactions. I have his averment on affidavit that they were loans, but the only other material in his evidence which I have is the following passage at t.102.
 "Q. You are claiming in this case you understand that your daughter and her husband owe you money? 
A. That's right.

Q. Money that you say you lent to them? 
A. Yeah.

Q. You understand that they agree that they owe you some money - you understand that? 
A. Yes.

Q. But there is disagreement about a little bit of it.

A. That's right.

Q. And your daughter says that the disagreement of the little bit concerns what she thought was a gift from you? 
A. She thought maybe and he thought maybe, but not me.

Q. But what I am suggesting to you that maybe you thought it was a loan but you didn't actually tell them this was a loan, you just said money? 
A. No, you suggested like that but it's not like that." 
In my opinion there is nothing of any weight in Mr Vytas Aras' evidence in support of the proposition that any of the disputed items was a loan.

With respect to item 1 - Bankcard account $2,600 - Ruth Schmutz spoke of this repeatedly in evidence as money borrowed; she then said that she was confused on the subject, and her evidence at t.47, l.36 to 48, line 8 is as follows: "O'LOUGHLIN: Q. Do you say that the answer you just gave, that the sum of $2,600 for the bankcard account lent to you, was in fact an error on your part? 
A. It - I am confused.

Q. Would you like to have a look at your affidavit? 
A. Yes, please.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Just before you do, just reflect on what your answer is. Do you recall whether or not it was arranged that it be used or a loan when you obtained $2,600 to pay a bankcard account? 
A. I, I thought it was a gift and because my father would always say, `Look, you don't have to pay it back. This is for you to help you out'. He would always say this, and then to separate them between gifts and giving - my father would help and he would say `This is for you, to help you'. We would never go there and demand the money. He would always say `This is for you. You can have it to help you. Pay it back if you want; if not, don't worry'.

O'LOUGHLIN: Q. Was that kind of conversation the kind of conversation you had in relation to the bankcard debt? 
A. No, if they were debts or if it was something to do with like, we had to - for the car, we had every intention to pay that back.

Q. In relation to the bankcard account, did he say to you, `Give it back to me if you can'? 
A. Yes." 
Mr Riccardo Schmutz was cross-examined on this transaction; it was put to him that Mr Vytas Aras said in relation to transaction "I'll let you have the money and pay it back to me if you like" and he denied this (t87) and he gave an account of the transaction (at t86) in which it appears that it was a voluntary payment by Mr Vytas Aras. Bearing in mind that Ruth Schmutz repeatedly spoke of this as money borrowed, my conclusion of fact is that the money was paid for the benefit of the plaintiffs on terms to the effect that they were to pay it back if they wished to or if they could or if they were able to. The plaintiffs were able to repay it when they were entitled to a larger payment from Vytas Aras, so it is appropriate to set it off when awarding money to them from Mr Vytas Aras.

Item 2 relating to an advance of $2,350 for the stereo was dealt with in cross-examination of Ruth Schmutz at t.49. She was asked the circumstances (t49, l.3) and replied: A. Yes, he said this is - `You can pay me back any time you can. If you can't, don't worry about it.' It was a gift. I interpreted it as a gift.

Q. He did say `Pay me back when and if you can'? A. He didn't demand the money. He didn't want the money. He said `It's up to you." 
Riccardo Schmutz denied that this sum was paid over on the basis that the plaintiffs would pay it back if they could (t88). However my finding is that it was a loan, to be repaid on similar terms to item 1, that is when the plaintiffs were able to do so; and they now are.

There was no oral evidence dealing with the repayment of item 3 the blinds deposit and item 4 payment of $1,005 for the blinds. Vytas Aras' affidavit evidence is lacking in weight particularly in view of the passage which I have quoted from his cross-examination, and I find that these sums were not loans.

With respect to item 5, $1,100 for the video, Ruth Schmutz in cross- examination at t.49 gave an account of this transaction in which this payment was unmistakably a gift for the purpose of buying a video. Her evidence is quite clear on this. Riccardo Schmutz' evidence on this transaction is to a generally similar effect. (t.86 and 88). In the circumstances I find that the transaction was not one of loan.

With respect to item 7 relating to payment of $1500 for a Bankcard account Mrs
Ruth Schmutz accepted in cross-examination that she had no basis for saying whether or not it was a gift or a loan (t48). Mr Riccardo Schmutz denied that it was paid on the basis that the plaintiffs were to pay it back if they could . The effect of Mr Vytas Aras' evidence which I have set out above is that, as with each other item, he regarded it as a loan and the plaintiffs may have thought otherwise. In the circumstances his claim cannot succeed as he has not established on the probabilities that there was a loan transaction in respect of this sum.

In effect then the cross-claim succeeds with respect to items 1 and 2 totalling $4,950. $400 part of the payments conceded in the Cross-claim has been set off in arriving at the conceded liability of $6153, and the remaining $4,665 must be set-off against the additional liability of the cross- defendants as found. So that the cross-defendants are liable for an additional $285 and the amount recoverable on the cross-claim is $6438.

Interest.  
The sum of $100,000 payable to the plaintiffs and the sum of $6438 recoverable on the cross-claim should in my opinion bear interest at court rates from 19 June 1992, when Mr Vytas Aras was in a position to make the payment and all transactions between the parties ought to have been settled. I will give judgment for the plaintiffs for the balance after setting-off these two sums.

Interest calculations are as follows: June 1992 to 31 August 1992: 73 of 366 days at 13% p.a. 2.5929 September 1992 to 31 August 1993: 1 year at 11.25% p.a. 11.2500 September 1993 to 28 February 1995: 1.5 years at 10.5% p.a. 15.7500 March 1995 to 28 February 1996: 1 year at 12% p.a. 12.0000 March 1996 to 7 August 1996: 160 of 366 days at 12$ p.a. 5.2787 .8716 
Interest on $100,000: $46,871.00 
Interest on $6438: $ 3,017.00 
As the Cross-claim was undisputed except as to a very small sum no order for costs of the Cross-claim should be made.

My Orders are as follows: . Order that the defendant pay to the plaintiffs the sum of $100,000 together with interest thereon of $46,871.
Upon the cross-claim give judgment for the first cross-claimant Vytas Aras against the cross-defendants for the recovery of $6438 together with interest of $3,017
Declare that the defendants hold the land in Folio Identifier 45/5840 being house property at Scales Parade, Balgowlah Heights upon the following trusts: upon trust for the defendants during the lifetime of the said 
Vytas Aras and upon trust for the plaintiffs in remainder after the lifetime of the said Vytas Aras.
I order that the defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings upon the plaintiffs' claim.
I order that each party pay his or her own costs of the Cross-claim.
 * * * 
