

Regina versus Crowl Matter No Cca 60689/97 [1998] NSWSC 369 (20 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
REGINA versus JAMES ALBERT CROWL 
CCA 60689/97 August 1998 
Wood CJ at CL, Sully J, Ireland J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
WOOD CJ at CL: The applicant, James Albert Crowl, was tried at Wagga Wagga District Court before Twigg DCJ and a jury, on an indictment containing twenty-four counts, each odd numbered count alleging an offence contrary to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and each even numbered count alleging an offence contrary to <case> of that Act. Although the indictment did not originally specify the counts as alternatives, the Crown case was conducted on the basis that the jury were invited to consider first the counts alleging dishonestly obtaining by deception (s178BA) and to consider the counts alleging fraudulently omitting to account (s178A) only in the event that they were not satisfied that the former had been proved. 
At the conclusion of the evidence, the Crown prosecutor invited the jury to acquit on what were conveniently described as the primary counts numbered 1, , 5, 7 and 9. That invitation was accepted by the jury which convicted the applicant on the remaining seven primary counts, and also convicted on the five counts of fraudulently omitting to account, which were paired with those counts of dishonestly obtaining by deception upon which acquittal had been invited.

The applicant's appeal against conviction was heard by this Court, constituted by Grove, James and Sperling JJ on 10 July 1997, on which day judgment was delivered dismissing the appeal. Extensive reasons for judgment were given by
Grove J, with whom Sperling J agreed.

In effect, what the applicant now seeks to do is to reargue ground three of that appeal, which comprised an allegation that the Crown was required to elect whether it relied upon the counts framed under <case> or <case> in respect of each of the offences alleged.

By letter dated 17 September 1997, the Registrar of this Court informed the applicant that if he wished to seek a review of the judgment of the Court, the appropriate course was to make an application for special leave to appeal to the High Court of Australia.

The applicant's appeal, having been considered and determined on its merits on July 1997, and the order then made having been perfected, this Court lacks jurisdiction to re-open the appeal or to entertain a fresh appeal - Grierson v King [(1938) 60 CLR 432], and see also Regina versus Lloyd Arthur Saxon (CCA NSW, April 1998, unreported).

In any event, the contention now sought to be reargued by the applicant is entirely without merit, for the reasons given by Grove J in dismissing the earlier appeal.

The application is accordingly dismissed.

SULLY J: I agree. 
IRELAND J: I agree. --- * * * 
