

Orbit Travel Services Pty Ltd versus Trustees-Travel Compensation Fund and Ors
Matter No 3647/96 [1998] NSWSC 78 (24 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 April 1998 
ORBIT TRAVEL SERVICES PTY LTD versus TRUSTEES-TRAVEL COMPENSATION FUND & ORS /96 March 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings, the plaintiff Orbit Travel Services Pty. Limited (which I will call "Orbit") seeks an order restraining the defendant Trustees - Travel Compensation Fund (which I will call "the Fund") from calling upon the National Australia Bank Limited (which I will call "the Bank") to make any payment under a bond in the sum of $173,500.00 given by the Bank to the Fund in August 1995 in connection with any liability due to the Fund from Orbit; and seeks also various declarations concerning the activities of the fourth cross-defendant, Mrs. Nemes. Orbit's claim is resisted by the Fund and also by the defendant Minister for Fair Trading (who I will call "the Minister"). 
The Fund has brought a cross-claim against Orbit, two directors of Orbit Mr.
and Mrs. Abdul-Karim, and Mrs. Nemes, seeking declarations relating to the liability of the cross-defendants to certain claimants and to the Fund, at general law and also under the [Travel Agents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/), the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), and the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cwth). At present, as a result of an order made by Windeyer, J. on 4th April 1997, the issues arising under the last two Acts are not being considered; and I am dealing only with the Fund's claims for declarations 1-6 and 8 in the cross- claim.

BACKGROUND 
Orbit has at material times been a travel agent licensed pursuant to the [Travel Agents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s11.html) of that Act deals with the conditions of licences under that Act; and [subsections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s1.html) and [2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s2.html) of that section are as follows: (1) The Commissioner may: upon the granting of an application for a licence, and at any other time, impose conditions or restrictions subject to which the licence is to be held; and upon application or of the Commissioner's own motion, at any time vary or revoke any of these conditions or restrictions or any other conditions or restrictions that the Commissioner may impose in relation to the holding of the licence.

A licence is subject to: a condition that the licensee shall, at all times during the currency of the licence, be a participant in the compensation scheme; 
A condition that each place at which the licensee carries on business as a travel agent shall at all times comply with such standards, and with such other requirements, as may be prescribed; any prescribed conditions and restrictions; and any conditions and restrictions imposed under subsection (1) or any other provision of this Act, of which written notice has been served on the licensee.

The compensation scheme referred to in [s.11(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s11.html) is defined in [s.3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s3.html) of the Act to mean the scheme prescribed under [s.57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s57.html) of the Act. It appears that the effect of Regulation 20 of the Travel Agents
Regulations 1987 (or 1995) is that the prescribed scheme is a compensation scheme established by a Trust Deed made on 12th December 1986: see Travel
Compensation Fund v. Travel Guide Pty. Limited, Federal Court of Australia,
Lehane, J., 13/2/97. The Deed sets up a trust fund administered by trustees.
Clause 15 of the Deed deals with payments out of the Fund, as follows: .1 Subject to this Deed, the Trustees shall pay compensation out of the Fund to a beneficiary - who is a client; and who has suffered or may suffer pecuniary loss arising directly from a failure to account for money or other valuable consideration by a participant where - the failure to account arises from an act or omission by the participant or an employee or agent of the participant; and the clients is not protected against the loss by a policy of insurance.
 .2 The Trustees may in their absolute discretion: pay compensation to a beneficiary under clause 15.1 in relation to any consequential pecuniary loss suffered by reason of a failure to account; and pay compensation, including compensation in relation to any consequential pecuniary loss suffered by reason of a failure to account, to a person to whom they are not required to pay compensation under clause 15.1.

The other most relevant provision of the [Travel Agents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/) is [s.40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html), which is in the following terms: (1) In this section: "unlisted person" means a person other than an exempted person or the holder of a licence) who carries on business as a travel agent under a name or names that is not included in a list in force under subsection (2).

The Commissioner shall as soon as practicable after the commencement of this section and from time to time thereafter, publish in the Gazette a list in which is specified: the name or names under which each holder of a licence at the time of preparation of the list was authorised to carry on business as a travel agent; the date on which the list comes into force, being a date that is not earlier than the date of publication of the list in the Gazette; and the date on which the list ceases to be in force.

Where a payment is made to a claimant under the compensation scheme by reason on an act or omission by a person carrying on business as a travel agent, the compensation scheme trustees are subrogated to the rights of the claimant in relation to the act or omission.

Where the rights conferred by subsection (3) on the compensation scheme trustees are exercisable against a body corporate, those rights are enforceable jointly against the body corporate and the persons who were its directors at the time of the act or omission and severally against the body corporate and each of those directors.

Where it is proved that an act or omission by a body corporate occurred without the knowledge or consent of a director of the body corporate, rights are not enforceable as provided by subsection (4) against the director in relation to the act or omission.

Where an act or omission referred to in subsection (3) was the act or omission of a person who, at the time of the act or omission, was an unlisted person, any other person who, in the course of carrying on a business, provided the unlisted person with goods or services in relation to which the act or omission occurred shall, for the purposes of subsections (3), (4) and (5) but in relation only to the act or omission in so far as it involved those goods or services, be deemed to have, at the time of the act or omission, carried on business as a travel agent in partnership with the unlisted person.

A person who, in the course of carrying on a business, provides an unlisted person with goods or services for disposal in a manner that would constitute the carrying on by the unlisted person of business as a travel agent shall be deemed to have aided, abetted, counselled and procured the carrying on by the unlisted person of business as a travel agent.

Subsection (6) does not have effect in relation to an act or omission that occurs in relation to goods or services, and subsection (7) does not have effect in relation to goods or services, that are provided at a time when there is no list in force under subsection (2).

When Orbit applied for participation in the compensation scheme, the Travel
Compensation Fund required it to take steps to meet its financial viability criteria. Orbit elected to take one of the alternatives suggested, namely the giving of a bank guarantee in the sum of $18,500.00. This guarantee was provided by Westpac on 23rd January 1992, in favour of the Travel Compensation
Fund. It contained a term that it could be applied by the Fund "in such circumstances for such purposes and in such manner as the Fund in its absolute discretion may determine". For time to time, further guarantees were required and provided, including another guarantee by Westpac in the same terms, dated th June 1994, in the sum of $100,000.00.

It appears that all existing bank guarantees provided by Orbit were replaced by a bank guarantee dated 3rd August 1995 given by National Australia Bank, according to which the Bank was holding at the disposal of the Fund $173,500.00 "in connection with any liability due to the Travel Compensation
Fund from Orbit Travel Services Pty. Limited".

Between about March 1995 and about May 1996, it appears that about 121 persons made payments totalling about $855,000.00 in respect of travel arrangements which they apparently made with Mrs. Nemes. It seems also that these persons claim losses totalling that amount through failure to account. It also appears that during the period in question, Mrs. Nemes had an association with Orbit.
In particular, the Traveltrade Year Book in various editions between 1986 and
June 1996 records Mrs. Nemes as a member of the Orbit "selling staff". There is a service agreement between Orbit and Mrs. Nemes dated 8th May 1996. It seems also that from time to time Orbit paid commission to Mrs. Nemes.

The Travel Compensation Fund contends that Orbit is liable for the alleged failure to account. It also contends that the 121 persons are entitled to payment of their loss under cl.15.1 of the Trust Deed, or else are proper objects of a discretionary payment under cl.15.2 of the Deed. The Fund contends that it is entitled to be indemnified in relation to such payments by
Orbit.

In about October 1996, the Fund gave notice to Orbit that it proposed to call up the guarantee given by the Bank, giving rise to these proceedings.

On 5th September 1997, I indicated that I would make an order under s.68(3) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) to the effect that evidence of the following matters could be given by statements by the 121 claimants: 
The Claimants entrusted money ('Money') to the fourth cross-defendant.

The Money was in the amount listed in column 4 of Schedule 1. 
The Money was entrusted on the date listed in column 5 of Schedule 1.

The Money was entrusted in the form listed in column 6 of Schedule 1.

The Money was entrusted for the purchase of the travel arrangements or travel-related arrangements listed in columns 11-14 of Schedule 1.
 ...

The Claimants did not receive the Travel, except where otherwise noted in Schedule 2.

The matters stated in Schedule 2 in respect of each of the claimants are true.

The fourth cross defendant did not supply the Travel, except where otherwise noted in Schedule 2.

Orbit did not supply the Travel, except where otherwise noted in Schedule 2.

The fourth cross defendant has not accounted to the Claimants for the Money.

Orbit has not accounted to the Claimants for the Money except where otherwise noted in Schedule 2.

The Claimants claim to have suffered pecuniary loss in the amounts listed in column 8 of Schedule 1 ('Pecuniary Loss') arising from the failure to account by the fourth cross defendant.

The Claimants claim to have suffered the Pecuniary Loss arising from the failure to account by Orbit.

The Claimants have lodged claims with the Fund ('Claims').

The Claims are for the Pecuniary Loss.

Orbit provided bookings in relation to the Travel on behalf of the Claimants in relation to whom the word "Confirmed" is listed in column 9 of Schedule 1.

Orbit issued itineraries in relation to the Travel on behalf of the Claimants for whom the word 'Confirmed' is listed in column 9 of Schedule 1.

Schedules 1 and 2 are annexed to this judgment.

I indicated that the order would be made on condition that Orbit be permitted to cross-examine any of the claimants; although the precise quantum of any recovery by the Trust would be left to a separate hearing, so that it was unlikely that cross-examination would be required for the initial hearing on liability.

In the judgment I gave on that day, I noted that an application for particulars by Orbit was not being pursued, so long as the Trust was not relying on any ostensible authority of Mrs. Nemes, and I stood the matter over to 17th September 1997 for Short Minutes. On 17th September 1997, it seems that an order under s.68 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) was not actually made; but it was noted that the Trust proposed to obtain witness statements from between ten and twenty claimants with a view to supporting a case of actual authority in relation to all claimants, and making out a case of ostensible authority only in relation to those particular claimants.

On that basis, the matter was prepared for hearing.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
Some information about the business of Orbit in the years from 1984 to the present is provided by the Traveltrade Year Book, a trade publication published each January and July, which lists most travel agents in Australia.

The earliest issue in evidence, that of January to June 1984, shows Orbit as having a city office and branches in Hurstville and Double Bay. Ten "selling staff" are listed under the city office, including Bill Karim (the second cross-defendant Mr Abdul-Karim). The next issue shows the same branches, four "selling staff", including Bill Karim who is also described as an associate director, and sixteen "sales representatives" including V. Nemes (the fourth cross-defendant). Much the same position was disclosed in the January to June and July to December 1985 issues.

The issue for January to June 1986 shows the same branches, with the city office showing twenty-six "selling staff" including Bill Karim (described as
Associate Director) and V. Nemes. The July to December 1986 issue contained similar information, except that the Hurstville branch was omitted. All issues in 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, and 1992 were very similar, except for small variations in the number of "selling staff", and also a change in the address of the city office from July to December 1991.

The issue for January to June 1993 showed a head office at a new city address, and branches at the previous city address and at Double Bay. Bill Abdul-Karim is shown as Managing Director, Mrs. K. Abdul-Karim (the third cross-defendant) is shown as a director. There are thirteen selling staff named under the head office listing, including Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-Karim, and also V. Nemes. Anna
Karim is shown among the selling staff at the Double Bay office, and is noted as an Associate Director. The issues for July to December 1993, both issues for 1994 and 1995 and the issue for January to June 1996 are very similar.
From January to June 1994, however, the Double Bay branch manager is shown as
John Karakashian (Kay).

Evidence was given by a Ms. Stamoulos that she was employed in the Double Bay office of Orbit from 1990 to May 1995. She says that between late 1994 and May , she saw Mrs. Nemes come to the office sporadically, sometimes about twice a week and sometimes about once a month, and that on each occasion, she spoke to Anna Karim.

Nine witnesses who gave evidence before me spoke of dealings with Mrs. Nemes from about May1994 to about May 1996, the earliest payment for which a claim is made by them in these proceedings being in March 1995. The schedule of claimants attached to this judgment show one payment made earlier, in January , and one payment made as late as 2nd June 1996.

It appears that between 1st July 1995 and May 1996, Orbit provided travel arrangements arranged through Mrs. Nemes to the value of around $1.47 million.
Orbit issued receipts in respect of payments totalling about $1.47 million, being 165 receipts in the name of individual travellers, and three in the name of Mrs. Nemes. It seems clear that over a period a year or more, Mrs. Nemes was offering to provide travel arrangements at about half price, and it seems to be common ground that I can infer that the persons to whom the $1.47 million worth of travel arrangements were provided only paid about half that amount for those arrangements. It seems clear that the other half of the amounts paid for those arrangements came from the sum in excess of $800,000.00 paid by the claimants in these proceedings, as set out in schedule 1. It seems that the ordinary value of the travel arrangements promised to those claimants was approximately twice the amount that those claimants paid.

There is evidence that Mrs. Nemes received from Orbit, in one way or another, substantial commission from Orbit in respect of the travel arrangements totalling about $1.47 million. It seems she received around $25,000.00 in cheques paid by Orbit, and it seems that she also received some cash and some remuneration by way of a difference between the price which Orbit received for tickets and the face value of those tickets.

Despite the volume of the business brought by Mrs. Nemes to Orbit, there was a suggestion by Orbit on these proceedings that Mrs. Nemes also dealt through other travel agents. However, there was no evidence that this was so, except possibly in relation to one transaction at the very end of Mrs. Nemes' travel dealings.

I will now briefly summarise the transactions recounted by the nine witnesses who gave evidence before me.

Mr. Keri gave evidence that in May 1994 he telephoned Mrs. Nemes, and that she agreed to sell him two business class round-the-world air tickets for $3,600.00. On 21st August 1994, he went to Mrs. Nemes' apartment at Bondi, where she told him that for $3,900.00, she would provide two round-the-world business class tickets, including six nights' accommodation. He would need to pay the full amount then, and could take the trip any time within the following twelve months. He gave Mrs. Nemes a cash cheque for $3,900.00. In
February 1995, he received an itinerary printed out by Orbit; and the trip was successfully taken between August and October 1995.

On 22nd March 1995, he went to Mrs. Nemes' apartment at Bondi, and gave her a cash cheque for $3,900.00. He was given a receipt by Mrs. Nemes, stating that the money was for a round-the-world trip for two in 1996 in business class. On th May 1995, he went to Mrs. Nemes' apartment, and gave her a cash cheque for $2,000.00. Mrs. Nemes gave him a receipt indicating that this was for one business class air ticket round-the-world for June 1996, including hotel for six nights. In November 1995, he telephoned Mrs. Nemes, and was told that to upgrade three tickets to first class would cost $3,000.00. On 16th November , Mrs. Nemes came to his office at Bondi, where he gave her a cheque for $5,000.00, being an amount to upgrade to first class his three tickets, and also two tickets of another customer.

During February to April 1996, Mr. Keri was in contact with Bill Karim at
Orbit in relation to various travel arrangements for his proposed trip. On th April, Mr. Keri went to Mrs. Nemes' apartment, and gave her a cash cheque for $5,500.00 for accommodation. Subsequently, on 16th May 1996, Mrs. Nemes asked him to provide an American Express authorisation for $11,576.30 to enable tickets to issue, on the basis that this would be cancelled once the tickets had issued. Shortly after this, Mr. Keri cancelled all travel arrangements made with or through Mrs. Nemes. He claims in all $14,400.00, being the total of all amounts paid in respect of the 1996 travel arrangements.

Mr. Schey gave evidence that in September 1995, he made arrangements with Mrs.
Nemes for travel to Europe and Africa in December 1995. For some of this travel, he paid cheques in favour of Orbit, and he received an Orbit itinerary for this travel. On one visit to Mrs. Nemes at her apartment, Mrs. Nemes told
Mr. Schey, when he asked for certain details about the travel, Mrs. Nemes said she would have to go to Orbit to check these things on the computer there.
This travel was successfully undertaken in December 1995: however, Mr. Schey found that he had to pay $2,700.00 for hotel accommodation, for which he believed he had paid Mrs. Nemes.

On 9th November 1995, Mr. Schey saw Mrs. Nemes at her apartment, and paid her $7,000.00 in cash for travel to Europe and America in September 1996. He received a receipt from Mrs. Nemes which indicated that the payment was for two round-the-world tickets. On 23rd February 1996, Mr. Schey paid Mrs. Nemes a further $2,800.00 in cash. He received from her a receipt for $5,500.00, stating that the payment was for two business class round-the-world tickets.
The additional $2,700.00 was, according to Mr. Schey, a credit in respect of the $2,700.00 paid for hotel accommodation in December 1995. Mr. Schey claims $12,500.00; although the actual amount paid for which no travel was received was $9,800.00.

Dr. Roland gave evidence that between about November 1995 and January 1996, he had a number of conversations with Mrs. Nemes at her apartment. On 22nd
November 1995, he gave his father $2,000.00 to give to Mrs. Nemes, for which he received a receipt signed by Mrs. Nemes stating that the $2,000.00 was a deposit for two round-the-world business class tickets. On 23rd January 1996 he gave his father a further $2,000.00 to give to Mrs. Nemes, and for this he received a receipt signed by Mrs. Nemes to the effect that this was the balance for two business class round-the-world tickets, which were then fully paid. On 18th April 1996, he received by facsimile a revised itinerary for the proposed travel from Orbit. In May 1996 he advised Mrs. Nemes that he wanted to cancel the arrangements. No consideration was received for his payments, and he claims $4,000.00.

Mr. Sachs gave evidence that between about late 1994 and January 1996, he and his wife purchased tickets from Mrs. Nemes on about six occasions. These tickets were very cheap, and Mrs. Nemes told Mr. Sachs that they had been booked through Orbit. When questions were raised about the travel, Mrs. Nemes said she would have to go to "the office at Orbit" and check. In each case, payment was made well in advance by cash or by bank cheque in favour of Orbit.
Itineraries were received from Orbit, in a plastic sleeve naming Orbit.

In November 1995, Mr. Sachs agreed with Mrs. Nemes to pay $4,400.00 for two business class tickets to Canada and the U.S.A. On 31st January 1996, he went to her apartment, and gave her $4,400.00 in cash. He was given a receipt by
Mrs. Nemes recording that the payment was for two business class tickets to
San Francisco, Toronto, and Vancouver.

In about January 1996, he agreed with Mrs. Nemes to pay $4,400.00 for two business class ticket to South Africa for October 1996. On 24th April 1996, he went to Mrs. Nemes' apartment, and gave her $4,400.00 in cash. He was given a receipt by Mrs. Nemes, recording that the payment was for two business class tickets to Johannesburg in October.

On 21st May 1996, he saw Mrs. Nemes at her apartment, and asked for his money back. He did not receive money back and received no consideration for the payments made in January and April 1996. He claims $8,800.00.

Mr. Forrester gave evidence that in January 1996, he telephoned Mrs. Nemes at her Bondi apartment, and she told him she was a "commission agent" of Orbit
Travel. On 6th March 1996, he saw Mrs. Nemes at her apartment, and gave her a bank cheque for $5,000.00 in favour of Orbit for travel to Europe and accommodation. On 11th April 1996, he went to the Orbit city office, and there spoke to Mr. Kay and Mr. Karim. He told them that he had made bookings through
Mrs. Nemes, and had heard rumours that she was engaged in illegal activities.
According to Mr. Forrester, Mr. Kay said that the transactions were legal, and gave him a printed itinerary. According to Mr. Forrester, Mr. Kay got out a folder, and showed him a copy of his bank cheque. He was cross-examined about this, and in cross-examination said that he thought it was his cheque that he was shown. No consideration was received for the $5,000.00 paid by Mr.
Forrester, and he claims that amount.

Mr. and Mrs. Fisher gave evidence that on 18th March 1996, they saw Mrs. Nemes at her Bondi apartment. They enquired about first class tickets to America, and told them that this would cost $3,500.00 each, to be paid by cash or bank cheque. Mrs. Nemes said words to the effect that she had been affiliated with
Orbit for years. On the following day, they went again to Mrs. Nemes' apartment and have her a bank cheque for $7,000.00 in favour of Orbit. They went to see Mrs. Nemes again on the following day, 20th March, and on that day
Mrs. Nemes told them she was "waiting for someone from Orbit to deliver tickets". Mr. Abdul-Karim later arrived at Mrs. Nemes' apartment with a wad of tickets which were given to Mrs. Nemes. Later on in March 1996, Mrs. Nemes gave them a pamphlet for travel insurance, bearing the Orbit stamp. They received no consideration for the $7,000.00 and they claim that amount.

Mrs. Landa gave evidence that on 23rd February 1996, she visited Mrs. Nemes at her apartment, and asked for tickets to travel to America, Mexico and Cuba.
She was initially quoted $4,000.00, but this was quickly reduced to $3,500.00.
Mrs. Landa asked Mrs. Nemes who she was associated with, and Mrs. Nemes replied "Orbit". On 5th March 1996, Mrs. Landa again visited Mrs. Nemes at her apartment. On that occasion, Mrs. Nemes telephoned Orbit, Mrs. Landa spoke to "John" (apparently Mr. Kay), and John faxed an itinerary to her at Mrs. Nemes' apartment. On 15th March 1996, Mrs. Landa went again to Mrs. Nemes' apartment, and gave her a cash cheque dated 10th March 1996 for $7,000.00, drawn on her account "A.V. Landa". Mrs. Nemes gave her a receipt for this amount, as being for "Orbit Travel air tickets". On 22nd April 1996, Mrs. Landa spoke again to
John at Orbit, and he again faxed her an itinerary. Mrs. Landa received no consideration for the $7,000.00, and claims that amount.

Dr. Vince gave evidence that in November 1995, Mrs. Nemes came to his home, and told him she could give him two first class tickets to Europe and Israel for $9,500.00, so long as he paid in the next few days by bank cheque or cash.
She told him "I am an agent for Orbit Travel. I can be telephoned at Orbit
Travel Double Bay branch". On 21st November 1995, Dr. Vince gave Mrs. Nemes a bank cheque for $9,500.00 in favour of Orbit. He was given a receipt by Mrs.
Nemes. Shortly afterwards, Mrs. Nemes brought him an Orbit itinerary, in an
Orbit plastic sleeve. At around this also, Dr. Vince telephoned Orbit's Double
Bay branch, and there spoke to Mrs. Nemes. In December 1995 and January 1996, he was provided with the travel arrangements in Europe and Israel that he had paid for.

In about April 1996, Dr. Vince again contacted Mrs. Nemes in relation to proposed air travel. She asked him to get her a bank cheque for $7,500.00 within the next forty-eight hours. On 30th April 1996, Dr. Vince went to Mrs.
Nemes' apartment, and gave her a bank cheque for $7,500.00 in favour of Orbit.
Mrs. Nemes gave him a receipt, which stated that the payment was for two first class round-the-world tickets. In early May1996, Mrs. Nemes came to his home, and said that Orbit was very busy, in order to explain that no tickets or itinerary were then provided. Later on in May, Dr. Vince telephoned Orbit at its head office, and spoke to a man whose name he could not recall. The man said "You are one of our good customers. How was your travel early this year?"
Mr. Vince said that he had booked some tickets through Mrs. Nemes and was having trouble getting them. He was told that "I do not know about this travel, but we can supply you with some fresh tickets". Dr. Vince received no consideration for the $7,500.00, and claims this amount.

Business records of Orbit throw some light on what lay behind the attendance by Mr. Abdul-Karim at Mrs. Nemes' apartment on or about 20th March with a great wad of tickets. These records include copies of receipts issued by Orbit dated 21st March 1996, and copies of bank deposit slips of the same day.

I set out below the numbers of the receipts, the amount, the surname of the persons to whom the receipts were purportedly issued, and the description of what the payment was for.

Receipt No. Amount Name & Description $ 1,852.00 Hallas &Tory $ 1,918.00 Markovic (air tickets) $ 1,918.00 Markovic (air tickets) $ 6,442.00 Fiscl (air tickets) $16,996.00 Fiscl (air tickets) $11,328.00 Faux (air tickets) $ 9,936.00 Izsak (air tickets) $11,300.00 Farcas (air tickets) $ 5,984.00 Tory (air tickets) $ 9,984.00 Hallas (air tickets) $17,582.00 Burger (air tickets) 
Total $127,240.00 
The deposit slips show a number of bank cheques, mainly in multiples of $3,500.00 totalling $118,850.00. They also show a cheque drawn by Landa for $7,000.00 (this plainly being the cheque handed by Mrs. Landa to Mrs. Nemes on th March). Although this does not appear from the deposit slips, other material suggests that a further amount of $50.00 may have been provided on the same day, perhaps in cash. The difference between $125,900.00 and $127,240.00, namely $1,340.00, was subsequently explained by Mr. Abdul-Karim as being Mrs. Nemes' commission.

On 10th April 1996, Mr. John Dart, who was then Chief Executive of the
Australian Federation of Travel Agents Limited (AFTA), went to the George
Street premises of Orbit, and met Mr. Abdul-Karim. Mr. Dart had been aware of someone offering for sale greatly discounted airline tickets in the Eastern
Suburbs of Sydney since about October 1995. On or about 11th March 1996, he had lodged a suspect transaction report with the Australian Transactions
Report and Analysis Centre, asserting that it had been reported to him by one of their major members that Mrs. Nemes was obtaining batches of international airline tickets issued by Orbit with the correct value, but was selling them directly to customers with a fifty percent discount; and that he had ascertained that the airlines and IATA Billing Settlement Plan were receiving full value. Mr. Dart asked Mr. Abdul-Karim to show files relating to customers referred to Orbit by Mrs. Nemes; and asked to see records of payment to the relevant airline or consolidator for a number of the relevant tickets. On examining the documents produced by Mr. Abdul-Karim, Mr. Dart was satisfied that, in relation to the tickets selected, Orbit had received full payment and accounted for the funds. Following the meeting, Mr. Dart wrote to Mr. Abdul-
Karim the following letter, which was dated 10th April 1996: 
Thank you for your personal time this morning during which we discussed a matter relating to international airline tickets being sold to customers at a substantial discount.

Whilst we understand that your company, together with the consolidators and airlines, have been receiving the correct value, the fact that customers can receive discounts in excess of 50% of the printed value of the ticket is of concern to AFTA members.

I should inform you that having received complaints from 11 travel agents in New South Wales that they were losing business, and having tracked certain cash transactions, I submitted a Suspect Transaction Report to the Director of AUSTRAC on 11 March 1996. Attached for your information is Acknowledgement of Receipt of Suspect Transaction Report dated 13 March 1996.

It has been reported to us that the person responsible for these transactions is Mrs. Vera Nemes of 29 Penkivil Street, Bondi, NSW, 2026.

It would be appreciated if you could investigate this matter so that Orbit Travel's reputation is maintained at the highest level.

On or about 8th May 1996, it appears that a service agreement was signed by
Mrs. Nemes, and by Mr. Abdul-Karim on behalf of Orbit. Clauses 1, 4, 7 and 13 of that service agreement were as follows: . The Representative shall seek out and refer customers to the Company and arrange the sale of travel on behalf of the Company.
 . No special discounts shall be arranged or promised on behalf of the Company without prior approval of Company Management.
 . All monies received by the Representative on behalf of the Company shall be receipted and accounted for daily.
 . This appointment is an (sic) independent contractor and no employer/employee relationship exists.

On 14th May 1996, Mr. Antony Whittacker, the Fund's Manager, Special
Investigations, attended the offices of Orbit, together with an accountant,
Mr. Garry Grahame. On that occasion, both Mr. Abdul-Karim and Mrs. Nemes were present. They were both asked whether or not they were aware of allegations that first class air tickets were being sold at a value of approximately fifty percent of the face value of the ticket. Mr. Abdul-Karim answered to the effect that Orbit only issues tickets upon full payment for full value. Mrs.
Nemes answered to the effect that she was unaware as to how that could happen, and that many people initially paid say $7,000.00 for two first class air tickets, but that was only a deposit or part-payment and the balance, of course, would be fully payable at a later time closer to travel.

Inspection of Orbit's books disclosed that between July 1995 and April 1996,
Orbit had paid Mrs. Nemes by cheque a total of $24,856.00 as commission. As noted earlier, the difference between the receipts issued on 21st March and the amount of the deposit into Orbit's bank account was explained as commission given to Mrs. Nemes. It appeared that, in general terms, Mrs. Nemes was paid one-third of the ten per cent commission earned by Orbit on travel arrangements introduced by her.

Evidence was led on behalf of Orbit and Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-Karim from an accountant, Rene White, to the effect that, with some minor exceptions, none of the accounting records of Orbit indicated that Orbit ever received from any of the claimants any moneys in respect of any of the travel arrangements identified, in the schedules annexed to this judgment, as being the travel arrangements in relation to which the claimants claimed to have paid such moneys to Orbit. There was also evidence on both sides as to practices in the travel agents' industry in relation to employees and other representatives of travel agents, and also the role of persons called spotters, who refer clients to travel agents. This evidence was of limited value, because it was common ground that the role played by Mrs. Nemes did not conform to any recognised role in the travel agents' industry.

ISSUES 
Broadly, three issues have been debated before me.

First, there was the issue of whether Orbit was liable to account to the claimants at general law. This arose in relation to declarations 1 and 4 sought in the cross-claim, as follows: . A Declaration as to whether or not the fourth cross defendant was the servant or agent of Orbit Travel Services Pty. Limited at any time in the period 1 March 1995 to 31 July 1996 (inclusive).
 . A Declaration as to whether or not Orbit Travel Services Pty. Limited has a liability to any of the Claimants named in the Defendant/Cross Claimant's document headed "Claimants Payments - Vera Nemes/Orbit as at 23 September 1996".

Secondly, there was the issue of the Fund's entitlement as against Orbit, under the [Travel Agents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/) and the compensation scheme. This arose in relation to declarations 2, 5 and 8 sought in the cross-claim, as follows: . A Declaration as to whether any person who entrusted money to the fourth cross defendant in the period 1 March 1995 to 31 July 1996 (inclusive) did so as a beneficiary within the meaning of the Regulations made under the [Travel Agents Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/).
 . A Declaration as to whether or not, if a payment is made by the Cross Claimant to any of the Claimants named in the Defendant/Cross Claimant's document headed "Claimants Payments - Vera Nemes/Orbit as at 23 September 1996", the Cross Claimant is subrogated to the rights of the Claimant in relation to the act or omission as against the First Cross Defendant.
 . A Declaration as to whether or not the First, Second or Third Cross Defendants have a liability to the Cross Claimant pursuant to [s.40(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) or [40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html)(7) of the [Travel Agents Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/).

Finally, there was the issue of whether Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-Karim had any personal liability pursuant to [s.40(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) of the [Travel Agents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/). That issue arose in connection with declaration 6 sought in the cross-claim, as follows: . A Declaration as to whether or not any rights the subject of the preceding Declaration are enforceable jointly against the First, Second and Third Cross Defendants pursuant to [s.40(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) of the [Travel Agents Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/).

I will deal with these issues in turn.

ORBIT'S LIABILITY TO CLAIMANTS AT GENERAL LAW 
Submissions 
Both Counsel have provided written outlines of submissions, which I will leave with the papers.

Mr. Gray, for Orbit and Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-Karim, submitted that an agent for the purpose of entering into contracts or receiving money has only the authority conferred (actually or ostensibly) by the principal: see Freeman & Lockyer v. Buckhurst Park Properties (Mangal) [(1964) 2 QB 480] at 502. The onus of proving authority rested on the Fund: Lysaght Bros. v. Falk [(1905) CLR 421] at 428-9. The evidence was that Mrs. Nemes dealt with Orbit on the basis that all tickets were sold for full value. Mrs. Nemes was treated by Orbit as a member of the public, in much the same way as a secretary of a club organising travel for members. Mrs. Nemes issued receipts in her own name, whereas a business which authorised an agent to accept money on its behalf would give the agent a receipt book contained receipts bearing its own name. Orbit itself issued receipts for moneys which Mrs. Nemes brought to the business.

Nothing Mrs. Nemes said or did could be evidence of actual authority: see
Armagas v. Mundogas SA <case>; [(1986) 2
AllER 385] at 390F. Orbit was deceived by Mrs. Nemes, just as the claimants were deceived by her; so it was impossible to say that Orbit authorised Mrs. Nemes to commit Orbit by contract to any of the claimants. The evidence does not show therefore that Mrs. Nemes had actual authority to enter into these contracts which the claimants allege, or to receive money on behalf of Orbit. The case against Orbit is not advanced by the agreement of 8th May : this could amount to an adoption of what happened earlier only if Orbit had full knowledge of what Mrs. Nemes had done, and there was no evidence of this.

It would be inaccurate to describe the scope of any agency to receive money in general terms: at best, it would be to receive money in the context of ordinary contracts at ordinary prices, not for example to receive payment from trade debtors. As to the question, on whose behalf was Mrs. Nemes acting when she specified to Orbit the person paying money, this is inextricably linked to the question on whose behalf the money was received: the circumstances and the receipts given by Mrs. Nemes made it plain that the specification was on behalf of the payer.

Turning to ostensible authority, Mr. Gray submitted that, since what Mrs.
Nemes was doing was unprecedented, it could not be suggested that she had ostensible authority. None of the claimants had purchased airline tickets previously in equivalent circumstances. Itineraries printed in Orbit's name did not support ostensible authority, because they can be printed out at any time on request.

The claimants relied on the fact that, despite the extraordinary circumstances of their dealings with Mrs. Nemes, they understood that on prior occasions,
Mrs. Nemes had delivered tickets in performance of equivalent promises made to them or to others. This was immaterial to the question whether Orbit held out
Mrs. Nemes. Orbit supplied travel tickets to Mrs. Nemes only on payment of the full price; and there was no evidence that Orbit knew of her promises to sell tickets at greatly reduced prices. The circumstance that Mrs. Nemes delivered money to Orbit and attributed that money to specific clients, and that Orbit gave her receipts for those moneys, could not constitute a representation by
Orbit that Mrs. Nemes was authorised to accept money on behalf of Orbit and issue receipts in her own name which were binding upon Orbit.

In any event, all claimants had notice of irregularity in the transactions, so could not proceed on the assumption that the agent was acting in the ordinary course of business and for the principal's benefit. Irregularity was shown by the extraordinarily low prices, which were never publicly advertised and could not be obtained anywhere else; by the fact that the price was a round lump sum, fixed without any specific itinerary, and in one case, reduced by $500.00 immediately on request; by the fact that all dealings were conducted away from
Orbit's premises, generally at Mrs. Nemes' home; by the fact that Mrs. Nemes demanded immediate payment in cash or bank cheque, in respect of travel which was not to be undertaken for many months in the future; by the fact that Mrs.
Nemes could not give details of the travel arrangements over the telephone, only at her apartment; and by the fact that, in cases where the claimants had previously received tickets from Mrs. Nemes, they were aware of the substantial discrepancy between what they had paid for their tickets and the face value on the tickets. Despite these matters, no claimant questioned Orbit or the carrier, and in one case, a claimant candidly acknowledged that his failure to make such enquiry was deliberate.

Accordingly, even if Orbit had expressly authorised Mrs. Nemes to enter into contracts and receive money in the ordinary course of business, the claimants had notice that Mrs. Nemes was not acting in this way: Baden & Delvaux v.
Societe Generale SA [(1983) BCLC 325], 407; Lysaght
Bros. v. Falk; Combulk v. TNT Management [(1993) 13 ALR 214.] 
Mr. Francey for the Fund submitted that, in the course of her activities from late 1994 until mid-1996, Mrs. Nemes represented to clients that she was affiliated with or could arrange travel through Orbit; attended Orbit's premises from time to time, dealing almost exclusively with Mrs. Abdul-Karim at Orbit's Double Bay branch; was present at Orbit's premises when clients called and was connected to those clients when they telephoned Orbit's office; arranged itineraries for clients in the name of Orbit, on occasion in consultation with representatives of Orbit in the presence of clients; collected payments from clients for travel so organised, including in numerous instances by way of personal cheque or bank cheque made out to Orbit; and delivered tickets issued by Orbit to clients. Throughout this period, Orbit allowed Mrs. Nemes to be held out to the travel industry in general as being a sales representative or member of the selling staff of Orbit; made bookings and prepared itineraries for clients of Mrs. Nemes; accepted payment from Mrs.
Nemes in respect of the travel so arranged, by way of personal cheques and bank cheques made out to Orbit, as well as substantial amounts of cash; issued tickets to Mrs. Nemes on behalf of clients whose travel arrangements were arranged by Mrs. Nemes in that way; occasionally delivered tickets to Mrs.
Nemes including in the presence of clients; paid Mrs. Nemes commission equivalent to about one-third of the nine percent or ten percent commission made on travel arranged by her; occasionally printed out or faxed itineraries to clients of Mrs. Nemes in respect of those travel arrangements; occasionally made additional bookings or alterations to bookings in respect of those travel arrangements; allowed Mrs. Nemes to use the telephone in Orbit's premises for the purpose of discussing travel arrangements with clients; and generally acquiesced in Mrs. Nemes dealing with clients on behalf of Orbit, to the extent that in the period between July 1995 and June 1996 the total of over $1.47 million was received by the Orbit in the name of customers on behalf of whom Mrs. Nemes had made travel arrangements. These matters showed that Mrs.
Nemes was an agent of Orbit on the basis of either an express or implied agreement, having authority to make travel arrangements on behalf of clients and receive payment on behalf of Orbit. This was confirmed by the agreement of th May 1996.

Alternatively, there was evidence in respect of the claimants who gave evidence supporting a finding of ostensible agency or agency by estoppel. Mr.
Francey also provided supplementary submissions to suggest that, even in relation to claimants who had not given evidence, there was an onus on Orbit to show that any limits to Mrs. Nemes' authority were brought to the attention of persons dealing with her: see Lysaght Bros. v. Falk.

Mr. Johnson SC, who appeared for the Minister for Fair Trading, pointed out that Mrs. Nemes was accepted by Orbit as a member of its sales staff. The circumstance that Mrs. Nemes did not issue receipts in the name of Orbit was overcome by the circumstance that claimants paid for the travel arrangements in many cases by bank cheque in favour of Orbit. This circumstance proved that the money was paid to Orbit, and confirmed that Mrs. Nemes was acting for
Orbit in receiving that money.

Decision 
Dealing first with Mr. Gray's submission that Orbit dealt with Mrs. Nemes as a member of the public, in a way analogous to a case where a secretary of a club arranges travel for club members, it is plain in my view that Orbit did not deal with Mrs. Nemes as a customer or client of Orbit. She was for many years listed in the trade journal as one of Orbit's sales staff. Travel arrangements were provided by Orbit to people who dealt through Mrs. Nemes, rather than to
Mrs. Nemes herself. Orbit issued receipts addressed to those people. It would have been illegal for Orbit to supply tickets to Mrs. Nemes, for them to be on-sold by Mrs. Nemes, because she was not licensed under the [Travel Agents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/). Orbit paid commission to Mrs. Nemes. These matters in my opinion show that, in way or another, Orbit was dealing through Mrs. Nemes with the people with whom
Mrs. Nemes dealt.

However, I accept Mr. Gray's submission that it is not shown that Mrs. Nemes had actual authority from Orbit to make contracts on behalf of Orbit on the terms which Mrs. Nemes arranged with the claimants. The evidence indicates that, when Orbit issued tickets or other travel arrangements to clients dealing with them through Mrs. Nemes, it did so for the full price; whereas
Mrs. Nemes had arranged with the customer to supply the relevant tickets for approximately half the usual price. From the customer's viewpoint, the customer had a contract with Mrs. Nemes or with Orbit for travel arrangements for about one-half the usual price; whereas from Orbit's viewpoint, it had a contract with the customer to supply those travel arrangements for the usual price. In those cases where the tickets or other travel arrangements were provided, the customer received them having paid only fifty percent of the full price; whereas Orbit parted with the tickets or other travel arrangements for the full price, with the other half being contributed apparently by some other person with whom Mrs. Nemes dealt. But just as Mrs. Nemes did not have
Orbit's actual authority to make a contract to provide the travel arrangements at half price, she did not have the customer's actual authority to make a contract for the supply of the travel arrangements for full price.

In those circumstances, it is not clear what, if any, contracts were in fact made between the customers and Orbit. Perhaps there was no contract, just the transfer of travel arrangements from Orbit to the customer, and the receipt of a sum of money by Orbit.

Mr. Francey in effect submitted that it would be enough if I were to find that
Mrs. Nemes had authority to make contracts at the usual prices in the ordinary course of business, and that this limitation on her authority was not brought home to the claimants. He submitted in effect that this was not a reliance on ostensible authority, which in accordance with the directions given earlier could only be relied on by the claimants who actually gave evidence, but rather was a kind of actual authority. In my opinion, cases where an agent is given actual authority to make contracts of a limited type, and the principal is held to be bound because the limitation was not brought to the notice of the person dealing with the agent, are just a particular example of ostensible authority. Although some passages in Lysaght may suggest otherwise, in my opinion those are cases where reliance on a holding out by the principal has to be shown; although of course that reliance may readily be shown in cases where there is actual authority and also failure to disclose a limitation on that authority. Accordingly, having regard to the basis on which this case was conducted, that submission would only be open in relation to the claimants who actually gave evidence.

Even in relation to those claimants, in my opinion no case of ostensible authority to make contracts for the provision of tickets at half price is made out. I do not think the matters pointed to by Mr. Francey overcome the points made by Mr. Gray, as regards both the paucity of holding-out by Orbit and the notice of irregularity to the claimants.

This leads to the question of what, if any, authority Mrs. Nemes had either to receive money on behalf of Orbit, or to pay money to Orbit on behalf of the claimants. It is clear that Mrs. Nemes received money from claimants, and it is clear also that she paid that money, or most of it, to Orbit. In order that she be Orbit's agent with actual authority to receive money, it would need to be the case that Orbit and Mrs. Nemes consented that she should act on Orbit's behalf to receive money. Alternatively, it could be the case that each claimant and Mrs. Nemes consented that Mrs. Nemes should act on the claimant's behalf to convey money to Orbit.

There are a number of matters supporting the view that Mrs. Nemes was acting as Orbit's agent to receive money rather than as the claimant's agent to pay it. Over a considerable period, Orbit was dealing with people who were its customers through Mrs. Nemes, who was described by Orbit as one of its "sales staff". Through Mrs. Nemes, Orbit received around $1.5 million, much of it in cash, over a twelve month period, for which Orbit issued 165 receipts. In those circumstances, in my opinion, the conveyance of the money from the customer to Orbit was part of Orbit's business activity. In my opinion, it was reasonable for the customer to regard payment to Mrs. Nemes as payment to
Orbit. This is confirmed by the agreement of 8th May 1996, which provided among other things that "moneys received ... on behalf of the company shall be receipted and accounted for daily": in my opinion, this supports the view that the previous arrangement was that Mrs. Nemes received money on behalf of
Orbit.

There is some weight in Mr. Gray's submission that the money was received by
Mrs. Nemes in connection with arrangements which she was not authorised to make; and also that Mrs. Nemes did not give receipts in the name of Orbit but only in her own name. On balance, however, I do not think those considerations are sufficient to outweigh the other considerations to which I have referred; and I conclude that Orbit and Mrs. Nemes did expressly or impliedly consent that Mrs. Nemes should act on Orbit's behalf in receiving money paid by prospective clients who proposed to make travel arrangements with Orbit, so that she was Orbit's agent for this purpose.

In any event, whether or not Mrs. Nemes was authorised by Orbit to receive on its behalf the money paid by the claimants, I am satisfied on the evidence that, at least in relation to most of the claimants, the money which they paid was actually received by Orbit - apart possibly from commission paid or credited to Orbit by Mrs. Nemes. Since Orbit has received the money paid by the claimants, both by its agent Mrs. Nemes and in its own bank account, the question arises whether Orbit has failed to account for this money which it actually received.

The money received by Orbit was the claimant's money until it was received by
Orbit, and in my opinion it was received by Orbit from the claimant in each case. That the money remained each claimant's money until received by Orbit is clear in the case of bank cheques: it could not conceivably be suggested that there was any transfer of title in the bank cheque to Mrs. Nemes prior to the bank cheque being received by Orbit. As regards cash, Mrs. Nemes did not purport to act as principal; and even if she were, contrary to my earlier finding, agent for the claimant, she had no actual authority to pay this money to Orbit on someone else's behalf. In my opinion, the legal ownership of the cash, or if the cash had been negotiated and other cash substituted, at least the equitable ownership of the cash, remained with the claimant until payment to Orbit. Orbit did not plead or give any evidence of any ostensible authority in Mrs. Nemes on behalf of any claimant to pay money on behalf of anyone else.

In those circumstances, in my opinion, Orbit would be liable to each claimant for money had and received, unless Orbit could say that it had accounted to that claimant, or unless Orbit could rely as against that claimant on consideration on which Orbit gave to someone else. Again, there was in my opinion no actual or ostensible authority in Mrs. Nemes to nominate anyone else to whom consideration could be given.

Accordingly, in my opinion, it is not necessary to find in favour of the claimants that Mrs. Nemes had actual authority from Orbit to allocate money which she paid to Orbit as being paid on behalf of particular customers.
However, if it were necessary to make such a finding, I would make it.
Allocation of money paid on behalf of a customer to Orbit by a member of Orbit sales staff is plainly in my opinion part of Orbit's business, which it left in these cases to be performed by Mrs. Nemes. Mrs. Nemes carried out this task incorrectly; whereas it cannot be said that she carried out any task on behalf of the claimant when she allocated money, paid by that claimant, to other persons. Furthermore, it was Orbit's responsibility to have procedures to ensure that money which it received was correctly allocated to the persons paying it. This is also, in my opinion, confirmed by the agreement of 8th May .

For all these reasons, in my opinion Orbit is liable at general law to account to each of the claimants in respect of money actually received from those claimants; and in relation to those claimants who received no consideration whatsoever from Orbit, this involves Orbit in a liability to repay the whole amount.

Before considering the implications of this approach for the claims of the claimants who gave evidence before me, I should refer to an argument advanced by Mr. Gray on another issue, which has some bearing on this one. Mr. Gray supposed the case of A paying money to Mrs. Nemes for his own travel arrangements, but Mrs. Nemes paying the money to Orbit with instructions to apply it to the cost of B's travel arrangements. If Orbit misappropriated the money, would Orbit be liable to A or to B? Mr. Gray submitted that in equity,
Orbit would have received the money under a Quistclose trust for B, and would be accountable to B, who would then be held accountable to A for money had and received by B to A's use.

In my opinion, consistently with what I have said above, there would in that case be no Quistclose trust for B. Mrs. Nemes never had A's authority to use the money for B's purposes, nor indeed did she have B's authority to do so.
Neither Mrs. Nemes nor B would have any claim against Orbit. The money would have remained A's money until payment to Orbit, at least in equity, and A could claim for it directly against Orbit.

Turning to the application of this discussion to the claims of particular claimants, I note first that two payments made by Mr. Keri, namely $3,900.00 paid to Mrs. Nemes on 22nd March 1995, and $2,000.00 paid to her on 17th May , were made prior to Mr. Keri taking an overseas trip between August 1995 and October 1995. He had previously paid Mrs. Nemes $3,900.00 for two round- the-world business class tickets, including six nights' accommodation; but it seems clear on the evidence that the true cost of these travel arrangements would have been something like twice that amount. Before Mr. Keri would be entitled, as against Orbit, to repayment of the $5,900.00 to which I have referred, he would need to prove that it had not been applied towards the full cost of the trip which he took between August 1995 and October 1995. As regards the other payments, namely $3,000.00 on 16th November 1995, and $5,500.00 on 26th April 1996, it would appear that, on the basis of the above discussion, he has a claim against Orbit for $8,500.00.

As regards Mr. Schey, he paid $7,000.00 cash on 9th November 1995, and thereafter travelled overseas pursuant to arrangements he had made with Mrs.
Nemes in September 1995. In order for him to recover any part of this $7,000.00, he would need to show that it was not used towards the travel which he took in December 1995. He made a further payment of $2,800.00 on 23rd
February 1996, and in my opinion has a good claim against Orbit for that sum.

Dr. Roland has a good claim against Orbit for $4,000.00, $2,000.00 of which was paid on 22nd November 1995 and the other $2,000.00 of which was paid on rd January 1996.

As regards Mr. Sachs, it would appear that his payments of $4,400.00 on 31st
January 1996 and a further $4,400.00 on 23rd April 1996 were both made after he had used travel arrangements provided under previous dealings with Mrs.
Nemes. Assuming that is so, in my opinion he has a good claim against Orbit for $8,800.00.

In my opinion, Mr. Forrester has a good claim against Orbit for $5,000.00 paid on 6th March 1996; Mr. and Mrs. Fisher have a good claim against Orbit for $7,000.00 paid on 19th March 1996; and Mrs. Landa has a good claim for $7,000.00 paid on 15th March 1996.

Finally, there is Dr. Vince. It seems clear that his payment of $7,500.00 made on 30th April 1996 was made after he had completed travel pursuant to earlier travel arrangements made with Mrs. Nemes; and if so, in my opinion he has a good claim against Orbit for this $7,500.00.

FUND'S ENTITLEMENT AGAINST ORBIT 
Submissions 
Mr. Gray submitted that Mrs. Nemes was not an "unlisted person" within [s.40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html), because she did not carry on business. For this, there would have to be a commercial enterprise considered as a going concern: see Hyde v. Sullivan [(1956) 56 SR 113] at ; Goddard v. Collins [(1984) VR 919] at 925; State
Authority Superannuation Board v. Commissioner of Taxation [(1990) 21 FCR ]
at 541, 548; Wellington v. Norwich Union Insurance <case>; [(1991) 1 VR 333] at 335; Hope v. Bathurst City Council <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 1] at 8; Hughes v. Clubb (1987) 10 NSWLR 325 at 333;
Shanaghan v. Chief Commissioner of Land Tax, Newman, J., 4/4/96, unreported.
What Mrs. Nemes was doing was not conducting a commercial enterprise, much less one conducted systematically and/or with a view to profit. Her activities were doomed to financial catastrophe, could not give financial benefit to Mrs.
Nemes, and could only be explained by her medical condition, as evidenced in
Dr. Bell's report. The definition of carrying on business in [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s4.html) did not help: someone who, like Mrs. Nemes, merely responded to people who approached her at her home did not hold herself out as selling tickets.
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) was not intended to impose on a travel agent such as Orbit liability for the irrational activities of a mentally disturbed person such as Mrs. Nemes.

Turning to the Trust Deed, Mr. Gray submitted that the application of cl.15.1 was dependent on whether Orbit was liable to claimants at general law, as discussed earlier. So far as cl.15.2 is concerned, it conferred wide discretionary powers on the Trust, so that it could not be asserted that payment to a claimant would be ultra vires the trustees under this clause, even if Orbit were not answerable for Mrs. Nemes' actions and defaults.
However, for the purposes of [s.40(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html), any payment by the trustees under cl.15.2 would not be in respect of an act or omission by Orbit; so that the Trust would not have a claim against Orbit.

Turning to [s.40(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html),
Mr. Gray submitted that, assuming (1) Mrs. Nemes received money from claimant
X; (2) Mrs. Nemes failed to account for that money; and (3) at the time she failed to account, Mrs. Nemes was carrying on business as a travel agent (a point denied by Mr. Gray); then any payment by the trustees to claimant X under cl.15.1 of the Deed would be a payment to which [s.40(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) applies. That gave rise to the question under [s.40(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) whether Orbit provided Mrs. Nemes with goods or services in relation to which
Mrs. Nemes' failure to account to claimant X occurred. Mr. Gray submitted that, in those circumstances, there were no goods or services provided to Mrs.
Nemes by Orbit in relation to the failure to account. The receipt of moneys from Mrs. Nemes on behalf of one traveller could not amount to the provision of goods or services to Mrs. Nemes in relation to money paid by another traveller, that is, claimant X.

Mr. Francey submitted that the Fund was subrogated to the rights of claimants in relation to any failure to account to them by Orbit. He submitted further that, if it were held that Mrs. Nemes was not the agent of Orbit, then the
Fund still had a discretion to pay compensation under cl.15.2 of the Trust
Deed. In that event, the trustees would be subrogated to the rights of the claimants against Mrs. Nemes in respect of her failure to account, and Orbit was jointly and severally liable in respect of that act or omission pursuant to [s.40(6).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html)
Mr. Francey submitted that the receipt of money from Mrs. Nemes for the purpose of buying tickets was a service to Mrs. Nemes; and was closely connected to the failure to account to the client actually providing that money.

Mr. Johnson submitted that the definition of carrying on business as a travel agent, contained in [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s4.html) of the Act, plainly applied to Mrs. Nemes. The statute was to protect the public by the regulation of persons selling travel arrangements to the public by way of a licensing system and a compensation scheme. It would be contrary to that purpose to give a narrow interpretation to carrying on business. It was sufficient that there be the repeated activity of selling tickets and the like; and in any event, it was plain that Mrs. Nemes did hold herself out as willing to sell tickets, among other things.

Decision 
The Fund claims to be entitled as against Orbit on the basis of [s.40(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) of the [Travel Agents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/), on the ground that if and when it makes a payment to each claimant under the Trust
Deed, such payment will be by reason of an act or omission of Orbit, so that the Fund will be subrogated to the rights of that claimant in relation to that act or omission.

The relevant provisions of the Trust Deed are cls.15.1 and 15.2 set out earlier.

Clause 15.1 relevantly requires the Trust to pay compensation to a "beneficiary" who is a "client", and who suffers loss from a failure to account which "arises from an act or omission by the participant", the participant in this case being Orbit. This in turn raises three questions: whether each claimant is a beneficiary; whether each claimant is a client; and whether the loss of each claimant arises from a failure to account which in turn arises from an act or omission by Orbit.

Clause 1.1 of the Deed defines beneficiary to mean a person on trust for whom, pursuant to cl.2.2, the compensation fund is held. Clause 2.2 is in the following terms: .2 The Trustees shall hold the Fund on trust for - the Crown in right of the States; and every person who entrusts money or other valuable consideration to another person, who carries on business as a travel agent (or an employee or agent of the other person) in connection with travel arrangements or travel-related arrangements or both in a State if either: that other person; or any third or subsequent person who carries on business as a travel agent in a State and who, in turn, receives directly or indirectly through an employee or agent of the third or subsequent person all or part of that money or consideration, other than as a principal, fails to account for the relevant money or consideration, whether due to an act or to an omission of that person (or of an employee or agent of that person).

In my opinion, each claimant did, albeit indirectly, entrust his or her money to Orbit. If that is incorrect, then certainly each claimant did entrust his or her money to Mrs. Nemes. As to whether Mrs. Nemes carried on business as a travel agent, cl.1.2 of the deed makes that depend upon the application of [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s4.html) of the [Travel Agents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/). Despite the irrationality of Mrs. Nemes' conduct, in my opinion it would tend to defeat the purpose of the Act if the irrationality of a sustained activity were to prevent it being regarded as carrying on the business of selling tickets. In any event, in my opinion, Mrs. Nemes clearly did hold herself out as willing to sell tickets. Accordingly, in my opinion, Mrs. Nemes did carry on business as a travel agent within the meaning of the [Travel Agents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/); and therefore did carry on business as a travel agent within the meaning of the
Trust Deed. Since both Mrs. Nemes and Orbit have failed to account to the claimants, in the way I have already indicated, it follows that the claimants are beneficiaries as defined in cl.2.2.

Client is relevantly defined in cl.1.1 of the Deed to mean "a person who enters into travel arrangements or travel-related arrangements directly or indirectly with a participant ...". Accordingly, in relation to each claimant the question is whether that claimant entered directly or indirectly into travel arrangements or travel-related arrangements with Orbit. I do not think that the making of arrangements with Mrs. Nemes, and the payment of the claimant's money by Mrs. Nemes to Orbit, without more, would amount to entry into travel arrangements or travel-related arrangements with Orbit. It would appear therefore that some claimants are clients, and others are not.

As to whether the claimants suffered loss arising directly from a failure to account, which in turn arose from an act or omission by Orbit, in my opinion that element is satisfied in each case. Clearly the loss arises directly from a failure to account, and in my opinion, the failure to account in turn arises from an act or omission of Orbit. Firstly, it seems to me that the Orbit's receipt of money from a claimant, and Orbit's failure to give consideration or to account to that claimant, is itself an act or omission by Orbit. Secondly, for reasons I have given, the incorrect allocation of the money to another person, through the agency of Mrs. Nemes, is another act or omission of Orbit.
Finally, there is a combination of facts which I think can fairly be regarded as acts and/or omissions by Orbit: the receipt of over $1.4 million in cash or bank cheques, for which 165 receipts were given; providing consideration for that money only to persons identified by Mrs. Nemes, in circumstances where there were no relevant account documents, no relevant receipts, no relationship between the payments made and services provided, no system to ensure correct allocation of funds, and no safeguards to protect against incorrect allocation of funds; and, at least as from 10th April, the circumstance that Orbit had information asserting that customers were only paying fifty percent of the value of air tickets. Of course, if the allocations made by Mrs. Nemes had been correct, there would not have been a failure to account; but in my opinion, failure to account can be considered as arising from the combination of facts I have identified, because those facts involved a serious risk of failure to account, and actually caused such a failure in this case. But for those facts, there would not have been failure to account to all or any of the claimants.

It follows that, in my opinion, the Fund is obliged to pay compensation to those claimants who directly or indirectly entered into travel arrangements or travel-related arrangements with Orbit. As regards those who did not, plainly cl.15.2 permits the trustees, in their discretion, to pay compensation.

Returning to [s.40(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html), it seems to me that, even in relation to cl.15.2 discretionary payments, it is clear that such payments would be by reason of an act or omission of Orbit, as discussed in relation to cl.15.1.

On the view I have taken, it is not necessary to apply [s.40(6).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html)
That question would arise if I were wrong in finding that Orbit was liable at general law to account to the claimants, presumably on the basis that I was wrong to find that Mrs. Nemes did not have authority from the claimants to attribute their payments to other persons. If I were wrong in that respect, then in my opinion [s.40(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) would apply. In my opinion, Mrs. Nemes is an "unlisted person" as defined in [s.40(1):](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html)
I have already given my reasons for finding that she carried on business as a travel agent. In my opinion also, Orbit did provide services in relation to which the omission of Mrs. Nemes in failing to account to the claimants occurred: the receipt by Orbit of money paid by the claimants, albeit attributed by Mrs. Nemes to some other person, was a service provided by Orbit in relation to which Mrs. Nemes' failure to account to the respective claimants occurred.

LIABILITY OF DIRECTORS 
Submissions 
Mr. Francey submitted that, in circumstances where no evidence was given by
Mr. or Mrs. Abdul-Karim, they could not make out the defence under [s.40(5).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html)
Plainly, the directors had been put on enquiry by a number of matters, and it is impossible to say what other material might have come out had they given evidence.

Mr. Gray submitted that the relevant act or omission was essentially the failure to record the correct payer as the source of funds; and it was inconceivable that Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-Karim would have known and consented to this, having regard to the disastrous implications for their business. Mrs.
Nemes' conduct is explained by the medical report. No such explanation would be possible for Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-Karim.

Decision 
In order that Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-Karim exclude the liability placed on them by [s.40(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html), it is necessary for each of them to prove that he or she did not know or did not consent to the act or omission by reason of which the payment was made to the claimant. Clearly in my opinion, that essentially means the act or omission from which the failure to account arose, as contemplated by cl.15.1 of the Trust Deed.

In this case, Orbit's failure to account arose from its receipt of money from each claimant, and from there being no consideration and no accounting provided to that claimant. It seems clear that the directors knew of these matters, except to the extent that they may not have known that a person to whom consideration or accounting was given in respect of these payments was not the person from whom the money was received. Accordingly, it seems to me that to escape liability, Mr. and/or Mrs. Abdul-Karim must at least prove that he or she did not know or consent to the giving of consideration or accounting to some person other than the person from whom the money was received.

I accept that the word "know" in this subsection means more than suspect, and probably means something like "believe with reasonable assurance something that is in fact true". Neither Mr. nor Mrs. Abdul-Karim gave evidence, so the proof in question depends essentially on the argument that it defies belief that they would have allowed Mrs. Nemes to carry on as she did, applying large sums paid by various persons towards travel arrangements provided to other persons. There is force in that submission, but ultimately I am unable to accept it.

In the first place, it seems to me that I have to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities in relation to each individual claimant, rather than satisfied on the balance of probabilities as to a lack of knowledge and approval of Mrs. Nemes' overall practice. Looking, for example, at the case of
Mrs. Landa, I ask whether, without any evidence from Mr. or Mrs. Abdul-Karim,
I can be satisfied that they did not know and consent to her money being applied towards someone else's travel arrangements. I find that I cannot be satisfied about this, in circumstances where a personal cheque for $7,000.00, signed by her, was deposited towards payment on behalf of other persons to whom receipts were given on 21st March.

Furthermore, I find that I cannot be satisfied in relation to Mr. Forrester.
He gave evidence that he saw a copy of the cheque he provided in a folder held at Orbit's premises. I cannot be absolutely certain that this is what he saw, but no evidence to the contrary was led, so I think that is a matter which I can take into account, along with the lack of evidence from Mr. and Mrs.
Abdul-Karim, in finding myself not satisfied that they did not know and consent to Mr. Forrester's cheque being applied towards travel arrangements for other persons.

In those circumstances, can I be affirmatively satisfied in relation to any other particular case? Even if it defies belief that the directors could have known and consented to the misapplication of over $800,000.00 paid by the claimants, the directors, who could have given evidence supporting a finding that they did not know or consent in relation to any of these cases, or given evidence as to which of these cases they knew and consented to and which they did not, gave no evidence at all.

One further matter which tends to confirm my lack of satisfaction is the evasive answer given by Mr. Abdul-Karim on 14th May 1996, when he was asked whether he aware of allegations that tickets were being supplied at half price. Mr. Abdul-Karim answered to the effect that Orbit only issues tickets upon full payment for full value; whereas he had been told of the allegations on 10th April 1996 by Mr. Dart.

A further ground for not being satisfied of the matters set out in [s.40(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) is that, in my opinion, the directors have certainly not excluded knowledge and consent in relation to acts or omissions from which the failure to account arise, in the sense that those acts or omissions involved a serious risk of failure to account, and actually caused such a failure in this case. It seems clear that the directors did know and consent to the acts and omissions in following combination of circumstances, which I have referred to earlier: the circumstance that over $1.4 million was receive in cash or bank cheques, in transactions for which as many as 165 receipts were given; the circumstance that the only consideration or accounting for these receipts was for persons identified by Mrs. Nemes, without the support of any receipts or accounts, or any relationship of payments to travel arrangements being supplied by Orbit, and in the absence of any system of ensuring coincidence of payment and supply of travel arrangements, and of any safeguards against abuse; and the circumstance that at least from 10th April, the directors had information that customers were receiving air tickets in return for payment of only fifty percent of their value.

For those reasons, in my opinion, Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-Karim are liable, along with Orbit, to reimburse the Trust for payments properly made to claimants.

CONCLUSION 
It follows that I will dismiss Orbit's claim for an injunction.

On the cross-claim, I am prepared to make declarations to the following effect: that Orbit has a liability at general law to claimants for amounts paid by them to Mrs. Nemes, in respect of which they have received no consideration or accounting; that such claimants are beneficiaries within the meaning of the Trust
Deed; that if the Fund makes payment of the said amounts to the claimants, it will be subrogated to their rights against Orbit; that such rights are enforceable by the Fund against Mr. and Mrs. Abdul-
Karim.

If there is a dispute as to precise amounts, this could be dealt with by me or referred to a Master. There have been no submissions yet concerning interest or costs.
 * * * 
