

M M MacRae versus F S Stevens [1996] NSWSC 500 (18 October 1996) * ORDERS * Background * FILE NOTE: 14/2/83 * Trial Judges findings in the Contribution Proceedings * Immunity of legal practitioners from suit * Extent to which High Court applied Saif Ali versus Sydney Mitchell & Co * Causation * * * 
MONICA MARY MacRAE versus FRANCIS SEYMOUR STEVENS /93 DC9572/87 
Friday 18 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY, MEAGHER AND BEAZLEY JJA 
CATCHWORDS: LEGAL PRACTITIONERS - Negligence - Barristers' Immunity from suit - Failure to advise of expiration of limitation period and availability of action in another forum.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
LEGAL PRACTITIONERS - Negligence - Barristers' immunity from suit - Scope of immunity- Whether failure to advise of expiry of limitation period and availability of action in another forum attracts immunity 
The appellant solicitor had briefed the respondent barrister in a personal injuries matter in July 1980. The client had been injured in the course of his employment in August 1977 in Queensland. The relevant limitation period in
Queensland was 3 years. The first respondent negligently failed to advise that the Queensland limitation period would expire in less than a month, and also negligently advised that the proceedings could only be brought in Queensland.
The proceedings could also have been brought in New South Wales, where the limitation period was 6 years. The plaintiff client brought action against both the appellant and first respondent. The proceedings against the appellant solicitor were settled in the sum of $35,000.00 inclusive of costs. The contribution proceedings were heard and determined by Smyth DCJ.

The trial judge did not make express findings of negligence. His Honour held that the first respondent was protected by the immunity from suit which applies to a barrister's conduct of litigation. His Honour also found that, in any event, the barrister's conduct was not causally responsible for the client's loss. The appellant appeals from these findings.

HELD: 
The first respondent's conduct was negligent in two ways: first, the advising of a course of action which, if acted upon, would mean that the Queensland limitation period was likely to expire before the statement of claim was drafted and filed and secondly, that the proceedings could only be commenced in Queensland.
 
Even if the first negligent advice was part of the "management" of the case so as to attract the immunity, the second act of negligence could not be described as either "management" of the case, nor as leading "to a decision affecting the conduct of the case in court".

Giannarelli versus Wraith <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 543]; [62 ALJR 611]; [81 ALR 417] applied; Keefe versus Marks [(1989) 16 NSWLR 713] applied.

ORDERS
Appeal allowed.
Judgment and order of Smyth DCJ dated 1 March 1993 be set aside.
Judgment be entered for the appellant in the contribution proceedings in the sum of $21,000.00, such judgment to take effect from 1 March 1993.
The first respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and in the
Court below.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I have had the benefit of reading in draft the reasons of Beazley JA in this appeal and agree generally with them.

I would add that, in my opinion, the reasons of each of the judges in this court's decision of Keefe versus Marks [(1989) 16 NSWLR 713] supports the view that the question in the present case whether the barrister was immune from proceedings for negligence fell to be answered by the test whether or not what he did was so intimately connected with the conduct in court of the proposed proceeding that it could fairly be said to be a preliminary decision affecting the way the proceeding would be conducted when it came to a hearing: see 16 NSWLR at 19-720, 723, 724 and 729.

In my opinion the application of this test to the facts of the present case leads to the conclusion reached by Beazley JA, that at least the barrister's advice that the "claim will obviously have to take place in Queensland", which was clearly negligent, was not within the area of a barrister's immunity.

I agree also both with Beazley JA's opinion that the barrister's negligent advice to the solicitor was a relevant cause of the loss suffered by the solicitor, within the tests stated by the High Court in March versus E & M H
Stramare Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506], and with her assessment of the position concerning contribution.

In my opinion the appeal should be allowed and the orders proposed by Beazley
JA made.
 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Beazley JA.

BEAZLEY JA: The appellant, a solicitor, appeals against a finding by Smyth DCJ, that the first respondent, a barrister, was entitled to the benefit of the immunity from suit which protects legal practitioners from claims in negligence in respect of in-court conduct. The appellant also appeals against the trial judge's further finding that, in any event, the loss sustained by the client, the second respondent, was not caused by the barrister's negligence.
 # Background 
On 4 August 1977, the client, who then resided in Queensland, sustained injuries in the course of his employment in that State such as to give him a right to claim damages from his employer (the damages claim). The limitation period for any such proceedings brought in Queensland was 3 years (Section 11, Limitation of Actions Act, 1974 (Qld)).

In late June 1980, the client, who by then had moved to New South Wales, retained the appellant as his solicitor to commence proceedings in respect of his damages claim. On 1 July 1980, the appellant briefed the first respondent to "Advise and Prepare Statement of Claim". The instructions in the brief and the first respondent's advice are relevant to both issues raised on the appeal and need to be set out in full.

The brief, which apparently was delivered on 1 July 1980, contained the following instructions: "Counsel is requested to draft a Statement of Claim after examining the enclosed documentation. In a recent interview with our client he indicated that he has had no medical attention other than that rendered at the Southport
Hospital following his accident. Counsel may wish to advise us to refer our client to an orthopaedic specialist to ascertain an opinion prior to drafting a Statement of Claim.
. ." 
On 1 July 1980, the first respondent gave the following written advice: "I acknowledge receipt of your brief in the above matter. Before proceeding with the drafting of the Statement of Claim, I think it would be advisable, as you suggest, for Mr. Lancaster to obtain the opinion of an Orthopaedic
Specialist in relation to any ongoing problems which resulted from his accident in employment with the defendant company. . .

As I have pointed out to you on the telephone there are some difficulties involved in litigation of this nature accross (sic) State borders, the administration of the action not being the only one. Damages in the Queensland
Jurisdiction are notoriously mean and we would need to have clear evidence of ongoing disabilities and limitation of earning capacity to warrant undertaking the action in mind. In this respect I draw your attention to the fact that
Mr. Lancaster mentions on page 3 of his statement that his treating doctor considered that he might contract osteo-arthritis as a result of the accident.
Indeed, the present pain that he is experiencing may well be the onset of that particular disease. When he attends the specialist for an opinion this prospect should be directly pointed out to him. I think until this opinion is to hand we should not proceed any further with drafting documents. When the opinion is received, however, you might then draft the Statement of Claim and seek legal aid in pursuing the matter. 
As the action will obviously have to take place in Queensland you may well be best advised to act through a New South Wales Solicitor who also has a practice in Queensland as agents for the conduct of the case. . ." 
Two things are to be noted about this advice. First, it failed to draw attention to the fact that proceedings in Queensland would be statute barred on 3 August 1980. This omission was clearly negligent, given that the first respondent had advised that an orthopaedic opinion be obtained which, in the normal course of events, would not have been able to have been obtained prior to the expiration of the limitation period. Secondly, it stated that proceedings "will obviously have to take place in Queensland". This was wrong. Proceedings could have been brought in New South Wales: Pt 10 Rule
A(1)(e) of the [Supreme Court Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/): See
Pederson versus Young <case>; [(1964) 110 CLR 162] at 167-8; Brix-Neilsen versus Oceaneering Australia Pty Limited [(1982) 2 NSWLR 173] at 176-177. The limitation period in New South Wales for the damages claim was 6 years, expiring on 3 August 1983.

In accordance with the first respondent's advice, an orthopaedic opinion was obtained. The doctor's written report was received by the appellant on 28
October 1980. The appellant referred the report to the first respondent on 8
January 1981. The first respondent, shortly after being briefed with the medical report, gave the following advice: "I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 8 January 1981, and the attached medical report relating to the above matter.
 
I also refer to my letter to you dated I July, 1980.
 
I have read the medical report and it is obvious that Mr. Lancaster has a valid claim both at Workers Compensation and Common Law.
. .
 
As I pointed out to you in my previous letter there are many problems associated with a N.S.W. solicitor endeavouring to undertake litigation in
Queensland. It is best handled by a solicitor in that State. As mentioned to you before, I work closely with Richard Attwood of Attwood Marshall and
Woodward of Coolangatta and have found him an extremely reliable person.
However, the fact that Mr. Lancaster is now living in Sydney and is employed, makes his case that much more difficult to conduct. The fact that Attwood is close to the scene of the accident would be of assistance in obtaining witnesses etc if Mr. Lancaster desires to proceed." 
This advice (the second advice) was clearly directed to implementing the first respondent's initial advice that "the action will obviously have to take place in Queensland". The second advice was of no assistance to the client, as the limitation period in Queensland had expired, although no-one appreciated that at the time.

On 31 March 1981, the appellant requested Messrs Attwood Marshall and Woodward (AM&W) to act as agents "in this matter". The letter made it clear that proceedings in Queensland were proposed and that a legal aid application to the Legal Aid Commission in Queensland should be made on behalf of the client.
The appellant requested AM&W to advise "whether you require any additional information to enable you to institute proceedings on our client's behalf".

On 15 September 1981, AM&W advised the appellant, apparently in a telephone call, that the limitation period in Queensland had expired. It appears that the appellant overlooked that she had been so advised as, in June , following inquiries from the client, the appellant wrote to AM&W as follows: ". . .
 
Bearing in mind the time which has elapsed since the date of the accident, we are anxious to obtain some indication for our client as to his prospects of succeeding in his claim. With reference to the second paragraph of your letter of 28th August, 1981, it would seem necessary to brief a Queensland Barrister.
Would you please advise if that is the only course open to our client and if so, provide us with an estimate of Counsel's fees so that we may advise our client and obtain funds to cover same." 
AM&W replied on 22 June 1992 in these terms.
 ". . .We also note that the writer advised yourselves that your clients (sic) claim was statutory (sic) barred from proceeding due to the three year limitation period imposed by the [Limitation of Actions Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/loaa1974226/) - 1978.
The writer suggested that your firm obtain a full statement of his delay in the proceedings so that Counsel could be briefed on the prospect of bringing this action within one of the exceptions contained in the Limitations Act and that legal aid be sought for this purpose." 
There was no further activity in the matter until 3 December 1982 when
AM&W wrote to the appellant seeking further instructions. They again wrote in the same terms on 3 February 1983. The appellant then sought her client's instructions. A file note dated 14 February 1983 records: 
FILE NOTE: 14/2/83 
RE: LANCASTER 
Telephone conversation with client who telephoned in response to our letter of 11th instant. Discussed with him in some detail the question of proceedings [sic] with his claim for damages. Pointed out to him that there was [sic] some difficulties associated with the obtaining of grant of legal aid in Queensland because of the three year limitation period imposed by the Limitations of
Actions Act. Advised that it would be necessary to obtain a full statement as to the delay in bringing in [sic] the proceedings. He advised that he only had a mild disability in his foot as a result of the accident and was in full time employment. He confirmed that he had lost time from work immediately following the accident but had been paid wages for that period. Discussed with him the advice given by Mr Stevens in his letter of 1st July, 1980. Further advised client that in the event that we could not obtain legal aid from Queensland
Legal Aid Department, and in the event that he was not successful in his action, he would be responsible for any legal costs. Having discussed these various aspects in some detail with client, he instructed me that he did not wish to pursue this matter further at this point in time. He requested that I advise the Queensland Agents accordingly and render an account for work done to date. He also requested that I return to him all documentation in the file so that if he decided at some future date to reinvestigage (sic) the matter in the event that his foot became worse, he would have the documentation necessary to make enquiries in that regard." 
On 15 February 1983, the appellant advised AM&W that the client did not wish to take the action further. Nothing further happened until 20 June 1986, when the client commenced proceedings against the solicitor and the barrister, alleging negligence for failing to commence his damages claim. The solicitor claimed contribution or indemnity from the barrister (the contribution proceedings).

The allegations by the client against the solicitor and barrister and by the solicitor against the barrister were based upon the assumption that the relevant limitation period was that which applied to actions brought in
Queensland. The specific allegations made against the first respondent in the contribution proceedings were: that the first respondent was negligent in advising that the institution of proceedings be delayed until a report was obtained from an orthopaedic surgeon with the consequence that the client's proceedings became statute barred if commenced in New South Wales; and he was negligent in failing to advise the solicitor that any action by the client must be commenced by 4 August 1980 otherwise it would be statute barred.

On about 2 February 1993, the client settled the proceedings against the appellant. The settlement involved a payment of $35,000 inclusive of costs, to the client. The first respondent admitted that the settlement sum was the proper quantum for the purposes of the contribution proceedings. The contribution proceedings were heard and determined by Smyth DCJ on 1 March .
 # Trial Judges findings in the Contribution Proceedings 
The trial judge found that neither the appellant nor the first respondent had directed her or his mind to the limitation period applicable to the client's claim in Queensland. His Honour also found that neither had directed their respective minds to the availability of a cause of action in New South
Wales, with its limitation period of six years.

The trial judge did not expressly make any finding of negligence. Rather, he considered the two issues raied by the first respondent in defence of the proceedings: namely, whether the first respondent was entitled to the immunity from suit which applies in relation to a barrister's conduct of litigation and whether the first respondent's conduct was causative of the client's loss.

His Honour held that the immunity applied although he described the case as being "at the extreme edge of such immunity". Notwithstanding that there were no express findings of negligence, counsel for the first respondent correctly conceded that his Honour's judgment involved a finding that the first respondent had been negligent in two respects: first, in failing to advise in relation to the limitation period applicable in Queensland, and secondly, in failing to advise of the availability of a cause of action in New
South Wales under Part 10 paragraph (e) of the [Supreme Court
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/).

His Honour also held that the first respondent did not cause the client's loss. This finding was based upon two considerations. First, his Honour found that the first respondent had advised, prior to the expiry of the limitation period (by which his Honour clearly was referring to the Queensland limitation period), that Queensland solicitors should be retained but this was not done.
Secondly, his Honour found that even after the expiry of the Queensland limitation period, proceedings could have been commenced in New South Wales.
His Honour thus found a verdict for the first respondent against the appellant. The appellant appeals against both of these findings.
 # Immunity of legal practitioners from suit 
The immunity of a barrister from suit in respect of in-court negligence is well established. The immunity also extends to certain work done out of court.
The existence of the rationale for and the extent of the immunity have been discussed in five modern cases in England, New Zealand and Australia. They are: Rondel versus Worsley [1969] 1 AC 191; Rees versus Sinclair [[1974] 1 NZLR ];
Saif Ali versus Sydney Mitchell & Co [[1980] AC 198]; Giannarelli v
Wraith <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 543]; Keefe versus Marks [(1989) 16 NSWLR 713.] In each case, there was extensive reference to the decision (and other decisions) which had gone before. However, as there are differences within the majority judgments in each decision, both as to the relevant policy considerations which underpin the immunity and the extent of the immunity, it is useful to revisit them in seeking to determine whether the first respondent here is entitled to the benefit of the immunity for his admittedly negligent conduct.
Before turning to the individual cases, there is a consensus in these authorities as to the following:
The immunity is an established rule of law.
Its rationale is grounded in public policy.
The rule extends beyond strictly in-court conduct.
It does not extend to all out-of-court work.
The immunity extends to solicitor advocates.

Rondel versus Worsley is the starting point for the consideration of the modern law on barrister's immunity. It decided that the immunity applied to a barrister's in-court negligence. There were also strong obiter statements that the immunity extended to out-of-court work, although their Lordships differed as to what work fell within the immunity. Lord Reid, at 231, for example, considered that the immunity extended to the drawing of pleadings. Lord
Upjohn, at 286 considered the immunity commenced at the "letter before action" and covered all work done subsequent to that. Lord Pearce, at 265, considered it extended to all barristers' work. Nor were their Lordships unanimous as to the policy grounds or the weight to be accorded to the differing policy considerations which underpin the immunity. However, the following considerations of policy are discernible in the judgments: 
A barrister owes a duty, not only to the client, but also to the court and to the public. The duty to the court is paramount and this may involve the barrister in a conflict between duty to the court and duty to the client (Lord
Reid at 227, Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest at 247-8; Lord Pearce at 271-2; Lord
Upjohn at 282-3, and Lord Pearson at 290-2). The administration of justice thus requires that a barrister's conduct in court be protected from the threat of litigation.

A barrister should be accorded the same protection as is accorded to other parties involved in the court process - judge, jury and witnesses:
Munster versus Lamb (1883) 11 QBD at 588; Cabassi versus Vila <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 130] at 141 (see Lord Reid at 229; Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest at ; Lord Pearce at 270-271. It may be that this is concomitant to the peculiar position of the barrister referred to in (i).

It is contrary to the orderly and due administration of justice to allow issues determined in the principal proceedings in which the conduct is alleged to have taken place to be relitigated in collateral proceedings for negligence. (Lord Reid, at 230, considered this a weighty but not conclusive consideration. Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest at 248-250, saw it as a major consideration, whereas Lord Pearce said it was not a reason supporting the maintenance of the immunity); 
Lord Pearson, at 292, considered that the immunity was a natural corollary of the rule that counsel does not enter into a contract with the client and cannot sue to recover fees. Lord Upjohn, however, at 280, dismissed this as an irrelevant consideration; and Lord Pearce, at 263, observed that the immunity had arisen independently of the inability to sue, albeit from the same source of public policy; and 
The "cab-rank" rule, whereby counsel is obliged to accept any brief within that counsel's area of practice and provided the appropriate fee is proffered: see Lord Pearce at 274; Lord Upjohn at 281.

The next case in point of time is Rees versus Sinclair. That case involved a solicitor advocate who refused to raise certain issues on behalf of his client in a maintenance action, for which the solicitor considered there was no justification and no evidence. McCarthy P, in a passage which has been subsequently endorsed in whole or in part by the House of Lords in Saif Ali, by the High Court in Giannarelli and by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Keefe versus Marks, stated at 187: "But I cannot narrow the protection to what is done in Court: it must be wider than that and include some pre-trial work. Each piece of before-trial work should, however, be tested against the one rule; that the protection exists only where the particular work is so intimately connected with the conduct of the cause in Court that it can fairly be said to be a preliminary decision affecting the way that cause is to be conducted when it comes to a hearing. The protection should not be given any wider application than is absolutely necessary in the interests of the administration of justice, and that is why I would not be prepared to include anything which does not come within the test I have stated" 
The issue arose again in Saif Ali, in the context of alleged pre-trial negligence in a civil action for motor accident damages. The barrister in that case had failed to advise the joining of material parties as defendants before the expiration of the relevant limitation period, and also negligently advised the discontinuance of proceedings against the only defendant, thereby depriving the plaintiff of the damages to which he would have been entitled.
By a majority, (Lords Wilberforce, Diplock and Salmon), the House of Lords held that the immunity did not extend so far as to encompass conduct such as that complained of. In so holding, Lords Wilberforce and Diplock adopted the statement of McCarthy P in Rees versus Sinclair to which I have referred above, as delimiting the boundaries of the immunity. Lord Salmon adopted the first part of the statement, but did not refer to the last sentence. A question has arisen in this case whether the adoption of part only of the statement of
McCarthy P reflects a difference in principle as to the extent of the immunity.

All of their Lordships, including Lord Russell of Killowen and Lord Keith of
Kinkel in the minority, were unanimous in accepting that the immunity, whatever its boundaries, was based on considerations of public policy.

Lord Diplock, at 222, considered two policy considerations, both based upon the "need to maintain the integrity of public justice", as the most persuasive. They were the "general immunity from civil liability" afforded to in-court participants: see Cabassi versus Vila <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 130] at 141, and the undesirability of allowing collateral proceedings to undermine the correctness of initial litigation. As he saw it, to permit such proceedings would "bring the administration of justice into disrepute". His Lordship recognised that the immunity is often said to arise from the conflicting duties owed by a barrister, not only to the client, but to the court. However, he noted that this argument lost force in the context of giving advice in chambers, where there is usually ample opportunity for deliberation. Lord Diplock also doubted the continuing application of the cab- rank rule as a relevant policy consideration underpinning the immunity.

Lord Wilberforce, at 214, referred to the competing public policy considerations, namely that a wrong ought not be without a remedy, on the one hand, and the policy against collateral challenge, on the other.
Notwithstanding the former of these considerations, he accepted that policy dictated that the immunity be maintained. However, his Lordship, at 212, rejected any correlation between the immunity and the rule that a barrister could not sue for her or his fees.

Lord Salmon identified the relevant policy considerations as being first, the principle that a barrister should enjoy the same immunity as a judge, jury and witness: Munster versus Lamb, Cabassi versus Vila; secondly, the peculiar position of the barrister owing a paramount duty to the court as well as owing a duty to the public and to the client; and thirdly, but of lesser weight, the principle against collateral challenge. His Lordship did not accept that there was any correlation between the immunity and a barrister's inability to sue or that it was based on the non-contractual aspect of a barrister's relationship with the client or the cab-rank rule.

The minority, Lord Russell of Killowen and Lord Keith of Kinkel, held that the immunity applied to all pre-trial conduct. Lord Russell, at 233, emphasised that in order to "participate in and contribute to the orderly proper and expeditious trial of causes", it would be against the public interest to allow barristers to be "vulnerable" to a claim in negligence, for such a threat may interfere with her or his exercise of judgment in the normal course of running the case. Lord Keith agreed with Lord Russell on this point, also relying on the undesirability of re-litigation between client and barrister of the same issues which have already been decided in previous litigation, albeit adversely to the client. Lord Keith, with whom Lord Russell agreed, was unswayed by the cab-rank rule argument.

It will be seen from the above that there was a consensus amongst their
Lordships that the due administration of justice was the overriding policy consideration supporting the immunity and that further, the House of Lords was moving away from the fourth and fifth considerations referred to in Rondel. 
In Giannarelli, it was alleged that the barrister had failed to advise the client of an available defence to a perjury charge and had failed to object to certain inadmissible evidence tendered by the Crown. Such evidence was essential to the success of the Crown case.

Mason CJ, at 555, identified, as the relevant considerations of public policy, first, the "peculiar nature of the barrister's responsibility when he appears for [a] client in litigation" and secondly, "the adverse consequences for the administration of justice which would flow from the re-litigation in collateral proceedings for negligence of issues determined in the principal proceedings." His Honour averted to the seriousness of potentially denying to a client a remedy for negligent conduct. However, as his said at 557: "...the exception which the law creates is not to benefit counsel but to protect the administration of justice". He saw the conferral of the immunity as being in conformity with the privilege conferred on judges, jurors, parties, witnesses, solicitors or counsel in respect of what they say in court: Cabassi versus Vila;
Munster versus Lamb.

His Honour also held that there is no distinction between barristers and solicitors on the issue of immunity from suit for in-court negligence. In this regard, his Honour agreed with the observations of Lords Wilberforce, Diplock and Salmon in Saif Ali. Mason CJ next recognised, at 559, that the grounds "for denying liability for in-court negligence have no application to work done out of court which is unconnected with work done in court" (emphasis added). His Honour again referred to Saif Ali in support of this principle. In drawing the dividing line between the activities which fell within the immunity and those which fell outside it, Mason CJ said at 560: ". . .the immunity must extend to work done out of court which leads to a decision affecting the conduct of the case in court." 
His Honour added that to take the immunity further would risk extending the immunity beyond the public policy considerations which sustained it. His
Honour expressly endorsed the statement of McCarthy P other than the last sentence. He made no comment as to the import or relevance of the last sentence. Nor did his Honour adopt, in his own formulation, the adjectival language of McCarthy P when the President said that to be immune, a barrister's work had to be "so intimately connected" with work in court. I will return to the language of the two formulations shortly.

Mason CJ held that alleged negligent conduct fell within the immunity.

Wilson J accepted that the basis for the immunity lay in "the public interest in the due administration of justice" and adopted, as the relevant considerations, the five grounds of public policy enunciated by the House of
Lords in Rondel versus Worsley. His Honour considered that certain aspects of public policy should be given more weight than others. He accorded the administration of justice the position of "transcendent importance", but thought that the "cab rank rule", though relevant, should not be given significant weight.
 
Brennan J identified the proper administration of justice as the overriding policy consideration underpinning the immunity. He endorsed the particular policy considerations identified by Mason CJ as justifying the retention of the immunity. His Honour then formulated the common law rule as follows at :
 ". . .neither a barrister or a solicitor may be sued by a client in respect of any act or omission made in the conduct of the client's case in court or in the making of preliminary decisions affecting the way in which the case is to be conducted when it comes to a hearing".
 
Neither Wilson nor Brennan JJ referred to Rees versus Sinclair.
 
Dawson J considered that the undesirability of allowing collateral challenge to judicial determinations by action against a barrister or solicitor, was a relevant and significant policy consideration. However, the most cogent policy reason, in his Honour's opinion, was the necessity for the proper administration of justice for those who participate in court proceedings to be able to speak freely: Cabassi. His Honour considered that the need to make difficult decisions unhampered by the prospect of being sued to be of lesser weight and the "cab rank" rule" referred to in Rondel, to be of little weight. To this extent, Dawson J agreed with Lord Diplock in Saif Ali. His
Honour noted that the test in Rees versus Sinclair had been applied in Saif
Ali. His Honour then concluded: "I have reached the conclusion that the reasoning upon which the two English decisions are based has a clear application here and that those cases ought to be followed".
 
Deane and Toohey JJ each decided the matter on the basis of liability under the relevant statutory provisions governing the conduct of barristers in
Victoria. Deane J, without deciding, expressed the view that there was no common law immunity. Gaudron J agreed with Toohey J.

Notwithstanding the differences and the different emphases in the majority judgments in Saif Ali and in Giannarelli as to the policy considerations which underpin the immunity, the central policy consideration is not in doubt. The immunity is required for the due administration of justice. That consideration recognises that a barrister has an overriding duty to the court which requires the exercise of an independent judgment in the "conduct and management of a case": per Mason J at 556. The barrister is concerned therefore, not only to achieve the most favourable possible outcome for the client, but also with the proper and efficient administration of justice. The due administration of justice also requires that collateral challenge to decisions of the court in the initial litigation conducted by the barrister be avoided.

This court has had occasion to consider the application of the principles governing the immunity on two occasions since Giannarelli, first in Keefe v
Marks [(1989) 16 NSWLR 713] and later in Donellan versus Watson [(1990) 21 NSWLR 335.] 
Keefe versus Marks was a claim for indemnity or contribution by a solicitor against a barrister where the solicitor had been sued by a client for professional negligence in respect of loss the client sustained by a failure to claim interest under <case> of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/). The client's action against the solicitor was compromised. The barrister moved to strike out the solicitor's claim against him. Gleeson CJ and Meagher JA held that the immunity applied. Gleeson CJ (with whom Meagher JA, in an additional short judgment agreed), after referring to Mason CJ's endorsement of the principle in Saif Ali, that the immunity does not extend to "work done out of court which is unconnected with work done in court", stated at 719: "It is impossible to characterise that aspect of the opponent's conduct which occurred prior to the commencement of the hearing before Master Greenwood as "work done out of court which is unconnected with work done in court". On the contrary, in so far as complaint is made of action or inaction prior to the commencement of the hearing it concerns a matter which was intimately connected with the work ultimately done in Court, that is to say, the presentation of Mr Tehfe's claim for damages and any consequential relief to which he was also entitled." 
Gleeson CJ next referred to Mason CJ's statement that preparation of a case out of court was inextricably interwoven with presentation of the case in court stating at 719-720: "Once again, in my view that statement applies precisely to the facts of the present case. To take up the language of McCarthy P in Rees versus Sinclair [[1974] NZLR 180] at 187, the particular "pre-trial work" of which complaint is here made was "so intimately connected with the conduct of the cause in Court that it can fairly be said to be a preliminary decision affecting the way that cause (was) to be conducted when it (came) to a hearing. 
The substance of the allegation against the opponent is that he was negligent in the way in which he conducted Mr Tehfe's action, and the principle of immunity which applies in such a case cannot be circumvented by drawing fine distinctions between the preparation and the conduct of the case, or between the opponent's failure to advert to the matter of interest while he was in his
Chambers and his failure to do so while he was in Court." 
Priestley JA considered that the case arguably fell on the other side of the dividing line. Accordingly, on the basis of the principles which govern a strike out motion: see General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner for
Railways  <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125], his Honour held that the solicitor's claim against the barrister should not be struck out.
 # Extent to which High Court applied Saif Ali versus Sydney Mitchell & Co 
During the course of hearing the appeal, the question arose as to the extent to which the High Court in Giannarelli applied Saif Ali, and, depending upon the resolution of that question, the extent to which Saif Ali should be applied in New South Wales. It is evident that if this case was decided having regard to the application of the immunity in Saif Ali, it would, quite clearly, fall outside the immunity. However, the same result does not necessarily follow when regard is had to the manner in which the High Court in Giannarelli applied the immunity to the facts in that case.

Counsel for the respondent submitted that Saif Ali should not be applied in
New South Wales. Much of the argument on this point revolved around the question of the extent to which there had been an adoption of McCarthy P's statement in Rees versus Sinclair, by the House of Lords in Saif Ali, and by the High Court in Gianarelli. In this regard, a distinction was sought to be made between the adoption of the full statement or the adoption, of the first part of the statement only, excluding the last sentence. Counsel for the respondent submitted that the varying references to McCarthy P's statement meant that, as a matter of principle, the outer boundaries of the immunity remained unsettled. In particular, it was submitted that McCarthy P's full statement involved a more restrictive approach to the immunity than was the case if the last sentence was not adopted. I do not agree. In my opinion, there is no relevant distinction in the endorsement of the whole or part of the statement. In the first part, McCarthy P stated the rule which determined whether conduct fell within the immunity or outside it. In the second part, he emphasised that policy considerations did not justify the extension of the immunity beyond that rule. As Lord Wilberforce said in Saif Ali at 215,
McCarthy P in this last sentence, was not formulating a second test or a second limb of the test. Rather the last sentence stated "the justification for the test".

I have referred earlier to some difference in the language used by McCarthy P to that used by Mason CJ. However, when the effect of the last sentence in
McCarthy P's statement is understood, it is clear that there is no substantive difference between the test enunciated by McCarthy P and that enunciated by
Mason CJ. It follows that there is no relevant distinction between the test stated by the majority in Saif Ali and that stated by the High Court in
Giannarelli. The difference between the two decisions lies in the application of the test to the facts of the respective cases.

Counsel for the respondent also submitted that the law in New South Wales is governed by this Court's decision in Keefe versus Marks. In Keefe versus Marks, the
Court adopted the statements of Mason CJ to which I have referred as expressing the relevant principle. It is clear from the manner in which
Gleeson CJ referred to the language of McCarthy P that his Honour saw no distinction between that test and that stated by Mason CJ. As this Court has already adopted the language of Mason CJ as the appropriate statement of principle, it is neither necessary nor appropriate to seek any further or other formulation of the extent of the immunity.

Leaving aside for the moment the difficult question of application of the principle to the facts of this case, one further matter requires consideration - namely whether, for the immunity to apply, the facts fit within both the positive and negative aspects of Mason CJ's formulation. This raises the question whether his Honour's formula involves one test or two. In my opinion, it involves one. His Honour was simply looking at the one principle from two different aspects. Provided one aspect is satisfied, the immunity will apply.
 
Before determining whether the immunity does apply here, there is a further consideration which is relevant. There is ample authority that a solicitor is liable for failing to commence proceedings for a client prior to the expiry of any relevant limitations period: see Fletcher & Son versus Jubb, Booth and
Helliwell [1920] 1 KB 275; Kitchen versus Royal Air Forces Association [[1958] 2 All ER 241]; Yardley versus Coombes [(1963) 107 Sol Jo 575];
Nikolaou versus Papasavas, Phillips & Co [(1988) 82 ALR 617]; Golec v
Scott (unreported NSWCA 8/11/95). Is it the case, therefore, that a solicitor is to be liable in negligence for failing to draw the client's attention to the imminent expiry of a relevant limitation period, but a barrister briefed to draft the relevant pleadings is not? Both Lords Pearce and Upjohn found the solution to this problem in the contractual relationship between solicitor and client.
 
Handley JA's approach in Donellan & Ors versus Watson & Anor [(1990) 21
NSWLR 335] is an illustration of an analogous resolution of this issue.
In that case, the conduct complained of was that of a solicitor and occurred in court. However, the immunity was held not to apply. The facts may be recounted briefly. The solicitor was instructed to compromise District Court appeal proceedings on a specified basis. The solicitor's agent, for whose conduct the solicitor was liable, compromised the matter on a different basis.
Handley JA decided the matter on the basis of the law of agency. His Honour held that a solicitor has no actual authority to compromise litigation contrary to instructions and a solicitor who did so was liable for damage sustained by the client for the unauthorised compromise. His Honour cited
Fray versus Voules <case>; [(1859) 1 El & El 839],
Butler versus Knight (1897) LR 2 Exch 109 at 112; The Hermione [[1922] P ] and
Thompson versus Howley (at 23-26) and Bullen and Leake, 3rd ed (1863) at 83-84, , in support of this proposition. His Honour noted these authorities had not been expressly overruled by Giannarelli. His Honour then considered that none of the policy reasons referred to in Saif Ali and in Giannarelli were offended on the facts of the case. Finally, his Honour held, at 344, that the immunity of solicitor advocates which the High Court in Giannarelli held existed was: "directed to cases where the claim against the solicitor is based on negligence [and was] not applicable to an action of breach of the duty of the solicitor as agent not to compromise litigation otherwise than in accordance with the instructions of the client." 
Mahoney JA held that the matter fell outside the rationale, identified in
Giannarelli, upon which the immunity is based, and in particular to the adverse consequences for the due administration of justice which flow from the relitigation of issues determined in court proceedings. There was no question as to the correctness of the consent order of the court, and it was not and could not be subject to collateral challenge. The sole issue was the solicitor's negligence in failing to carry an authorised compromise into effect. Waddell AJA agreed with Mahoney JA.

The extent of the solicitor-advocate's immunity was not in issue in Saif Ali or in Giannarelli. It is interesting to observe, however, that Mason CJ, when referring to the application of the immunity to a solicitor's in-court negligence, did so before determining the extent to which the immunity applied to a barrister's out-of-court work, and specifically referred only to a solicitor's in-court work. There is undoubtedly a question whether this confined reference to the solicitor's immunity was deliberate or whether it merely reflected the fact that the extent of a solicitor-advocate's immunity was not in issue. As will be seen, I do not find it necessary to resolve the dilemma, if there be one, of the potentially differing application of the immunity to barristers' and solicitors' conduct in this case. The question for resolution here is whether the immunity applies to the conduct of the barrister in this case, having regard to the test which has been laid down by
Mason CJ in Giannarelli.
 
Does the immunity apply in this case? 
Counsel for the first respondent submitted that his client's conduct fell within the immunity as the advice to obtain a medical opinion before the drafting of pleadings was relevant to the manner in which the matter was to be conducted. Thus, had the statement of claim failed to particularise adequately the injuries and disabilities, the client may have been subjected to cross examination, directed to credit, that any later alleged disability was invented. He submitted alternatively that the medical report was necessary to determine whether, having regard to the extent of injury and disabilities, a claim ought to be brought. The former submission fits into the language of the immunity, namely, the preparation of a case out of court being inextricably interwoven with preparation of the case in court. The second submission is more debatable. It is arguable that counsel's advice as to whether there is a cause of action falls within the immunity. Otherwise, counsel may be less rigorous and less independent in advising whether a client has a claim, for fear of being sued if wrong. However, if either submission were upheld, it would raise the question whether a solicitor would be liable in negligence for conduct which, if engaged in by a barrister, would give rise to the immunity.
As I have said, that question does not call for determination on this occasion. The answer to this case is to be found on a proper analysis of the conduct of the first respondent.

The first respondent's negligence was twofold. First, he advised a course of action, which if acted upon, meant that the Queensland limitation period was likely to expire before the statement of claim was drafted and filed. In giving that advice, he failed to advise that the limitation period expired on August 1980. Secondly, the first respondent advised that the "claim will obviously have to take place in Queensland". In my opinion, even if the first act of negligence was part of the "management" of the case, so as to attract the immunity, the second was not. It did not involve advice as to choice of forum for tactical reasons, such as the possibility of obtaining higher damages in one or other jurisdiction (indeed, he advised damages were lower in
Queensland than in New South Wales), or because of the availability of procedures in a particular jurisdiction which might have been thought advantageous to the client. The effect of the advice was simple. Queensland was the place where the client had to proceed. It was implicit in that advice that there was no other jurisdiction in which the claim could be brought. In my opinion it would be an artificial construct to say such advice "leads to a decision affecting the conduct of the case in court", merely because it can be said to have a connection with litigation. In my opinion, this conduct does not fall within the immunity. It neither falls within the test enunciated by
Mason CJ nor is required by any policy consideration based upon the proper and efficient administration of justice.
 # Causation 
In March versus E. & M.H. Stramare Pty Limited & Anor <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506], Mason CJ stated the principles which govern the question of causation in tort as follows: "The common law tradition is that what was the cause of a particular occurrence is a question of fact which "must be determined by applying common sense to the facts of each particular case", in the words of Lord Reid:
Stapley versus Gypsum Mines Ltd <case>; [[1953] AC ] at ." 
The trial judge held that causation had not been proved. In coming to that conclusion, his Honour stated: "It is clear that neither the first defendant nor the second defendant directed her or his mind to the limitation period applicable in Queensland nor to the availability of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in this State.
 
The advice given by the second defendant, before the Statute of Limitations expired, included the suggestion that Queensland lawyers should be retained, and this was not done.
 
At the time the first defendant was informed that the Queensland period of limitation had expired there was still ample time to commence the proceedings in New South Wales but this the first defendant did not do and does not appear to have directed her mind to." 
With respect to his Honour, this finding contains an internal inconsistency.
He found on the one hand that neither the appellant nor the first respondent turned her or his mind to the availability of an action in New South Wales. It appears from his Honour's reasons that this finding amounted to a finding of negligence. In any event, as I have said, the first respondent was negligent in that respect. His Honour then found that the client's loss was caused by the failure to commence action in New South Wales, a course still available to the client after the expiry of the Queensland limitation period. However, not only did the solicitor not know that course was available, she had, impliedly, been told such a course was unavailable - that the client's claim lay only in
Queensland. In my opinion, the first respondent's advice in this regard was a cause of the client's loss.

Counsel for both parties urged the Court to determine the percentage of contribution, should it find that causation was established. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the first respondent's contribution should be greater than 50%. Had it not been for the first respondent's advice to the effect that proceedings must be brought in Queensland, I would have been inclined to assess contribution at 50%. However, the first respondent's advice continued to operate upon the appellant's mind until February 1983, when she spoke to her client about taking action to extend time under the Queensland limitations statute. From her evidence it appears that nothing occurred thereafter to cause her to realise that advice was wrong. In my opinion, given the nature of that advice and the appellant's reliance upon it, the first respondent's contribution should be 60%.

I propose that the following orders be made:
Appeal allowed.
Judgment and order of Smyth DCJ dated 1 March 1993 be set aside.
Judgment to be entered for the appellant in the contribution proceedings in the sum of $21,000, such judgment to take effect from 1 March 1993.
The first respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and in the
Court below.
 * * * 
