

Regina versus Ronen and Ors [2005] NSWSC 320 (20 January 2005) 
Last Updated: 8 May 2005 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Regina versus Ronen & Ors <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 70222/03  /03  /03  
HEARING DATE{S):  
JUDGMENT DATE: 20/01/2005  
PARTIES: 
Regina versus Ida Ronen 
Regina versus Nitzan Ronen 
Regina versus Izhar Ronen  
JUDGMENT OF: Whealy J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Local Court  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S):  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER:  
COUNSEL: 
Mr T. Game SC; Ms S. McNaughton - Crown 
Mr R. Richter QC; Mr N.Rosenbaum - Accused Ida Ronen 
Mr I. Hill QC; Mr. E. Power - Accused Nitzan Ronen 
Mr. R. Van de Wiel QC; Mr P. Jones - Accused Izhar Ronen  
SOLICITORS: 
Ms P. Musgrave - Cth DPP 
Watsons Solicitors - Accused  
CATCHWORDS: 
Jury Act <case> 
Discharge of juror - reasons continuation of trial with less than 12 jurors  
ACTS CITED: 
Jury Act  
DECISION: 
I make an order that the remaining 10 jurors be considered as remaining for all purposes of the trial properly constituted as the jury  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
CRIMINAL LIST  
WHEALY J  
THURSDAY 20 January 2005  /03 - REGINA versus Ida RONEN  /03 - REGINA versus Nitzan RONEN  /03 - REGINA versus Izhar RONEN  
JUDGMENT - See page 638 of summing-up  HIS HONOUR: I shall proceed on the basis I have to now determine whether
I should allow the remaining jurors to be considered as remaining for all the purposes of the trial. I refer again to the principles that are set out in
R versus Wu (1999)199 CLR 99. Again, the principles are well understood and clearly expressed. I have reached the conclusion that, in the exercise of my discretion, I should make an order to allow the trial to continue with the 10 remaining jurors. First, there is no opposition to the trial continuing.
Indeed, the Crown has made the application that it should continue and counsel for the accused have consented to it continuing. Secondly, there are these significant facts: this is a trial that began in May 2004; it was hoped that it would conclude within a period of four months. It has been now nearly nine months since the jury were empanelled. It has been a very, very long trial and a complex one; but complex only in relation to its particular facts and circumstances.  Thirdly, the very complexity of the factual issues in the trial and the enormous amount of work that, no doubt, the jury have had to perform to keep abreast of these complex factual and accounting matters seems to me to be, quite apart from the length of the trial, an important matter in relation to exercising a discretion to continue on with ten jurors.  Fourthly, the trial is likely to conclude within a week or so of today's date. That is my present estimate.  On the other hand, I appreciate and take into account that an order on my part that the trial should continue will bring about a situation where the accused will have a verdict from the jury arrived at by less than twelve persons. As McHugh J said in Wu at page 107:  "For hundreds of years the common law has insisted that no person be convicted of a serious crime without the unanimous verdict of the twelve jurors. Even if one juror died or had to be discharged the common law required that the rest of the jury, be discharged, and the trial had to recommence with a new jury of twelve."  His Honour said that it does not follow if a juror dies or is discharged the trial should automatically continue with the remaining jurors and his Honour explained why that was so. His Honour also said that one reason, indeed the usual reason, for exercising the power under <case> is that the trial has proceeded for some time and that it would cause significant expense to begin again with a new jury. Having made that observation his Honour considered that in relation to particular cases there may be valid reasons nevertheless why a new jury should be empanelled.  In my view, in the wholly unusual circumstances of this trial as to its length, its complexity, its expense and the inordinate expense that would be occasioned for the community and for the accused were it to start afresh, it seems to me that I should make an order that the remaining ten jurors be considered as remaining for all purposes of the trial properly constituted as the jury.  That is the order I make and I do so bearing in my and conscious of the fact that I have already discharged one juror some months ago and made at that time an order that the trial should nevertheless continue before the then remaining eleven jurors.  
LAST UPDATED: 18/04/2005 * * * 
