

Citibank Savings Limited versus De Gouveia Matter No 12179/92 [1997] NSWSC 529 (31 October 1997) 
Citibank Savings Limited versus Jose Joao De Gouveia and Maria Gorete De Gouveia /92 October 1997 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /92 CITIBANK SAVINGS LIMITED v Jose Joao De GOUVEIA and Maria Gorete De GOUVEIA 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: By statement of claim filed 22 April 1992 the plaintiff seeks an order for possession of real estate of which the defendants are the registered proprietors and which is subject to a mortgage in favour of the plaintiff. No appearance or defence having been filed on behalf of either defendant, judgment was entered in favour of the plaintiff on 16 June 1992. By notice of motion filed on 18 September 1995 the defendants seek orders that the judgment be set aside and for leave to file a defence and cross-claim in the form of drafts annexed to the notice of motion. Those orders are opposed by the plaintiff. 
The proceedings arise out of a mortgage entered into by the defendants on 20
October 1989, the purpose of which was to secure advances made by the plaintiff to Gabriel Jose de Freitas in respect of a used car business conducted by him. The property the subject of the mortgage is the land upon which the defendants' home is built. Evidence of both defendants, and their solicitor, Mr Pinto, was put before me in affidavit form, and Mr de Gouveia and Mr Pinto gave oral evidence and were cross-examined. Mrs de Gouveia was not available for cross-examination for reasons that were explained in an affidavit sworn by Mr Pinto. Objection was taken to the reading of her affidavit but, in the exercise of my discretion and notwithstanding her unavailability, I permitted it to be read. Her unavailability, does, however, have potential impact upon the weight that can be accorded to the contents of the affidavit where the facts to which she deposes are in contest.

The defendants accept that, to succeed in their application, it is necessary that they provide a satisfactory explanation for their failure to file a defence prior to the entry of judgment, and establish that they have an arguable defence to the proceedings. Both matters are in issue.

Before proceeding to the substance of the application it is convenient to deal with an evidentiary matter. At the commencement of the hearing counsel for the respondent called on a Notice to Produce directed to the defendants requiring production of: "1. Any file notes or other records kept or maintained by J S Pinto and Co. of conferences with, instructions from and/or advice given to the defendants, J J de Gouveia and M G de Gouveia, between 1 January 1993 and 13 November 1994.
All correspondence written or received by J S Pinto and Co, solicitors for the defendants between 1 January 1993 and 30 November 1994.
Statement of claim filed in proceedings No. 20789 of 1996 in the Supreme
Court between J J de Gouveia and M G de Gouveia and Ms Jennifer Darin." 
In response to the call a claim was made on behalf of the defendants that the documents are subject to client legal privilege. That claim was promptly abandoned in relation to the document identified in paragraph 3 of the Notice to Produce, but was maintained in relation to all other material. Mr Pinto, solicitor for the defendants, had isolated a bundle of material answering the descriptions contained in paragraphs 1 and 2. He identified the material as being correspondence between himself and the defendants, or between himself and others on their behalf, file notes, and documents provided by the defendants to him. In these circumstances it was not argued that the documents fell outside the class of documents protected in the ordinary course by the principles of client legal privilege; it was argued, rather, that the privilege which otherwise would have attached to the documents had been waived. One short passage in Mr de Gouveia's affidavit was pointed to as evidence for this proposition. In recounting the history of the events concerning the mortgage and the proceedings, Mr de Gouveia deposed: "36. Sometime after this I went with my wife to Mr Pinto, a Portuguese speaking Solicitor. This was some time in 1993. Mr Pinto told us that the legal costs of proceedings to try and do something about the matter would be large and there would have to be a case with Citibank." 
With the substitution of the word "husband" where the word "wife" appears, Mrs
De Gouveia's affidavit contains an identical paragraph.

Communications between lawyer and client are protected from disclosure by, relevantly, [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s118.html) and [119](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s119.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) . [S ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) is concerned with relevant waivers of the privilege. The privilege does not apply where the substance of the evidence sought to be adduced has been "knowingly and voluntarily disclosed to another person" by the person entitled to the privilege, other than in specified circumstances none of which is presently here material. The plaintiff's argument is that, in the paragraphs extracted above from their affidavits, the defendants "knowingly and voluntarily disclosed" the substance of the evidence now sought to be adduced from the documents otherwise the subject of privilege. Reliance was placed upon the decision of O'Loughlin J in Adsteam Steamship Company versus Spalvins [(1997) ACSR 536.] That decision concerned an application to amend a statement of claim, and evidence was adduced on the part of the applicant for the purpose of explaining a substantial change in the scope of the case sought to be made. That evidence included reference, inter alia, to legal advice.
O'Loughlin J held that it was open to the defending parties to test the deponent of that affidavit on his decision making process and for that purpose he was required to produce all documents relevant to the decision making process, including those that normally would be protected by the same privilege as is here claimed.

I am unable to conclude that the contents of the de Gouveias' affidavits are in any way analogous. There is nothing in the paragraphs upon which reliance was placed that could, in my view, be seen as disclosure of the substance of the evidence or material contained in documents fitting the description given by Mr Pinto. All that was deposed to in the affidavits was general advice, or even a general comment, that legal costs would be large, and contesting the plaintiff's claim would involve litigation. These statements were almost self evident. They cannot be seen to have involved the disclosure of the contents of the documents concerned. The affidavits are, in my opinion, insufficient to bring the matter within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s122.html) . Accordingly, I upheld the claim for privilege, and rejected the argument that privilege had been waived.

Failure to File a Defence Within the Time Permitted by the Rules.

Both Mr and Mrs de Gouveia deposed to the circumstances in which they became involved with Mr de Freitas and with Citibank. They are Portuguese immigrants who came to Australia in 1977. Mr de Gouveia has been employed as a welder since that date and Mrs de Gouveia has worked as a machinist except during her two pregnancies. They have a very limited command of the English language and little sophistication in matters of business and finance. They had no independent legal advice, or indeed any legal advice, no contractual documentation of their arrangement with Mr de Freitas, and no confirmation of any entitlements or liabilities they acquired on entering into the arrangement. In short, Mr de Freitas sought the use of the plaintiff's property as security for the continuation and enlargement of a used car business conducted by himself and his son. He suggested to the defendants that, if they made their property available in this way, they would become partners and share in the profits of the business, which were represented to them as having already been substantial. They attended a solicitor's office only for the purpose of signing the relevant documents, and had no communication with the solicitor who, it seems, spoke English at all times.
All communications were through Mr John de Freitas.

During the following year the defendants agreed to the expansion of the business, and signed additional papers, again without any understanding of the liability they were incurring by doing so. In 1992 they began to receive correspondence from, presumably, the plaintiff, which they did not understand and which they immediately passed on to Mr John de Freitas. On each occasion he told them not to worry about the documents and that he would attend to the matters raised. It was not until after some time that they became concerned that all was not well, and consulted Mr Pinto in 1993. At that time they had no funds to engage a solicitor and nothing more happened, so far as they were aware, until February 1995 after which they returned to see Mr Pinto. From that point matters progressed with some expedition, with Mr Pinto applying for legal aid which was eventually granted.

In all of the circumstances I am satisfied that the defendants have advanced an adequate explanation for their failure to act at the time they should, in their best interests, have acted.

An Arguable Defence.

The defendants seek to defend the proceedings by way of a cross-claim. They seek to allege that Mr Gabriel de Freitas and Mr John de Freitas made false representations to them, and/or omitted to disclose material matters to them such as to induce them to participate in the arrangements, and that the plaintiff was or ought reasonably to have been aware that the relationship between the de Freitas' and themselves was such that the de Freitas' could be expected to exercise influence over the defendants, and had an interest in misrepresenting the nature and effect of the documents. The defendants will seek to rely upon the principles stated by the House of Lords in Barclays
Bank plc versus O'Brien <case>; [[1994] 1 AC .]
They further seek to rely upon the provisions of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) . The plaintiff contends that the evidence does not disclose even an arguable defence in this respect. Principal amongst its arguments is a reference to the evidence concerning legal representation and/or advice available to the defendants at the time of the transaction. The evidence does not make at all clear what the position in relation to legal advice was. The solicitor at whose office the documents were signed was a Ms Tina Moore of a firm known as
Moore and Associates. Ms Moore was, it was acknowledged, on the panel of solicitors retained by the plaintiff, and had acted for the plaintiff in relation to the de Freitas' in 1988, and acted again for the Bank in the re- financing transaction in 1990. She does not appear to have been acting formally for the plaintiff in the 1989 transactions. Ms Moore provided a certificate to the effect that she was a legal practitioner instructed and employed independently of the plaintiff and of Mr Gabriel de Freitas, and that the defendants appeared "to understand the true purport and effect of the third party mortgage and voluntarily executed the said third party mortgage." 
While this certificate will undoubtedly be a relevant matter in the ultimate proceedings, it is not, in my view, a conclusive rebuttal of the defence sought to be advanced by the defendants. That will centre, inter alia, around the relationship between the plaintiff and the de Freitas', and the extent, if any, to which the plaintiff may be caught by any improprieties on their part.
This is not the occasion to enquire in depth into the facts and circumstances which will be relevant to their defence of the proceeding; once it is established that the defendants have available to them an arguable defence, then it is appropriate that they be afforded the opportunity of advancing that defence. I am satisfied on the evidence before me that there is material which constitutes an arguable defence in that sense. I propose therefore to set aside the judgment entered on 16 June 1992 and grant leave to the defendants to file a defence and cross-claim in the form of the drafts annexed to the notice of motion dated 18 September 1995.

The defendants also sought an order that the proceedings be transferred to the
Equity Division but no argument was advanced in support of this claim and I make no order in that respect.

The plaintiff sought also to move on a notice of motion filed in court at the commencement of the proceedings to-day seeking leave to amend the statement of claim in accordance with a draft annexed to that notice of motion. The substance of the amendment sought is to add to the statement of claim as originally filed a further allegation in relation to the transactions which occurred subsequent to the mortgage, and involve documentation identified in the proposed amended statement of claim as "the First Supplementary Deed" and the "Second Supplementary Deed". Although the defendants opposed such leave being granted, I was told that notice of the proposal had been provided to the defendants well in advance of the hearing, and no basis was advanced on which the defendants could be shown to have been prejudiced by the passage of time between the filing of the statement of claim and the addition of the proposed new matters. It is, in my view, appropriate that all matters in issue between the parties be litigated and resolved and I propose to grant the plaintiff the leave sought.

The orders I make, therefore, are: judgment entered in favour of the plaintiff on 16 June 1992 be set aside; the defendants have leave to file a defence and cross-claim in the form of the drafts annexed to the notice of motion dated 18 September 1995; the plaintiff have leave to amend the statement of claim in accordance with the draft annexed to the plaintiff's notice of motion filed in court on October 1997.

I will hear the parties in relation to costs.
 * * * 
