

Raoc-Rac Pty Ltd versus Vbc Corrugated Packaging Pty Ltd Matter No 3794/97 [1997] NSWSC 470 (10 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
RAOC-RAC Pty Limited versus VBC Corrugated Packaging Pty Limited` ` 3794/97` `10 October 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 - RAOC-RAC PTY LIMITED versus VBC CORRUGATED PACKAGING PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a final hearing of proceedings between two companies that were in a commercial relationship, at least up until very recently. 
The defendant corporation was incorporated on 19 July 1993 and commenced trading on 15 February 1994. It was the successor to various businesses which had been carried on by Victor Atanasov and his wife, Anna. The business had been carried on under the name of Victor Boxes & Cartons from 3 October and that is doubtless from whence the letters "VBC" in the defendant's name were derived.

There was no formal transfer of any property from the individual proprietors of the predecessor business to the defendant when it commenced trading.
However, since the time it commenced trading, the assets of the former business have been used by the defendant company in its business. As the business of the defendant is controlled by Victor Atanasov, it is clear that this happened with consent. Moreover, the accounts of the company clearly show that the property in dispute, which I will itemise shortly, has been treated as an asset of the company in its accounts.

The plaintiff company was a person who provided factoring services for the defendant. At least, that is how the relationship appears to have commenced.
The defendant would send out its invoice with goods and the plaintiff would pay 95 percent of the value of the invoice and then collect the moneys from the customer in due course. This arrangement commenced about 10 January 1996.

However, shortly afterwards, the arrangements between the parties altered and expanded. By February 1996, the plaintiff was not only factoring invoices, but was also making advances to the defendant. It may be that this started because some of the invoices which were factored were fabricated so that the amount that was going to be recovered by the plaintiff from customers would not compensate it for all the money that had been paid out. However, whatever the situation was, there was an agreement in February 1996 that all the invoices would be factored to offset the amount that had been advanced. This agreement continued through to, at least, 30 June 1997.

Apart from the initial factoring agreement of 10 January 1996, the parties entered into a deed of charge of 1 April 1996, which charge was duly registered with the appropriate authority. By that deed, the defendant charged all its future and present rights, property and undertaking to the plaintiff.
The charge was in respect of what was defined as "secured money", namely, "All debts and liabilities of the Chargor to the Chargee irrespective of whether the debts or liabilities are present, future, actual, prospective, contingent or otherwise..." (there then follows another page and a half of possibilities).

The charge under clause 3 was a fixed charge of all present and future interests in fixtures, buildings, plant and equipment and a floating charge on the balance of the charged property.

The deed provided in clause 9 for events of default. One was 9.1(d), if the defendant "fails to comply with any of its obligations under any agreement or document between" the defendant and the plaintiff. If such a default occurred, then the plaintiff, at its option, would be entitled to have paid to it the secured money and, under clause 10, to appoint a receiver and under clause 11, inter alia, to obtain possession of the charged property.

Mr Bennett, the controller of the plaintiff says that on 19 July 1997 he received a facsimile from his assistant when he was in the United States and telephoned Victor Atanasov. He put to Mr Atanasov that the latter was now doing his own business and was not involved with the plaintiff company and he was told that indeed the defendant was doing its own thing re invoicing and as far as the financial side of things was concerned. That conversation was not denied by Mr Atanasov in par 31 of his affidavit of 9 September 1997, though he said there was more to the conversation, in which Mr Bennett had said: "... If that is the way you want it, have $800,000 ready when I get back on 28
July." 
The initial time for repayment of the moneys that were secured under the charge was 28 July 1997 but that was extended through to 15 August 1997.
However, after that date, when the moneys secured were not paid, the plaintiff demanded possession.

The answer to the plaintiff's claim appears to be threefold: that the plaintiff was not able to establish the amount of the moneys secured by the charge; that the plaintiff had not shown a default; and that, in any event, five of the most expensive items, which the plaintiff claimed were covered by the charge, were not property of the defendant but are property of Mr and Mrs Atanasov personally.

The matter I have listed under (c) was made the subject of a cross claim. That is of little moment because the plaintiff amended its summons to ask for a reverse declaration that the property was the property of the company and subject to the charge.

The facts clearly are that the arrangement between the parties developed from where I described it earlier. It developed to the stage where not only was the plaintiff receiving invoices from the defendant but the plaintiff was actually preparing the invoices using delivery dockets and other material which had been generated by the defendant. The plaintiff was virtually keeping all of the books and records, though these were being audited in a fashion by the defendant company's accountants. Moreover, not only was there factoring of invoices, but there were cash advances made not only to some members of the
Atanasov family but also to pay the rent and to pay other creditors and legal bills. So there were actually two flows of money from the plaintiff to the defendant, one in its factoring division and one from its lending division, each coming from different cheque books.

There is some force in what is said by Mr Strong for the defendant, that the actual amount of what was paid by the plaintiff to or for the defendant on the material before the Court is not particularly reliable. However, even if I did, as Mr Strong invites me to do, discount material, particularly the material in exhibit PX05, as unreliable and confusing, there is not the slightest doubt at all that considerable moneys are owing by the defendant to the plaintiff. That being so, there are moneys secured by the charge and the plaintiff is entitled to demand their repayment. There does not have to be a demand under clause 9 for a precise amount. If the only matter between the parties was some dispute as to the exact amount and the defendant was willing to pay the minimum amount that was obviously due and litigate, arbitrate or mediate on the balance, the case might be in a different plight. There is no such suggestion and, accordingly, it is sufficient that I find that there are some moneys secured.

So far as default is concerned, Mr McKeand for the plaintiff took me through the evidence as to the triggering event. Although a figure of $30,000 was floated as the possible amount of invoices which had not been factored through the plaintiff, there was no satisfactory evidence as to how much by way of invoices were not factored. Again this does not really make any difference to the result of the case. The evidence is that it was a term of the agreement that all invoices should be factored and since 1 July the defendant has been doing its own thing. Accordingly the default is established.

The evidence is that there are eight significant pieces of equipment, which are used in the business. Three of these - a trestle/printer slotter, a die cutter and a wrapping machine - are not really in issue. It may be that the first of these is held by the company under a lease. The total value of those three machines appears to be no more than $66,000. However, the other five machines, the five that are mentioned in the cross claim, are claimed by the defendant as being the personal property of Mr and Mrs Atanasov. These five machines are described in the cross-claim as: a Gherardi Corrugator; a Folder/Glue Machine; a Simon Hooper Printer/Slitter machine; a Semi-Automatic gluer; and a Semi-Automatic Slitter.

There is some evidence, which I accept, that the Gherardi corrugator was purchased from the United Kingdom for 150,000 pounds sterling in June 1993. As the defendant company was not incorporated in June 1993 and did not commence business until February 1994, Mr Atanasov says it is obvious that the machine could not have been purchased by the defendant company. One would have to agree. Mr McKeand, however, puts that the registration of the company the following month shows that the company was at that stage being set up to commence business and it is quite a real probability that the corrugator was being purchased for the company and would be assumed by the company. I really do not need to pursue that thought.

It would seem that the corrugator, which is the most expensive piece of equipment and which is in the strongest position of all five items, was the property of Mr Atanasov, or perhaps his wife as well. But what has happened since shows that there has been a transfer of the asset to the company. Apart from the fact that it has been used by the company, with the consent of Mr and
Mrs Atanasov since the company's formation, it has been continually on the company's premises. There is no evidence of any rental payments being paid for the use of the machine. It is in the company's accounts as an asset of the company and in common law litigation between NewStart 97 Pty Limited and Mr and Mrs Atanasov, they claimed that the property was the company's. All these factors show that, more likely than not, the property set out in the cross claim is the property of the company. Apart from the date of purchase, there is nothing of any great moment the other way. It is also, accordingly, property covered by the charge.

The next question is what relief to give to the plaintiff. It would seem, reading between the lines, that the eight chattels that I have mentioned are virtually the only property of the defendant. It has also been, at least suggested to me in submissions that the defendant has been excluded from its premises where the property is because it cannot pay the rent. There may be other persons who have interests in the property, because there is evidence that a financier, which is not a party to the present proceedings, has a fixed charge over the corrugator, which may well rank in priority to the plaintiff's charge. However, no defence of ius tertii has been raised. Notwithstanding this, I have to be careful in framing the orders, so that no non-party to the litigation is prejudiced by the orders.

Although the Court should not deal with only part of a dispute and should make orders which resolve the whole of the questions between the parties in the one piece of litigation, it is not always possible to do that at the one time. I think the present is a case of that nature. I believe the appropriate thing to do is to make some declarations and injunctions, dispose of the cross claim and then reserve further consideration with the matter to come back into the list on some notional day, unless the parties restore it to the list earlier.

Accordingly, the Court makes declaration 2(a) in the amended summons. The
Court also makes declaration 1B in the piece of paper, which I will mark MI
The Court orders that the defendant, by itself, its servants or agents, be restrained from interfering with the rights of the plaintiff in respect of the property referred to in declaration 2(a). The Court reserves further consideration generally. The cross claim is dismissed with costs against the cross claimants. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings to date (other than the cross claim) and the matter is stood over for mention on 4 May 1998 before the Registrar at 9.30 am with liberty to restore on five days' notice. The exhibits may be retained pending further order.
 * * * 
