

Dalkeith Olde Pty Limited versus Robert Holmes (Transport) Pty Limited Matter
No 11137/97 [1998] NSWSC 197 (18 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
DALKEITH OLDE PTY LIMITED versus ROBERT HOLMES (TRANSPORT) PTY LIMITED /97 February 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 30 July 1996, Stevenson LCM delivered judgment on a claim brought by Robert Holmes (Transport) Pty Limited (the defendant) against Dalkeith Olde Pty Limited (the plaintiff). The defendant had brought a claim for damages against the plaintiff founded on negligence. The claim arose out of a collision between a truck owned by the defendant and some cattle owned by the plaintiff that took place on Dubbo Road near Cassilis. The cattle had escaped through a hole in a fence separating a paddock owned by the plaintiff and a travelling stock reserve. The fence was of a type known as a flood curtain. The reserve was located adjacent to Dubbo Road. The claim was for property damage. The defendant obtained judgment in the sum of $13,145.99. 
A Stated Case was signed on 2 April 1997. These proceedings were commenced by
Summons filed on 16 April 1997. The plaintiff seeks to disturb the decision made by the Learned Magistrate.

I shall briefly refer to the contents of the Stated Case. Paragraph 1 sets out the Determination. Paragraph 2 sets out the Facts found by the Learned
Magistrate. Paragraph 3 sets out the Grounds For Determination. Paragraph 4 sets out the Appellant's Contentions.

Apart from the Stated Case, the Court has had the material which comprises the affidavit of Felicity Lisa Gowing placed before it.

At the outset, it may be helpful to make some brief comment concerning the remedy pursued by the plaintiff. The authorities make it clear that the remedy of case stated provides a limited avenue of appeal. The Court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law and only such questions of law as are submitted to it (Allen versus Kerr & Anor [(1995) Aust Torts Reports -354] and The Australian Gas Light Company versus The Valuer-
General <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 126).]
The matter of what is a question of law (as opposed to a question of fact) was considered, inter alia, in Allen and Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] at 155-156. The facts stated are to be taken as the ultimate facts for whatever purpose the case is stated (Press versus Mathers <case>; [(1927) VLR 326] at p 330).

The questions which came before the Learned Magistrate were those of existence of a duty of care, breach of any such duty and contributory negligence. The defendant was successful on each of these questions. The parties had reached agreement as to the quantum of the claim. Despite the modest amount involved, the hearing occupied some four days.

The Stated Case contains a large number of contentions. The plaintiff seeks to disturb the decisions made on the questions of negligence and contributory negligence. I should mention that it does now accept that the decision as to the existence of a duty of care was open to the Learned Magistrate.

It is not necessary to embark on a detailed recitation of the contentions.
Broadly speaking, it was said that the errors of law fell into the categories of failing to apply the law of negligence to the facts and making findings which had no evidentiary basis. Certain alleged erroneous findings of fact were identified.

The defendant took issue with these arguments. It was said that the alleged errors were in reality only questions of fact. The defendant's ultimate position was that the decisions of the Learned Magistrate could not be disturbed because they were open to her on the evidence.

I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has demonstrated error in the fact finding process. In any event, if a different view was taken, I am not satisfied that any error would justify a disturbing of her decisions.

There has been criticism of the judgment. The elegance of the expressions used and the appropriateness of terminology received mention (for example, the
Learned Magistrate used the expression, "The defendant was negligent as to his duty of care"). In proceedings of this nature, the Court looks to the substance of what is sought to be expressed in the judgment. It seems to me that the substance of what the Learned Magistrate had in mind was sufficiently clear.

This case has been argued at some length. Counsel has referred the Court to various authorities (the plaintiff placed much stress on what was said by
Mahoney JA (as he then was) in Brown versus Toohey [(1994) 35 NSWLR 417] at 425).
The Court has been extensively appraised of the relevant evidence.

In my view, it is unnecessary to embark on a process of further canvassing these matters. It seems to me that the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate any error of law.

This is a case where other minds may have reached a different result (particularly on the question of contributory negligence). However, be that as it may, in my view the decisions that she reached were open to her on the evidence. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has shown an entitlement to have those decisions disturbed.

I affirm the determination in respect of which the case was stated. I dismiss the Summons. The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs.
 * * * 
