

Allen versus Kerr and Anor Nos: Ca 40691/94; Cl 11500/94 Appeal - Practice and
Procedure [1995] NSWSC 46 (25 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CLARKE JA(1), MEAGHER JA(2) AND POWELL JA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 25 May 1995 #DATE 7:8:1995 #ADD 25:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant     M. P. McCulloch 
Solicitors for the Appellant    Clayton
Utz 
Counsel for the Respondent     D. Campbell 
Solicitors for the Respondent   Leitch Hasson and Dent
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
CLARKE JA I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Powell JA, in draft form, in which the relevant facts appear. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with the broad thrust of his Honour's observations on the stated case procedure adopted by the unsuccessful party before the learned magistrate. I wish however to express, shortly, the reasons which lead me to the ultimate conclusion.
Although the learned magistrate said that he was considering the submission of "no case to answer" he considered and determined a number of factual questions. Whether he was proceeding under r5 or r6 of [Pt 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lccr1988299/index.html#p21) of the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Rules 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lccr1988299/) was not made clear. An alternative view is that, in substance, the magistrate was deciding whether he was prepared to find on the evidence that the respondent had established his cause of action.
The matter is not at all clear and arguments could be put which support each of the views. Two things are, however, plain. First, no complaint was made about the procedure followed by the
Magistrate and, secondly, having posed and answered a number of factual questions, he entered a verdict for the defendant (appellant).
In these circumstances the grounds on which the plaintiff (respondent) could appeal were strictly limited. It was not open to him to argue that the ultimate factual conclusions were wrong. He could do that only if an appeal lay on questions of fact, and it is clear that it did not. He was limited to errors of law, if any, which underlay the factual finding. Such errors may occur where, for instance, there is no evidence to support a finding, where a tribunal has misdirected itself on the legal principles applicable or where the primary facts found are necessarily within or outside a statutory description and a contrary finding has been made (see
McPhee versus S Bennett Ltd [(1935) 52 WN 8] at 155-6).
The grounds of appeal appearing in the stated case asserted that the learned magistrate erred in law in finding that the defendant (appellant) did not owe a duty of care to the respondent and in concluding that the damage was not reasonably foreseeable. During the hearing before Donovan AJ the plaintiff was given leave to argue that the magistrate erred in law in holding that there was no evidence of negligence.
Of the three questions it is only the last which raised an issue of law.
The question whether a duty of care existed in the circumstances depended upon an examination of two factual questions, viz.
proximity and forseeability (see
Shirt versus Wyong Shire Council [(1978) 1 NSWLR 631] at 639) and it is clear from both the magistrate's judgment, and the stated case, that the magistrate decided those factual issues against the plaintiff (respondent). In the circumstances in order for this plaintiff (respondent) to succeed he had to establish the existence of a legal error which underlay those findings. If he had shown that the findings were based on an erroneous legal test it would have been necessary for the judge to return the proceedings to the Local Court for the factual determinations to be made in accordance with the correct legal test.
The respondent, however, neither asserted, nor established the existence of a legal error underlying the magistrate's factual conclusions. He asserted only two errors of fact and his appeal on those grounds should have failed.
Unfortunately Donovan AJ embarked on a wide ranging enquiry into the law of negligence and ended up deciding the factual questions posed by the stated case. Such a course was not, in my opinion, open to him and his judgment cannot stand.
The only possible error of law was the magistrate's finding (as expressed in the state case) that there was no evidence of negligence. A finding that there is evidence of negligence when in fact there is none, and vice versa, does, or may, involve a question of law.
However an assertion in a stated case that the magistrate erred in law in concluding that there was no evidence of negligence requires, obviously enough, that the appellate court examine the evidence to determine whether there was evidence on which a finding of negligence could, as a matter of law, be made.
The transcript in this case was not appended to the stated case and it is questionable whether it was ever properly before Donovan AJ. It is not necessary, in my opinion, to examine this nice question for the judgment of the magistrate, which was before the judge, made it quite clear that the learned magistrate made a factual finding that no breach of duty had been established.
This finding was readily open to him and no basis appears, either in
Donovan
AJ's judgment or in the argument before this Court, for concluding that it was tainted by error of law. In these circumstances there is little point in examining the theoretical question whether there was evidence on which the magistrate could have found a breach of duty.
It is for these reasons that I agree with the orders proposed by Powell
A.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA I agree with Powell
JA.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA This is an Appeal from a Judgment delivered by Donovan AJ on 4th
November 1994 when dealing with a case stated, at the request of the First
Respondent ("Mr. Kerr"), by Magistrate R.A. Sterland who, when sitting as a
Local Court at Queanbeyan, had dismissed an action brought by Mr. Kerr against the Appellant ("Mr. Allen") seeking to recover against Mr. Allen damages which he claimed to have sustained as the result of what he asserted was negligence on the part of Mr. Allen.
At the outset, it is to be noted that, so far as is relevant to the present Appeal, the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/) provides: - "69. (1) Subject to subsection (2), all judgments and orders of a court exercising jurisdiction under this Act shall be final and conclusive.

A party to proceedings under this Act who is dissatisfied with the judgment or order of the court as being erroneous in point of law, may appeal to the Supreme Court therefrom.

The provisions of section to section 115, both sections inclusive, of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), apply, to the extent to which they are applicable, to appeals under subsection (2) in the same way as they apply to appeals to the Supreme Court under those provisions. "
So far as is relevant to the present Appeal, the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) provides as follows: "[Part 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/index.html#p5) Appeal and Review 
Division 1 - Stated Case to Supreme Court
Any party to the proceedings, if dissatisfied with the determination by any Justice or Justices in the exercise of their summary jurisdiction of any information or complaint as being erroneous in point of law may, within 35 days (or such longer period as may be fixed under section 102A (1) in respect of the party) after such determination, apply in writing to the said Justice of Justices to state and sign a case, setting forth the facts and grounds of such determination for the opinion thereon of the Supreme Court.
 ...
The
Court shall hear and determine the question or questions of law arising on such case; and shall: reverse, affirm, or amend the determination in respect of which the case was stated; or remit the matter to the Justice or Justices with the opinion of the Court thereon; or make such other order in relation to the matter as seems fit: 
Provided that the Court may cause the case to be sent back for amendment, and thereupon it shall be amended accordingly, and judgment shall be delivered after it has been so amended.
 ...
Subject to this Act, the practice and proceedings in reference to the stating of cases as herein provided shall be as provided by rules of the Supreme Court made under the [Supreme
Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/)." [Part 32](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p32) of the [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/), so far as is relevant to the present Appeal, provides as follows: - "Division 1 - External Stated Cases (1) Proceedings in the Court on a stated case shall be commenced by summons claiming the decision or determination of the questions and matters stated for decision or determination in the stated case.

The plaintiff shall file and serve the stated case with the summons.
 ...

Division 2 - Stated Cases Generally ...
A stated case shall - be divided into paragraphs numbered consecutively; state concisely the facts and documents necessary to enable the Court to decide the questions arising or otherwise to hear and determine the proceedings on the stated case; and state the questions and matters to be decided or determined.
 ...
The Court may draw inferences from the facts and documents stated in a stated case.
Where it appears to the Court that a stated case does not state the facts and documents sufficiently to enable the
Court to decide the questions arising or otherwise to hear and determine the proceedings on the stated case, the Court may -
with the consent of all parties interested, add to or otherwise alter the stated case; send the stated case back to the Division or court in which it is stated or to the judge, justice or person by whom it is stated for the purpose of addition or other alterations; or receive evidence, make findings of fact, and add to the stated case in accordance with the findings of fact of the
Court.
 ...

Division 3 - Cases Stated by Justice ...
Within 28 days after the expiration of the time limited under [section 101(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s101.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) for making an application under that subsection, the appellant shall serve the draft case upon the clerk of the court at which the determination was made and upon the respondent.

A copy of any record of evidence need not be annexed to the draft case.
 ...
...

The appellant shall commence proceedings on the case by filing with the case a summons claiming the decision or determination of the questions and matters stated for decision or determination in the case.
As will be apparent from what I have recorded above, the right of appeal granted by the provisions of [s.69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s69.html) of the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/) is limited, and does not permit the Supreme Court to correct errors of fact, it following that any ground of appeal, however dressed up, which seeks to have the Supreme Court correct an alleged error of fact does not disclose a valid ground of appeal - since it discloses no error of law - and, thus, must be rejected (see, for example, Azzopardi v. Tasman UEB Industries Limited (1) [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139).]
Although the Appeal papers do not contain the original pleadings, the form of the case which was stated by Magistrate Sterland makes it clear enough, that, in the proceedings which were heard by Magistrate Sterland, Mr. Kerr sought to recover damages from
Mr. Allen in respect of the damages which he claimed to have suffered by reason of the alleged negligence of Mr. Allen. The factual basis upon which Mr. Kerr sought to rely to support that allegation of negligence on the part of Mr. Allen - which factual basis appears, in any event, not to have been established in full at the hearing would appear to have been as follows: - at all material times, Mr. Kerr was the owner of a cottage property known as 6 Beasley Street, Captains Flat, of which property the Third Party ("Mr.
Winbank") was tenant, and in which property Mr. Winbank and, at the least, his child, Troy, aged 3 years, lived; at all material times, Mr. Allen, together with, at the least, his two children, Isaac ("Zac") aged 5 years, and Tobias ("Toby") aged 3 years, lived in a residential property known as 185 Foxlow Street, Captains Flat, which property was located at a distance of about 100 yards from the property at 6
Beasley Street, Captains Flat; that, on 31 August 1992, Mr. Winbank left Troy with Mr. Allen at the latter's home at Foxlow Street while he, Mr. Winbank, "went into town"; that, while Troy was at Mr. Allen's home, Mr. Allen failed adequately to supervise Troy, Zac and Toby in consequence of which failure Troy, Zac and
Toby were able to leave the home and went to the property at Beasley Street where, as a result of Toby playing with matches near a lounge chair in the premises, a fire was started and damage was caused to the property.
The proceedings came on for hearing before Magistrate Sterland at
Queanbeyan on 3rd February 1994, at which time Ms. W.S. Strathdee of counsel appeared for Mr. Kerr, Mr. M.P. McCulloch of counsel appeared for
Mr. Allen, while Mr. Winbank's solicitor, Mr. P.A. Moon, appeared for him.
Such difficulties as there are in determining the proper resolution of this Appeal arise, in the first instance, from what appears to have been a somewhat irregular course taken on the hearing, a failure of the parties legal representatives fully to understand the rules governing the practice to be followed on the hearing of a proceeding in the Local Court, and a degree of looseness of language on the part of those involved at the hearing.
The difficulties to which those matters contributed have since been compounded by a failure on the part of those involved fully to comprehend what are the limitations upon an appeal by way of case stated, and what are the rules and practice to be followed in relation to the prosecution of an the hearing of such an appeal.
Before proceeding to demonstrate that this was so, I should record that [Part 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/index.html#p21) rr 5, 6 of the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Rules 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lccr1988299/), which rules were introduced into the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Rules 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lccr1988299/) as on and from th April 1990, were in the following terms: - "5 (1) The court, on the application of the plaintiff in any action, may, at any time before judgment is given, make an order, on terms, for the dismissal of the action so far as concerns any cause of action on which the action is brought.

Where the plaintiff is the beginning party and no judgment has been given, a defendant may, at any time after the conclusion of the evidence in the plaintiff's case in chief, move for an order for the dismissal of the plaintiff's action, or of the action so far as concerns any cause of action on which the plaintiff claims against that defendant, on the ground that, on the evidence given, a judgment for the plaintiff could not be supported.

The plaintiff may decline to argue the question raised by a defendant's motion.

Unless the plaintiff declines to argue the question so raised, the court shall, if the ground of the defendant's motion is established, make an order for the dismissal of the plaintiff's action, or of the action so far as concerns the cause of action in question, as the nature of the case requires.

If the plaintiff declines to argue the question, or if the defendant's motion is refused, the defendant may adduce evidence or further evidence or may make an application for judgment under rule 6.
 
If the court makes an order for the dismissal of the plaintiff's action, or of the action so far as concerns a cause of action, the plaintiff shall pay the defendant's costs of the action, or of the action so far as concerns the cause of action in question, as the case may be.

If fewer than all defendants move the court under this rule, the court shall not entertain the motion before the conclusion of the evidence given for all parties.
 (1) This rule applies to the hearing of an action.

An opposite party may: after the conclusion of the evidence in the beginning party's case in chief; or after the conclusion of the evidence given for all parties, move the court for judgment for that opposite party in the action generally, or on any claim for relief in the action, on the ground that, on the evidence given, a judgment for the beginning party could not be supported.
 
If the ground of an opposite party's motion is established, the court shall give judgment for the opposite party accordingly.

If an opposite party moves the court under this rule, that party may not adduce evidence or further evidence in the action generally (where the motion is for judgment in the action generally) or on the claim for relief in question (where the motion is for judgment in the action on a particular claim).

If fewer than all opposite parties move the court under this rule, the court shall not entertain the motion before the conclusion of the evidence given for all parties."
Even a cursory reading of rr 5 and 6 would indicate that they have their origins, either directly or indirectly, in the provisions of [Part 34](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lccr1988299/index.html#p34) rr 7, 8 of the [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/), the former of which rules was intended to replace the former procedure whereby a defendant might apply for a nonsuit, and the latter of which was intended to replace the former practice of a defendant moving for judgment or applying for a verdict by direction.
So far as one can judge it from such material as is properly before the
Court on the hearing of this Appeal, it had, either, been agreed between Ms.
Strathdee and Mr. McCulloch that such evidence as was available to Mr. Kerr to seek to establish liability on the part of Mr. Allen would be led, at the conclusion of which Magistrate Sterland would be invited to hear submissions as to whether or not that evidence was capable of establishing liability in
Mr. Allen, or, alternatively, Mr. McCulloch acquiesced in that course being adopted. Be that as it may, it seems clearly to be the fact that, after there had been tendered the oral evidence of
Constable Sweeney - a local Police officer who had attended the property at Beasley Street after the fire - and a formal statement which had been prepared by Constable Sweeney - part only of which statement was admitted into evidence, because of objections taken by Mr.
McCulloch to its tender - Magistrate Sterland then entertained a submission of "no case to answer" which was made by Mr. McCulloch.
After hearing the submissions advanced by Mr. McCulloch and Ms. Strathdee on the application - Mr. Moon not offering any submission
Magistrate Sterland then delivered a Judgment which concluded as follows: "I am of the opinion therefore that there is in this case no duty of care, that even if there was (sic) the damage was not reasonably foreseeable, and even if there was there's no breach of it.

For those reasons there will be a verdict in favour of the defendant."
After hearing further submissions, Magistrate Sterland then indicated that there would be a verdict for Mr. Winbank on the Third Party Claim which
Mr.
Allen had raised against him, and for Mr. Allen on the Cross-Claim which
Mr. Winbank had raised against him, and then ordered that
Mr. Kerr pay the costs of Mr. Allen and Mr. Winbank in the sums which he then assessed.
Despite the fact that, in his Judgment, which was tendered on the hearing of the Stated Case, and in the Stated Case itself, Magistrate Sterland referred to the application which he had entertained as a "no case to answer submission", the facts that, at the conclusion of his Judgment he found, and that, in the case which he was later to state, he referred to his determination as, a verdict, indicates to me that Magistrate Sterland proceeded upon the basis that the application which was made to him was an application made pursuant to r 6, rather than r 5, of the [Part 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lccr1988299/index.html#p21) of the [Local
Courts (Civil Claims) Rules 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lccr1988299/). Nor should it be regarded as entirely surprising that this was so, for, as has been pointed out, a submission of "no case to answer" in civil proceedings is not altogether satisfactory (see, for example, Tate versus Johnson ((2) (1953) 53 SR 492, 494), as it comprehends, both, a submission that the evidence is insufficient in law, and also, that the evidence is so unsatisfactory that the court should not act upon it (see, for example, Yuill v. Yuill ((3) [(1945) P 15)], 244).
The case which, at the request of Mr. Kerr, Magistrate Sterland was later to state was in the following form: " STATED CASE
DETERMINATION i Verdict for the Defendant in the claim and the Defendant on the Third Party's Cross-Claim.
ii Verdict for the Third Party on the Third Party Notice.
iii Plaintiff to pay Defendant's costs of $4,000.00 iv Plaintiff to pay Third Party's costs of $800.00
FACTS 
The Plaintiff at all relevant times was the owner of the premises known as 6 Beasley Street, Captains Flat.

The Defendant was a neighbour residing at 185 Foxlow Street,
Captains Flat, about 100 yards distance from Beasley Street.

The Third Party was the tenant of the Plaintiff of No. 6 Beasley
Street, Captains Flat.

On 31st August 1992 the Third Party and the Defendant agreed between themselves that the Defendant would mind the Third
Party's child (Troy - aged three years) at the Defendant's premises whilst the Third Party went into town.

The Defendant also had two children, Tobias aged three years, and Isaac aged five years. The three children were left unattended for a time at the Defendant's home.

That afternoon a fire occurred at 6 Beasley Street, causing substantial property damage.

The Plaintiff alleges that the fire was caused by one (or more) of the children playing with matches whilst unsupervised.

There is no direct evidence that the children were involved in the fire. There are no witnesses, and no admissible physical evidence.

The only evidence implicating the children was obtained by
Constable Sweeney of the Captains Flat Police.
Certain admissions were obtained from the children who answered questions with nods and shakes of the head, to the effect that Tobias was playing with matches near a lounge chair in the premises, thereby starting a fire.
 
The children are too young to be called as reliable witnesses, and were not in fact called.

In my opinion the evidence implicating the children is very thin.

Counsel for the Defendant submitted 'no case to answer' which was resisted by Counsel for the Plaintiff.

For the purposes of the 'no case to answer' submission I held that there was some evidence, however slight, that the children were responsible for the fire. In this respect I relied on the case of Hampton Court and Crooks (1957) 94 C.L.R. and especially the dictum of Dixon, CJ. at p.371.

I held that there was no case to answer on the following grounds:
GROUNDS
FOR DETERMINATION 
I held that in the circumstances there was no duty of care owed by the Defendant to the Plaintiff, for the reason that there was insufficient degree of proximity between the Plaintiff and the Defendant so as to give rise to that duty.

I also held that the damage occasioned was not reasonably foreseeable to the Defendant.

I also held that there was no evidence of negligence on the part of the Defendant.
APPELLANTS CONTENTION 
The Appellant contends that my determination was erroneous in point of law upon the following grounds: i Having heard the evidence and deciding that the damage to the
Plaintiff's property was caused by children supervised by the
Defendant there was an error in law in finding that the
Defendant did not owe a duty of care to the Plaintiff.
ii That the damage caused was not reasonably foreseeable.
The matter to be determined by the Court is whether my determination was erroneous in point on law." .
We were informed that, although, in accordance with the practice provided for in the Rules of Court (Supreme Court Rules 1970 Part r 13) a draft of the case was prepared by Mr. Kerr's advisers and submitted to Magistrate
Sterland to be settled, and although the case otherwise conformed to that draft, paragraph 3(3) of the case, as settled, did not appear in the draft, but was included by Magistrate Sterland in the case as settled. Despite the addition of that paragraph, and despite its form, neither the transcript of evidence taken, nor the statement of Constable Sweeney which was tendered, on the hearing before Magistrate Sterland, was appended the case, nor, so it would seem, was any application made to Magistrate Sterland, at the time of his settling the case, to extend the grounds upon which Mr. Kerr would wish to submit that Magistrate Sterland's determination was in error in point of law - the absence from the case of the transcript of evidence and the statement of
Constable Sweeney would tend to indicate that those advising
Mr. Kerr did not consider them to be relevant to the case (Supreme Court Rules 1970 Part 32 r ), while the absence of any contention directed to paragraph 3(3) would tend to indicate that those advising Mr. Kerr read that paragraph as indicating no more than that, even if a duty of care had been established, there was no evidence to indicate that Mr. Allen had failed to comply with it.
 .
The form of the Stated Case and, in particular, of the grounds of determination recorded therein and the contentions sought to be raised in respect thereof make it appropriate to return, once more, to the nature of an appeal by way of Case Stated.
As will be apparent from what I have earlier recorded, this Court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law, and only such questions of law as are submitted to it. The principles to be borne in mind, and the rules to be applied in cases in which an appellate tribunal has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law, were collected and discussed by Jordan CJ in
The Australian Gaslight Company v. Valuer Genera1 ((5.) (1940) 40 SR ,137-8). For present purposes, it is sufficient to record that those principles, and those rules, include the following: - 
A finding of fact by a tribunal of fact cannot be disturbed: if them is evidence capable of supporting the finding of fact; or if the facts inferred by the Tribunal, upon which the finding of fact is based, are capable of supporting its finding, and there is evidence capable of supporting its inferences;
Such a finding can only be disturbed: if them is no evidence to support a finding of fact; or
If them is no evidence to support the facts inferred by it; or if the facts inferred by it and supported by evidence are incapable of justifying the finding of fact based upon those inferences; or if it has misdirected itself in law - 
Thus, if the ultimate question to be determined is whether or not the facts necessarily fall within the description of a word or phase in a statue, or necessarily outside that description, a contrary decision is wrong in law."
The significance of these principles, and rules, in the present case, lies in the following: - as the High Court has most recently reaffirmed (see Bryan v. Maloney ((6) [(1994-1995) 128 CLR 163], 165): - "... A duty of care arises under the common law of negligence of this country only where there exists a relationship of proximity between the parties with respect to both the relevant class of act or omission and the relevant kind of damage.
In more settled areas of the law of negligence concerned with ordinary physical injury to person or property of a plaintiff caused by some act of the defendant, reasonable foreseeability of such injury will commonly suffice to establish that the facts fall into a category which has already been recognised as involving a relationship of proximity between the parties with respect to such an act and such damage and as attracting a duty of care the scope of which is settled'." in McHale v. Watson ((7) <case>; [(1964) 111 CLR 384], 397) Windeyer J, after referring to what was said by Lord Macmillan in Glasgow Corporation v. Muir ((8) <case>; [(1943) AC 448], 457) with reference to the standard of foresight demanded of a reasonable man, continued: - "That is the question I have to determine. It is a question of fact, a jury question, not a question of law. I have not to determine it by regarding the facts of other cases, but by regarding all the circumstances of this case." if, therefore, in a case such as this, the existence of a duty of care on the part of Mr. Allen to Mr. Kerr depended upon whether or not damage to Mr.
Kerr's property was reasonably foreseeable by Mr. Allen, and if forseeability is a question of fact, then it would seem that a finding that, in all the circumstances,
Mr. Allen owed no duty of care to Mr. Kerr was itself a question of fact; further, as it seems to me, a finding that "there was no evidence of negligence on the part of the defendant" - in the sense that, assuming a duty of care on the part of Mr. Allen to Mr. Kerr, there was no evidence that Mr.
Allen had failed to discharge that duty - seems also to involve but a finding of fact.
That this is so is suggested by the following passage in the Judgment of Mason J (as he then was) in Wyong Shire Council v. Shirt ((9) <case>; [(1979-1980) CLR 40], 47-48): - "In deciding whether there has been a breach of the duty of care a tribunal of fact must first ask itself whether a reasonable man in the defendant's position would have foreseen that his conduct involved a risk of injury to the plaintiff or to a class of persons including the plaintiff. If the answer be in the affirmative, It is then for the tribunal of fact to determine what a reasonable man would do by way of response to the risk.
The perception of the reasonable man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude of the risk of the risk and the degree of probability of its occurrence, along with the expense, difficulty an inconvenience of taking alleviating action and any other conflicting responsibilities which the defendant may have. It is only when these matters are balanced out that the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what is the standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the defendant's position." if what I have written above be a correct assessment of the position, then, as it seems to me, the case stated no question of law for the opinion of the Court - that fact, however, so it would seem, would not have justified Magistrate Sterland declining to state the case (see, for example, Ex parte
Henderson ((10) [(1925) 42 WN 72)]; Ex parte Greenwell, re
Williams ((11) (1964) 81 WN Pt 1 (39)).
Despite the provisions of the Rules of Court (Part 32 r 2(1), 18(3)) as to the relief to be prayed in a Summons relating to a Case Stated, the Summons which,on the 24th June 1994, was filed on behalf of Mr. Kerr prayed the following - not entirely comprehensible - relief: - "1. An order that the Magistrate erred in law in finding that the defendant did not owe a duty of care to the plaintiff.
An order that the Magistrate erred in law in finding that the damage caused was not reasonably foreseeable.
The matter be remitted to the Magistrate to hear the matter in accordance with the law or alternatively that this Honourable
Court substitute the Magistrate's finding for this Honourable
Court's finding (sic).
Costs of the Stated Case together with that of the Local
Court hearing.
Such further or other orders as the Court deems fit."
The Summons came on for hearing before Donovan AJ on 20 July and continued on 22 and 28 July 1994, on which latter date His Honour reserved
Judgment.
The Judgment which His Honour was to deliver on 4th November 1994, in my view, serves to confirm what I have said earlier (see p. 6 (above)) namely, that the difficulties which were caused by the somewhat irregular course taken on the hearing before Magistrate Sterland, the failure of the parties' legal representatives fully to understand the rules governing the practice to be followed on the hearing, and the degree of looseness of language on the part of those involved at the hearing, were thereafter compounded by the failure on the part of those involved fully to comprehend what are the limitations upon an appeal by way of case stated, and what the rules and practice to be followed in relation to the prosecution of the hearing of such an appeal.
The first departure from regularity appears to have occurred at the outset of the hearing. As recorded in Donovan AJ's Judgment, what occurred was as follows: - "At the start of the proceedings I raised with Mr. Bartley, counsel for the plaintiff, the problem of the third ground "(of determination)". It seemed to me the situation may arise where, if I found in the plaintiff's favour in relation to the first and second findings of the magistrate, the plaintiff may be in a position where he still lost because of the third ground added by the magistrate to the stated case.
The summons filed in this Court also did not seek any relief in relation to the third ground of determination of the magistrate.
Subsequently, Mr. Bartley sought to amend the summons by adding paragraph 2A after paragraph 2 of the summons in the following form: 'An order that the magistrate erred in law in finding that there was no evidence of negligence on the part of the defendant.' 
Initially, Mr. Bartley sought additional matters in the paragraph but that is as he finally put it forward. There was much debate over this amendment. The defendant, through his counsel, Mr. McCulloch, indicated that he had not come to court prepared to argue this proposition. Eventually, after considerable argument, the defendant consented to the amendment to the summons and indicated that he would not seek an adjournment provided he was entitle to argue a further matter, namely, whether the admission into evidence before the magistrate of a statement made by Police Constable Todd Edward
Sweeney (Exhibit 2 in these proceedings) was an error of law.
In an interim ruling on Wednesday, 20th July, 1994, I gave leave to Mr. Bartley to make the amendment and I also ruled that, subject to the constraints imposed by the scope of the stated case appeal jurisdiction, I would permit Mr. McCulloch to raise and deal with the issue about the admission of 
Exhibit 2.
 
I did not at the time of granting the amendment to the summons deal with an alteration to the stated case.
Part 32, Rule 7 of the [Supreme Court Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/) permits me to do a number of things. In summary, these are: with the consent of the parties, add or alter the stated case, otherwise send the case back to the court, or receive evidence, make findings of fact and add to the stated case in accordance with the findings of fact that I make.

I propose to exercise my powers under Rule 7(1)(c) and in accordance with the findings of fact which I make in these reasons, I now add to the stated case under Section 4 on page ,
after (ii) the following: '(iii) That the magistrate erred in law in finding that there was no evidence of negligence on the part of the defendant.' 
This completes the procedural problems arising from the third ground added by the magistrate to the stated case. I propose also to make rulings about the admission of Exhibit 2 which I will deal with later." .
This passage from His Honour's Judgment, in my view, makes clear: - that those involved did not appreciate that the relief to be sought in the Summons commencing proceedings on a case stated was, not the Orders sought in the Summons as originally filed, nor the additional "Order" which His
Honour gave leave to be added to the Summons, but "the decision or determination of the questions and the matters stated for decision or determination in the case" (Supreme Court Rules 1970, Part 32 rr 2(1), 18(3)); that the parties involved did not appreciate that an Appellant's contentions as to the grounds upon which a magistrate was alleged to have erred in law are required to be set out in the application to state a case (Supreme Court Rules 1970, Part 32 rr 11(1), 14A;
Form 41A) which contentions must then be incorporated in the case stated (Supreme Court Rules, Part 32 r.11 (2); Form 41B) seemingly, without alteration by the Magistrate stating the case (Booton v. Hosking ((12) [(1948) 65 WN 110)]; that the parties involved do not appear to have appreciated that, the matters referred to in (2) above notwithstanding, the
Court had power, both inherent and by virtue of the provisions of the [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/) [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p1) r 12, to permit Mr. Kerr to argue grounds which had not been taken in the application to Magistrate Sterland to state a case (Galletta v. Walter ((13) [(1977) 1 NSWLR 1)]; although the power to do so is one which would normally be exercised only sparingly; that the parties involved do not appear to have appreciated that the powers conferred on the Court by Supreme Court Rule Part 32 r 7 are exercisable only where the case does not state the facts and documents sufficiently to enable the Court to decide the questions arising, or otherwise to hear and determine the proceedings on the case; it following, that, unless - contrary to what I have suggested was the case - Magistrate Sterland's determination was to be treated as a dismissal pursuant to [Part 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p21) r 5 - as opposed to a Judgment pursuant to [Part 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p21) r 6 - of the [Local Courts (Civil
Claims) Rules 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lccr1988299/) upon the ground that the evidence tendered at the hearing before him was insufficient in law to support a judgment for Mr. Kerr - in which event, the transcript of the hearing before Magistrate Sterland and the exhibits tendered on the hearing, should have been annexed to the case - the case, as stated, was not inadequate - for it was neither necessary, nor permissible, for reference to be made to the transcript or the exhibits on the hearing of the case (see, for example, McNeall v. Croker ((14) [(1939) 56 WN )]; Glover v. MacDougall ((15) (1976) NSWLR 359), and the amendment of the case was neither necessary nor justified; that despite all this, and despite the fact that the appeal papers contain the whole of the transcript - including the Judgment - of the hearing before Magistrate Sterland, which transcript is described in the Index to the
Appeal papers as having been Exhibit I on the hearing before Donovan AJ, we have been informed, without objection (Transcript pp. 5, 15; see also Judgment of Donovan AJ AB p.72) that it was not the whole of the transcript of the hearing before Magistrate Sterland, but only his Judgment, which became
Exhibit 1 on the hearing before Donovan AJ; the use, if any, which was made by
Donovan AJ of the statement of Constable Sweeney, which was said to have become Exhibit 2 on the hearing before Donovan AJ, is difficult to ascertain for, despite what His Honour said in the passage which I have recorded above,
His Honour appears ultimately to have made no ruling "about the admission of
Exhibit 2" (see Judgment of Donovan AJ AB p.71).
In the light of these matters, it is not surprising that the hearing of the case seems thereafter to have proceeded upon a false, and completely mistaken, basis. That this was in fact so is, I think, sufficiently demonstrated by two examples: - despite the statement of the "facts" contained in the case as stated (see, in particular, p.11 (above)) His
Honour, at an early stage of his
Judgment recorded the following: - "According to the facts as found, the children were left unattended for a time at the defendant's home and went to the plaintiff's premises, entered the premises and, while playing with matches, started a fire." a statement which cannot be reconciled with the Magistrate's statement: - "In my opinion, the evidence implicating the children is very thin.
...
For the purposes of the 'no case to answer' submission I held that there was some evidence however slight that the children were responsible for the fire.
despite the fact that, as
I have earlier sought to demonstrate, the case as stated raised no question of law, the hearing of the case proceeded upon the basis that it was open to counsel for Mr. Kerr to embark upon, and that
His Honour was obliged to entertain, a wide ranging inquiry as to the law of negligence generally, in the course of which inquiry it was open to counsel for Mr. Kerr to challenge, and His Honour was obliged to examine, the reasoning process disclosed in the Judgment of Magistrate Sterland. Just how wide ranging was the inquiry embarked upon is indicated by the fact that there appear to have been extensive submissions made, and entertained, as to the nature and extent, if any, of the duty of care owed by a parent to his or her child and to third parties (see, for example, Smith v. Leurs ((16) <case>; [(1945) 70
CLR 256)] of the nature and extent, if any, of the duty of care of other carers towards children in their care or to third parties (see, for example, Hahn v. Conley ((19) <case>; [(1971) 126 CLR 276)] and of the nature and extent, if any, of the duty of care owed by others having the care or supervision of children or other young persons - whether in a day care nursery (see, for example, Carmarthenshire County Council v. Lewis ((20) <case>; [(1955) AC )] or in an institution (see, for example, Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co. ((22) <case>; [(1970) AC 1004)] - to the children or young persons in their care or to third parties. The result of all this was that, in my view, the hearing of the case completely miscarried. That this was so is demonstrated by the findings which
His Honour made in relation to the three grounds of determination set out in the case, those findings being as follows: - "1. I therefore conclude as a matter of law there was a duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff to act reasonably in the supervision, care and control of the children to avoid their causing injury to the plaintiff's property. I conclude, therefore, that as a matter of law, the first ground of determination of the Magistrate was erroneous.
In coming to any decision on this issue, the findings of fact of the Magistrate must also be examined. The house was in the vicinity of the premises where the children were left unattended.
It was approximately 100 yards away but still within easy walking distance by the children. The house was the home of one of the children. It follows that it would not be far sighted or fanciful to expect or foresee that that child and the others with him would go to that house. Further, the risk of children playing with matches and thereby causing damage to themselves or to property is a well recognised risk in this society. It is a risk which is generally known in the community and which all responsible parents warn children against and take steps to avoid. It, therefore, follows, in my view, that the damage, as a matter of law, was foreseeable. I therefore, find that the conclusion of the Magistrate of that the damage was not foreseeable was erroneous.
Given the period of time that the children were left unattended, particularly in a situation where the third party's child was left with the defendant under an express agreement that the child would be 'minded' by the defendant, in my view, there was significant evidence of failure to supervise. Indeed, the finding of the Magistrate, as noted in the transcript, that there was not evidence of lack of supervision is totally at odds with the evidence as presented. I am, therefore, of the view that as a matter of law, the finding by the Magistrate that there was no evidence of failure to supervise was erroneous.

In examining the transcript of the Magistrate's decision, it is clear that his finding that there was no evidence of negligence is based upon his finding of fact that there was no evidence of failure to supervise. It follows that his finding that them was no evidence of negligence, as a mater of law, was, therefore, erroneous."
Then, after dealing with a number of other matters which, in my view, were not open to be argued on the case as stated, His Honour concluded his
Judgment as follows: - "H. CONCLUSION 
One final matter remains: What to do with the proceedings? The magistrate made a finding that there was no case to answer. He then found a verdict for the defendant. A question arises whether I can make any final orders at this stage. The proceedings involve, so I am told, an amount of some $28,000.00.
I am conscious of the costs which will be involved in remitting the matter to the magistrate. The defendant, however, has not had an opportunity to present his case before the magistrate.

Mr. McCulloch indicated to me that the defendant did not intend to call any evidence before the magistrate. Given the principle in Jones versus Dunkel ((1959) <case>; [101 CLR 298)], the plaintiff would succeed. I would normally deal with the matter here and save the cost of sending the matter back to the magistrate. There is, however, a Third Party Notice which has to be dealt with.
Further, the quantum of damages as between the plaintiff and the defendant remains to be determined. This requires the whole matter to be dealt with by the magistrate.
Although I have indicated a view as to the conclusion which follows as between the plaintiff and the defendant, the magistrate will have to make his own determination on all issues of fact in the light of my rulings on law.

I rule as follows: -
As a matter of law, there was a duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff.
As a matter of law, the damages were foreseeable.
As a matter of law, It was not open to the magistrate on the evidence before him, to find that there was no evidence of negligence.

Pursuant to [s.106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s106.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), I, therefore, reverse the three determinations and remit the matter, together with my opinion, to the magistrate to further hear and determine the matter according to law. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiffs costs of and incidental to the stated case."
It being my view, as I have earlier indicated, that the case, as stated, did not raise a question of law, it follows that, in coming to the conclusions which he has recorded, and in making the Orders which he did, Donovan AJ fell into error.
I should, perhaps, add, that, even if it had been open to Donovan
AJ to come to the conclusions which he has recorded, the Orders which His
Honour then proceeded to make were inappropriate - in the event supposed, "the appropriate orders to be made are that the questions in the Stated Case be answered yes, that the case be remitted to the (Local) Court for it to hear and determine the application in accordance with law" (see Toohey v. Taylor ((23) [(1983) 1 NSWLR 743], 751) together with such order as to costs as seems appropriate in the circumstances.
The Orders which I would propose are as follows: 
ORDER that the Appeal be upheld. 
ORDER that the Orders made by Donovan AJ be set aside and that in lieu thereof the question in the case stated by answered "No". 
ORDER that the Respondent pay the costs of the Appellant of the Appeal and of the hearing before Donovan AJ. 
ORDER that the Respondent, if qualified, have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/46.html  
