

Susan Jane Tweedale versus Dr John Tennant Herron and Ors [1997] NSWSC 168 (1
May 1997) 
SUSAN JANE TWEEDALE v. DR JOHN TENNANT HERRON & ORS /93 
TUESDAY 10 DECEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER J 
JUDGMENT (On admissibility of evidence - see p.712 of transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: I have already indicated that I would refuse the application on behalf of the plaintiff to amend the particulars to allege, in addition to other matters, the development of a post-traumatic stress disorder.

In support of that proposed amended case the plaintiff sought to rely on the report of Dr. Richard Bryant of 29 November 1996. In the light of the ruling which I have made, the plaintiff's advisers obtained from Dr. Bryant an amended report which sets out very clearly the psychometric testing he carried out and his opinions based thereon, but continues to repeat much of the material relating to post-traumatic stress disorder and his conclusions founded on it without, however, utilising that expression.

It appears to me that the proposed new report, except so far as it consists of history and the report on psychometric testing, goes outside the existing particulars and could not be relied on by the plaintiff without an amendment of the particulars such as I have already refused, and without considerable prejudice to the defendant.

I refuse therefore the tender of so much of Dr. Bryant's report as is contained in pp.8-13.

I will give fuller reasons for that in due course as well as for the refusal of the application to amend the particulars.

SUSAN JANE TWEEDALE v. JOHN TENNANT HERRON & ORS /93 
WEDNESDAY 23 APRIL 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
The background 
On 30 November 1976, the plaintiff Susan Jane Tweedale, then aged 14, took a large dose of valium in circumstances to be described later. Her parents took her to Hornsby Hospital. After initial treatment there she was referred to Dr.
John Herron, a psychiatrist who recommended treatment at a private hospital.

On 2 December 1976, the plaintiff was admitted under the care of Dr. Herron to
Chelmsford Private Hospital (hereinafter called "Chelmsford"). She remained there until 20 December 1976. She was readmitted to the hospital on 18 March until 24 May 1977 (during which period she passed her 15th birthday) and admitted again two days later (on 26 May 1977), remaining until 2 November .

During the second such admission, Dr. Herron, who was going overseas, arranged for her to be treated by Dr. Harry Bailey, and she was in fact treated by Dr.
Bailey, with the knowledge and apparent concurrence of Dr. Herron, by way of deep sleep therapy, also known as narcosis therapy (hereinafter called DST), for a period of about a fortnight (27 April 1977 to 11 May 1977), and before and during that period of deep sedation, she was treated on some 15 occasions by way of electro-convulsive therapy (hereinafter called ECT) (six before DST began, nine during the DST period).

The litigation 
By statement of claim filed on her behalf on 23 August 1993, the plaintiff claimed against six defendants damages in respect of injuries said to result from that treatment and otherwise from her period at Chelmsford. The relevant limitation periods having long since expired, application was made on behalf of the plaintiff for extensions of time pursuant to the provisions of s.58 and/or [s.60G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60g.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). Such extensions were not opposed by the defendants other than the fourth defendant,
John Ewan MacDonald Gill; and on 28 November 1995 I granted the extension sought as against the defendants other than Dr. Gill. An application for leave to amend the statement of claim as against that defendant, was heard by me on May 1996; judgment was reserved and has not yet been delivered.

The fifth defendant is the New South Wales Medical Defence Union Limited sued purportedly pursuant to [s.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s6.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/) and the insurer of the defendants Bailey and Herron in respect of their alleged liability to the plaintiff. The proceedings against this defendant are defective in that there has been no previous grant of leave to sue, as required by [s.6.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s6.html)
In the spirit of co-operation which has existed between the parties to this whole body of litigation and which has facilitated the disposal of it an efficient and orderly way, no point is taken about that. In particular, it is accepted on behalf of the plaintiff that the appearance of counsel who have announced their appearance for the MDU as well as for the other defendants is not to be taken as a waiver of the requirement that the plaintiff obtain leave before proceeding against that defendant; on the other hand it is agreed that should an application for leave in due course be made and be successful, the evidence given in the present proceedings will be admitted as evidence in any subsequent proceedings against MDU.

Case management 
The case is one of a large number of actions brought against the same defendants (or some combination of them) by former patients of Chelmsford.
Since about August 1993 the court has undertaken special case management procedures in respect of the whole group of cases, because otherwise they would have placed an insupportable burden on the limited resources of the court to the disadvantage of other litigants, and because, left to the ordinary processes of the court, they would have been subject to such delays as to cause real hardship to plaintiffs whose causes of action (if such exist) arose some 20 years ago. Most of the case management directions that were given from time to time were proposed by one party or by the parties jointly; the final form in which any particular direction was made represents the view that I came to after discussion rather than argument; the directions given represent, for the most part, consensus rather than submission.

The case management process involved the appointment, in each of a number of cases of which this was one, of a court expert pursuant to the provisions of the Supreme Court Rules, Part 39 Rule 2. The circumstances in which such orders were made are outlined in a judgment which I delivered on 24 February , entitled Maria Helene Salay & Ors v. The Estate of the Late Harry
Bailey & Ors (127 matters). In the circumstances there outlined and for the reasons there set out I gave directions which, so far as they related to the appointment of court experts, were as follows:- "5. The parties are to agree on or before 7 April 1995 as to 15 test cases in relation to which documents will be sent to court appointed expert psychiatrists.
Failing an agreement being reached as set out in order 5, the first named patient under each letter of the alphabet in the list of Chelmsford claims for the first 15 letters of the alphabet will be deemed to be the 15 test cases but so that the list include at least one case in which Mr. Bates appears for the plaintiff, at least one case in which Mr. Veitch appears for the plaintiff and at least one case in which Mr. Everingham appears for the plaintiff.
Each of the plaintiffs in the 15 test cases is to provide particulars of pre and post-Chelmsford medical, employment and educational history as agreed or as settled by the Registrar Harrison on or before 5 May 1995.
Subpoenas to be returnable on 31 May 1995.
The court will appoint expert psychiatrists as court experts pursuant to
Part 39 Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules in the following manner: 
The court will request that the president of the Royal Australian and New
Zealand College of Psychiatrists (the College) for the time being nominate five psychiatrists who:- are senior members of the College of good standing and repute are resident outside New South Wales have to date had no direct involvement with matters pertaining to or patients or treating doctors of the former Chelmsford Private Hospital.

The parties will within 14 days of the president nominating the five psychiatrists attempt to agree to three of those psychiatrists being appointed by the court as experts.

Failing agreement as set out in (b), the plaintiffs collectively have a right to veto one of the psychiatrists nominated by the president of the
College and the defendants collectively have a right to veto one of the psychiatrists nominated by the president of the College and the remaining three psychiatrists will be the three psychiatrists to be appointed as experts by the court.

The parties have leave to approach the Registrar Harrison on two days notice to have consent orders for the appointment of those experts.
Each of the three experts referred to in order (9) is to be provided, in relation to five of the 15 test cases, with the documents set out in the attached schedule entitled "experts schedule of documents" (Annexure B hereto).
The defendants will make the necessary arrangements for the plaintiffs in each of the test cases to be examined by the psychiatrist to which their case has been allocated at a time and place agreed between the parties and the plaintiffs in those cases will attend such examinations as are arranged.
Within 28 days of receipt of the court expert's report, the plaintiff may send to the court expert any other expert report which the plaintiff has obtained and ask the court expert to comment on and/or review his/her opinion in light of all those additional expert reports subject to the terms of order .
The parties are to have no communication, whether oral or written, with the court experts unless such communication is by consent or as directed by
Registrar Harrison
The parties have liberty to approach Registrar Harrison on seven days notice to settle:- - the particulars referred to in order (7); - the form of the letter referred to in clause 1 of the experts schedule of documents; and/or - any correspondence to the court experts not agreed between the parties referred to in order (13).
All costs of the court experts are to be borne by the Health
Administration Corporation and the New South Wales Medical Defence Union
Limited.
The Health Administration Corporation and the New South Wales Medical
Defence Union Limited are to bear the reasonable costs incurred by any of the plaintiffs in attending such expert examination." "ANNEXURE B 
EXPERTS' SCHEDULE OF DOCUMENTS
A letter in a form agreed between the parties or as settled by Registrar
Harrison.
Any psychometric report in relation to the plaintiff as may be available.
Such records as are available in relation to the plaintiff's medical, employment and educational history.
The Chelmsford Private Hospital notes in relation to the plaintiff's relevant admissions, together with the admitting doctor's clinical notes.
So much of the report of any medical practitioner by whom the plaintiff has previously been seen as records the patient's history and complaints on the occasion of examination and that practitioner's observation of presenting symptoms, his or her diagnosis, and his or her assessment of the severity at that stage of the patient's condition - but not so much of any such report as purports to express any opinion as to the aetiology of the plaintiff's condition and in particular as to whether or not it was caused wholly or in part by any treatment administered to the plaintiff at Chelmsford." 
It was anticipated by the parties that the receipt of an independent expert report on issues relating only to the quantification of damages (for that purpose the validity of each plaintiff's cause of action being assumed) would facilitate settlement and, should settlement not be achieved, enable some reduction in the hearing time of any case that went to trial. I intend no criticism of either party nor to express any dissatisfaction with the court expert procedure nor any criticism of the expert appointed in the instant case, when I record that, unfortunately, in the present case neither anticipation was realised. The fact is, as will later be apparent, that the engagement of an independent expert who provided a well-considered report and made himself available for cross-examination by counsel for both parties has been of great assistance to me in determining a most difficult case.

The expert appointed in this matter was Dr. Martin Nothling, a consultant physician in psychiatry practising in Brisbane. His curriculum vitae (Exhibit
C) demonstrates his eminence in his profession and his suitability for the role in which he was thus cast. He saw the plaintiff in Sydney on 14 June 1996 and presented to Registrar Harrison a report of the same date. With the consent of the parties, I directed that his report be admitted in evidence; that all documents provided to him for the purpose of the preparation of his report be admitted in evidence irrespective of whether the author of any such document was called to give oral evidence; but that if either party required the author of any such document to attend for cross-examination, it should be incumbent on that party to secure the attendance of that person as a witness.
Further, with the consent of the parties, I directed that each should have leave to cross-examine Dr. Nothling and that the order in which such cross- examinations should take place would be determined by me, unless the parties were able to agree, on the basis that that party most favoured by the conclusions expressed in the expert's report should cross-examine first. In the result, the parties agreed that the application of that principle in the present case should mean that counsel for the plaintiff would cross-examine first; and so it occurred.

The separate trial of certain questions 
In this case as in many of the others, an order was made, on the joint application of the plaintiff and the defendants other than Dr. Gill, pursuant to Part 31 Rule 2(a) of the Supreme Court Rules, for the determination of certain questions in the proceedings separately and before any other question.

The questions thus ordered to be separately determined were the following- "1. Did 'deep sleep therapy', either alone or in conjunction with electro- convulsive therapy, at the former Chelmsford Private Hospital cause or contribute to the injuries and disabilities of the plaintiff referred to in the plaintiff's Part 33 statement or any, and if so which, of them.
If yes to question one, what is the amount of plaintiff's compensatory damages (excluding aggravated damages) in respect of those injuries or disabilities." 
This judgment is delivered at the conclusion of the separate trial of those questions and deals only with those questions.

It is important always to bear in mind the precise wording of those questions and to emphasise that that which the court is required to identify as the subject of compensation (and, if so identified, to assess damages in respect of) is injury resulting from "DST either alone or in conjunction with ECT" (which concept is hereinafter referred to as DST/ECT) and not injury, loss or damage resulting from any other aspect of the plaintiff's admissions to and treatment at Chelmsford. That proposition is simple to state and is incontrovertible. Nevertheless, a controversy arose as to the relevance and significance of evidence, necessarily before me as part of the chronology of events and for that reason if for no other admissible, dealing with the fact of and the incidents of the plaintiff's continued hospitalisation at
Chelmsford after the conclusion of DST on 11 May 1977, through to 2 November
I shall come later to discuss the relevant evidence but it is convenient to say at this stage that the fact of and the incidents of the plaintiff's continued hospitalisation will be clearly relevant, and a proper subject of compensation, should the evidence establish that her continued hospitalisation was more probably than not itself a consequence of the treatment given to her by way of DST/ECT. If her continued hospitalisation was itself a consequence of that treatment, then any of her injuries and disabilities which are shown to be a consequence of DST/ECT, not directly but indirectly because they were caused by her continued hospitalisation and the incidents thereof, will themselves be appropriate matters for compensation. This matter was discussed from time to time during the course of the trial and it is my understanding, reinforced by a perusal of the written submissions and the transcript of the oral submissions advanced on behalf of the defendant, that the defendant accepts what I have just said as a correct statement of the legal position.
The defendants' contention is that there is no evidence upon which I can find, or alternatively that such evidence as there is does not establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the plaintiff's continued hospitalisation after the termination of DST was necessitated by or was a consequence of that treatment. To that issue of fact I shall return in due course.

The plaintiff's case 
The plaintiff's case as particularized pursuant to Part 33 Rule 8A is that the treatments by way of DST/ECT administered to her at Chelmsford by or under the direction of the first three defendants injured her in the following ways:- "(a) Caused her chronic organic brain damage resulting in significant cognitive defects.

Caused in her a psychological illness referred to as a Major Depressive
Disorder.

Caused her to develop a dependency on illegal narcotic drugs, in particular heroin." 
From the point of view of my analysis of the evidence and of the issues that emerged during the trial, it is convenient to restate those allegations as follows, namely as allegations that:-
The plaintiff suffers significant cognitive defects.
Those cognitive defects are, in part at least, caused by chronic organic brain damage caused by DST/ECT.
The plaintiff suffers a psychological illness in the nature of a major depressive disorder.
The plaintiff's major depressive disorder results from her treatment by way of DST/ECT:- as a direct consequence thereof; and/or as an indirect consequence thereof, resulting from her reaction to her perception of the consequences of her organic brain damage.
To the extent that the plaintiff's significant cognitive defects are not directly caused by organic brain damage, they are caused by her depressive illness.
The plaintiff is addicted to heroin, and that addiction to heroin was caused by DST/ ECT.

Application to amend 
Very late in the proceedings, the plaintiff sought to rely on a report of Dr.
Richard Bryant, a clinical psychologist, who was engaged to make an assessment of the plaintiff on 28 November 1996, after the plaintiff's legal advisers decided (for reasons which I need not here discuss in detail) not to rely on the report of another psychologist whose report of a neuropsychological assessment conducted on 22 July 1975 had been served on the defendant before trial. The circumstance that that report would not be relied upon was made known to the court and to the defendants' lawyers on or about 12 September following cross-examination of that psychologist in another Chelmsford case; and the likelihood that the plaintiff would seek to obtain some alternative psychometric evidence was foreshadowed at that stage. No ruling was sought, none was made, but it was clearly in contemplation of both parties and of the court that some further neuropsychological assessment would take place, and that the results would be adduced in evidence. It was pursuant to that intention, clearly made known at that stage, that Dr. Bryant's report was to be served.

However, the report, when served, went a long way further than merely to record the conduct of and the results of neuropsychological testing. I intend no criticism of the author. On the contrary: obviously he had endeavoured to carry out a very complete psychological assessment of the plaintiff's condition, to examine carefully the materials made available to him and to arrive at his own independent opinion as to her correct diagnosis and the relationship between her current problems and her treatment at Chelmsford.
However, the result of all that was that his report, when tendered, introduced into the proceedings a new element, namely a new diagnosis which had not previously been advanced by nor put to any of the plaintiff's experts (nor the court expert), of which the defendant had had no notice, and upon which the defendant could not reasonably at that stage (without unduly delaying the further conduct of the proceedings) obtain expert opinion, namely a diagnosis proffered by Dr. Bryant of post-traumatic stress disorder.

The service of a report offering an opinion of that kind was clearly in breach of the extensive pre-trial directions which had been given in this matter; the defendant could not have been expected to meet it without a substantial adjournment; the granting of such an adjournment would have delayed not only the completion of this case but also the completion of a number of other
Chelmsford cases also part-heard before me; and would have delayed the commencement of other Chelmsford matters scheduled to be heard by me during a limited period in the few months of 1997 which the court had been able to allocate for that purpose. Given the detailed programme of case management to which this and other Chelmsford cases had been subjected, it appeared to me quite clearly to be not in the interests of justice to allow the plaintiff to amend the Part 33 Particulars in such manner as would have been necessary permit the extension of the litigation to embrace this new diagnosis and the issues relating to it.

That decision was founded in particular on a series of decisions in which superior courts have emphasized the relevance of case management considerations to such matters as late application for amendment and late application to adduce evidence not previously disclosed despite pre-trial directions requiring such disclosure: W. Dazenko Structural and General
Engineering Pty. Limited v. Fraser Hrones & Co. Limited (Court of
Appeal, unreported 5 October 1990); Friends of Glenreagh Dorrigo Line Inc.
v. Jones (Court of Appeal, unreported 15 March 1994); SPCC v. AIS Pty.
Limited [(1992) 92 NSWLR 487]; Sali v. SPC Limited <case>; [(1993) 116 ALR 625]; Apex Pallet Hire Pty. Limited v. Brambles Holdings
Limited (Victorian Federal Court, unreported 8 April 1988). At the time when
I made that ruling (10 December 1996), I was unaware of the decision of the
High Court in State of Queensland v. J.L. Holdings Pty. Limited (date of order 2 December 1996, reasons for judgment delivered 14 January 1997; as yet unreported) in which many of those cases were reviewed. Bearing in mind that the application in this case for leave to amend the particulars was made:- more than 19 years after the dates upon which the tort (if tort there was) was committed.
more than 19 years after the plaintiff's ultimate discharge from
Chelmsford.
more than 13 years after the expiration of the relevant limitation period.
more than six months after the appointment of a court expert pursuant to an agreed direction made at the conclusion of a lengthy case management process.
more than three months after the commencement of the trial (which was interrupted for reasons not attributable to either party) and on what was in fact the eighth day of hearing, it does not appear to me that anything in the recent High Court case ought be understood as suggesting that my discretion in this regard ought to have been exercised in some other way, or that the principles upon which I exercised my discretion were not correct principles.

In the result I admitted into evidence only pp.6 and 7 of the report, the complete report being marked for identification (MFI 19).

The issues 
The defendant did not contest that the plaintiff has cognitive deficits, but denied that same were due to brain damage and alternatively, denied that any such brain damage was caused by DST/ECT. The defendant did not contest that the plaintiff suffers from a psychological illness, whether properly described as a major depressive illness or as a dysthymic disorder, but denied that any such psychological illness was caused by DST/ECT. The defendant denied that the plaintiff's heroin addiction was so caused. The defendant raised issues as to the severity or gravity of any such condition as might be found to result from DST/ECT and of any resultant disability. Also there is an issue as to the level of appropriate compensation for such deficits as are proved attributable to Chelmsford treatment, and, in particular, issues as to what was likely to have been the plaintiff's course in life had she never had such treatment, and as to the extent by which any amount that might have been assessed as damages should be discounted by reference to the degree of doubt as to what her course (but for Chelmsford treatment) may have been.

Such being the issues, it becomes important to make findings as to the circumstances in which the plaintiff was admitted on each occasion, and as to her intellectual and cognitive functioning and psychological and emotional health at and before that time. It becomes necessary to review in some detail the whole of the evidence of the plaintiff's life before her first admission, between the two admissions and subsequently, as well as the events which occurred during each of those admissions.

The reliability of evidence (generally) 
The parties, but particularly the plaintiff, are significant hampered in that exercise because the matters which require to be examined are matters which existed or occurred during the plaintiff's childhood, up to a date now more than 20 years in the past; because the lapse of time is likely to affect the reliability of evidence; and because some evidence is lacking which might have been thought most likely to assist.

The evidence of the plaintiff, her parents, her siblings and her friends of what purports to be their recollection of the plaintiff's behaviour and functioning during her childhood and early teenage years before her admission to Chelmsford, and indeed during her later teenage years after her discharge from Chelmsford may have been rendered unreliable by the passage of time, and by the effect which emotions and motivations may have on their present recollection of past events. I shall have a little more to say on that subject when I come to deal with the evidence of the plaintiff's past, but it is important to distinguish the evidence of the plaintiff and her close family about her present state, from their evidence about her past. Most of the considerations which may undermine the reliability of their evidence about earlier days do not operate in relation to their evidence of her current situation; and I am satisfied that their evidence in relation to the latter was not only honestly given but is to be accepted. Particularly is that so because that evidence accords reasonably closely with the expert evidence of her condition.

The defendant submitted, with good reason, that I should scrutinise the plaintiff's evidence with some care because of the obvious risk that her reliability has suffered by the passage of time, by the effect which emotions and motivations may have on her present recollection of past events, and by reason of her cognitive defects, whether or not as severe as the plaintiff's case asserts. Counsel did draw attention to many instances of inconsistency between her evidence and what she was recorded as having said about certain aspects of her history as told by her to various medical practitioners and drug counsellors over the years, as well as to medical experts qualified to give evidence at the trial. I shall from time to time make particular comment on some such matters but I do not propose to deal in terms with all of them.
It is sufficient to say that I have taken all of those matters into account, both in reaching such conclusions as I have expressed from time to time as to the acceptability of her evidence on some particular points, and in my general assessment of her credibility, which is that she has at all times attempted to give a truthful and accurate account of events as she remembered them, though it is obvious not only that her memory in many respects was faulty, leading her to give an account of particular events and circumstances which other evidence suggests was inaccurate (her version being by no means always to her own advantage), but also that her recollection of her experience in Chelmsford and of her unhappy life since is attended with such emotion (understandably so) that she has been led to exaggerate, probably unconsciously, from time to time.

The plaintiff before November 1976 
The plaintiff was born on 23 May 1962. She attended a local kindergarten, then commenced at PLC Pymble in Year One on 5 February 1969 at the age of six years and nine months. She completed her primary schooling there, in 1974, and entered the secondary school.

I have not heard from any person who taught the plaintiff at school nor from any school counsellor engaged at or by the school. The reality no doubt is that relevant records have been lost and the persons involved, if still alive, have little useful recollection; and I draw no inference adverse to the plaintiff from the absence of such witnesses, although such inference would no doubt be available: Jones v. Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298.] I have seen no school reports for neither the plaintiff nor her parents have retained them. The defendant tendered some meagre records from PLC Pymble which throw some but no very bright light on the plaintiff's performance in primary school. No records relating to her secondary schooling have been produced.

The one school document placed in evidence records comments about her, term by term, over those six primary years, each comment on the form being preceded by the printed letter C, which I take to refer to conduct, or P, which I take to refer to progress. Her conduct was rated "good" or "very good" in every term except the first two terms in 1970 (when she was aged about eight); I construe "helpful" in first term 1974 as at least equal to "good". On only three occasions is the comment qualified in any way: in first term 1972 (when the plaintiff was aged 10) the remark is made (against C and P bracketed together) "homework neglected, untidy work"; in each of third term 1972 and third term , there is reference to the plaintiff seeking attention.

Her progress appears to have declined from "very good", "excellent", "good" in , to "very fair" in 1970. In 1969, 1970 and 1971, there is reference to careless work and careless attitude. However, from first term 1972 to the end of her primary schooling, she is described as "satisfactory", and in her sixth class, 1974, the three comments are "trying hard", "working well", and "steady progress".

Overall, her grades were A in [1969, B in 1970-71], C in 1972-73, and back up to B in 1974. This record seems more than fully to justify the plaintiff's description of herself to Ms. Breen (and in the course of her evidence at t.68) as a "C-average" student.

There is one aspect of the school document which warrants explanation, but of which no explanation is forthcoming. It reveals a quite striking record of absenteeism, the plaintiff having been absent from school a total of 17 days in 1969, 27 days in 1970, 511/2 days in 1971, 29 days in 1973, 22 days in 1973 and 27 days in 1974. The plaintiff was cross-examined about that and gave this evidence:- "Q ... was it the case that sometimes prior to Chelmsford while you were at
PLC, that sometimes you did not want to go to school? A. In my junior years, yes. In my senior years, it was totally different.

Q. Did you on occasions say that you were sick by way of an excuse to not go to school? A. In my junior years, possibly yes.

Q. Is it the case that you were absent from school on a large number of occasions and I don't mean at any particular time, but over the years you were at PLC, did you not go to school because, on a number of days, because you did not want to go to school? A. Yes there would have been days when I didn't go to school.

Q. Without going to each individual year or term at PLC, I suggest that each term there seemed to be a large number of days that you did not go to school, do you have any recollection of that? A. I recollect one particular time when my parents were away and my sister who is two years older than me, was supervising and I do believe there was a few days then that were missed which mum became aware of when she got back.

Q. Did you have any illness that you can remember, that could explain the absences from school during the year you were at PLC? A. Yes I had my toe nails removed. I have had my appendix out. Tonsils and adenoids. I was very prone to middle ear infections, from swimming. And I believe that I have also had days off, from cramps.

Q. Were there also days off arose from you not wanting to go to school? A.
There would have been a day I didn't want to go to school." 
The plaintiff's mother, Phyllis Ilene Tweedale and father, Dr. Kenneth
Tweedale did not refer to any problem of absenteeism in their evidence in chief. In cross-examination, Mrs. Tweedale said that she was not happy with the plaintiff's performance at school because "she was a lazy student" and "she wouldn't do her homework", but was not prepared to assent to the proposition that she was "disappointed" by Susan's performance. It was her recollection that Susan had not performed as well in primary school, and in secondary school, as her siblings. However, she was not asked about absenteeism as such, or truancy (except an oblique and unhelpful reference at t.358.16). Dr. Tweedale said that he regarded the plaintiff as an average student, as compared with his other daughters who were all above average, but he remembered nothing unusual about her in primary school. There was brief reference to occasions where she pleaded or feigned illness to secure a day off school. He had no knowledge of truancy otherwise and was not cross- examined specifically about any unusual level of absenteeism. There is, on the other hand, evidence given by the plaintiff herself and reflected in her histories to various doctors, of a particular problem which she encountered during her primary school years which made her primary school years unhappy and may certainly have provided a reason why she may have wished to absent herself from school - namely, the fact that she was rather tall and big for her years and was the butt of constant teasing because of that (although the plaintiff's mother has no recollection of such a thing as a major problem for
Susan during her primary school years - if it occurred, she regarded it as trivial; her father had no recollection of any such thing.) 
As I have said, the primary school record of absenteeism warrants explanation.
It is a matter upon which the defendants' principal expert witness, child psychiatrist Dr. Brett Waters, placed some weight. In those circumstances, I would have expected defendants' counsel to raise the matter specifically with
Dr. and Mrs. Tweedale, and in the absence of his doing so, I am not prepared to draw from the record of absenteeism any inference favourable to the defendants' case or adverse to the plaintiff's.

If the plaintiff's absenteeism had been due to truancy, then one would have expected it to be an issue raised with the parents by the school authorities; one would have expected some reference to it under the heading of conduct; and one would expect it to have stuck in the memory of her parents. That none of those things occurred suggests that, at the time of any prolonged absence or unusually frequent repeated absences, there was an explanation acceptable both to the school and the plaintiff's parents. The state of the evidence simply is that there is a record of considerable but unexplained absence from school in the primary years, particularly noticeable in the second term (winter) of
The cross-examination of the plaintiff on this aspect was cursory, to say the least; it may well be that the various illnesses to which she refers account for by far the large part of her absenteeism. Her evidence on this, as on many other aspects of the case, is likely to be unreliable because of her cognitive deficits whether organically or emotionally determined, but it may well be the case that had her attention been directed particularly to the very heavy incidence of absence in 1971, her memory may have been jogged. The fact of absenteeism may be noted and brought to account; but unexplained, it is at least as consistent with repeated or a significant period of illness as it is with misconduct.

It does not appear that either of the plaintiff's parents has any recollection of the plaintiff during her early childhood years as being anything other than a happy child nor do her two elder sisters who gave evidence, Mrs. Legg and
Mrs. Lough. She was naughty, but she was not, according to their recollection, any more so than any of her siblings. Mrs. Greenaway, a close family friend, had never observed anything which gave her cause to think of the plaintiff any differently from the other children in the family. Evidence was given by David
Murray Westmore, a childhood friend of the plaintiff who had known her since he was six or seven years old, she a couple of years younger. He had regular contact with the family and with Susan for about 10 years. He described her as an outgoing, friendly girl with lots of energy, fun to be with and to play with and "just a sort of normal teenage kid".

In 1975, when she was 12, the plaintiff moved into the secondary school. By her own account she was happier there than she had been in junior school, evidently because she was no longer teased about her size; and indeed in 1976 she was made class captain and a member of the Student Council, which seems to indicate that she got on well with her peers. There is no objective evidence of her progress, but her description of herself as "about a middle of the range student ... not particularly - exceptionally brainy but I wasn't dumb" was never seriously challenged. The evidence of one of her school friends, Ms.
Sophie Goddard, now a barrister, tended to confirm that description. Neither of the plaintiff's sisters nor Ms. Goddard conceded any recollection of any unusual or anti-social behaviour on the part of the plaintiff during those years.

In general, I doubt the reliability of the evidence of the plaintiff's parents; but I was impressed with the evidence of Mrs. Lough, Mrs. Greenaway and Mr. Westmore and Ms. Goddard, and I accept that evidence in preference to any conflicting evidence (except where I have specifically noted otherwise).

The only evidence of anything untoward about her conduct is in the plaintiff's own description of herself, in the course of her evidence and in the course of histories given by her to the doctors and psychologists who have been consulted in respect of these proceedings or whom the plaintiff herself has consulted from time to time. To the extent that she has made statements which can reasonably be understood as admissions against her interest, obviously some weight must given to what she says; but she cannot be regarded as an entirely reliable historian, and that is true whether what she says can now be understood to be favourable to or adverse to her interest in this litigation.
In particular, it seems to me that it is necessary to guard against a too literal acceptance of the truth of what she says in every detail because, as it seems to me, some of the things that she is recorded as saying may well have been said under the influence of some emotion and without a great deal of concern for absolute precision. An example is a reference in the notes from
Rankin Court Drug Rehabilitation Unit purporting to record a statement by the plaintiff that her mother had wished that it had been the plaintiff who drowned rather than her three year old brother. There are similar references in some of the histories to doctors. That she had said such a thing was put to the plaintiff and the thrust of her answer was that that was a reconstruction made by her later in life of what, later in life, she perceived may have been her mother's reaction. That explanation appears very probable and to me more probable than that the recorded statement is literally true. Further, care has to be taken, in relation to things recorded as having been said by the plaintiff, to try to identify precisely what she said rather than a listener's interpretation of it, particularly where the circumstances were such that what is recorded as having been said by the plaintiff was probably an answer to a question and very likely an answer to a leading question. This is particularly important in relation to some of the entries in what purport to be Dr.
Herron's notes and the nursing notes from Chelmsford where the difficulty is compounded by the brevity and disjointed nature of the records.

A constant theme is the plaintiff's poor relationship with her mother. It certainly seems to be the case that it was a relationship marked by strong words on each side, and probably an unwillingness in the plaintiff to confide in her mother, which may have been coupled with an equal unwillingness on the part of her mother to fulfil her desirable role as the child's confidante.

The plaintiff's mother and father denied that there was anything unusual about the relationship between the plaintiff and her mother, although her father did, realistically, concede the possibility that there was some problem which he had failed to observe. Mrs. Tweedale tended to describe the relationship with Susan as no different from her relationship with her other children, a relationship which did involve their always arguing but not by any means a relationship of conflict or otherwise unsatisfactory. I have to say that I have some doubts about the reliability of that evidence which perhaps reflects a recollection filtered by the passage of time.

I regard as much more reliable the evidence of Louise Lough who said of the plaintiff:- "She was a normal teenager. She had conflict with mum but I wouldn't say she had any conflict outside of just a normal teenager who bucks against the system." 
She agreed that there was conflict between the plaintiff and her mother but her description of it puts it in a much more realistic light than does the evidence of the plaintiff herself and her mother. In cross-examination Mrs.
Lough gave this evidence:- "Q. From that, do I take it what you are saying is that Susan had conflicts with her mum, but no more than the rest of you, or are you saying that she did have more conflicts with her mum than others? A. The rest of us? 
Q. Yes. A. Well, I think all of us went through a time when we hit that teenage, you know, about 14 or 15, whenever when we all had head-ons with mum and what I remember is that I was a bit older than her, so I had been through that with mum and I had settled down and Susie was going into her head-on period with mum.
 ...

Q. ... Are you saying that Susan had no more difficulties with her mother in than the rest of the children, or are you saying that Susan's relationship with her mother was particularly difficult? A. What I am saying is when Susan got to that teenager bit and she started having her head-on arguments with mum, I don't think they were any worse than when I was at that year old stage and I had head-on arguments with mum as well. So by 18 I was getting on much better with mum, because I wasn't fighting with her every five minutes and Susie was just heading into that, so I don't think it was any worse than the fighting and arguments that I had with mum.

Q. Would you describe your mother as an unknowing and harsh and uncaring person? A. No.

Q. No? A. No.

Q. Would you ever have described your mother that way? A. No, no, no.

Q. Have you ever heard your other sisters describe your mother that way? A.
No.

Q. Have you ever heard Susan describe your mother that way? A. No, I haven't,
I don't think. I have heard Susan describe mum in various ways, but not those words.

Q. I might have the wrong adjectives, please tell me the adjectives your sister had used - Susan? A. Susie? 
Q. Mm. A. She's is a bitch, she's tough, she doesn't listen to her, she doesn't understand her." 
On the other hand, I do not accept as reliable some of the more extreme descriptions of the relationship attributed to the plaintiff in the records of doctors and counsellors who have seen her since her discharge from Chelmsford, descriptions which appear to me very likely to have been much influenced by her depression.

In general I accept the plaintiff's evidence at trial as a more accurate reflection of the true state of her childhood relationship with her mother than the other descriptions attributed to her. She conceded that she had arguments with her mother and that that was a constant problem. She said:- "Mum and I didn't get on very well most of the time."; and she identified various topics of dispute, typical matters of concern to a teenager. She agreed that there were some things in her life which she felt she could not discuss with her mother and that includes in particular certain specific incidents to which I will refer in their chronological place. I am satisfied that during some of their arguments in those early teenage years of the plaintiff, both she and her mother may have used excessively strong language but that the relationship cannot properly be described as abusive.

On one occasion, when the plaintiff was aged 11, she attempted shoplifting; she was caught, threatened with prosecution, and received a severe fright. I accept her evidence that she did not offend again in that way before her admission to Chelmsford.

When the plaintiff was aged about 12, a party was held in her home for one of her elder sisters. I gather the plaintiff's parents were not at home at the time. Without the knowledge of her elder sister, the plaintiff was given a number of alcoholic drinks by other persons present at the party. That was the first time she had had alcohol and she was considerably affected by it: in her own words, "extremely drunk". She went up to her bedroom and found in her bed a boy some years older than herself, who was naked. He induced her to get into the bed with him and eventually persuaded her to have sexual intercourse. She does not suggest that he forced her but it is clear that he took advantage of her naivety and her intoxication.

There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the plaintiff's use of alcohol on that occasion was other than an isolated incident. There is no foundation for any suggestion that she had used alcohol before that date or that she used it again prior to her admission to Chelmsford. Equally, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that, apart from the incident just described, the plaintiff was sexually active before her admission to
Chelmsford. I accept her evidence that she was not.

Dr. Phillips in his report of 29 April 1992 recorded an ambiguous history that "she has smoked cannabis since her teenage years". In evidence he said that his present understanding of his notes was that the plaintiff had told him of marijuana use occurring before her admission to Chelmsford. There is some support for that, in a reference in the Chelmsford notes, early in the course of the plaintiff's second admission, recording that she had "continued to use marijuana after her discharge from Chelmsford on the first occasion". The plaintiff in evidence agreed that she had used marijuana in her teens (which is what Dr. Phillips had recorded) but said she did not now recall having used it before her admission to Chelmsford; her recall was that she first used it when she was aged about 16, and at about the time when she met the man Gary who subsequently introduced her to heroin. Nothing was put to Ms. Goddard, Mr.
Westmore or Mrs. Lough which may have elicited any history of regular use of cannabis.

It is clear from Dr. Phillips' evidence that the plaintiff was intoxicated at the time of his first interview with her. The history which he was able to obtain on that occasion contains significant errors, almost certainly due to ambiguity or lack of clarity in the plaintiff's answers to him, but perhaps also or instead due to failure on her part to understand. I accept her present evidence that she did not use marijuana before her first admission to Chelmsford. On the other hand, I prefer to her suspect recollection the entry in the Chelmsford notes early in the course of her second admission which satisfies me (contrary to her present recollection) both that she was first introduced to marijuana during her first admission and also that (continuing, as I understand it, in January 1977 her association with one of the men whom she had met in Chelmsford) she continued to use marijuana between the two admissions. Assuming that to be so, it is not possible on the evidence to say how frequently or how regularly she did so.
 (I should interpolate that the finding that she was introduced to marijuana whilst in Chelmsford on the first occasion, although it may be relevant in some ultimate assessment of her damages if the case proceeds in that direction, does not itself attract or inflate damages in the present proceedings having regard to the form of the questions for separate trial. The relevance of those findings in the present phase of the proceedings arises in relation to the use which the defendants, and their principal expert witness,
Dr. Waters, seek to make of the plaintiff's pre-DST use of marijuana).

During the plaintiff's fifteenth year, that is to say during the school year prior to her admission to Chelmsford, there occurred a quite bizarre episode in which she was party to the procuring of an abortion for one of her school friends whom I shall refer to only as Pamela (not her real name: her real name is recorded in MFI 1 which I have ordered to be sealed and not opened except by order of a judge). Pamela, having become pregnant, desired to terminate the pregnancy without the knowledge of her parents. I accept the plaintiff's account of what occurred, which emerged only in cross-examination of her, based upon a note in the Chelmsford Hospital records to the effect that she herself had had an abortion. She denied that that had occurred, and it emerged that she had accompanied her friend to a "family planning clinic" in Sydney and allowed her friend to use her (the plaintiff's) name and her (the plaintiff's) parents' health insurance. The bulk of the cost of the procedure was charged to Dr. Tweedale's health insurance fund, and Pamela paid the excess in cash. It was suggested to her that the story was not true. I think it too bizarre to be anything but true. No attempt was made by the defendant to demonstrate its falsity, for example by the production of records of any relevant family planning clinic or health fund. The plaintiff frankly admitted that the act was dishonest or fraudulent. I think ultimately the defendants' counsel was prepared to accept that the incident occurred substantially as the plaintiff described it and that it was not true that she herself had had an abortion. There is no doubt that the plaintiff's conduct was dishonest and fraudulent. There is equally, I think, no doubt that her motivation was not in any way self-interested. (In particular I reject the fatuous suggestion by Dr.
Waters that her purpose was or may have been in part to embarrass or exact some revenge from or score some sort of victory over her father). On the contrary, I think it is clear that she was motivated by nothing other than her friendship with and her concern for Pamela.

First admission to Chelmsford Private Hospital 
The same girl, Pamela, was involved in an incident later that year out of which arose the plaintiff's first admission to Chelmsford. The plaintiff described the circumstances substantially as follows.

One morning she arrived at school to find that Pamela had gotten into trouble because of her failure to complete some particular school work, had become very distressed about that and had become the butt of teasing or worse from some of their class mates. The plaintiff rescued Pamela from the unwelcome attentions of her class mates. It appeared to the plaintiff that Pamela was not merely distressed but mentally disturbed - she describes Pamela as:- "... growling, it was a growling noise like dog ... she didn't recognize me ... I didn't know what had happened to her ... as in what had mentally happened to her, she had just completely changed, she was not reasonable ..." 
The plaintiff was scared, distressed, confused. She thought that Pamela had a serious problem. She tried to discuss it with her mother but her mother did not take it seriously. The plaintiff was so distressed that she would not go to school on the following day and "Mum thought it was just an excuse to stay off school for the day and was constantly needling me about it". It was in those circumstances that the plaintiff took from the family medicine cupboard a quantity of Valium tablets and consumed them.

It is not clear whether the plaintiff was thereby rendered unconscious. There is no direct evidence but a history to that effect was recorded by Ms. Breen, and Dr. Waters records that the plaintiff told him that, having taken the valium, "the next thing she remembered was waking up at Hornsby Hospital". The plaintiff's account of the incident in her evidence in chief makes no reference to unconsciousness; and it was never put to her in cross-examination that she had become unconscious. In chief she was asked the leading question, "After you took these tablets do you understand you were taken to the Hornsby
Hospital?", to which she replied, "That's right". That certainly is capable of being understood as an acknowledgment by her that she was not conscious but it is equally consistent that she simply now has no recollection; and given her emotional state at the time, that is quite likely. It is certainly not necessary to interpret that answer as implying that her belief is that she was rendered unconscious.

The plaintiff's mother's account of the incident contains no reference to unconsciousness; and it was never put to her that the plaintiff had become unconscious. The plaintiff's father was cross-examined and made clear his belief that his daughter was not unconscious. He said:- "I am sure she was not unconscious, that is what we were worried about, that she might become unconscious but I am sure she was not unconscious ... Had she been unconscious they would have told me." 
He said he had no real recollection but it seems to me that he, medical practitioner as he is, would have been, as he says he was, concerned to know whether she was unconscious or not; and it is likely that he would have remembered it if that were the case. Dr. Nothling inferred that she was not unconscious, at least on arrival at hospital, because of the history he obtained from the plaintiff that her stomach had been pumped out, a procedure which he believed would not have been undertaken if she was brought in unconscious. The history recorded on the plaintiff's admission to Chelmsford contains no reference to unconsciousness at the time of the ingestion of valium a couple of days earlier; and Dr. Herron's notes in Exhibit 8, which purport to be his notes of his first consultation with the plaintiff, make no such reference. He was not called to give evidence.

It appears to me unlikely that the plaintiff in fact became unconscious, although she may have been dazed or drowsy, but even if she was unconscious the period of unconsciousness must have been very brief.

While she was at Hornsby Hospital, the plaintiff was seen by a social worker and it was then recommended to her parents that she should see Dr. John
Herron. In the company of her father she attended on Dr. Herron who "suggested a couple of weeks in Chelmsford just to have a rest". Notes which purport to have been made by Dr. Herron at that time contain a history that she had been depressed for months, that a couple of her friends had been killed in a motor car accident, that her boyfriend was on drugs and she had heard a rumour that he was dead; and that although that rumour was not true he was "badly knocked off" by drugs. The plaintiff denied having given any such history. She did not have a boyfriend at the time. It had not occurred that any of her friends had been killed in a motor car accident. Neither of her parents was aware of the matters allegedly given in that history but both were aware (although their recollection is faulty as to detail) that the plaintiff (at the time) related her ingestion of valium to the problems of her school friend. There is no evidence that all or any of the recorded history emanated from the plaintiff directly. There is no evidence whatsoever to suggest that the recorded history is true. There is no apparent reason why the plaintiff should have given such a history. It should be observed that on the arrival of the plaintiff a nurse's record was made which relates to the overdose of valium two days earlier and a history in relation thereto, "unable to cope with problems of friends", another circumstance which casts doubt on the validity of the purported entry in Dr. Herron's notes recording a different history. In the absence of any evidence from Dr. Herron as to the time when and the source from which the history was obtained, I conclude that no such history was given by the plaintiff herself.

The same note includes this line, "sleeping terribly, knots in stomach, feels hopeless and helpless, crying a lot". The plaintiff did not recall having given that description of her symptoms although she agreed she may well have told the doctor that she was sleeping terribly (ie. since Pamela's distress at school). I do not doubt that she told Dr. Herron that she felt depressed at that time, but I accept her evidence that she had not been, and did not tell
Dr. Herron that she had been, "low and depressed for months" before the valium incident.

The only other evidence to suggest that the plaintiff was depressed at the time of her admission are entries in the Chelmsford Hospital notes. The
Register of Patients, completed (presumably) at the time of her admission, states as the "nature of any disease manifest at time of admission", "depression" but, unexplained, and, in particular, unexplained by any evidence from the admitting doctor, Dr. Herron, it is not possible to know whether that is simply a clerical or administrative classification by a clerk; whether it was in fact based on a medical diagnosis; and if so by whom that diagnosis was made and on what basis; and whether in any event, it was no more than a provisional diagnosis which may have been modified or confirmed in the course of her admission. It may be significant that the same form contains no entry in the space provided to record "nature of any disease manifest after admission".

The hospital notes record that she was treated with amitriptyline, an anti- depressant (but it is not clear whether that was administered continuously or only on one or two specific occasions), and Dalmane, for sleep, but there is no evidence as to the indications which led to the prescription of those medications. Nurses' notes occasionally refer to her as being "depressed" or "still depressed" or on other occasions "mood lifting", "appears brighter today". One occasion, the date of which is unclear but probably around about 6 or 7 December, "said she still feels depressed over various things".

It is not clear that any such reference to her being "depressed" is intended to express a diagnosis; I would understand them rather as recording the plaintiff's own report of her mood.

I think it is appropriate to observe that the plaintiff may at the time when she saw Dr. Herron or subsequently in conversation with hospital staff have used the word "depressed" to describe the way she was feeling then or at some earlier time, but meaning by that word no more than unhappy or low spirited.
Having, of course, in more recent times been diagnosed as suffering the illness called depression, the plaintiff now uses the word in a sense approaching the medical sense, that is to say uses the word "depressed" to convey suffering from the illness called depression. Care needs to be taken in determining whether in what she is reported to have said on any past occasion she used the word in one sense or the other. Unfortunately, counsel cross- examining did not take the trouble to make that distinction which is, I think, a vital one. Inasmuch as the defendants' experts and the defendants' counsel in final submission tend to attach significance to the use by the plaintiff during and before her first admission to Chelmsford of the word depressed, those submissions and opinions are invalidated insofar as they seek to attach to her use of the word the technical medical meaning.

More significant, perhaps, is an entry which attributes to the plaintiff an expression of fears about her thoughts of suicide.

I think there is little doubt that she had symptoms of depression while in the hospital. That was the view both of the court expert, Dr. Nothling and the plaintiff's principal medical witness, Dr. Phillips, when the matters recorded in the notes were brought to their attention in cross-examination; but both affirmed, upon a consideration of all of the evidence about the plaintiffs' condition both before and during her admission, that she was not suffering from diagnosable depression at those times. The furthest that Dr. Phillips was prepared to go was in this passage of his evidence:- "Q. Is it the case that you are not prepared to concede that there was depression suffered by the plaintiff prior to the second Chelmsford admission?
A. Miss Tweedale clearly suffered significant dysphoria and in a lay term dysphoria equates with a symptom of depression, certainly not in the scientific sense, the constellation of symptoms which go up to making depression. It is much more likely that she was suffering, if we need a medical diagnosis - it would be closer to an acute adjustment reaction at that time with dysphoria as a prominent symptom within the adjustment reaction.

Q. If we have these problems with the word depression would you agree with this: that up to the time of experimentation with heroin she had for a considerable period starting before the first admission and continuing thereafter, with increases and decreases right up until the time of experimentation, dysphoria? A. There is no doubt that throughout that period there was substantial dysphoria - the second period.

Q. What do you mean by the second period? A. The period that began, I believe, during her second admission to Chelmsford and continued through to her seventeenth birthday, when she first used heroin.

Q. I asked you about the period that incorporated that but included the period beforehand. Do I take it that you do not concede that prior to the second admission the plaintiff had suffered for a considerable or significant period from dysphoria? A. Oh, I concede that she had dysphoria during that first period leading up to and perhaps incorporating part of the second admission to
Chelmsford Hospital.

Q. If you assume that prior to the first admission the plaintiff had felt for some time that she was depressed, would you not agree with me that that period of dysphoria would be extended prior to the first admission? A. I think - yes,
I think I have said it already. There was dysphoria, the symptom, prior to her first admission and during the interval between the admissions and a more pervasive dysphoria, as I have the history, after her second admission to
Chelmsford. But it is a symptom which we are able to pick up throughout the period you've mentioned." 
Earlier, Dr. Phillips had drawn a distinction between her condition in a period which embraced some time before the first admission, the interval between her first and second admissions and the early part of her second admission to Chelmsford which he described as "a stage of very considerable vulnerability"; and her condition following "her second period in Chelmsford".
He referred to what he saw as the pervasive changes that had occurred and said, "it would seem to me that a stage of vulnerability and perhaps reversibility have given way to a stage of or a situation of pervasive irreversibility". A little later he gave this evidence:- "Q. Before the break I was asking you about whether the plaintiff had had dysphoria at various times. Would you agree with me that by her 17th birthday she had had, on the assumptions I have given you, a long history of dysphoria going back beyond the second admission and indeed beyond the first admission?
A. Yes, dysphoria as a symptom had been present for a long period of time.

Q. And she had had a long history of vulnerability which was another word you had used? A. Yes, the vulnerability was there throughout her teenage years.
The cluster of symptoms including dysphoria appeared after the vulnerability, the vulnerability was the situation in which these symptoms developed." 
The suggestion that she was generally depressed over a period of time before that first admission was rejected by her mother whose evidence on that point I accept. I am satisfied that to her parents, the valium episode came "out of the blue", an incident of which they had, and had no reason to have, any premonition. I am satisfied that the distress which occasioned it was not something that had been building gradually over many months but was an isolated episode of distress originating only the day before in the incident involving the girl I have called Pamela. Mrs. Tweedale knew of no other reason.

I do not infer from the fact that the parents consented to their daughter's admission to hospital that they believed her to be suffering from a psychological or emotional disorder. Obviously Mrs. Tweedale was concerned that Susan should have acted as she did and she readily accepted the suggestion of Dr. Herron that he would admit her to hospital and "was going to talk to her and help sort out her problems". Clearly she relied on her husband and Dr. Vickary, a family friend who was a psychiatrist and, having been referred to Dr. Herron, relied upon him. The plaintiff's father seems to have had blind faith in Dr. Herron and accepted his advice that the appropriate course to deal with her distress was to admit her to the hospital.

Mrs. Tweedale visited her daughter in the hospital and observed that she had "moments of depression" which she thought were nothing abnormal in a child of that age. She accepted Dr. Herron's advice that the child should remain there and should be discharged when she was. The plaintiff made no report to her of suicidal feelings. Her father was not able to comment on her mood state during the period of the admission, but would not assent to the proposition that he would not have allowed her to remain in the hospital for such a long period at that time unless he had himself observed something unusual about her. On the contrary, he said:- "It is up to the psychiatrists to tell me when the patient is ready to go home and I would not interfere with them." 
The plaintiff's recorded statements of her feelings afford evidence of the existence of symptoms such as would be found in a diagnosis of depression or dysphoria, but in the light of all of the available evidence, and in the absence of any medical evidence as to her actual condition, in particular the absence of evidence from the one doctor known to be available and to have seen her during that time, Dr. Herron, I find on the probabilities that she was not suffering from diagnosable depression.

The plaintiff made no complaint of anything that occurred during the first admission. She said she was just allowed to relax and watch television. She enjoyed being there. She appears to have formed a friendship with another patient by the name of Paul, which may have developed into a more intense relationship during or after that admission (but was never a sexual relationship).

The hospital notes of this admission contain a couple of references on which the defendant places considerable reliance. On a date not precisely recorded but which may have been 15 December 1976:- "Told nurse she is not on the pill. Have been raped twice and had an abortion which her parents do not know about. Patient told her father she will be for discharge end of week.", and possibly on the following day:- "Visited by elder sister and upset since saying, crying and talking about her fears of discharge in small group. To commence oral contraceptive tonight.
Paul and Sue have asked that the staff allow them to mix. They have no intention of having sexual intercourse `at present'." 
If it be assumed that the first entry correctly records something said by the plaintiff, nevertheless I do not accept that what she said was true or accurate. I accept her evidence that her sexual experience before Chelmsford was limited as previously described; and that she had not had an abortion. She may have been fantasising. On the other hand it is entirely possible that something which she may have said was confused and misunderstood. As to the second entry, I am unaware of any evidence that the oral contraceptive was in fact prescribed for her during that admission although it may be that somebody on the staff had it in contemplation as a result of awareness of her developing relationship with Paul. The reference to sexual intercourse highlights the danger of placing too much reliance on unexplained entries in records where what is recorded is probably the reporter's summation of a conversation very likely including leading questions. I do not interpret the entry as any evidence that the plaintiff at that stage was contemplating a sexual relationship with Paul and was herself seeking prescription of the oral contraceptive pill. The plaintiff herself, when asked, did not recall the particular conversation on 15 December 1976 but denied that she had asked to be put on the pill because she was contemplating a sexual relationship with
Paul at that time. I accept her evidence.

After discharge from Chelmsford Private Hospital - before second admission 
There is very little evidence about the plaintiff's emotional state at the time of her discharge from Chelmsford. She did say that she felt better after that short time; that she had had time to think about and come to terms with the incident concerning her friend which had happened in early December; that she still had her difficulties with her mother but, asked, "Did you still feel depressed or did you feel better at that point?", she said, "I felt fine." It is not clear whether the anti-depressant medication which had been prescribed while she was in the hospital continued after her discharge; although a note purporting to have been made by Dr. Herron at the time of her second admission suggests that she continued on amitriptyline for one month after she left hospital.

The recollection of her parents (for what it is worth) is that she appeared to be her normal self.

In circumstances about which the recollection of the plaintiff and her parents is certainly unclear, a decision was made that she should not return to PLC but should be enrolled as a border at All Saints College at Bathurst. The plaintiff's parents were disappointed that she did not perform as well at school as her siblings and had discussed, at least with Mrs. Greenaway, whether it would be in her best interests to change schools. Against that background occurred the valium incident, and there was a convergence of the parents' concerns about her performance at PLC and the plaintiff's own understandable and obvious reluctance to return to PLC where she would foreseeably face embarrassment over what had just occurred. In face of her evident reluctance, her parents offered her the option of going to Bathurst. I have no doubt that part of her willingness to go stemmed from the fact that she was having problems in her relationship with her mother: particularly, as
I would infer, from her feeling that her mother had somewhat let her down in relation to the recent incident involving Pamela.

The plaintiff was unhappy at All Saints. She was lonely; she wanted to go home; she missed her family; she missed her friends; she did not like the strict discipline involved in a boarding school. She ran away from school with the intention of hitchhiking back to Sydney. She was found, she was taken back to the school. Her parents were advised and her father went to Bathurst and collected her and drove her back to Sydney. The plaintiff perceived that her mother was upset by what had taken place and proposed that she might go back to Chelmsford for a couple of weeks to allow time for things to settle down before she returned home. Her evidence is that her father concurred; that without going home they went directly to see Dr. Herron and he readmitted her to Chelmsford. I am satisfied that her recollection is at fault and I accept the evidence of her mother that the plaintiff came home; she was probably at home for at least a few days, during which period her mother perceived her to be upset "a bit emotional, a little hysterical".

Second admission to Chelmsford Private Hospital - until institution of DST 
There was a discussion within the family as to what was best for Susan, and
Mrs. Tweedale or her husband telephoned Dr. Herron who "suggested that we take her up to Chelmsford again and work out the problems" (Mrs. Tweedale - t.316).
I accept Mrs. Tweedale's evidence on this because it is clear that whereas she was not a party to any discussions which led to the plaintiff's first admission to Chelmsford, she has a clear recollection of being involved in the decision on the second occasion. She did not, however, go with the plaintiff and her father when they went to see Dr. Herron in his rooms for a consultation, following which she was actually admitted to the hospital. The plaintiff recalls such a consultation; her father does not recall it. Dr.
Herron's notes contain reference to an apparent consultation on 17 March which records the fact of her past admission and treatment by way anti-depressants and which, strangely, inaccurately records that she had been treated with ECT.

The plaintiff agreed that she may well have told Dr. Herron, as recorded in his notes, that she had become teary, depressed and upset about her position.
The Register of Patients again records depression as the diagnosis at the time of admission. The first nurses' note records that she said she was very depressed and hated Bathurst and boarding school. The plaintiff said she did not recall having told staff that she was very depressed but I have no difficulty in accepting that she did say that.

The nursing notes in respect of the period prior to the commencement of DST on April, that is a period of some five weeks, reveal that she was initially inactive and somewhat lethargic, perhaps due to medication, though on occasion she seems to have participated in patient activities. She was visited by her parents and, clearly, pressure was being exerted upon her to go back to school, which she resisted. From time to time it is recorded that she was complaining of feeling depressed. Within a couple of days of her admission she complained that another patient had come into her room and stroked her legs, and asked that steps be taken to keep him away from her. This seems to be the first record of any incident during that admission having sexual overtones, and it is a record which makes it clear that the particular advances to which it refers were not solicited or welcomed by her. Subsequently there are records showing that she was forming a friendship with a male patient with whom she progressively began to spend a lot of time. There was some concern about their being alone together in her room on one occasion and her being sullen when her visitor was told to leave. Elsewhere there is a reference to her tending to buck at authority "like most teenagers" - certainly there is little to suggest any serious misbehaviour in that regard.

However, as the pre-DST period goes on, it is apparent that she was misbehaving in a progressively more serious manner. She was apparently smoking from time to time; sometimes drinking alcohol (apparently made available to her by adult patients); her relationship with an unidentified male patient progressed to the stage where she was, on one occasion, found lying with him on a bed in a darkened room; she was reprimanded for interfering with the property of another patient and it is recorded several times that her behaviour was "very manipulative". She continued to be treated with anti- depressant and other medications. There are plenty of indications in the notes that her mood was very depressed.

The plaintiff in her evidence in chief claimed to have little specific recollection of the period in hospital prior to the commencement of DST. She said she was heavily medicated virtually from the word go and "it was horrible", "being medicated to the point where you could not think". It became clear in cross-examination that when prompted she did in fact recall various incidents, including some of the social activities in which she engaged with other patients both at the hospital and at a nearby hotel, although I accept that she has no clear or complete recollection. In general I am prepared to accept that the notes in the hospital records accurately represent her condition and behaviour, so far as those notes go.

DST/ECT 
It appears that on or about 15 April, Dr. Herron raised with her father the idea of administering ECT though for what reason and upon the basis of what indications does not appear and is not, of course, the subject of any evidence by Dr. Herron. ECT was given on a number of occasions following that. In the face of the evidence of Dr. Phillips and Dr. Nothling that, although symptoms of depression existed, there is insufficient information to justify a diagnosis of depression, I am not prepared to infer from the presence of those symptoms and the additional fact that ECT (recognised as a treatment for depression) was prescribed, that the plaintiff did in fact suffer from a diagnosable depression. On 17 April, she is recorded as saying that she felt down and as having asked "if she is allowed to kill herself". It is not clear but seems likely that this occurred after the first ECT. A note on the night of 20/21 April records that the plaintiff was anxious about further ECT but was reassured. Further treatment was given the following day and on several days thereafter.

On 26 April, it is recorded that "Dr. Tweedale would like Dr. Bailey to look after Sue in Dr. Herron's absence". Dr. Tweedale gave evidence about a consultation which he had with Dr. Herron some time after Susan's admission.
His recollection was that it was earlier than the notes indicate, but it is reasonably clear that the discussion in question took place somewhere around April. His evidence is that Dr. Herron said:- "He was quite worried about Susan and he was sure that she would require further treatment in the hospital but unfortunately he was going on holidays and he said, `Now Dr. Bailey, Harry Bailey works at Chelmsford Hospital and I would like him to look after her' and seeing that I knew Dr. Bailey I was in agreement with that and he said, `The line of treatment that he wants to use is deep sleep therapy'." 
The notes record that Dr. Bailey saw the plaintiff on 27 April and determined to institute deep sedation immediately. The administration of the DST medications commenced that day.

The plaintiff described the treatment processes and I am satisfied that such recollection as she has of them is of a most distressing experience indeed, both as to ECT and as to DST. As to the former, she said it used to give her bad headaches and "emotionally just wreck you for the day". She said:- "You wouldn't know what had happened sort of thing because they give you a general anaesthetic and knock you out. You would come to later and you'd be very disorientated." 
She would know in advance that such treatment was to be given because she would be repositioned in her bed and the machine would be wheeled in on a trolley. She asked Dr. Herron not to give her ECT or further ECT after the programme had started but he simply said, "That is part of the treatment".

The process of DST was not explained to her in advance: indeed, the fact that she was to be treated in that way appears to have been deliberately concealed from her. She recalls having feeding tubes down her nose which she found uncomfortable and distressing so that she used to pull them out. She was restrained or shackled to prevent her from doing that. She experienced hallucinations, some of which have been repeated in her nightmares since.

The plaintiff immediately after DST 
At the end of the DST period she woke up in a room other than the DST ward.
She found that she couldn't walk; she couldn't talk and it was several days before she was able to stand and walk properly and put words and sentences together. She was unable to recall who she was and who the family was until her father's entry into her room brought those memories back to her.
Physically she felt crushed and she had a respiratory problem similar to influenza. For some time she had little or no appetite. She had lost a lot of weight which however she regained over the next few months.

She gave the following description of her condition in the weeks immediately after the DST:- "Q. I want you to describe, if you could please, how you were feeling in those weeks immediately after the deep sleep therapy, whether you noticed anything unusual about yourself? A. Well, I was not able to remember things that were told to me. My - I became a bit sort of paranoid, I suppose, because I was a bit frightened that they would put me back to sleep again. I didn't quite trust - my trust hit an all time low because I felt I had been better and put to sleep and no one told me anything beforehand; so I thought it had been done in secret.

Q. What were you doing with your time over those weeks following the deep sleep therapy? What would you do during the day? A. Well, I was heavily medicated. I was falling asleep a lot. They were trying to get me up to do things. They had craft, occupational therapy. They would take us out, bowling and to movies and things but they used to make us feel - you would sort of be going out to a movie or something and you would think: Well, people won't know that you are from a crazy, you know, a mental hospital but they would take you out in the bus and you felt like a real mental patient. They would hand out our pills in the middle of the foyer and things like that.

Q. How was your thinking in those weeks following the deep sleep therapy? A.
Very confused.

Q. Had you ever had a problem like that before? A. No, no.

Q. When you say confused thinking, could you just describe what you are trying to convey please? A. Yes. Well, it is sort of like 0 on the medication itself it was hard to think straight and to analyse a problem and getting the words out because of the medication but after the sedation it was - just go get the thoughts together just seemed so much harder. I was very confused and found that I could not clear that confusion.

Q. Do you recall your sisters coming in to see you in those weeks following the deep sleep therapy? A. No I don't.

Q. You can't recall? A. No.

Q. Do you recall having conversations with people in those weeks following that therapy, with other people at the hospital? A. No, I don't recall much after that. My memory became ...

Q. Well, no doubt at some stage you can recall conversations that you had with people after the deep sleep therapy? A. Yes.

Q. Can you recall anything unusual about such conversations? A. I would lose track of what someone was saying or I would just lose what - I would be in the middle of saying something and I would lose track of what I was saying; unable to understand the questions that were being put, unable to get a good idea of what concepts were being put across to me.

Q. In those weeks following the deep sleep therapy how was your recollection of events that had occurred before you had been put out of it? A. Afterwards how was my recollection of before? 
Q. Yes, or can't you recall? A. I am sorry, I can't remember.

Q. Did you notice anything unusual about your memory for previous events in the weeks or months following the deep sleep therapy? A. I noticed that unless something came physically in front of me I would be unaware of it until it was there. I mean, I did not remember I had a family until I saw my Dad. As I said, - I think I said I did not know I was a smoker until I was around cigarettes again, things like that and that maintained, that kept going for quite a while afterwards, just not having a recollection of something until it was jogged and sometimes even then it just did not come." 
The plaintiff's sister, Louise Lough, saw her within a day or so after the completion of DST. She said:- "A. I saw her, she was sort of sitting like just all hunched up and she didn't recognise me.

SEMMLER: Q. Why do you say that? A. Because I went up to her and I said, you know, `Hi Susie' and she just sort of stared back at me with her head down and low and just looked at me like - and she was really weird, just very strange; it just wasn't like her.

Q. Could you describe what you mean by `she was really weird'? A. Well, it just wasn't Susie. It was like something had been done to her and she wasn't the Susie who had been there a week - prior to that. She was different.

Q. In what respect was she different? A. Well, she couldn't talk to me at that point; at that point she couldn't talk even and she just had her head down.

Q. How did she differ, if she did differ, from people, for instance, who had just had major operations? A. Well, she was like a zombie, she was like a non- functioning person.

Q. How long did that continue for? A. Well, I think she was in that state - the next time I saw her she could remember who I was.

Q. When was that? A. That would have probably been a few days later. I can't remember exactly, but it would have been a few days to a week because I would have gone every week, and she could remember who I was but she was - she just - her concentration wasn't there. She could hardly concentrate on what you were talking about. It was like I wasn't - it was, you know, it was like she was looking at me, `Oh, this is my sister' but there was no - she just wasn't responding as Susie would. She just wasn't like she was - would normally respond, just, `Hi, how are you' and just chatting away; she wasn't doing that. She couldn't. She just sat there and stared at you. She had put on a whole lot of weight and was - with head bowed and was very very miserable.
 ...

Q. When you first saw her on that first occasion after she had come out of the deep sleep, can you recall how you reacted to it? A. Yes, I just sat at the end of her bed crying.
 ...

Q. When you sat at the end of the bed crying, did she say anything to you? A.
No, she just sat there kind of looking at me. She didn't even have a response.
She just sort of had her head down as if what was going on around her wasn't computing in her head, like - it was like she was distanced from what was going on around her. She was just sitting there like, with her head down, and
I was talking to her and she would just be - she would just look at me, and she just wasn't normal, she wasn't herself." 
The plaintiff's mother described the plaintiff during those days as looking "very vulnerable":- "She looked as though she really didn't know what was going on or where she was. ... She was speaking incoherently and very tearful, very shaky and she really just looked like a little baby." 
She was disorientated although she recognised her mother. She was physically very weak.

There are no hospital nursing records available in respect of the period from May 1977 to 28 June 1977.

Plaintiff's hospitalisation after DST until November 1977 
For reasons which the evidence does not make clear, the plaintiff remained a patient in the hospital in effect until 2 November 1977. She said and I accept that she asked her father to move her to some other hospital but he refused. It appears that she was in fact discharged on 24 May 1977 but she was readmitted two days later. The circumstances in which those events occurred are not explained nor were any questions directed to the plaintiff or to her parents about it. It is the fact that throughout her whole time at Chelmsford (apart from periods when she was too heavily medicated or otherwise too unwell) the plaintiff was from time to time allowed home overnight, and it may be that what is recorded as discharge and readmission was in fact no more than one such period of leave. It appears that she continued to be Dr. Herron's patient after his return from an overseas trip. As time went on the plaintiff availed herself often of the opportunity to go home for a day or two but always seemed anxious to return or at any rate willing to return to the hospital. Why it was thought necessary that she should do so is left unexplained. She continued to be treated with considerable quantities of sedative medications under the direction of Dr. Herron. I accept her evidence that there was no significant change or improvement in her condition other than that she recovered from the distressing immediate post-DST symptoms within a relatively few weeks.

It is clear from Mrs. Lough's evidence that her impression of the plaintiff throughout the subsequent months in Chelmsford is of a person quite different from her pre-treatment state:- "She was never herself again." "She was lethargic. She had put on a lot of weight. She was depressed and to me she was miserable. She had lost her sense of humour which she had always had a good sense of humour, she was very - she seemed to become, the longer she was in there the more alienated she sort of ..." 
She became alienated from her family; when Mrs. Lough visited:- "She had less and less to talk to me about; she was very involved in the inner workings of the breakfast, lunch and dinner and that had become her life." 
Mrs. Lough was aware that the plaintiff came home sometimes on weekends, she was aware that the plaintiff sometimes left the hospital to go shopping and to attend a business course to which reference will later be made, but she was not otherwise aware of the plaintiff's activities at the hospital. Having described the plaintiff's condition immediately after the treatment as "like a zombie", she said:- "On many other occasions when I went into Chelmsford she was depressed and morose and didn't talk and was in a fairly drugged state and at no time during the subsequent period of hospitalisation did she appear to be in anything other than a zombie like state." 
Dr. Tweedale's evidence did not clearly distinguish between the plaintiff's condition immediately after DST and throughout her subsequent hospitalisation but he said that talking to her:- "Everything was in slow motion as it were and she found it very hard to concentrate and if we asked her about something that she did previously, well she had trouble recollecting." 
She was quite different from what she was like before. She had lost all the animation that she had as a child. She no longer had a nice bright personality but on the contrary was "very depressed" and her mood state gradually got worse. His recollection was too imprecise to enable him to trace with any accuracy any change in her condition between when he first saw her immediately after DST, his contact with her during the remainder of her hospitalisation and his contact with her during the subsequent 18 months when, as will appear, she lived in the family home. He had no recollection of her having come home from the hospital on leave, nor of her having gone to business college and I am driven to the conclusion ultimately that I can place no reliance on his evidence of the plaintiff's state except to the extent that he contrasts her bright and animated persona before Chelmsford and her depressed and somewhat vague state after treatment.

Somewhere about July 1977, the plaintiff commenced to attend two or three days a week at a business college at Hornsby to undertake a typing course. She travelled from the hospital to the college in her mother's car, and her mother either waited or returned to pick her up afterwards to take her back to the hospital. She appears to have continued that course until shortly before her discharge from hospital on 2 November 1977.

No certificate of her achievement is available. It is the case that over subsequent years the plaintiff represented to prospective employers that she had learned to type to a speed of about 90 word per minute but I accept her evidence that that was a fabrication designed to assist her to obtain employment. In those later years she undoubtedly became capable of typing a great deal faster and more accurately than should could when she left the college though never, I accept, at a speed of 90. I accept her evidence that when she left the college she had a typing speed of no more than about 30 words per minute and, with perfect accuracy, somewhat less.

The plaintiff's mother confirmed that throughout the period when she was taking the plaintiff to the business college the plaintiff appeared to be:- "Very slow and very dopey ... just very lethargic ... a bit slurry; I thought she slurred her words. She did not seem to be right on the ball ... and a little bit despondent ... She was not focused ... Her attention span wasn't good." 
It seems to have been particularly on those occasions when she took her to the business college that Mrs. Tweedale made those observations about her daughter. In the course of her description of the plaintiff's condition at this stage, and in response to the suggestion that she wouldn't have bothered to take her to the secretarial course if she thought her so stupefied that she would take nothing in, Mrs. Tweedale said, rather surprisingly:- "She seemed to be fine. It was only just the actual typing from what I gathered that she was slow at ..." 
Asked a little later what she meant by saying that the plaintiff "was fine", she said:- "She seemed to be reasonable. I did not notice anything that was very much out of place. She was just in her usual condition. ... She was just a bit unresponsive ..." 
I think it would be a mistake to understand what Mrs. Tweedale said as representing that there was nothing wrong with the plaintiff other than that she was a bit unresponsive. Looking at the whole of her evidence I am satisfied that what she was endeavouring to convey was that the plaintiff was in the lethargic and despondent condition that she had earlier described but was, in Mrs. Tweedale's belief, "fine" meaning no more than that she was apparently capable of undertaking the business course. The undoubted fact that the plaintiff's attendance at the business course continued for so many months with so little achievement tends to confirm rather than deny the existence at that time of some level of cognitive dysfunction related either to actual brain damage, her then current medication or her emotional state, or some combination of those factors.

The defendant submits that the evidence falls short of showing any significant deterioration in the plaintiff's condition after DST as compared with her condition whilst in Chelmsford before that treatment was given. Reference is made to the evidence of the plaintiff's mother who described the plaintiff, during the year generally over the months March 1977 to November 1977 as "quieter, not as exuberant as she was ... before she had the incident of the tablets". She gave this evidence:- "Q. That loss of exuberance occurred around the start of December 1976 when she had this bizarre incident with the tablets? A. I would say so." 
Then she was asked this:- "Q. During those months of March 1977 through to November 1977 you did not notice any change occurring over that period for the better or for the worse ...? A. Not for the first few months but after, I do recall when she was taken to her typing course that there was a definite change. She was very despondent, lethargic ... not so much depressed but more stupefied, I would say. I really didn't get much reaction out of her at all and I was very worried out her." 
That evidence hardly supports the defendants' submission. The "first few months" to which the witness referred seems to mean (she was not asked to clarify) a period commencing with her admission to hospital and which may well coincide broadly with the end of DST or the end of her immediately recovery from it, and it is that period which the witness appears to be contrasting with the state of lethargy and despondency which followed DST and which was most apparent to her during the business course. Reference was made also to the evidence of the same witness in chief at pp.320-321 but that cannot be isolated from her evidence in the preceding couple of pages. At pp.318-319 she described the plaintiff's condition during Chelmsford; pp.320-321 deal with the decline in her condition after her discharge. The defendants' submission ignores the evidence of the plaintiff herself and of Mrs. Lough which shows a quite dramatic difference between the plaintiff's condition immediately after
DST and her condition before both in terms of cognitive function and mood, and shows that she never returned to her pre-DST state.

I see no reason why that evidence should not be accepted. The matters to which the defendants' submission refers seem to me to be really beside the point. It may be the case that the Chelmsford notes, so far as they are available (there are no notes during the period from the conclusion of DST until July 1977) do not support the contention that there was an early deterioration in the plaintiff's state after, as compared with before, DST. Because there are no notes between 11 May and July 1977, the lack of support, although obvious, has no significance; after that date the entries in the notes are certainly not inconsistent with there having been a deterioration. The circumstance that she did not return home on a full-time basis following DST may have been influenced by her reluctance to do so but the decision to keep her in hospital must have been a medical decision - it was not a matter entirely of the plaintiff's choice. Accordingly the significance of the fact that she did not return home on a full-time basis can only be determined in the light of medical evidence as to why she was retained in hospital - and there is no such evidence. So too the fact that the plaintiff was prescribed drugs which would have impacted on her cognitive state and may have masked the cognitive effect, if any, of DST/ECT, does not assist in determining whether her condition had deteriorated, in the absence of any evidence as to why those drugs were prescribed.

The medical evidence that is available is only the evidence of the experts who attempt to reconstruct from such slender materials as are available the plaintiff's condition at the time of her admission. The evidence of Dr.
Nothling and Dr. Phillips shows that there was no medical justification for lengthy hospitalisation in her condition as it existed at the time of her admission. Yet she was admitted to hospital, and after the administration to her of DST/ECT in the sixth, seventh and eighth weeks of her admission it was evidently found to be necessary to retain her in hospital for a further five months. It is not to be assumed that the defendants would have retained her in hospital without medical justification. If there was a medical justification for her retention in hospital, it is most likely to have been attributable to some change in her condition after her admission. The only thing which occurred which was apparently capable of causing and likely to cause a significant change in her condition appears to have been the administration of
DST/ECT. The inference is available that the need for her long period of hospitalisation after completion of those treatments, in the absence of any other explanation for it, was in some way related to the effects of those treatments upon her. If that is not the correct inference, it would have been very easy for the defendants to demonstrate that by calling Dr. Herron who had the control of the plaintiff's treatment at the time. Dr. Herron elected not to give evidence; the other defendants chose not to call him to give evidence although he was available. There is no explanation for his not giving evidence. In those circumstances I have no hesitation in drawing the inference that the plaintiff's prolonged hospitalisation after the administration to her of DST/ECT was rendered medically necessary as a consequence of that treatment. That being so, to the extent that her subsequent cognitive, emotional and disorders are caused by that period of hospitalisation and its incidents, those consequences are, in my view, shown to be consequences of
DST/ECT and compensable as such.

The defendant submits that what is relevant in answering the questions posed for separate trial is "what would have happened to the plaintiff had she not received DST/ECT. She had been admitted to Chelmsford for an extended period.
The question before the court is, `what would have happened if the admission had continued without the DST/ECT?'". It seems to me, with respect, that that does not accurately present the position. There is no evidence that at the time of her admission it was the intention of Dr. Herron, the admitting doctor, that she should remain for a long period, if by long period is meant a period extending through to November. There is simply no evidence as to what his intention was. What would have happened to the plaintiff had she not received DST/ECT is probably that since she was not subject to any psychiatric condition or emotional state which required her to be hospitalised for a lengthy period, she would have been discharged. If that is not so, the person best able to show why that is not so is Dr. Herron.

There are other aspects of the plaintiff's behaviour during her period in
Chelmsford after DST which require to be noticed. She participated, to some extent, in sporting and social activities organised by the hospital for the benefit and diversion of patients; she was allowed to leave the hospital to go home sometime for a couple of nights at a time and for periods which overall may have been approximately equal to the period she actually spent in the hospital. Certainly that is the effect of a sample survey of day report entries from 18 July 1977 to 17 August 1977. She was guilty of a certain amount of misbehaviour - use of alcohol and marijuana and some shop lifting; and she was involved in a series of sexual encounters with other patients, one aspect of her behaviour which is not altogether easy to assess. It is probably the case that she was eventually, if not initially, a not unwilling participant in those activities. She was, however, only 15 at the time, below the legal age of consent, sexually naive, and placed in an essentially adult environment. I think the truth of the matter is as she said:- "Q. Do you say that the sexual activity that you have described at Chelmsford was in the nature of molestation or do you say that that is something that you were happy to engage in? A. I'd say it was that I was heavily medicated at the time and didn't have the faculties to make a decision; I wasn't old enough to make those decisions." 
The other aspect of her hospitalisation during that period which is difficult to assess is the fact that, having spent so much time at home she was apparently willing to return to the hospital at the end of her allotted periods of leave. I think it is reasonably clear that she found in the hospital a refuge from the problems which she continued to experience with her mother when she went home; on the other hand there were occasions when she was clearly very anxious to leave the hospital to go to her home and distressed when she was refused leave.

Notwithstanding the apparently inconsistency between her claim that she felt herself imprisoned during that lengthy period in hospital and the fact that she spent so much time on leave, in pursuing her business college course, and on other outings, I accept her evidence as to how she felt about it, that "I felt like I was trapped there and I was unable to get out of the place" but on the other hand, that "I became very shy of people outside the hospital. Inside the hospital I felt safe ...". It has to be remembered that she was but 15 years old and ultimately under the control of adults, that is to say her parents and Dr. Herron, and it seems the reality is that she did not consider herself to have the power, whether or not she did in fact, to terminate the period of her hospitalisation of her own volition.

The plaintiff said in the course of her evidence:- "Q. Your evidence today is that you felt trapped throughout that entire six months, isn't it? A. Yes I did.

Q. And you felt that you could leave Chelmsford even you'd wanted to? A. Well
I wanted to and I couldn't - I was not allowed." 
Certainly in the evidence which followed that passage she did tend to over- state the extent to which her hospitalisation deprived her of access to her parents. She certainly did not convey that she was in fact at home for possibly as much as 50% of the time. I think there is no doubt that as the plaintiff looks back on her period at Chelmsford her precise recollection is distorted by emotion and some care needs to be taken to recognise that she is sometimes guilty of overstatement, while at the same time to acknowledge, as I do, the absence of any deliberate intention to exaggerate for the purpose of inflating her damages. It also is the case that the plaintiff somewhat exaggerated to Dr. Phillips and Dr. Nothling the extent to which she was, by reason of her hospitalisation, "trapped". She did not tell them that she had attended a business course, that she had gone frequently to her home to visit her family and that she had taken part in shopping, sport and other outings. I am satisfied that this was more likely the result of oversight or faulty memory and the absence of any relevant direct question, rather than any deliberate attempt on her part to deceive those witnesses. It does not appear that the opinion of either expert was significantly influenced by this part of the history. Neither was asked to agree that correction of the history in this respect should cause them to modify their opinions. Significantly, the evening report on 1 November 1977 notes that she was "in high spirits - stated father had contacted Dr. Herron and she is for discharge in am".

It is necessary to contrast that with her evidence at pp.31-32:- "Q. You were finally discharged, I think, on 2 November 1977, is that right?
Does that sound right? A. Yes.

Q. How were you feeling at that stage? A. I remember the morning, Dr. Herron saying, `You can go home today' and I remember thinking he was joking, that he was making some mean joke because ...

Q. Why do you say that? A. Well I was at the worst that I had been. I mean, I was really paranoid of people, very medicated, very subdued and sort of, I was - how would you explain it - unable to sort of stick up for myself anymore. I had become quite crushed ..." 
I do not find the apparent inconsistency to be significant, in light of her obvious ambivalence, at the time, as to which environment offered her the most security.

After Discharge from Chelmsford Private Hospital 
Following her discharge from the hospital the plaintiff returned to the family home and she remained there for about 18 months until about the end of May
There appears to be no suggestion that her parents (her mother in particular) were reluctant to have her home and that circumstance of itself tends to suggest that the relationship between the plaintiff and her mother, stormy though it sometimes was, was not as fundamentally flawed as the defendants contend.

The plaintiff's periods at home on leave during the period of hospitalisation were not periods of happy family activity. Mrs. Lough, who was living in the family home until February 1979, said:- "When she came home [at weekends] she remained preoccupied with food and she also didn't really do anything, she just sort of sat around and sat in her room and watched television and was depressed or unhappy.

Q. Had she ever done that kind of thing before Chelmsford, that is sit in her room and watch television? A. She did before Chelmsford. She'd sit around and watch television but after she'd been to Chelmsford she spent hours in her room; she would sleep a lot and during the day should would even go to sleep.
She wouldn't communicate normally with the household as she did before she went to Chelmsford." 
After her discharge her sisters were together at home and to Mrs. Lough's observation the plaintiff was never the same:- "She had changed in some fundamental way through the experience of what happened in Chelmsford.

Q. Would you do your best and give us some examples of the way you say she changed in this fundamental sense; did she have a different demeanour or personality? A. She did. She had a different demeanour; she was very unhappy, she was emotional after the Chelmsford experience, she could become very emotionally upset, she was emotionally labile, she would get upset and overreact to things that really didn't deserve a reaction like that." 
She described an incident where the plaintiff had locked herself in her room, completely hysterical, upset over some relatively trivial matter. She said:- "Prior to Chelmsford she yelled and had fights but she had never become hysterical like this episode. This was elevated beyond normal teenage yelling at mum and having fights, this was really over the top." 
During the period of 15 months or so after the plaintiff's discharge from hospital and before Mrs. Lough left the family home, she said she observed that the plaintiff's concentration was very disjointed:- "She couldn't concentrate on what you were talking about for a long time", but she couldn't comment specifically on the plaintiff's memory. As to her ability to engage in conversation, she said it was very limited:- "She would chat away; she could talk but she also would get agitated, she was very agitated a lot of the time and emotionally labile so that if something was said that wasn't quite right she would get very upset very easily." 
Mrs. Lough could not remember her having any boyfriends during that period though she could not say that the plaintiff did not have one; nor could she recall her having a job.

I have already referred to the evidence of the plaintiff's mother as to her cognitive state and her affect during the period of her hospitalisation after
DST/ECT. She went on to speak of a period thereafter, and up until the present. She was asked whether during that period her cognitive abilities appeared to be the same, that is her abilities to think and concentrate, and she replied:- "Her memory is very poor and she certainly seems to forget things very quickly and she does have to write everything down." 
She was asked when she first became aware of that and she said:- "It was certainly not immediate. She was very vague after Chelmsford but, as far as I know, the memory problem, I really hadn't gotten into; it was only later. ... It is hard to work out.

Q. Can you recall at what stage you first remarked to yourself that she seemed to have a problem with her memory? A. Look I really couldn't recall. It is just something that was gradual.

Q. Dating from when? A. Well it was dating virtually after Chelmsford. She left home and we sort of went on from there; her memory seemed to deteriorate, her concentration seemed to deteriorate.

Q. Did you say you can relate that to a time after she left home or was it something you observed before she left home? A. The first time I observed that she was not concentrating very well was when I took her to her business college course ... I observed the fact that she was much slower and that she was much more depressed. She was not as bubbly and her general attitude was rather pessimistic than optimistic which is what she had been before
Chelmsford." 
She said in relation to the memory problem of which she had spoken that although during the 18 months that she was living with her before she left home the plaintiff was certainly was not as quick as she used to be, "as far as the memory problem is concerned, there was no great occasion to test it, but she definitely was not as quick as she used to be". She said that during the period they were going to the business college while they were in the car she could scarcely hold a conversation with the plaintiff because of her sedation. She said that when the plaintiff came home towards the end of 1977 she was very quiet and very despondent which was quite different from her demeanour before she went into hospital. Asked was she chatty, she said:- "No, we did not really have a lot of conversation at all. I think she just seemed to be content to be at home and just stay there; that was all. She was quiet.

Q. Did she go out a lot? A. Not a lot for the first few months, just a few friends visiting." 
She spent most of her time listening to music and television and reading.

She made no contribution to the household: no cooking, no housework, "just sat around her room quite a bit". Her mother thought she lacked motivation and did not seem to be enthusiastic about anything. Mrs. Tweedale tried to encourage her to go out to apply for a job to improve her typing and recalled that eventually the plaintiff did get various jobs the details of which she could not remember. Her impression now is that they were of a short casual nature.
To her knowledge the plaintiff used no drugs during the period that she lived at home. Her self-esteem fluctuated:- "One minute she would be on top of it and the next minute she would be very depressed and despondent." 
She was asked in cross-examination whether she thought the period of living with her family in that 18 months period improved her somewhat and Mrs.
Tweedale said:- "I think she felt a bit isolated and she was not very happy and she was disorientated.

Q. Because she had been away full-time? A. I don't know why, but she was just generally disorientated. She had lost contact with her sisters because they had all been doing their own thing." 
By disorientated Mrs. Tweedale said that she intended to convey "just that she was finding it hard to feel her way and to come to grips with things".

The plaintiff said that when she got home she felt "just very uncomfortable and out of place. It did not feel like my home anymore". She said that initially she stayed at home all the time, she did not go out, because she was scared of people and couldn't face people; her thinking was very confused; she did not enjoy talking with anybody. She felt out of place. She spent time mainly watching television and found when she tried to read, "it just didn't seem to settle in. I couldn't quite absorb things as well as I used to".
Throughout the time that she continued to live at home she felt "pretty terrible, pretty depressed". She even forgot her 16th birthday. She was asked:- "Q. For how long after you got out of Chelmsford were you depressed?", and she replied:- "It has been pretty much most of the time I got out of there because I was spending a lot of time trying to maintain normal, just like everyone else, just like before I'd gone in there and it just seemed like I couldn't get it all back together and make - make it like it didn't happen. It was something that no-one else could relate to so there wasn't anyone else I could really talk to." 
I think it is correct to say, as the defendant suggested, that that account of her inactivity, her staying at home and not going out, was somewhat exaggerated but in the light of the evidence of other members of her family I accept it as true in substance.

The latest particulars pursuant to Part 33 Rule 8A include a claim for past gratuitous assistance in relation to assistance given by the plaintiff's mother to her during this period. In my view the evidence falls short of establishing that the plaintiff had a real need for domestic or nursing assistance during that period and I do not think that the care given to her by her mother during that period is such as to attract compensation in accordance with the principles established in Griffiths v. Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 161.] 
The plaintiff had put on a great deal of weight while she was in Chelmsford and according to Mrs. Lough was quite overweight at the time of her discharge.
The plaintiff said that she weighed about 11 stone at the time of her admission and about 15 stone when discharged and that her body weight has been a problem for her ever since. With effort she has sometimes been able to reduce her weight "but it comes back". She said that her self-image was damaged by the fact that she was overweight and I accept that that is so. Her father prescribed medications for her to assist in that respect.

Otherwise, she had not sought medical treatment or advice during the period she was living at home, nor, it seems, was she on any continuing medication prescribed by the Chelmsford doctors.

Employment (1978-1979) 
On 12 April 1978, the plaintiff first obtained employment. She worked until 2
May with a firm called Systematic Marketing as an office junior. A letter from that company states that she performed her duties in a satisfactory manner and in cross-examination she agreed that that was accurate. The evidence does not explain why her employment terminated.

She was next employed from 27 October 1978 to 29 June 1979 with a firm of architects, Ross Ainsley & Partners, again as an office junior. I accept that term as an accurate description of her duties rather than the more impressive sounding "drafting assistant" in a reference which the employer gave her some years subsequently to assist in a later job application. I accept her description of her work:- "I photocopied plans and stuck them together. I took plans to the Council to be delivered and picked up. I made coffee, did mail and some filing", and I accept that her later description in her job application to AMEB, suggesting a much higher level of competence and responsibility, was fabricated. The employer in the same document stated:- "Miss Tweedale carried out all duties entrusted to her in a competent and co- operative manner.", which opinion the plaintiff endorsed when it was put to her in cross- examination. The same letter said:- "She left to pursue her career in other offices." 
I accept what the plaintiff says about that, that that was the excuse she gave for leaving that employment; but the true reason for her leaving was:- "I started to - people after a while when you are with them a lot start wanting to know more about your past and your background and things and I had to be very careful what I said and it just - I think they started - I started to become paranoid that they were guessing that I was - there was something wrong with me or I just didn't feel like - I just couldn't cope with it anymore, having to hide, because I had told them, you know, I had finished school or went to fourth form and there was all these other things there as well." 
During the period when she was working with Ross Ainsley, the plaintiff attended briefly at the Hornsby TAFE, studying for her School Certificate. She said:- "I just couldn't get it to stay in my head. ... I was doing work but it just - my retention wasn't very good." 
She said:- "My skills from PLC that I had learned, just your English and maths, weren't - not rusty but I just couldn't get them to come to the fore anymore." 
She discontinued the course after a couple of months. At some stage in the years following she undertook a computer course. She said:- "It was work that I could do. But when it is put out into a book and verbal and having to rely on my memory again, I just couldn't seem to grasp it. I had to give it up." 
I accept that evidence.

Nevertheless, as will appear, she did eventually acquire a reasonable level of skill in keyboard work/data entry: although as at 19 October 1990, she attained (on a Wang word processor with 100% accuracy) a speed of only 37 words per minute (Exhibit N).

Use of heroin 
Shortly before the termination of her employment at Ross Ainsley, namely in about May 1979 and at about the time of her 17th birthday, the plaintiff left home. She had formed an association with a man named Gary Walford and moved out of home to live with him, two to three months before her birthday. By the time of her birthday he had commenced to use heroin and it was in his company that she was introduced to that drug. She was asked:- "Q. Why did you start using heroin? A. There were other people - when I was in
Chelmsford people used heroin and they were there because they were at the end of it and they were sick and they were trying to get away from it. I met people when I was 17 who were from the North Shore. They were also from affluent families. They were dabbling in it and I used to think that if you went near heroin you had to be a bad person, you know, from the western suburbs who was, you know, it didn't happen to people from the North Shore.
And I watched these people muck around with it and it didn't cave in their life. They didn't suddenly turn into demented drug addict crazies and it didn't destroy their life as I sort of believed until then." 
She said she had never come into contact with anyone using heroin before she went into Chelmsford, and she had no real idea what it might do to her. She said that she had never taken illegal drugs before Chelmsford. She had never, she said, taken drugs "for fun" or "to make [her] feel better". Subject to the doubt about prior use of marijuana, I accept this evidence.

She was asked how she was feeling about the time when she first used heroin and she first said, "I can't remember, sorry". When reminded that it was not long after she left home at the age of 17 she was then asked the question, "How was your mood?":- "A. I was still trying, I was trying to fit in around my Chelmsford experience. Everything seemed to still measure from Chelmsford.

Q. What do you mean by that? A. When I was doing things, in my mind would always refer to `Oh, it is only a month since I did that at Chelmsford', or it was just - it would be in my head that with any experience if I had done it when I was at Chelmsford or there was a - that was mainly it. It would just be remembering that `Oh, it is so long ago since then'. It was just such a surprise to be that far away from it, you know, six months since." 
She was asked (t.42):- "Q. How did the heroin make you feel when you took it the first time? A. I remember the first time I ever had heroin and I thought, `This is what they were trying to do'. It made me feel right. It just made me feel right, that was what had been missing. At the time they kept sort of saying to me, if they could get - their explanation of the amount of drugs and treatment was given so that if they could get the combinations or the amounts right, that the right drugs in the right combination would fix me up and I just remember thinking that the heroin - that that was what they had been trying to achieve but hadn't had that particular drug." 
She said before she took it she had seen other people on heroin and they "appeared fine" except two Chelmsford patients. She was asked:- "Now what did you think would happen to you when you first took heroin? A.
Well I had watched other people try it and nothing had happened to them and I didn't think there would be any repercussions as such from having tried it.

Q. And how did it make you feel? A. As I said, it made me feel right. It made me feel more confident, things didn't hurt me so much.

Q. How had you been feeling in terms of your self-confidence over the 18 months since Chelmsford? A. Well I didn't have any. I had been building it up just a little from losing weight, that helped a bit." 
Then she was asked:- "Q. Who first suggested you should have heroin? A. I can't recall. It would have been just an acquaintance.

Q. Why did you accede to the suggestion? A. I just thought it hadn't - it hadn't destroyed anyone else so I didn't see that one trying it once would kill me.

Q. What did you think it would do for you? A. I was hoping it would fix me up.

Q. Did it fix you up? A. No, well it did in its - it made me feel fixed up. It made me feel a lot more whole and the whole - it didn't hurt as much, what they had done in Chelmsford.

Q. Had you ever thought about taking heroin before you went into Chelmsford?
A. No.

Q. What had been your attitude to drugs like that? A. I was very anti any type of administered drug. I grew up in a medical background. You didn't play with drugs. They were not something - I was brought up that they purely for medicinal use to make you better." 
Her evidence in chief as to the progress of her heroin use thereafter was somewhat sketchy:- "Q. Now how often did you take heroin at age 17? A. Now and then. May be, I don't know, once a month or something.

Q. Did it become more frequent? A. As - after a few years it did.

Q. I think you were taking it until 1987, is that right? A. That is right, yes.

Q. That is for nine years? A. That is right.
 ...

Q. Were you able - did you try to give up heroin in those years? A. Yes, if I wanted to I was pretty able to stop because it took about three years before I started getting to the point where I had to go to rehab, that kind of thing.

Q. So it was a progressive addiction? A. Yes.

Q. Is that what you are saying? A. Yes.

Q. At that stage were you apprehended by the police for possession of heroin?
A. Yes I was.

Q. Was that in 1984? A. Yes." (Of that arrest and its consequences, more later).

Dr. Phillips had recorded a history (obtained in his first interview with the plaintiff when, as noted elsewhere, she attended in an intoxicated state) that her first introduction to heroin occurred at a time when, having left the family home, "she was depressed and was casting around for something to make her feel better". There is no hint of any such "casting around" in the meticulous history obtained by Dr. Brent Waters nor in the plaintiff's evidence in chief and, given her acknowledgment that between her discharge from Chelmsford and the time when she left home she had sought no medical treatment or advice. In those circumstances surprisingly, when her heroin history was explored more fully in cross-examination, questions were put which in effect invited her to depart from what she had said in chief and to confirm the history obtained by Dr. Phillips, a history much more favourable to the proposition that her heroin addiction was caused by Chelmsford treatment. She gave this evidence:- "Q. The situation is, isn't it, that you were just given the opportunity of trying something exotic and when you tried it it made you feel strange but good? A. When I tried it I thought it would make me better. I thought it would help make me feel better.

Q. What I suggest to you is that in the period leading up to your trying heroin in May 1979 there was not any element of looking for combinations of drugs in an attempt to find the right sort of recipe, which I think is something you have suggested as an explanation in evidence, but that simply on that day in May 1979 you were living with a boyfriend who offered you something exotic and different and you tried it for no more complicated reason than that? A. That I wanted to feel better, yes." 
There was no objection to the question, notwithstanding the complex form of it, the assumption (not established by any earlier evidence) that it was Gary who introduced her to heroin, and the implied suggestion that she had said in her evidence something to the effect that she was "looking for combinations of drugs in an attempt to find the right sort of recipe". The last is a gross distortion of what she in fact said in the passage (from t.42) quoted earlier but reflects the history recorded by Dr. Phillips. She herself had given no evidence to the effect that she had been seeking the right combination of drugs, but only that she had understood that that was what was in train at
Chelmsford, and when she first experienced heroin she perceived that this was "what had been missing". However, it is clear that the plaintiff in her answer was not assenting to all of the propositions entangled in the question, for her reply was simply "that I wanted to feel better, yes". The cross-examiner continued:- "I am suggesting to you that you wanted to try it just because it was a new experience and that Gary told you that it would make you feel good? A. Yes, that's what I said, yes." (Another answer difficult to interpret because of the double form of the question).
 "Q. It was not, I suggest, as part of any systematic search for a medication or group of medications which you were looking to solve your life's problems?
A. Yes, I think it was." 
Taken literally that answer is clearly consistent with the history recorded by
Dr. Phillips, but I think the answer represents the plaintiff's confusion rather than the fact. I would be disposed to think that the history recorded by Dr. Phillips was incorrect, reflecting, as I have suggested elsewhere, confusion or lack of comprehension attributable to her intoxicated state; and perhaps an expectation on his part that she may have been, as he put it, "casting around".

The plaintiff acknowledged that the period during which her heroin use was only occasional, before she developed a habit, was approximately from 1979 through until 1983, a period when, as has been already outlined, she was working for the greater part of the time. I would infer that her use of the drug then increased progressively up to the time of her arrest in early 1984.
She gave this evidence:- "Q. When you started your heroin habit when you were 21, why was that? Why did you start? Why did it become a habit for you? A. It's a bit of the nature of the beast. It doesn't get its real hooks in for a couple of years. You physically don't get - you don't get sick like you do after you have been using for a couple of years. You physically get ill whereas that had not happened to me before.

Q. It was because you were splitting up with Gary, wasn't it? A. What was because? 
Q. You turned to heroin more, you started taking more heroin? A. When I became single? 
Q. When you were splitting up with Gary? A. When I was single, yes I did.

Q. Was the break up with Gary - as I understand it from your evidence - you had been living with him for something like five years? A. Yes, I think a bit less than that.

Q. And it was traumatic for you when you broke up with Gary? A. It was more of a relief when I broke up with Gary to be free of it.

Q. But after - A. There was a lot of trauma before.

Q. I see. I think you said it happened at the time you were breaking up with
Gary previously. Would it be fair to say you increased your usage of heroin because of the trauma you were going through around that time? A. Yes.

Q. And from that time on for several years you became a heroin addict. You were a heroin addict? A. I became an extremely large user." 
In re-examination the plaintiff was again asked about her initial experience of heroin:- "Q. You said when you tried heroin you thought it would help make you feel better, why did you think that? A. Because I had been under the impression from the medication I had been given in Chelmsford that if I can find the right medication combination, the right type of medication, that it would fix me; I would be okay, that I would be normal and feel normal, the same as everyone else felt." 
She was recalled for further cross-examination when the hearing resumed in
December 1996. The question of heroin use was revisited:- "Q. Did you, while you were in Chelmsford, argue with the friends that you made in there about the merit of heroin? A. I argued against and that it was not good.

Q. And did you continue to argue against it after you left hospital? A. Yes I did.

Q. On your seventeenth birthday did you experiment for the first time with heroin? A. Yes I did.

Q. Was that following a conversation or conversations when a friend told you you should not criticise heroin if you have not tried it? A. Yes.

Q. Now jumping ahead - A. Sorry. I should have said that when in Chelmsford I was watching a lot of junkies coming in and it also - they were not the animals that I had been told you become and envisaged. So that did in a way affect sort of how I saw people who used the drug.

Q. Now you were also in a relationship with Gary I think around the time you experimented? A. That's right.

Q. You had been living with him for three months or something? A. Yes, I think that is about right.

Q. And he was a friend of yours? A. He was my boyfriend.

Q. And you liked him? A. Yes I did.

Q. And he used heroin? A. Not full-time. He dabbled, yes. He had been a heroin user, yes.

Q. Was he a person who said you should not criticise heroin if you have not tried it? A. I am sorry I could not specifically say. It was an argument put up by a few people.

Q. Did you tell Dr. Bryant that you started heroin because of peer pressure?
A. Well, as I said, it was put to me that, you know, how could I make these wide decisions about how bad it was when I had not tried it.

Q. And did you see Gary and some of his friends occasionally use heroin without ill effects? A. Yes I did." 
She said that after separating from Gary (apparently in the first half of ) she had lived with a man called Mecit Ertam for about two and a half years (until, if that estimate is right, about the end of 1985). He was involved in the activity which led to her conviction of a drug charge; their relationship ended when he was arrested and deported. She was very upset. She was asked:- "Q. Did that lead to an increase in the use of your heroin? A. Actually no. It led to the opposite. I went into rehab to get off heroin.

Q. Did you tell Dr. Waters when you saw him in August that you became depressed and your use of heroin increased? A. At the time very probable, but as I said, I tapered off. I did not keep going out. You know what I mean? 
Q. Use of the heroin increased, then you went into rehab and then it went back down? A. That is right and then I stopped." 
She also said that her heroin habit worsened whilst she was living with Mecit and developed into a more serious habit which she had much difficulty in managing. She said that after the rehabilitation programme in 1984/86 (as to which, see below), she "basically remained on methadone or straight for 10 years. From 24 [she turned 24 on 23 May 1986] virtually to now I have been on methadone or I have been straight." However, she conceded that during her next relationship which was with a man named Colin, also a former heroin user (at a time when "we were both keeping clean nearly two years. I had been clean about seven months and we moved in together and everything was wonderful. I had a job and so did he"), her partner in the course of his employment suffered a chemical burn to his eye and was put off work, and she said, "My reaction to that was to use - use drugs". That went on for a time which was not made clear, "but we did not go on".

Again in re-examination the topic was raised and she gave this evidence:- "Q. When you were being questioned about arguments you had with people at
Chelmsford about heroin you mentioned that the junkies were not animals and that this affected - A. Yes, it didn't turn them into - I used to think that if one used heroin they'd immediately turn - you could tell and they were people who didn't have anything and they were low life. I am sorry to pin people like that but that's how I thought. I thought that was what a junkie was like and I met these people in Chelmsford and they were grown adults with families and they used smack - heroin, pardon me - and I think in a way that was sort of like a weird education, if you know what I mean ..." 
She had taken one recent overdose of heroin which was during the litigation process (by which phrase I mean not necessarily only the trial itself or the periods between the hearing days but also the period of preparation leading up to the trial). Asked why, she said:- "I had this very well capped, very well capped and had pushed it right out of my mind because it was the easy way to deal with it, and opening this all up, it has opened up a Pandora's box.

Q. When you say opening this all up? A. Opening up my stay at Chelmsford, what it was like, remembering all the medications, the times I used to see Dr.
Herron, he used to take no notice, people I know now used me, that's all." 
I have thought it desirable to quote at length the plaintiff's evidence of her acquisition of a heroin habit and its progress because the question whether it is true that her addiction to the drug was caused by DST/ECT involves first of all a factual finding as to the circumstances in which she became addicted. As to that, there is really only the plaintiff's own evidence. What she says is, taken overall, a consistent account, although one can point to variances in detail. I accept that she has done her best to explain accurately and honestly her introduction to heroin and the subsequent progress of her addiction. It was submitted that I should reject, in particular, her evidence to the effect that, after first using heroin and experiencing the resulting euphoria, she realised that this was the sort of result that Dr. Herron and his colleagues had been seeking during her hospitalisation. Her thought process may have been naive, illogical, but I do not doubt that she was accurately describing (as best she now remembers it) what she was in fact thinking at that time.

Employment (1979-1986) 
The foregoing account of her heroin history needs to be related to her work performance during those years. It is convenient to record at this point that the plaintiff was cross-examined as to why no documents relating to her employment history had been produced in response to a notice to produce duly served on her solicitor; she indicated that she had certain relevant documents in her possession, at home, and would bring them to court on the following day. That in due course she did.

Over the objection of counsel for the plaintiff, I permitted counsel for the defendant, in the course of continued cross-examination, to put to her questions which had the effect of placing on the transcript portions (at least) of the content of a number of those documents, verbatim. Counsel objected that the defendant was not entitled to have evidence of the contents of the documents placed before me in that fashion. The objection would be well taken if the purpose of the cross-examination was to get the content of the documents into evidence as evidence of the truth of the contents of the document in question - that is, as evidence that the plaintiff had some character or ability referred to in the document, or as evidence that the author of the document believed that she had such character or ability. That, however, was not the basis upon which counsel for the defendants was seeking to use the documents; and certainly it was not the basis upon which I allowed the cross-examination to proceed in a fashion which placed the content of the documents in evidence. The purpose for which the cross-examiner sought to use the documents and the purpose for which I allowed them to be used was to establish that the plaintiff herself, having been armed with the documents from time to time as they came into existence, had thereafter used them in support of her various applications for employment with a view to showing that, contrary to the thrust of her evidence in chief as to her disability, incompetence and unemployability throughout the relevant period, she herself was at that time maintaining that she was such a person as and having the character and abilities described in the several documents. On that basis and for that limited purpose, it appeared to me proper to allow the cross- examination, notwithstanding that incidentally it had the effect of placing the content of the documents in question into evidence. As it happened, some of the documents did later go into evidence, once the plaintiff admitted having used them to secure employment thereby in effect adopting their contents.

The plaintiff gave this evidence:- "Q. From the time of your eighteenth birthday onwards would you agree with me that you worked very well in the various jobs for at least two or three years until the age of 21? A. 18 - do you mean how I felt about my work? 
Q. Yes. I am suggesting to you that you were a good worker and that you were well-organised, dependable and reliable during those years? A. I like to think so, yeah." 
She said "I tried, I think that's how I felt about myself, how I felt I was trying to be." 
There was a time when she financed her heroin use by way of prostitution but she denied any criminal activity other than use and possession of the drug itself. She denied that she had committed crime in order to finance her addiction. I accept that, notwithstanding a notation in the records of the
Rankin Court Clinic suggesting otherwise. I do not doubt that the plaintiff said something of the sort to somebody at that clinic but I suspect that was by way of exaggeration, an attempt to emphasise the seriousness of her addiction in order to impress with the strength of her desire to rehabilitate herself.

The evidence of her employment history between leaving Ross Ainsley in June and the year 1986 is somewhat unclear although there are a couple of islands of certainty. From 4 February 1981 to 4 May 1982, she worked for a company called Jands Electronics. I accept her description of her work as basically a switchboard operator/receptionist and that her descriptions of the job in subsequent employment applications were fabrications to enhance her prospects of obtaining employment. From 14 March 1986 to 15 July 1986, she worked for Noogardie Pty. Limited (trading as Computer Exchange).

It is also established that she worked for uncertain periods and at uncertain dates with the following employers: CIC Insurance, door to door canvassing (six to eight weeks somewhere between 1979 and 1984); Massingham Research, part-time (on call, a few days a week for several months during the same period and after she worked for CIC); Northhaven Village Retirement Home, on a casual roster but effectively full-time for some 12 to 18 months, also between and 1984; and as a "producer's assistant and prize co-ordinator" with a television programme known as Simon Townsend's Wonder World. This was for a period of less than six months, probably around May to August 1982. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that the job was beyond her capacity. She said:- "The duties required were way more than I was - I thought it was just answering phones and typing, handling work for my boss, but it was also organising what was given away on the show for five shows a week, plus also they had people leaving the show so there was a lot of interviews which were mounds of applicants.

Q. What did you have trouble with? A. Just dealing with - on a personal level closely with other people I worked with.

Q. What was the problem there? A. Well I didn't - I couldn't handle people getting too close, getting to know me too well.

Q. Why not? A. Well they might find out about Chelmsford. ... I didn't want them to find out what had happened." 
I accept that the description of her work which she gave in subsequent job applications was inflated, but she did approach business organisations, shops, department stores or mail order companies, to obtain prizes by way of donations, pointing out to them the commercial advantages of their being associated with the show, and then she would correctly match the prizes to the winners to make sure that each got the correct prize. She also fulfilled functions in relation to hospitality associated with the production.

All of that amounts to a total of perhaps as much as three years employment between 29 June 1979 and October 1986. The evidence does not completely account for the balance of that period.

During a portion of the period she was unavailable for employment because of her involvement in drug rehabilitation programmes. It appears that her arrest early in 1984 on a charge of possession of prohibited imports may have been the trigger for her to attempt to break her drug habit. On 19 March 1984, she entered the William Booth Drug Rehabilitation Centre run by the Salvation Army and was there for some three or four months. She appears to have entered the
Westmount Drug and Alcohol Rehabilitation Centre at Katoomba on 2 October 1984 until 24 December 1984. On 25 November 1985 she appeared in the District Court in Sydney for sentence. The proceedings were adjourned until 10 December and she was granted a bond conditioned on her readmitting herself to Westmount for detoxification. She was admitted on 28 November 1985 and was still an inmate when she appeared for sentence on 10 December. She was placed on a bond to be of good behaviour for a period of three years, conditioned on her entering
Westmount and completing a rehabilitation programme. She was not discharged from Westmount until 25 May 1986 when she completed the programme but was evidently granted leave to go out to work, for there is good evidence that she was employed by Noogardie Pty. Limited, trading as Computer Exchange from 14
March 1986 to 15 July 1986. Between 25 May 1986 and 25 September 1986 she readmitted herself to Westmount on three occasions, sometimes only for a couple of days, the last occasion for more than three weeks.

It appears, therefore, that there was a period of about 26 months during which, because of her heroin problem, she was not available to participate in any employment. It does not appear that her heroin addiction otherwise affected her ability to work during the years now under consideration.

Whether she was otherwise employed does not appear with any clarity. Certainly there were substantial periods when she was unemployed and in receipt of
Commonwealth benefits although those periods in part coincide with periods of admission to rehabilitation centres.

She accounts for her frequent changes of job, in part by reference to her own perception of her inability to perform adequately, causing her to seek other employment in advance of her anticipation that she would be dismissed, and in part because of a problem she has experienced in relating to other workers, because of her perception that it was necessary that she conceal from them the fact that she was a patient in Chelmsford, or, in general, a psychiatric patient. I accept her explanation of the apparent inconsistency between her claims of difficulty in the performance of her work in various jobs and her claims to subsequent employers as to her level of ability.

Although the evidence accounts for only about three years of identified employment (and 18 months absence from the workforce), I would not be prepared to accept that the plaintiff's actual employment during the period 29 June to October 1986 was limited to those employments which the evidence allows to be identified.

The plaintiff has not proved that during those years she was prevented by reason of any cognitive deficits or emotional problems from securing other employment at a similar level to that which in fact she engaged in from time to time. I am satisfied that she was not capable of working at any higher level than in fact she did, and that she was not capable of earning remuneration at any higher rate than in fact she did, in such employments as she had; but I am not persuaded that she did not have at least that earning capacity (whether or not she exercised it) throughout the whole of those seven or so years (except when totally prevented from earning by her heroin addiction: approximately 1 January 1984 to 13 March 1986).

Employment (1986-1989) 
From October 1986 to August 1989, the plaintiff was continuously employed in a series of placements arranged through employment agencies: Small &
Associates Pty. Limited and Accountancy Placements Pty. Limited. These included a lengthy placement with the Department of Housing (October 1986 to
June 1987) and with the Department of Education (22 June 1987 to 12 May 1988).
Within the Department of Education she worked at different times for the
Australian Music Examinations Board, the departmental accounts section, and the Adult Migration Education Service. From May to December 1988 she is recorded as having been was employed by Small & Associates Pty. Limited and this seems to have been a period when she was in fact working for Telecom.

Her employment was interrupted for an uncertain period in early 1987 when she was admitted to hospital for treatment in respect of an ectopic pregnancy.
Upon her discharge from hospital, she was referred to a drug clinic and placed on a methadone maintenance programme (on which she has continued to the present day, most recently under the supervision of Dr. Potts). While on those programmes there have been occasions when she resorted to heroin use, but she has been substantially free of heroin since about 1987. The plaintiff claimed not to have observed methadone to have any effect on her problems of concentration and memory although other medications (including heroin) did so.
There is, however, uncontested evidence from Dr. Watson and Ms. Breen that methadone may have such effect and I think the probability is that it has done so in this case.

There was in evidence a number of documents (internal records of successive employers) in the nature of recommendations for promotion or wage increase.

In assessing the significance of those, and in evaluating such oral evidence as is available of her level of performance (which comprises only the evidence of the plaintiff herself and the evidence of Mrs. Bulmer, the lady from the real estate office) it is, I think, necessary to exercise some care to identify the nature of the work which the plaintiff did in these various jobs and the circumstances in which some favourable comments about her performance were made. I think it is necessary to keep clearly in mind that the plaintiff's presentation even today is not such as to alert the average observer to the probability that she suffers from brain damage; that the level of her deficits today is obviously exacerbated by emotional factors which, common sense suggests, will have produced an increasing effect as more and more time has passed; and that in relatively undemanding employments, and in competition with or comparison with a workforce of generally lower intellectual capacity than the plaintiff is likely to have had pre-Chelmsford, the existence of specific cognitive deficits may well have passed unnoticed if they were not of a kind to prevent the plaintiff from carrying out her work at an acceptable level. It is perhaps also realistic to recognise, having regard to the purpose of such communications, the possibility that the writers, obviously well disposed towards the plaintiff may have painted a somewhat rosy picture of her abilities. Despite the enthusiastic language of the letters in question, the actual job descriptions comprised in the file (part of Exhibit ) demonstrate that the work was relatively low level and routine. The plaintiff herself was, I think, inclined to overstate the level of her performance in her various employments (I think that in part accounts for the rather glowing account she gave of herself in her history to Ms. Breen), probably because by so doing she tended to bolster her self-esteem.
Nevertheless, making reasonable allowance for considerations of those kinds, there remains no doubt that in her series of positions in the New South Wales
Public Service, she performed at a level which was not merely acceptable to her superiors but outstanding among workers of her classification. That does not negative the existence of cognitive deficits attributable either to organic brain damage or emotional factors, but demonstrates that the level of deficit at that time was not great. The level of earnings available to her in employment of that kind seems, prima facie, to be the level of earnings which should be attributed to her at all times thereafter for the purpose of evaluating any claim she has for continuing and future loss of earning capacity.

The last of that sequence of employments was the job at Allan Dale Real
Estate. In a letter written by the plaintiff on the letter head of Allan Dale
Real Estate on 8 March 1989, she described her position as office manager/bookkeeper. She said that that was not true, she was not the office manager/bookkeeper but a senior accounts clerk, and she described her duties as accounts work, adding up bank statements and balancing them, which she coped with because she "had another boss who checked it over after me and would pick up any errors and I also had a computer to back me up". The evidence of Mrs. Bulmer corroborates that the plaintiff was not employed at a level which could be described as office manager/bookkeeper, but in a significantly lower position. She was not really in a position to comment on the plaintiff's work performance. She was, however, in a position to observe, and I accept her evidence that she did observe, that the plaintiff appeared to be capable of doing her work in the mornings, but appeared after the lunch break to be intoxicated and less capable or incapable of working effectively.
Even during the mornings, according to Mrs. Bulmer, the plaintiff was erratic, "as though she sort of didn't care; she was miles away in her brain; she was somewhere - not at her job a lot of the time". I conclude that the decline in her performance which Mrs. Bulmer attributed to intoxication was in part the result of the ingestion of the daily dose of methadone; in part the result of fatigue stemming from the plaintiff's difficulty in coping with her work and, on that latter aspect, attributable in part to her addiction and in part to her cognitive defects. The clear fact is that, by the time she came to work for Allan Dale Real Estate Pty. Limited, the plaintiff was performing at a significantly lower level than she had been a year earlier. This substantially, but not precisely, accords with the history she gave to Ms.
Breen of a deterioration in function since about the age of 25. I shall need to return to this topic later, in the context of assessment of damages for lost earnings.

The plaintiff's life, 1989 to trial 
There is little good evidence of the plaintiff's employment history after she lost her position at Allan Dale Real Estate Pty. Limited. Some relatively short periods of employment are documented, casual work at a lower level of achievement than she had previously been capable of, and interspersed with periods when she was in receipt of Commonwealth benefits. The evidence accounts for only, at most, two years of the almost four years from when she left Allan Dale Real Estate until she commenced in her present employment - August 1989 to 17 June 1993.

The plaintiff's evidence contains no clear account of her life during those years. It appears that she has been for the most part unemployed and that such employments as she has had during this period were of relatively short duration; and I accept her evidence that her performance in them was poor. I am not persuaded that her actual earnings prior to the time when she commenced employment with HomeCare Services of New South Wales represent accurately what she was in fact able to earn. I am not persuaded that the jobs which have been identified were her only employments; I am not persuaded that at times when she was not working she did not have the capacity to work had she chosen to exercise it. I propose to assess her damages on the basis that throughout that period she had the capacity to earn annually an amount equal to the net amount of her earnings with HomeCare Services in the 1993/94 tax year.

In September 1991, she became a patient of Dr. Diane Morgan whom she consulted initially for the purpose of obtaining a referral to a psychiatrist, Dr.
Koziol; and there are suggestions that she had sought some other psychiatric treatment. She complained to Dr. Morgan of a sleep disturbance, depression, inability to cope with stress, a feeling of vulnerability, and dependence on drugs, of one sort or another, including mogadon and heroin/methadone. Dr.
Morgan observed cognitive deficits, in memory and concentration, which in her evidence and perhaps influenced by her reading of specialist reports, she attributed to the effects of treatment at Chelmsford. Dr. Potts, who has managed her methadone programme since November 1991, felt that a major contribution to her presently deficient cognitive functioning was intoxication by mogadon and other sedatives.

In June 1993, the plaintiff applied for a position with the HomeCare Service of New South Wales as a member of the casual field staff and was appointed to that position on 17 June 1993 at an ordinary hourly rate of $12.74 with the possibility of payment at a slightly increased rate should she be required from time to time to work in a higher grade. On 3 October 1994, she was appointed to the next higher grade, casual grade two, and on 27 May 1995, to grade three (although it appears that by then the hourly rate of pay had reduced, The rate for grade three being now only $12.65). Her present work is part-time caring for one patient only whom she visits for two hours each
Friday and Saturday evening and two hours each Sunday morning, that is a total of six hours per week. She claims that she is limited in her present job. Her work is repetitive, that is to say on each occasion that she visits the disabled client she undertakes the same routine; the client is patient and helpful and reminds her in the event that she forgets what she is required to do. She claims that she could not cope with more clients or longer hours. She says she found, when required to work for different clients at different locations, that she would forget where she was supposed to be or when, she made errors in carrying out shopping and other tasks, and when she made errors she became flustered and stressed. But I accept her evidence that she could not cope with that additional work. She said (and I accept):- "It was too emotionally draining. I found it very hard to remember times and where I was supposed to be on the day at, say, 7.00 am. On Tuesday I would forget where I was supposed to be.

Q. Were you working at different locations, were you? A. Yes. ... I would forget what I was sent out to get and I was out shopping and people would say, `get this and this and don't forget to do that'. I would write it all down and still I would stuff something up and people would get annoyed about it." 
She said that:- "When things get a bit stressful ... I usually fall apart. I just come apart.
I tend to panic a bit and then get too stressed out." 
That evidence seems not to account for her claimed inability perhaps to work in the early part of the week on the same basis as she is now, that is to say for defined periods for one other client and I raised that question with her.
It emerged that she is really able to cope only with the work for the present client because that client is herself experienced in rehabilitation, patient and takes the trouble to explain to the plaintiff what is required of her in the event that the plaintiff forgets. I accept that to be the fact.

The plaintiff's present condition and situation 
At the time when she gave evidence at this trial, the plaintiff was a few months over 34 years of age. She presented at trial as a very intelligent, rather pleasant and reasonably articulate woman, but of rather untidy appearance, giving the impression that she did not take a great deal of care for or interest in herself. Although she was both intelligent and articulate, there were many occasions when she seemed quite clearly to lose the thread of the dialogue between herself and counsel; and from time to time she had difficulty in remembering matters both recent (including as recent as in the course of her earlier evidence) and remote, although considering the duration of her evidence (given on three days in August and one day in December 1996, and which occupied in all about 250 pages of transcript) such deficiencies (both of concentration and of memory) were relatively infrequent.

No serious challenge was made to her honesty as a witness and so far as concerns her evidence as to her current situation, lifestyle, functioning and disabilities, I have no difficulty in accepting her evidence, especially in light of the corroboration afforded by other lay evidence, that is from her sisters Mrs. Legg and Mrs. Lough; and her mother.

The plaintiff gave evidence that her memory is bad both short term and for the distant past, but that recent memory is worse. She has difficulty in following a conversation. She forgets what is being said, what she was talking about.
She endeavours to aid her memory by making notes: that is effective in most of the activities of daily life, although it is easy to see that it would not be an adequate substitute for a functioning memory in an employment situation.
She has trouble in concentration and that makes it difficult for her to read a book, so that she now does not read a lot. She has trouble learning any new skill, for example, how to use a particular appliance or get to a particular place; in particular she finds it very hard to remember the sequence involved in the use of equipment.

In general, she claims that her capacity to perform in all of the jobs that she has had has been limited by difficulty with concentration and memory, as well as her limited skills. She claims that so long as she was required to do only work of a relatively routine nature (the repetition of processes that she was able to learn) she was able to cope with her various employments, but found herself inadequate with any task of a more complex nature requiring any initiative and organisational skill on her own part.

The plaintiff describes her view of her present work capacity in the following passage of her evidence:- "Q. Do you think you could earn more in data entry work than you are earning now in this disabled work? A. I don't know. I don't think so.

Q. How did you find learning what you had to learn to do the data entry work that you have done over the years? A. I used to take copious notes and keep notepads by me at all times which, when I was doing that was very aggravating for whoever was teaching me and I used to just say that it was better than going back and asking them 50 times but I used to be queried all the time as to why the notes had to be so specific and from the very basic, the first thing you do in the morning to closing down the system in the evening.

Q. What, you had to refer to your notes? A. That is right and if I didn't have my notes I couldn't get in and out of the computer.

Q. Could you not remember how to go about shutting it down? A. No. You had to back up the system and copy the disks, things like that.

Q. What about based on your past experience of the different jobs you have described, how have you fared when you have been required to do things quickly? A. Not very well.

Q. Can you explain why, what the problem is? Because I need to have it set out as to how to - what they want done and be very specific. Often they would say, `Go and do this" and I would go, get to a certain point and then just totally not know what I am supposed to be doing and be too embarrassed then to go back and re-ask, especially since - especially if it has happened before.

Q. What about the job, like, say a console operator in a service station?
Could you do that? A. I have tried that type of thing. I am too frightened that someone is going to attack me.

Q. Did you have a fear about people attacking you before you went into
Chelmsford? A. No.

Q. Have you thought about any other kinds of work that might bring you in more money than you are earning now? A. Yes I have. It is just that I can't see my way around all the obstacles - all the things that come up. I have tried fielding my way through this in normal business, just jobs I have had and if you start telling lies about what you have done you get caught. And if I told the truth, it either got turned into rumour and it would end up just embarrassing me in the long run.

Q. What about a job where you had to meet new people? You had a job as a receptionist at one stage. How did you handle that? A. Pretty well. There wasn't a lot of people involved. It was on the phone, answering the switchboard.

Q. Was that a problem for you, answering the switchboard? A. No. That was all right. That was okay." 
I am satisfied that the plaintiff's capacity to work is indeed limited and has been limited throughout the period from October 1986 in the respects which she identified in that passage of her evidence. However, the extent of those limitations is to be gathered most reliably from the evidence of the work she in fact did until 1989.

The plaintiff's evidence of her cognitive difficulties was not seriously challenged in cross-examination. The defendants' submissions (to the effect that her deficits are less serious than she claims) were founded primarily upon the results of the lengthy cross-examination of the plaintiff about her work history, and upon examination of such documentary materials as are available to elucidate her work history. Although that evidence tends to establish a rather higher level of working and earning capacity than is indicated by the particulars filed on behalf of the plaintiff and by the plaintiff's evidence in chief, it did not cause me to doubt that in general the plaintiff's cognitive functions are significantly impaired, particularly in relation to memory, especially short term memory, and the ability to concentrate.

The plaintiff is embarrassed and distressed by her perception of her own inadequacies in work and distressed by her inability to achieve what she thought she might have been able to achieve in her life. She describes herself as depressed.

Her sleep is disturbed. She sometimes has suicidal thoughts. She finds it difficult to control her emotions and gets upset very easily. Her response to these symptoms has been to use (and until recently to abuse) mogadon and benzodiazepam; more recently, by using prescribed anti-depressants, she has reduced her dependence on sedatives and tranquillisers. She has bad dreams; she has what seem to be more than ordinarily rational fears for her personal safety and tends to prefer seclusion in her own home rather than going out for any form of social life. What she describes in those parts of her evidence seems readily to fit a dual diagnosis of depressive illness and of cognitive deficits of a sort that might be attributable to brain damage.

The cross-examiner did not challenge in any way the evidence of her emotional state.

The plaintiff's evidence in respect of both aspects is substantially confirmed by other lay evidence, by the evidence of expert psychologists who have conducted psychometric tests and by several psychiatrists who have given evidence including the court expert, Dr. Martin Nothling.

Kim Elizabeth Legg is the plaintiff's sister, about eight years older than the plaintiff. She gave this evidence relevant to the present question:- "Q. In the last, say 19 years since she came out of Chelmsford, have you noticed anything unusual about her memory or capacity to concentrate on things? A. You are asking the last 19 years? 
Q. Yes, on the occasions when you have seen her since she has been out of
Chelmsford over the last 19 years have you noticed anything unusual about her?
A. She is very slow. Her speech is often slurred and she had difficulty maintaining conversation at all. She is very hard to converse with. She goes on tangents very quickly. She can go in all directions at once in talking.

Q. Was that a problem you noticed before she went to Chelmsford? A. No.

Q. Did you have any cause for concern about her in that regard prior to her
Chelmsford days? A. No.

Q. When you say she has difficulty maintaining conversations, what do you mean by that? A. She can't seem to hang on to what the conversation is about. She doesn't comprehend a lot of things, I think, in the normal sort of backwards and forwards flow of conversation and she can't seem to appropriately join in.
She just can't do it. As I said, she often goes off on a tangent which has nothing to do with what is being talked about; I suppose you are looking at
Christmas conversation with a lot of people.

Q. When you say she is very slow, what are you referring to there? A. Slow in actually physically getting the words out. I suppose it is almost like a speech articulation problem and she can't articulate clearly words; so they tend to slur together, and I think the timing, the slowness is always as if she can't retrieve the words, they are not there to be brought out, she can't find what she is trying to say." 
She described the plaintiff's usual appearance in terms consistent with my own observations of her.

Louise Erica Lough is another sister, about four years older than the plaintiff. Unlike Mrs. Legg, Mrs. Lough has always been close to the plaintiff, not only before but during and after her admission to Chelmsford (apart from a period when she was overseas). She is far better placed than
Mrs. Legg to give evidence about the plaintiff over those years. The evidence she gave of the plaintiff's present cognitive functioning and mood state was not challenged in cross-examination. She described the efforts she had made over many years to assist the plaintiff to deal with her drug problem. Since her marriage a year or so ago, and indeed since she met her husband some two years earlier than that, Mrs. Lough has had less to do with her sister, largely, I think, if I may say so without appearing or intending to be unkind to her, because she had become aware that too great an involvement with the plaintiff might damage her own relationship with her husband and child.
Notwithstanding that diminished contact with the plaintiff, I find her evidence of considerable assistance on the present question because there is no suggestion that the plaintiff's state has significantly altered in the last three years or so. Over many years, the plaintiff has complained to Mrs. Lough of problems of memory and of concentration particularly significant in the context of her attempts to work. She gave this evidence:- "Q. In the last few years on the occasions you have seen her, have you noticed anything unusual about her capacity to follow her own train of thought? A. In the last few years she has trouble with memory loss; she has to write everything down, so if you ring her and say, `All right, I will meet you at six o'clock', she has to write it down immediately otherwise she will forget or she will forget that that conversation was today or yesterday, that it happened. She can't remember things like that, really immediate things she seems to have trouble with.

Q. Since Chelmsford has she complained to you about any problems with sleeping? A. Yes, she has complained she has trouble sleeping and I can't recall what she does to get to sleep.

Q. Has she complained to you about anything that occurs when she is sleeping?
A. Yes. I know she told me when she was under deep sleep therapy that she had trouble with nightmares and she couldn't get out of them because she couldn't wake up and I know on occasions she said that she has nightmares, but I don't know if she is still having them or how long ago.

Q. How would you describe her general presentation on the occasions when you have seen her over the last few years; the way she dresses and grooms herself compared to the way she was back in the early 70s when she was much younger, of course? A. My general impression is that she does not groom herself as much as she could and you are asking me to think back to when she was 14 and what she was like: she was like every 14 year old and spent a lot of time working on her appearance, you know, getting the right outfit, makeup and clothes." 
Mrs. Lough said that the plaintiff's mood state has never got back to what it was before Chelmsford. She said that her present behaviour, at the age of 34, which she described generally as "consistently inconsistent" was not normal for a 34 year old woman. Asked, "What do you mean by that?", she said:- "She is over-emotional, she emotionally reacts to things that's too much for - she over-reacts to things. She is very - she doesn't have many friends and I think the other day she was saying to me: if I was just going to go and have a coffee with a girlfriend what do you talk to people about over coffee, what sort of things do you talk about, you don't talk about yourself, do you? I said: you talk about videos or little light things. She just doesn't know that sort of thing. She doesn't know to just talk lightly.

Q. In her general behaviour does she behave like a 34 year old adult? A. No.

Q. What does she behave like? A. She behaves younger on a lot of occasions.
Emotionally sometimes she behaves as if she is a 14 year old, like a teenager, it's like she's not grown up. She definitely most of the time doesn't have the maturity of a 34 year old and a lot of the time she doesn't even behave with adult responses." 
She described both obsessional and manic behaviour on the part of the plaintiff. In relation to the plaintiff's cognitive functioning, Mrs. Lough gave this evidence:- "Q. Casting your mind back, did you have an impression as an 18 year old about her capabilities as a 14 year old, in terms of just doing things that human beings do? A. I have always thought and I have always said that Susie is very capable and she can be mentally efficient at doing things. At the moment, now, she has trouble. She is capable and efficient and she can get things done but she can't follow through with it or she gets too tired, she can't concentrate long enough to complete tasks and that sort of stops her from being able to be successful.

Q. Did she have a problem like that before she went into Chelmsford? A. No, she didn't have any problem like that. She was just a normal kid and she could complete tasks, you know, that sort of thing." 
The plaintiff's mother gave some brief evidence of the plaintiff's condition as she has observed it in recent times, but conceded that she does not see her often and they converse on the phone at irregular and sometimes fairly lengthy intervals, "It could be two months, perhaps longer". She said that on the occasions when she does see the plaintiff, "she is very erratic, she has good days and bad days". Her memory is not good and has not been in recent years.
"She has to write down every time she wants some shopping or if she wants to see about something in the place where she is staying, if there is that.
Everything that she wants to consult us for she seems to have to write down or she will forget it." Her speech is sometimes slurred, "She has very low self- esteem. She just does not think she is worth anything now." That is something
Mrs. Tweedale has noticed over many years. That part of her evidence was not the subject of any cross-examination.

The lay evidence of the plaintiff's state today and in recent years is, as I have observed earlier, substantially unchallenged. It accords reasonably closely with the expert evidence of her condition.

Existence of cognitive deficits - expert evidence 
Expert evidence of the plaintiff's present cognitive state falls into two distinct but overlapping categories, the evidence of clinical psychologists who have carried out psychometric testing of the plaintiff, and the evidence of psychiatrists (including the court expert), each of whom has relied, to some extent, on the psychometric testing as well as on his/her own consultation with the plaintiff and his/her clinical judgment. It is convenient to deal with the psychometric evidence first.

The defendant arranged for the plaintiff to be examined at the Neuropsychology
Unit at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital and she was seen there on 2 August 1996 by Ms. Nora Breen, neuropsychologist. Ms. Breen reported that:- "Ms. Tweedale presented as a casually dressed 34 year old woman. She was able to provide a detailed and coherent history. She had no difficulty understanding test instructions. She was co-operative with all testing and did not appear anxious. It was my opinion that Ms. Tweedale put forward her best efforts throughout the assessment and the results obtained are felt to be a valid reflection of her current level of functioning." 
The performance of the plaintiff on the tests administered by Ms. Breen led her to the opinion that:- "... the neuropsychological profile of this 34 year old woman comprises a global drop in intellectual functioning from a high average to an average level, with specific deficits in attention, verbal memory and high level executive functioning. This profile is occurring in the context of severe depression and extremely high levels of anxiety." 
She thought that the plaintiff's memory deficit was:- "... characteristic of an organic memory deficit, typically associated with frontal lobe dysfunction rather than dysfunction in the temporal lobe memory structures. The deficits in attention and executive dysfunction are also consistent with frontal lobe dysfunction." 
In that part of his report which went into evidence, Dr. Bryant described his administration to the plaintiff of a range of cognitive tests, specifically selected by him in the knowledge of the frequent practice that she had had of standard neuropsychological tests in recent times and the specific deficits reported by her. He reported on the plaintiff's responses, and concluded that she suffers cognitive deficits in the areas of short term memory and attention, although most of her cognitive abilities are intact. In his opinion, his findings were substantially similar with those recorded by Ms.
Breen and that view was not challenged: Dr. Bryant was not required for cross- examination.

Dr. Jonathan Phillips, consultant psychiatrist, saw the plaintiff at the request of her solicitors on 6 April 1992 and again on 10 July 1996. He was hampered in his initial consultation by the fact that at the time of the interview she was intoxicated with medication. That, as it seems to me, undoubtedly had an effect on the reliability of the history which Dr. Phillips was able to obtain from her, a circumstance which may be of significance when
I come to consider the causation issue. But it is my impression that he was not particularly hampered in obtaining from her an account of her current symptoms and in arriving at a diagnosis. It is quite clear that Dr. Phillips was well aware of the need to make allowance for her intoxicated state, and I am satisfied that he did so and that the opinions he expressed as to diagnosis and as to the extent of disability at the time of his consultation in April are not invalidated by the circumstance that she was thus intoxicated.

Dr. Phillips reviewed the plaintiff's condition on 10 July 1996 (report dated July 1996). On both occasions he recorded symptoms of cognitive difficulties and in his oral evidence he made it clear that it is his opinion that she does have significant cognitive deficits.

Dr. Diane Morgan is a general practitioner who was consulted by the plaintiff on a number of occasions between September 1991 and late 1994, and once or twice in 1996. She found the plaintiff to be suffering a degree of permanent intellectual impairment, an opinion based on her observations, during her consultations with the plaintiff, of poor memory, lack of concentration and slowness in thinking. Dr. Morgan agreed that she had made no specific note of any complaint by the plaintiff about memory problems, concentration and so forth, but that does not seem to me to weaken in any way her evidence that such deficits exist, because her evidence was based on her own observation rather than the plaintiff's complaint. In my experience, the general practitioner who would make a note of such a matter is a very rare creature indeed.

I have referred already to the fact that the plaintiff was examined (on behalf of the defendant) at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital on 2 August 1996, by Ms.
Nora Breen, the neuropsychologist. She was seen also by Dr. Watson, a specialist neurologist and the director of the unit. Two reports resulted. In the first, Dr. Watson set out a detailed history, his findings on physical examination, his opinion that that examination revealed no evidence of overt neurological disease, and the plaintiff's complaint of cognitive deficits, but went no further, referring the reader to Ms. Breen's report "for a detailed consideration of possible cognitive dysfunction". The admissibility of his evidence covering matters the substance of which may well have been found within Ms. Breen's report but not in his own, was the subject of objection.

The reality is, I think, that the Rules fail to make adequate provision for a situation which I believe to be increasingly common in medical practice and now in forensic medical practice, which involves a team approach, rather than a series of unco-ordinated individual approaches, to any particular problem.
There may need to be some consideration given to an appropriate amendment to the Rules in respect of that situation, but before that was done it would, I think, be desirable that some investigation be made and consultation be had with the medical profession to clarify the way in which, the extent to which, and the reasons why multi-disciplinary techniques are applied not only in the course of treatment but in the course of medico-legal investigation. It may be that the problem of compliance with the Rules in such a situation would simply have been met had Dr. Watson and Ms. Breen both put their signatures to a single report, embodying what presently appears as the content of two reports separately signed, but it seems to me that that solution is somewhat glib. The
Rule Committee should be invited to consider the question.

In the circumstances of the present case, it is clear that the neuropsychology unit did adopt a team approach, Dr. Watson himself and Ms. Breen seeing the plaintiff separately and then conferring subsequently, a process which led to the preparation of the two reports. He gave the following evidence, in answer to questions from defendants' counsel and myself:- "Q. Could you set out the procedure by which the plaintiff in this case came to be assessed and the reports produced? 
OBJECTION. QUESTION ALLOWED.

Q. Could you please set that out? A. For medicolegal matters the neuropsychology unit sees patients in a combined and comprehensive fashion. I am a neurologist clinician, and the clinical neuropsychologists have their own appropriate training, and by seeing people together, not simultaneously, but seeing people and then conferring afterwards, we're able to bring to bear better information and a better conclusion in our view than either speciality could on its own. In this case, when - Miss Tweedale's case, in this particular case I saw her first for approximately an hour and then spent a few minutes going through with the history that I had taken, with Miss Breen, and then she went ahead and did her assessment taking history which in the most part is complementary to what I did; sometimes duplicative.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Do I understand then the history recorded in your report is entirely history that you obtained? A. Yes.

Q. But the history recorded in Miss Breen's report, may derive in part from her interview with the plaintiff and in part from her discussion with you? A.
In the main that is true, although it can work the other way too, that there may be a history that she would have taken in this case or another case where
I would rely on that part of the history. After the assessments are finished we then write, we compare the results of our assessments and conclusions and confer, and finally the reports go out with an opinion. In a sense that appears to be an independent opinion but in fact represents, and should be taken together as a combined opinion on any particular case. And in these particular cases we have three neuropsychologists in our unit, and any of whom may have seen any particular patient, but in these particular cases a conference of four took place in every case to discuss the final conclusions and opinions." 
I allowed Dr. Watson to give evidence of matters which were disclosed only in
Ms. Breen's report, not his own, taking the view that the plaintiff's advisers were sufficiently made aware of the fact that evidence to that effect was to be given, even if not that it was to be given by Dr. Watson, and that no prejudice was caused which could not be cured, if need be, by an adjournment before cross-examination of Dr. Watson.

In his oral evidence, Dr. Watson expressed his total agreement with the contents of Ms. Breen's report, which I take to include his endorsement of her opinion that the plaintiff does suffer cognitive deficits organic in origin.

Dr. Brent Waters, a consultant psychiatrist who specialises particularly in child and adolescent psychiatry, saw the plaintiff on 16 August 1996. He refrained, according to his report, from any attempt to assess her cognitive functioning in any formal way but did observe that:- "Over the course of an hour or so she would become more lethargic, disinterested and her concentration would begin to flag. ... Although she digressed a little she generally was able to confine her replies to the question. She had some difficulty being specific and sometimes talked in generalisations, particularly towards the end of the interview. She had a good vocabulary and is probably of above average intelligence." (His observations were in the course of a four hour interview).

The court expert, Dr. Martin Nothling, saw the plaintiff on 14 June 1996 and his report of the same date was placed into evidence. In his opinion the plaintiff had cognitive deficits in the areas of attention, concentration, short term memory and the ability to learn new material, being the consequences of chronic organic brain damage.

In cross-examination counsel for the defendant did not seriously challenge the opinion that the plaintiff suffered from such deficits as Dr. Nothling described.

In the light of all of that evidence there can be no doubt that the plaintiff suffers real cognitive deficits, specifically in the areas of concentration, memory and the ability to learn new material.

The issues then are whether her cognitive deficits, so far as they are organically based, are innate or acquired; and, accepting that such organic cognitive deficits as exist are undoubtedly exacerbated by the effects of her depressive illness, whether that depressive illness was caused by her treatment at Chelmsford by way of DST and ECT.

Causation of cognitive deficits 
Whether deficits are organic 
There is evidence which shows that cognitive deficits of the sort manifested by the plaintiff can result from mood disorder, in particular from major depressive illness; and, as will appear, I am satisfied that the plaintiff at the present time and for many years past, has suffered from just such an illness. Ms. Breen and Dr. Watson were of the opinion that the deficits which have been demonstrated on psychometric testing, and otherwise have been identified by the psychiatrists on either side, are insufficient to account for the plaintiff's dysfunction in life, and they attribute a significant part of the plaintiff's defective cognitive functioning to the effects of severe depression; but accept that her deficits are, in part at least, organic. It is the opinion of the court expert, Dr. Nothling, that the plaintiff does indeed suffer a major depressive disorder and, although neither of them uses quite that language, it is my understanding of their evidence that both Dr. Phillips and Dr. Waters share that view. Dr. Nothling and Dr. Phillips are both clearly of opinion that significant depression such as afflicts the plaintiff can, and in her case does, produce cognitive dysfunction.

Dr. Bryant concluded that the cause of her cognitive deficits might be brain damage resulting from hypoxia in the course of treatment at Chelmsford and/or might be attributed to her heightened anxiety. He noted that "there is strong evidence that elevated anxiety levels are associated with cognitive deficits and particularly the type of deficits displayed by Ms. Tweedale". He also found that the plaintiff "satisfies diagnostic criteria for depression" and in that regard he referred to "her dysphoria, frequent crying, suicidal thoughts and attempts, listlessness, guilt, irritability and early morning insomnia".
He does not seem to have the opinion that depression, rather than anxiety, might be a cause of her cognitive deficits. However, accepting that cognitive deficits may result from either organic causes or anxiety, he was prepared to express the opinion that the plaintiff's cognitive deficits did result from her experiences at Chelmsford. He excluded the possibility that they should be attributed to her long term heroin and methadone use.

That evidence establishes that her depressive illness almost certainly accounts for a large part of her cognitive deficits, and for the severity of them at the present time. But the original cause of such deficits lies elsewhere. The clear conclusion from the expert evidence to which I have already referred, particularly the psychometric evidence, is that the plaintiff's deficits are at least in part organic.

Whether organic deficits are innate or acquired 
Ms. Nora Breen offered as a possible explanation that the pattern of deficits is innate; but she did not have access to any school records. She observed that she had no objective evidence to corroborate the plaintiff's claim that she had an excellent memory prior to her admission to Chelmsford. She noted the plaintiff's own description of herself as a C-average student. The evidence of the plaintiff's pre-Chelmsford life has been reviewed above.
Nothing in that material suggests that the plaintiff's cognitive deficits were innate rather than acquired.

Dr. Watson thought the school record was consistent with the existence of innate deficits but did not go further than to say that that was a possibility which required consideration.

I have reviewed such evidence as there is of the plaintiff's condition before
Chelmsford. That evidence lends no support to the proposition that the plaintiff had any significant (observable to lay persons) cognitive defects before her admission to Chelmsford. On the contrary, that evidence tends to show that the plaintiff was intellectually the equal of her siblings and her classmates, although her personality was such that she failed, in the academic context, to make the most of her capacities.

I am satisfied that such organically determined cognitive deficits as she now has are acquired, not innate.

DST as possible cause of brain damage 
For the purpose of instructing the court expert, the parties concurred in the following description of DST:- "The treatment involved the administration of a combination of sedatives, barbiturates and tranquillisers for extended periods of time and having certain effects on the patients [as] recorded in the clinical notes. While sedated, the patients would be `lightened' from time to time. Patients may have been sedated for periods up to 10 days and in some cases up to 14 days.
Most of the patients received ECT from a medical practitioner at frequent intervals while sedated." 
The plaintiff was sedated in that manner on 27 April 1977 (Exhibit H, nursing notes for that date), and continued in deep sedation until 11 (or perhaps 12)
May 1977: in both the evening report for 11 May and the night report for 11/12
May, she is described as "lightening out slowly".

It was not contested by the defendants, that DST so described and as practised by Dr. Bailey at Chelmsford Hospital was capable of producing brain damage.

Patients given DST are, in the words of Dr. Jonathan Phillips (report 17 April ):- "... at risk for all of the problems which are faced by an unconscious or deeply sedated patient. The risk of serious medical complications in such a patient are relatively high and include ... respiratory distress, aspiration pneumonia, infective pneumonia, anoxia with secondary brain damage ..." 
The risks are such that a patient who becomes comatose by way of, for example, trauma, suffocation or drug overdose, is ordinarily treated in an intensive care unit, equipped and staffed appropriately for the monitoring and care of such patients. I am satisfied that the level of monitoring and care facilities and staff available at Chelmsford was significantly below that which would be available in an intensive care unit (it was never suggested otherwise on the part of the defendant), and it follows, and I find, that the risks to which the plaintiff was exposed by her being treated with DST were accordingly more likely to materialise, less likely to be observed if they did, and less likely to be able to be neutralised by nursing or medical intervention. (It is not of course, any part of my function at this stage to form any judgment as to whether any different level of care ought to have been provided, and I expressly refrain from any comment on that aspect).

Dr. Phillips expressed the view (without challenge or contradiction) that the brain of an adolescent patient, still in the process of development, is particularly vulnerable to damage: which I take to mean, that the risk that brain damage may result from DST is even more likely to materialise where the patient is an adolescent than when the patient is an adult.

The mechanisms by which brain damage may result from DST are two-fold, one central, one peripheral; but in both aspects what is postulated is hypoxia that is, reduction, or anoxia, that is, interruption, of the blood supply to the brain. First, such may occur as the direct result of coma, which may impair the patient's respiratory drive, the innate urge to breathe so that the body and particularly the brain are furnished with adequate oxygen. Dr.
Phillips explained that the sedating drugs used in DST (in the plaintiff's case they included Tuinal, sodium amytal, Seranace, Newlactil, Placydyl,
Dalmane) have an effect on the respiratory centre in the hind-brain; they:- "... have the capability of slowing down respiration or actually stopping respiration if they are given in big enough doses, so we have a central effect of suppression of respiratory drive ... if the hind-brain is being adversely affected by sedating drugs, the respiratory drive will drop ... respiration is slowed down or becomes more inefficient, and thereby less oxygen reaches the brain." 
Secondly, hypoxia may occur in consequence of complications of coma, in particular infections of the lung or the upper respiratory tract. A perusal of the hospital records supports the inference that the plaintiff before and during deep sleep suffered a respiratory infection. Some days before the commencement of deep sleep therapy and during the first course of electro- convulsive therapy, nasal and throat swabs were ordered. The report is dated April but an entry in the nursing notes on 29 April suggests that it was not in fact received until the latter date. It revealed the presence of staphyloccoccus organisms sensitive to ampicillin. On 28 April (that is before the receipt of that report) she was given an injection of penicillin. On 29
April and following ampicillin was administered. Throughout the period of deep sleep her temperature was consistently elevated. Dr. Phillips drew attention to references in the notes to urinary incontinence, which, he said, raised the possibility that the infection indicated by the elevated temperature was of the urinary tract rather than a respiratory infection. However, the prescription of a specific antibiotic following the nasal and throat swab and the frequent references to accumulation of mucous requiring frequent suction to clear the airway satisfy me that whether or not a urinary infection was present as well, the plaintiff was subject to a respiratory infection during the period of deep sleep.

ECT as possible cause of brain damage 
ECT has long been regarded as an appropriate physical treatment for some types of psychiatric illness, especially depression (cf. Bolam v. Friern Hospital
Management Committee [(1957) 1 WLR 582)] although the situations accepted by the bulk of medical practitioners as appropriate for its use have been progressively circumscribed as various forms of psychiatric illness have become better understood, and as other, less traumatic, forms of therapy have been developed. It is a treatment which involves some well recognised risks. (Again I interpose to say that nothing I now say about ECT or the circumstances in which it was used in respect of the plaintiff is intended as in any way bearing on any question of liability which may ultimately need to be resolved; I expressly refrain from any comment on the question whether in the circumstances of this case, the administration of ECT and the manner of its administration were appropriate). ECT involves the sending of an electric charge through the brain and that has an effect on the oxygenation process to the brain. Dr. Phillips explained it, saying:- "... it is certainly more than an instant. There are two parts to this. There is the actual moment of the electrical impulse, which will vary, depending on the machinery used and a variety of other factors, and respiration will be stopped momentarily then. That does not matter particularly. The patient then, and this is why ECT is used, the patient will then have an epileptic seizure.
The first phase of an epileptic seizure is a phase whereby the patient goes into muscle spasm and during that phase, which can last from seconds to over a minute, respiration will cease. The patient then goes into the second phase of the epileptic seizure, which is a phase of contraction and relaxation of muscles, the characteristic, the lay idea of the seizure, and respiration will be disordered but will continue during that period. So it is the phase, the tonic phase, the tonic phase of contraction of muscles during which respiration ceases that is my concern in relation to anoxia." 
The risk of anoxia during ECT being well recognised, usual practice according to Dr. Phillips (again without challenge or contradiction) is for the patient to be oxygenated prior to the actual electro-convulsion and as quickly as possible following the tonic phase of the epileptic seizure. There is no evidence that oxygen was given on occasions when ECT was administered to the plaintiff.

It was not put to the plaintiff that oxygen had been administered to her. The plaintiff's evidence (t.24) shows that she had some recollection of the administration of ECT during her period at Chelmsford - she refers to the machine being wheeled in on a trolley. It may well be that if she was asked whether oxygen was administered she would be unable to say, because, as her evidence shows, a general anaesthetic was administered to her. On the other hand, had it been put to her that oxygen was administered she may have conceded that it was; she may have been able to say at least that it was not administered at any time when she was conscious. If it is the defendants' case that oxygen was given, that should have been put to the plaintiff.

The hospital notes relating to the administration of ECT to the plaintiff say nothing as to whether or not she was oxygenated. It is clear that the nursing staff were concerned about respiration during the period of deep sedation - the nursing notes are replete with references to suction of mucous, administration of ampicillin and on occasions the institution of an airway.
Specific record is made not only on the drug chart but in the course of the nursing notes, if when ECT was given there was or was not an injection of a drug called Brietal. Given the amount of detail which the notes reveal in relation to these matters, the absence of any mention of the administration of oxygen coupled with the absence of any suggestion in cross-examination of the plaintiff that oxygen was given, provides in my view at least a scintilla of evidence that no oxygen was given. It is, of course, possible that oxygen was given as a matter of course whenever a patient was subjected to ECT and if that is the case, the absence of specific mention of that in the nursing notes loses its significance. However this is one of those situations, common in the case of a patient subjected to treatment in hospital, where the true facts are not within the knowledge of the patient but entirely in the possession of the persons responsible for treatment. Where those persons are not called to give evidence the inference to which that scintilla of evidence gives rise, namely the inference that no oxygen was given, may more readily be drawn. If it is not the correct inference, it would have been easy for the defendants to call
Dr. Herron or Dr. Gardiner to establish the true position. I am satisfied in those circumstances that the probability is that the plaintiff was not oxygenated at the time of ECT.

In any event, the evidence does not suggest that the risk of hypoxia caused by the administration of ECT is entirely removed if oxygen is given. Dr. Nothling refers to the possibility of hypoxia resulting from the administration of ECT without reference in that context to whether or not oxygen was given. It was not put to any of the experts that if oxygen were given in association with the administration of ECT, the risk of brain damage was entirely removed.
Indeed, Dr. Watson expressed the view that ECT can cause cognitive dysfunction by means other than hypoxia and agreed that it was entirely possible that one or more of the bouts of ECT caused her organic brain damage.

I am satisfied upon the evidence of Dr. Phillips (again, not the subject of challenge or contradiction) that the chance that ECT may cause brain injury by way of anoxia is increased where the treatment is administered to a patient who is in coma and who, additionally, has a respiratory infection.

DST/ECT as likely cause of brain damage to plaintiff 
I am satisfied that the treatment of the plaintiff at Chelmsford by way of DST and ECT, in the manner and circumstances in which that treatment was in fact given, represented events which not only clearly had the capacity to cause organic brain damage, but which were very likely to do so in her case. The generally recognised risks were more likely to eventuate in her case because of her youth; because of the absence of the facilities of an intensive care unit; because of the presence in her of a respiratory infection at the time when she was placed under sedation and at the time when ECT was given; and because ECT was probably given without oxygen.

In the words of the court expert, Dr. Martin Nothling (report p.14), "the fact she was significantly sedated and was also given ECT may well have led to a situation where she suffered cerebral hypoxia with consequent brain damage".

Dr. Phillips expressed the opinion that "it is likely that brain damage occurred during the period of deep sleep therapy as a result of both chronic hypoxia and acute anoxia, the second associated with ECT".

However, the defendant submitted that the pattern of the onset and development of the plaintiff's symptoms of cognitive deficiency is at odds with that pattern which is typical of brain damage following cerebral hypoxia. The evidence of the medical witnesses is generally to the effect that it may be expected, in the case of brain damage, whether caused by trauma or hypoxia, that cognitive deficits will be at their most severe during a relatively short time immediately following the causative event, after which there will be a gradual improvement in function over a period of up to two years, corresponding with a period of learning and adaptation during which the patient acquires the ability to cope to some extent with the organic deficits.
Thereafter, it is said, the level of deficit will continue at a relatively stable, constant level until the onset of age, disease or other trauma either adds to the organic component, or destroys the ability of the patient to cope.

Dr. Watson put it this way:- "People are at their worst immediately after the hypoxic period and then they make some progress. If it is not so severe they make progress and improvement and don't deteriorate later. One of the things we are looking for in a clinical case with similarities of this kind, if we find such a later deterioration you have to look for other causes." 
Dr. Phillips accepted the general proposition that "when one is talking about hypoxic brain damage the accepted chronology is that the effects are worse right at the start and then there is an improvement over a period of months for up to two years and then there is a plateau". He said:- "I think perhaps the best way to look at it, the hypoxic damage is permanent, brain tissue cannot restore itself as we all know, but a person's adaptive powers allow some adjustment to the damage, and I agree with you entirely, that adaptation is generally better, not immediately after the event but in the years that follow ..." 
It was put to him:- "Q. Certainly what one does not see, if the problems are due to organic damage at the start, one does not see the incident occurring and then a progressive deterioration for a number of months before the stability starts. What one sees is immediate effect and then may be an improvement before the plateau? A.
I wouldn't argue with that. One is looking at a change in those first few months after the insult." 
So too Dr. Nothling:- "Q. Well doctor, if the motive mechanism of brain damage in this case is said to be hypoxic from two weeks or so of heavy sedation and chest infection and
ECT, you would expect, would you not, that the damage would be worse straight after that DST as opposed to it being a progressively worsening damage if the damage is organically based - you agree with that, don't you? A. Yes. The damage that would be organically based would be maximal after the particular injury, whether it is a head injury or a hypoxic episode, if we can call it that, which has occurred perhaps over a two week period which would be maximal after that event and then there would be a gradual improvement in the symptoms, if that is all it was, if it was due to brain damage. Now the course would then be complicated though if other factors were intervened, such as heavy use of particular medication would might affect that. You could get a pattern worsening of someone's attention and concentration due to medication which might be used after an insult like that and so rather than getting better they might appear to be getting worse. You could not just judge it unless you look at the whole context.

Q. For that to happen you would need to show that the medication level was increasing, would you not? A. Not necessarily increasing, but you just have to look at what the medication was and how that might affect attention and concentration." 
The point of this body of evidence is, I think, not that a pattern of relatively early progressive deterioration in cognitive function (whether or not preceded by a period of improvement and/or plateau) necessarily excludes initial hypoxic or traumatic brain damage as the source of cognitive deficits, but that such a pattern requires consideration of whether the whole condition is due to a cause other than trauma or hypoxia, and, if there was initial traumatic or hypoxic brain damage, what is the cause of the subsequent deterioration (which cannot be directly due to such brain damage).

The medical theory being clear, and common ground between the experts, the question becomes one as to what was in fact the plaintiff's course so far as cognitive state was concerned during the first couple of years after DST. I have found that her cognitive state during the period that she remained a patient in Chelmsford was impaired and quite substantially so. There is, of course, a very real question as to whether it was impaired by reason of brain damage or merely by the continuing sedative medication which she was being given.

I accept the evidence of the plaintiff, corroborated as it is by her mother's account of her complaints to her during that period, that she had very great difficulty in acquiring even a rudimentary level of skill, that she was very much slower in learning those skills than her fellow students. The plaintiff, when asked what she recalled of the typing course:- "I recall not be able to - they had a typing chart on the wall that you are supposed to be able to watch so that you can do your key strokes and I could not physically see it; I was too medicated. I was falling asleep and I was very upset because I was so medicated and disorientated. ..." 
I accept her evidence that her thinking during the weeks following DST was confused; that she would lose track of conversations; and that her memory was affected.

Dr. Watson observed that:- "There was evidence of the person, if you accept something happened to her in a hypoxic sense at Chelmsford, in the years after Chelmsford she went on to achieve in a number of areas that required skills of executive fashion requiring memory and so on then there is evidence of subsequent deterioration." 
In cross-examination Dr. Watson said:- "She did rather well at some jobs that required skills of attention and memory and concentration, the sorts of areas where she has problems at the moment; and ... she did rather well in those early and apparently rather well then, compared to what she is able to do now, a very late decline ..." "That wouldn't be the typical pattern the single - if you allow me to use it, the single insult to cover a two week hypoxic and hypo-tensive brain injury back in 1977, with early improvement, early ability to do things quite well, and then much greater difficulties decades later, when many other things have been happening to her." 
Dr. Waters also seems to have been impressed by the report that the plaintiff, whilst still a patient in Chelmsford, attended business college and acquired some rudimentary typing skills; and by her employment history. In the light of those matters reviewed already, it seems to me that these witnesses rather over-value the plaintiff's level of skill and competence during those years.

The evidence of her employment supports the view that over the period of a couple years following DST the plaintiff did adapt, to some extent, to her cognitive deficiencies and became capable of a level of activity in her various employments, at which level she continued for some years thereafter; but I see in the evidence of the plaintiff's performance during those years nothing inconsistent with the pattern of damage and gradual improvement to a plateau which medical theory pre-supposes as that which would follow hypoxic brain damage. That is not to say that the pattern demonstrates brain damage; it is to say that the pattern revealed by the evidence of the plaintiff's conduct does not afford a reason for rejecting the proposition that brain damage was incurred during DST. I accept, however, the proposition that the subsequent deterioration in the plaintiff's performance a number of years later cannot be attributed to cognitive deficits resulting from brain damage.
However, in the presence of ample other explanations of that later deterioration, it does not seem to me that the fact of that deterioration casts doubt on the proposition that brain damage was incurred during DST. The deterioration is in my view readily explicable by reference to the plaintiff's emotional state, psychological damage, however sustained; and to her drug use.

The finding in the plaintiff of organic brain damage consistent with hypoxia as the cause, coupled with the conclusion that she was in the course of her treatment by way of DST and ECT exposed to the risk of hypoxic brain damage, makes a fairly strong circumstantial case that that was the cause of her cognitive deficits and the inference that that was the cause may readily be drawn if there is no other more probable explanation of her condition.

Alternative explanations of cognitive deficits 
The defendants' submissions propound possible alternative explanations of the plaintiff's cognitive defects: alternative, that is, to the proposition of innate deficit and to the proposition that those deficits reflect organic brain damage sustained during the course of treatment at Chelmsford. These alternatives are that she sustained brain damage in one or more of a number of assaults committed upon her by one of her male companions, which caused concussion; or that her cognitive defects are attributable to her drug abuse.
I reject both of those as sufficient explanations of her condition, although I would not exclude the possibility that each of them has added something to the severity of her state.

As to drug abuse, the evidence is that heroin use does not, as such, cause cognitive deficits. An overdose of such an order as to produce loss of consciousness may, of course, do so. But I accept the evidence of the plaintiff that she has never experienced such an overdose of heroin. There was some rather confusing evidence, elicited in the course of cross-examination based upon notes from the Rankin clinic, which are themselves in evidence and which I have examined, suggestive of "overdose" but it became apparent during the course of the trial that that word is somewhat ambiguous.

Presumably, in the case of a licit drug it signifies the use of same without prescription (for example the plaintiff's original use of valium leading to her admission to Chelmsford) or at a dosage in excess of that which was prescribed, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that an overdose in that sense (not producing unconsciousness) could possibly have caused the plaintiff's cognitive deficits. In regard to the ingestion of valium on 30
November 1975, I have examined the evidence about loss of consciousness. There is no basis for a belief that she was unconscious (if at all) for such a period as was likely to cause hypoxic brain damage. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest the existence of any cognitive deficits following that event and prior to the administration of DST.

There are some references to the plaintiff having told counsellors at Rankin
Court that she had on occasion taken combinations of drugs: such incidents are referred to in the Rankin Court notes as "overdoses"; again, lacking any clarification as to what drugs were involved and what effects they were likely to have had, singly or in combination, it does not seem to me possible to attribute the plaintiff's cognitive defects to any such "overdose" in the absence of evidence that it produced unconsciousness.

Alternatively, the word overdose may be understood in the sense in which the plaintiff herself apparently understands it, namely an ingestion of heroin in such quantity, or at such a high level of purity, as to produce respiratory failure and consequent unconsciousness. In the absence of any evidence whatsoever to the contrary, I have no difficulty in accepting the plaintiff's evidence that at no time in her life has she experienced an overdose in that sense.

I reject the suggestion that drug overdose or drug abuse is to be regarded as a likely cause of the plaintiff's cognitive deficits.

In so saying I take into account also the evidence about the plaintiff's use of marijuana. Accepting that after she first used it, she continued to use it up to the time when she became a user of and eventually an addict to heroin, and has used it subsequently, since she succeeded with the help of her medical advisers in weaning herself off heroin and onto methadone, the fact is that it is impossible to quantify the amount of her marijuana use, and there is no evidence which would enable the court to say that there is anything more than a theoretical possibility that the abuse of that drug in particular made any contribution to her cognitive deficits.

As to the supposed concussion, the evidence is very slim. On 1 November 1986, the plaintiff complained to her general practitioner, Dr. Yuen, that she had been assaulted two nights previously. Dr. Yuen's notes are hardly legible but clearly record nothing of an injury to the head and in particular no loss of consciousness. In cross-examination when that was put to the plaintiff it was not suggested that there was any loss of consciousness on that occasion. On 29
August 1991, she told a psychiatrist, Dr. Koziol, that four weeks previously the man with whom she had then been living had beaten her and she had sustained multiple bruises to her head and face. Dr. Koziol's notes contained no record of any loss of consciousness on that occasion and in cross- examination of the plaintiff it was not suggested to her that she sustained any loss of consciousness. On 14 May 1993, she told Dr. Morgan that she had been assaulted by an ex-boyfriend on 9 May and hit her had against a wall. She was complaining to Dr. Morgan of headache (occipital) and neck pain. On examination Dr. Morgan found a small haematoma above the right ear and a small bruise on the face. Dr. Morgan's notes do not record any history of loss of consciousness nor was any such elicited from her in cross-examination. The plaintiff was asked whether she had attended St. Vincent's Hospital with concussion on 9 May 1993 but said that she had no recollection of that. There is no evidence to the contrary. Given that the plaintiff has told her doctors of such assaults from time to time, I have no doubt that some such assaults occurred; but in relation to none of them is there any evidence of an actual loss of consciousness.

The history of assaults might be more obviously relevant if it were possible to say that the plaintiff's cognitive deficits did not manifest themselves until after those events. I have already reviewed the evidence of the plaintiff herself, and of her family members, which established that cognitive deficits were manifest long before the supposed assaults, although they did not prevent the plaintiff from obtaining, working in, and keeping a series of jobs during the years 1979 to 1989.

Conclusion as to brain damage 
I am satisfied on a comfortable balance of probabilities that the plaintiff did sustain, by reason of DST and by reason of the administration of ECT, a degree of organic brain damage producing cognitive deficits in the areas of memory, concentration and learning ability. It is possible that such organic brain damage as she sustained was caused only by DST, both directly and indirectly through the mechanisms described above and that the several administrations of ECT added nothing; but upon a consideration of the whole of the evidence I think it more likely that both treatments contributed. If that is so, it is not possible to distinguish precisely their respective contributions, but clearly the probability is that DST played the larger part.

Whether the plaintiff suffers a depressive illness 
It is, I think, common ground that the plaintiff at present suffers a depressive illness. As to that the only difference between the experts is in their definition of the magnitude of the illness. Thus in his report of 20
August 1996, Dr. Waters expressed the view that she suffered (in addition to other diagnoses) "dysthymic disorder". Ms. Breen, with whom Dr. Watson expressly agreed, said that the plaintiff's responses on testing indicated "severe depression and extremely high anxiety levels". Dr. Morgan found deep emotional and personality problems but did not more precisely define the diagnosis. The court expert, Dr. Nothling, diagnosed her present state as a major depressive disorder; and the psychologist, Dr. Bryant, expressed the view that she "satisfied diagnostic criteria for depression".

Dr. Phillips in his several reports described the plaintiff on the occasion of his consultations with her as having many problems not only cognitive but emotional. Her mood state was characterised by apprehension and depression.
Although in his report of 28 April 1992 he did not offer a specific psychological diagnosis and referred to chronic depression rather as a symptom than a diagnosis, it is clear from the comments which he made in his later report (22 September 1992) that it was his view as at 28 April that "Ms.
Tweedale experienced chronic depression and chronic low self-esteem at that time".

When he reviewed her on 10 July 1996 (report dated 17 July 1996), Dr. Phillips recorded her account of symptoms, which substantially corresponds with what she described in evidence and identified her problems as both emotional and cognitive, without, however, proffering any formal diagnosis. I do not suggest that he should have, although it often facilitates discussion if symptoms can be linked according to some recognised diagnostic criteria or some accepted diagnostic label, so long as it is always borne in mind, of course, that the plaintiff's entitlement, if any, to damages is an entitlement to compensation for that which she in fact experiences whether or not it falls neatly within any particular diagnostic category. In oral evidence Dr. Phillips made it clear that in his opinion the plaintiff suffers brain damage which is a likely explanation of her cognitive deficits and that she suffers also emotional and personality problems, themselves capable of contributing and likely to contribute to her cognitive difficulties, apart from or in addition to their other effect upon her day to day functioning and enjoyment of life.
Notwithstanding the claim advanced in specific terms by the plaintiff's lawyers that she suffers a psychological illness "referred to as a major depressive disorder" I do not find anywhere in the evidence of Dr. Phillips any unequivocal assertion that such is the nature of her illness (to the extent that it is not an organic condition) but I think the whole thrust of his evidence has to be understood as based upon an opinion that, whether or not the label major depressive illness is appropriate, she does suffer significant dysphoria.

Causation of depressive illness 
The real issue in regard to this part of the case is not whether the plaintiff suffers the emotional symptoms of which she complains, but as to the attribution of those symptoms to the treatment by way of DST and ECT which was carried at Chelmsford. Ms. Breen and Dr. Bryant, psychologists, both very properly made no attempt to attribute the depression which they found to any specific cause. Dr. Watson also offered no opinion on the subject.

Dr. Morgan, the general practitioner, had little doubt of the connection. She said in her report:- "Susan's stay in Chelmsford was an horrific experience, which in my opinion would have left a mature adult shaken. This adolescent girl was shattered. As a result of the treatment she received, Susan has been left with some degree of permanent intellectual impairment. She also has deep emotional and personality problems and is reliant on drugs, of one kind or another, in order to cope. ... I have no doubt that Susan's experiences in Chelmsford have had a serious permanent adverse effect on her life." 
In oral evidence she made clear that that opinion was based in part on the view (which sufficiently accords with my own view of the facts) that "from
Susan's history she seemed to be a reasonably normal child prior to that" (ie.
her treatment at Chelmsford). That opinion was not really challenged in cross- examination except so far as there was generally an attack upon her qualifications to express opinions about psychiatric matters.

Dr. Nothling's opinion, as stated in his report and not challenged in cross- examination, was that the plaintiff's major depressive disorder was secondary to her organic brain damage and arose because she had insight into the loss of cognitive functions. That is an opinion which identifies, without more,
DST/ECT as the cause of her major depressive disorder. However, it appeared to be his opinion that, additionally, her unduly long hospitalisation with its adverse incidents of prolonged heavy medication and the loss of contact with her friends, her school and her family contributed additionally to that depressive disorder. In the course of cross-examination by counsel for the defendants he said:- "If an adolescent is in a hospital and the adolescent is basically unhappy to start with and they are put in a hospital, they will become more unhappy if they do not perceive there is any resolution to their problem. If they are having difficulties in their relationship with their parents, it is not being addressed, they have been taken away from their family and put in a hospital, they will often react by looking more down in mood and by looking unhappy." 
No attempt was made by either counsel to attempt to elicit from the expert any opinion as to whether it is possible to identify or quantify the respective contributions to her emotional illness made by, on the one hand, DST/ECT simpliciter, and on the other hand, the long period of hospitalisation thereafter. Perhaps that stemmed from a recognition that it was highly unlikely that any such differentiation might be made. Upon the view which I have taken as to the association between DST/ECT and the long subsequent period of hospitalisation, nothing turns upon it.

Dr. Phillips was also of the opinion that the plaintiff's insight into the loss of some cognitive abilities contributed to her emotional and psychological symptoms. In his view, however, there was another (and as I understand the general thrust of his evidence) more substantial cause. He attributed much of the plaintiff's depression in the years following her treatment at Chelmsford to what he described as "the aversive experience" of
DST and ECT and of her long hospitalisation in Chelmsford. He was not asked to make nor did he offer any distinction between the respective contributions of
DST/ECT on the one hand, and the lengthy period of hospitalisation on the other. Nor, in due course did the defendants' counsel in submissions address that question. The cross-examination of Dr. Phillips and Dr. Nothling did not challenge the propositions:-
That the plaintiff had an insight into her cognitive deficits.
That such was capable of causing or contributing to her dysphoric or depressive state.

Nor did counsel for the defendants in cross-examination of Dr. Phillips challenge his view that the "Chelmsford experience" was an aversive experience. I am satisfied that the plaintiff's experience as she described it in the course of her evidence and as she has described it from time to time in the course of histories to various doctors, fully merits that description of it. Counsel did not seek to elicit a contrary opinion from the court expert.
Nor did counsel challenge in cross-examination of Dr. Phillips the proposition that an experience of that sort was capable of producing a dysphoric or depressive illness particularly in a person who was in the view of both doctors, vulnerable.

The cross-examinations were directed rather to an attempt to highlight the existence in the plaintiff before and during her admissions to Chelmsford of symptoms not dissimilar to those of which she complained since, that is to say a significant degree of dysphoria, in order to support the proposition that her experience at Chelmsford brought no change; to highlight other aspects of her life, in particular at school and in her family relationships, capable of accounting for her low self-esteem, seen by both doctors as contributing to (as well as being a symptom of) her dysphoria; and to find support for the view of Dr. Waters, that the plaintiff, at the time of her first admission to
Chelmsford, had a significant conduct disorder such that she was likely, in any event and apart from anything that may have happened to her at Chelmsford, to develop in later life the problems of depression and substance abuse by which she is on any account now afflicted.

Dr. Waters concurred in the diagnosis (at least to the extent of acknowledging the existence of dysthymic disorder among other problems), but offered in his written report no opinion directly on the question whether that diagnosis was attributable to the treatment given at Chelmsford; nor did he in his oral evidence deal with that question in terms. He conceded, however, the shocking nature of the experience which the plaintiff had during the treatment at
Chelmsford and the potential which it had to cause adverse emotional effects in someone of her age, likely to leave her emotionally vulnerable and emotionally impaired and therefore, accordingly, at increased risk of self- medicating with drugs and, implicitly, of the acquisition of heroin addiction.
However, the clear thrust of his evidence was that her present emotional problems are attributable to a "quite severe conduct disorder" which, in his opinion, existed in the plaintiff before her admission to Chelmsford.

Dr. Waters said that the plaintiff's current diagnoses are substance abuse disorder, dysthymic disorder and type B personality disorder. He described type B personality disorder as including:- "... anti-social personality disorder which is the sort of personality which is associated with severe adult delinquency or criminality and so called borderline personality disorder which is often associated with anti-social behaviour, but more particularly is associated with marked mood instability, numerous suicide attempts, very unstable relationships, that kind of pattern, inability to get on with people with an element which is not nearly as strong, that is evident in anti-social personality disorder." 
Although he nowhere expressed himself in these terms, it is my understanding of his evidence that he attributed such aspects of the plaintiff's present functioning as her mood instability, unstable relationships and inability to get on with people not so much to her dysthymic disorder as to his diagnosis of type B personality disorder. That she should be diagnosed in that way is not a proposition which was ever put to Dr. Phillips or to Dr. Nothling, so that I do not have the benefit of their views upon it. Insofar as it is a diagnosis based upon her present symptoms, I find it somewhat unconvincing in the absence of any clear explanation from the witness of any reason for attributing her symptoms to that diagnosis rather than, as the other experts do, to the diagnosis of dysthymic disorder or major depressive illness. It appears to me that the diagnosis made by Dr. Waters of a personality disorder really rests upon his anterior conclusion that she suffered in childhood from a "quite severe conduct disorder", "a level of conduct disorder only a step below delinquency". He said that in the case of severe conduct disorder there is a significant likelihood of personality disorder in adulthood.

Dr. Waters is a psychiatrist eminent in the field of child psychiatry in particular. He was engaged on behalf of the defendants to provide an expert opinion. He reviewed the history given him by the plaintiff (in the obtaining of which he obviously took a great deal of care and paid a great deal of attention to detail) and the contents of various documents made available to him; and upon the basis of that information he erected that diagnosis of the plaintiff's pre-Chelmsford condition. He said:- "The prognosis for this degree of conduct disorder in a girl is guarded. Some girls and their families would be able to bring the behaviour under control, whereas for others it would represent a stage along a course leading to delinquency and later, to one or a mixture of criminality, substance abuse and severe personality disorder." 
I reject that view of the plaintiff's pre-Chelmsford state.

It appears to me to be based upon a quite unwarranted acceptance of the worst possible view of all of the plaintiff's pre-Chelmsford misbehaviour and of the literal truth of everything adverse recorded about her in the various documents to which the doctor had access. It appeared to me upon a first reading of his report that he attached undue adverse weight, in particular, to the single instance of alcohol use and sexual activity which she reported to him as having occurred before her admission to Chelmsford, and in doing so, he actually disregarded the detail of the account which she had given him. That first reading of his report gave rise to a considerable suspicion that he saw his role not as that of an independent expert but as one charged to extract from the evidence what he could most favourable to the defendant; indeed, at t.797/8, he virtually said as much. His second report reinforced that impression. I regret to say that his demeanour and his answers in cross- examination on the first day of his evidence did nothing to allay my concern.
Ultimately he was driven to concede that if the items of misbehaviour on which he had erected his diagnosis were single incidents separated by significant periods of time they might not have the significance that he had attached to them; and he conceded that to attach significance to them "one would need to know a lot more about them than I knew". (On the second day of his evidence, perhaps influenced by the extent to which on the previous day he had been forced to abandon entrenched positions, he displayed rather more objectivity when he was questioned about the issues of causation of the plaintiff's depressive illness and heroin addiction.

Both Dr. Nothling and Dr. Phillips, without significant challenge, emphasised on several occasions the importance to a diagnosis of severe conduct disorder of repetitive misbehaviour and anti-social behaviour.

It appeared to me that Dr. Phillips took a much more realistic view of the plaintiff's prior behaviour (the incidents of rebellious behaviour, shoplifting, the one occasion when she used alcohol, the one occasion (the same occasion) when she engaged in sexual activity, her involvement in
Pamela's problems, and her ingestion of valium). So too did the independent court expert, Dr. Nothling. It is indeed in such a situation as this that the value of the appointment by the court of an independent expert is very clearly seen.

Dr. Phillips in his report had opined that the plaintiff had some degree of conduct disturbance prior to her admission to Chelmsford but noted the absence of any history of serious anti-social behaviour and was not prepared to say that her behaviour was abnormal to the point that it was symptomatic of a psychiatric disturbance. Dr. Nothling's report expressed a similar view. He said she was not suffering from any psychiatric disorder but rather was involved in a conflict situation in her home. Each of them was acquainted in the course of the trial with additional aspects of the plaintiff's pre-
Chelmsford behaviour and with more detail of matters of which they had only previously a brief history, and each was prepared to concede the existence of a mild conduct disorder; but each remained of the view, particularly in the absence of significant anti-social behaviour and repetition of the misbehaviours identified in the evidence, that it was not correct to say that she suffered a severe conduct disorder such as postulated by Dr. Waters. That is not to say that either of them entirely discounted the possibility that she had personality traits of a sort which, irrespective of the fact that she was subjected to DST/ECT, could lead in later life to substance abuse. She displayed nothing, however, which in the view of either of those experts made it probable that, absent her treatment with DST/ECT, she would have developed a substance abuse disorder.

There is a further aspect of Dr. Waters' evidence which leads me to the conclusion to which I have come, and that is his reliance in part, to support his diagnosis of a severe conduct disorder pre-Chelmsford, on conduct of the plaintiff during the period of her admission. Dr. Nothling had pointed out:- "... that adolescents who have conduct difficulties often, when put into a hospital environment, tend to start acting out even more ...", and Dr. Phillips gave this evidence in answer to a question which I put to him:- "Q. In trying to decide whether it was appropriate now looking back to diagnose the plaintiff as having a conduct disorder by DSM4 criteria before she went to Chelmsford, to what extent is it relevant to look at her behaviour in Chelmsford after DST? A. Your honour, I am quite seriously troubled by behaviour after deep sleep therapy and ECT and in the context of ongoing significant medication. I think as best I understand it the process of deep sleep and the business of being at Chelmsford was rather distorting in terms of the behaviour of many people, and I believe that if we are looking to a diagnosis of conduct disorder it would be far safer to look at her behaviour prior to her admissions to Chelmsford and certainly prior to her second admission to Chelmsford." 
Those opinions commend themselves to me as rational and realistic, the more so as it is quite clear that the plaintiff in Chelmsford was allowed to mingle with patients considerably older than herself and that much of the misbehaviour attributed to her during her hospitalisation was at least influenced and probably induced by some of those other patients. To the extent that Dr. Waters rests his diagnosis on her conduct while in hospital, it appears to me that his opinion is substantially devalued.

It is clear (I have reviewed the evidence at tt.28-34) that the plaintiff had symptoms of depression prior to and during her first admission but not such as to justify a diagnosis of depression nor, I would add, of dysthymic disorder.
It is equally clear (I have reviewed the evidence at tt.35-37) that she suffered similar symptoms prior to her readmission to Chelmsford, at least from the time when she was at All Saints College, and during the second admission prior to DST, but that she did not suffer during that period diagnosable depression. Clearly, she was extremely vulnerable to the harmful effects of an aversive experience such as DST/ECT turned out to be. I am satisfied that her condition now is entirely different from her pre-treatment state. I am satisfied, on the basis of the expert evidence, particularly the evidence of Dr. Nothling and Dr. Phillips, that her treatment at Chelmsford by way of DST and ECT is a most material cause of her present depressive illness and has operated causally in the ways identified by Dr. Nothling and Dr.
Phillips.

It is not, however, in my view, the only cause. I think it is abundantly clear on the whole of the evidence that while her depression (which was clearly much less severe) between 1977 and 1983 was attributable almost entirely to her
Chelmsford treatment (operating upon her pre-existing state) and while the same is probably true of that level of depression which she experienced thereafter until about 1989, the severity of her symptoms has greatly deteriorated since that year. It appears to me a strong probability a the major cause of that deterioration has been her drug addiction and the pervasive effect of her attempts to deal with it, in particular her substitution of methadone for heroin; another is her addiction, in respect of which I accept the evidence of Dr. Potts, to mogadon and benzodiazepam as a response to depression.

Heroin addiction - causation 
The question whether the plaintiff is entitled to damages in respect of her drug addiction involves two questions of fact, namely as to whether DST/ECT was the cause in fact of her addiction; and if so, whether the acquisition of such an addiction was reasonably foreseeable as a consequence of the administration of those treatments. If her addiction was in fact caused by those treatments, but such addiction was not a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the treatments, the law does not allow her to recover damages in respect of it.

I have set out at length (j.60-69) the evidence given by the plaintiff as to the circumstances in which she first came to use heroin, the progress of her usage of the drug thereafter, and the development of addiction. It seems to me that it is upon that evidence alone (although the credibility and reliability of what she has said must, of course, be assessed in the light of all of the evidence in the case) that the question of causation in fact must be determined.

Each party led evidence from expert witnesses, without objection by the opponent, of opinions as to whether or not on the facts of this case as known to the respective experts, the plaintiff's resort to heroin and subsequent addiction did or did not result from DST/ECT. That evidence was no doubt admissible given the abolition of the "ultimate issue rule" by [s.80](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s80.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), but of no assistance, at least not directly, because it is not demonstrated that the facts upon which any one of the experts purported to base his opinion corresponds with the facts as I have found them or will find them to have been, nor is it possible to identify in what respect the opinion of any one of the experts would require modification because of some difference between the facts as found by the court and the facts known to or assumed by the experts (or both) upon which their opinions were based. (An alternative view is that the evidence was not in any event admissible because an opinion expressed by any of them as to what in fact caused the plaintiff's heroin addiction was an opinion going beyond the area of their expertise in respect of which alone opinion evidence can be given: [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s.76](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s76.html), s.[79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html).
However, as I have observed, neither party took objection, on that or any other ground, to the expression of such opinion by respectively Dr. Nothling,
Dr. Phillips and Dr. Waters).

It is not the function of an expert witness to determine facts. The proper role of the expert is to express an opinion upon an assumption that the facts are as presented to him or her: an assumption which ought be carefully formulated by counsel (or by the solicitor seeking the expert's opinion prior to trial) in the light of evidence which has been or will be given, upon the basis of which the court will ultimately be asked to find that the facts are indeed as assumed. All too often it occurs, as repeatedly occurred in this case, that experts are asked to express opinions on the basis broadly of such matters as have become known to the expert which are not subsequently capable of being precisely identified. For those reasons, I found no direct assistance in the opinion of any expert witness that the plaintiff's addiction was or was not caused by DST/ECT.

However, in addition to their function of expressing opinions on the basis of assumed facts, experts may and are properly permitted by the court to fulfil another very valuable function, namely of drawing to the attention of the tribunal of fact the existence or absence of matters, the existence or absence of which might not otherwise be apparent to the tribunal of fact: cf. per
Street, J. in Anchor Mortlock Murray & Woolley Pty. Limited v. Hooker
Homes Pty. Limited [(1971) 2 NSWLR 278], 286. In a particular case the existence or absence of a particular fact or feature may assist the court, properly instructed by the expert evidence, to conclude that a particular finding of fact which might otherwise be made is or is not valid.
In this case, leaving aside the opinions of the experts as to whether or not
DST/ECT did materially contribute to the acquisition of a heroin addiction, the evidence of the experts is of value so far as it identifies ways in which the plaintiff's treatment at Chelmsford may have contributed to the development of heroin addiction - for example: by nurturing a drug dependent personality or by giving her a taste of psychotropic medications thereby turning potential to actual addiction (both propositions to be found in the evidence of Dr. Potts) or by causing or exacerbating pre-existent low self- esteem or depression, creating a need to alleviate such, which need the plaintiff may have met by resort to heroin, (propositions found in the evidence of Dr. Phillips, Dr. Nothling and Dr. Watson) and by drawing attention to aspects of the plaintiff's personality and/or behaviour which may sufficiently explain her resort to heroin without any need to refer to her
Chelmsford treatments: in particular, features of her behaviour before, during and after her admissions symptomatic of a mild degree of conduct disorder (per
Dr. Phillips and Dr. Nothling) or diagnostic of a severe degree of conduct disorder (per Dr. Waters); or to other possible causative factors (per Dr.
Phillips, Dr. Nothling, Dr. Waters).

I return then to the plaintiff's own evidence, noting that it is to be evaluated in the context of an understanding that DST/ECT did cause injury by way of cognitive deficits and depressive illness, the existence of which clearly provided a reason why the plaintiff might resort to the use of heroin, and in the light of evidence which I accept that some aspects of her pre-
Chelmsford behaviour were such as may sometimes be found in the background of substance abusers with no history of DST/ECT.

I have reviewed above the plaintiff's evidence of the circumstances in which she first used heroin and gradually became addicted to it. I have noted the fact that during the period when she lived at home after her discharge from
Chelmsford, she used no drugs nor any prescribed medications and sought no medical advice or treatment. That long delay without use of or search for drugs appears to me to cast considerable doubt on the theory that the plaintiff's time at Chelmsford and the programme of medication to which she was submitted there was significant in either creating a drug dependent personality or in creating actual addiction in a person already having such a personality. I am satisfied that at the time when she was first introduced to heroin, she was suffering, at least to some degree, the symptoms of a depressive illness resulting from DST/ECT. She was at the time living with
Gary, and he and others of their acquaintance were heroin users who persuaded her, overcoming her initial objections, that she should try the drug. She did so and she enjoyed the euphoria which it produced. I accept her evidence that, having tried the drug and experienced that effect of it, she in her mind related the experience back to her experience of extensive medication under medical supervision in Chelmsford and the explanation (which I find as a fact was given her by Dr. Herron) that what was in train was an attempt to find that drug or combination of drugs which would help alleviate her symptoms. I accept that when she experienced heroin she perceived it as achieving the sort of result which had been sought unsuccessfully at Chelmsford. I do not, however, accept that her initial use of heroin occurred as part of any deliberate attempt to find, or was motivated specifically by a desire to find, that drug or combination of drugs which, as she had been taught at Chelmsford to believe, somewhere existed which had the capacity to make her feel better.
I do accept that because of her depression she was emotionally vulnerable and a candidate for heroin addiction should she be introduced to the drug. It is,
I think, clear that having experienced the euphoric effect of heroin on the first occasion when she tried it, she subsequently resorted to it (it being readily available to her through Gary and their acquaintances) whenever she felt down, and that by her repeated use of it in those circumstances over the next several years she reached a point where she was physically dependent upon it. There was some debate among the expert witnesses as to whether physical dependence is the same as addiction or whether a person may be psychologically addicted to a drug (which I take to be a permanent state) but not yet to have acquired, or, having acquired it to have overcome, physical dependence upon it. It matters not, as it seems to me, for any relevant purpose in this case.
The plaintiff became physically dependent on the drug (whether or not she was already psychologically addicted to it) and it is her physical dependence and her consequent resort to the use of the drug that has caused her damage. She has now overcome her physical dependence, by substituting a dependence on methadone, but remains in a psychological sense addicted to the drug and always at risk of reversion to the use of it, that is to say, of becoming again physically dependent upon it.

Allowing that the treatment of the plaintiff at Chelmsford by way of DST/ECT had injured her physically and emotionally so as to produce cognitive deficits and a depressive illness and made her vulnerable to heroin addiction should the drug be made available to her, nevertheless it does not appear to me realistic to say, as a matter of common sense, that her initial use of heroin, her resort to it on subsequent occasions when she felt depressed and her ultimate addiction or physical dependence can be said to have been caused by the Chelmsford treatments. I reach that conclusion without reliance upon the medical evidence to the effect that she had, prior to those treatments, symptoms of a mild conduct disorder or symptoms diagnostic of a severe conduct disorder. It is unnecessary for me to identify that which was the cause of her heroin addiction, if indeed it is possible to do so. In fact the medical evidence shows that in very many cases of drug addiction the cause is multi- factorial or in any event unidentifiable.

I add, because of its relevance to other issues that will arise in the course of the assessment of damages, that the finding that the plaintiff's heroin addiction is not proved to have been caused by her treatment at Chelmsford is not equivalent to a finding that she would have become a heroin addict even if she had not been treated with DST/ECT. That question remains open.

Heroin addiction - foreseeability 
The concept of reasonable foreseeability received some attention in the submissions of counsel, the defendant contending that even if causation in fact be established, the development in the plaintiff of heroin addiction was as a matter of law too remote because it was not reasonably foreseeable.
Having regard to the conclusion I have reached on the issue of causation, it is not strictly necessary for me to deal with this issue but in deference to counsels' submissions I propose to do so briefly.

The defendants' submission relied particularly upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in Yates v. Jones (1990) Aust. Torts Reports 81.009, itself a case of heroin addiction.

The Court of Appeal held (by majority, Samuels and Meagher, JJA., Kirby, P.
dissenting) that the plaintiff had failed to establish that her accident was the cause in fact of her heroin addiction, but even if it were, it was not, in the view of Samuels, JA., damage reasonably foreseeable as a consequence of the tort. Samuels, JA. distinguished the earlier decision of Grey v.
Simpson (Court of Appeal, unreported 3 April 1978) in which he, in a judgment in which the other members of that court agreed, had expressed the view that "in that case it would have been open to a tribunal of fact to find that the plaintiff's heroin addiction fell within the boundaries of foreseeability" because:- "In that case there was very plain evidence that he had fallen into his addiction as a direct result of psychological problems which the injuries and their consequences had entailed. Accordingly, there, it was the psychological problem which was the primary foreseeable consequence and its particular manifestation was the plaintiff's subsequent addiction." 
Samuels, JA. went on to say:- "... the question in matters of this sort is the degree of particularity that one can legitimately introduce into the equation. I would have thought that in a case such as the present it would not be enough to say that the appellant ought to have foreseen injury caused to a susceptible person, with consequent pain which the respondent sought to alleviate by the use of heroin, to which she became addicted. That is putting the matter at altogether too high a level of obstruction, and with wholly inadequate particularity. The essential matters in this case, according to the way in which the respondent put it, were that she suffered pain which seemed to her to be severe (and that must be foreseeable as a variant on the `eggshell skull' type of case) and was denied analgesics. And while in pain and frustration she was visited by an acquaintance who happened to be both a heroin addict and a predatory pusher of drugs; and the respondent ultimately surrendered to his persuasion and allowed herself, while still in the hospital, to be injected with heroin. I do not think that that sequence of events which must legitimately be taken into account was foreseeable. That consequence is beyond the limits of a tortfeasor's responsibility." 
It was argued on behalf of the defendant that the plaintiff's heroin addiction was not a reasonably foreseeable consequence of DST/ECT because the defendant could not reasonably be expected to have foreseen the particular chain of events by which the plaintiff became addicted. I agree that if it is necessary for the plaintiff to establish foreseeability at that level of particularity which in Yates v. Jones (supra) Samuels, JA. said was necessary, then the plaintiff must fail on this issue. However, it does not appear to me that the plaintiff is required in the circumstances of this case to establish the foreseeability of so particular a chain of events. The question whether a particular consequence of an event is foreseeable is not a question as to the likelihood that the event will lead to that consequence but a question only as to the possibility (not being a far fetched or fanciful possibility) that it will do so. In that sense it has been described as an "undemanding" test. If particular damage occurs in consequence of a tortious act but was not foreseeable even according to the undemanding test which the law applies, damages may yet be recovered in respect of it if the damage is of the same kind as that of the foreseeable damage: The Wagon Mound (No. 1) <case>; [[1961]
AC 388.] If damage by way of the acquisition of a heroin addiction was not itself reasonably foreseeable and is damage different in kind from that damage which was foreseeable, it is not compensable. Unforeseeable damage will be regarded as different in kind from foreseeable damage if it "was caused in a manner which was no part of the risk of harm which resulted in the foreseeable damage": per McHugh, JA. in Nader v. Urban Transit Authority of New South
Wales [(1985) 2 NSWLR 501] at 533-534. It was on that basis that his Honour explained Rowe v. McCartney [(1976) 2 NSWLR 72.] That, I think, is the true basis of the judgment of Samuels, JA. in Yates v. Jones .

The relevance of foresight of the particular manner in which the damage is caused is limited to a case where the damage is, because of the particular manner in which it was caused, to be regarded as not of the same kind as that damage which is readily foreseeable as the consequence of the tort. If the damage is of a kind which is plainly foreseeable, it no longer matters whether the particular chain of events which led to its occurrence was foreseeable.
Thus, in Grey v. Simpson (supra), it was open to the judge to find that the plaintiff's resort to heroin to alleviate his otherwise unrelieved pain was a foreseeable consequence of the back injury which caused that persistent pain and so it was unnecessary to consider precisely how it came about that he commenced to use heroin.

The damage which was reasonably foreseeable as likely to result from DST/ECT was organic brain damage of hypoxic origin causing cognitive deficits, and a depressive illness, precipitated by the aversive experience which the treatment constituted and exacerbated by the plaintiff's insight into her resultant cognitive deficits. I reach that conclusion largely by reference to the substance of the evidence of Dr. Phillips, Dr. Nothling and (on this issue, Dr. Waters), taking account also of the opinion of Dr. Morgan, and bearing in mind that the defendants are medical practitioners or otherwise involved in the provision of health services, and as such to be regarded as equipped with rather more foresight than a non-medical defendant. In my view it was clearly foreseeable that the plaintiff, injured psychologically in that way, might resort to the use of heroin to alleviate her symptoms of depression. That is to say, in my view, the plaintiff in this case easily surmounts the foreseeability barrier without any need to go further and to establish reasonable foreseeability of the particular chain of circumstances by which she became addicted. In that sense the case more closely resembles
Grey v. Simpson than Yates v. Jones, and the latter case is, in my view, distinguishable.

The difficulty which the plaintiff has on this issue, in my view, has nothing to do with foreseeability. The plaintiff's difficulty is in establishing causation in fact.

The plaintiff's likely course if she had not been treated with DST/ECT 
The plaintiff was born on 23 May 1962 and at the time of her treatment at
Chelmsford was in her 15th and 16th years. Her first admission to Chelmsford on 2 December 1976 was almost at the end of her second year of secondary schooling. The plaintiff was an average student, less academically successful than her siblings, but not subject to any innate cognitive deficits. Before her admission to Chelmsford, the plaintiff was a normally happy child and early teenager except for some unhappiness in primary school by reason of her being teased about her size and except that in her early teens her relationship with her mother was very turbulent.

Her father, Kenneth Tweedale, was (and is) a medical practitioner specialising as a consultant anaesthetist. Her mother Phyllis Ilene Tweedale was a trained nurse who ceased the practice of that profession to rear her children, of whom she bore seven. The eldest child, Kim Elizabeth was born in 1954. She matriculated, graduated as Bachelor of Arts and subsequently obtained a
Diploma in Education and a Master of Arts in School Counselling; and is currently employed by the New South Wales Education Department as a school counsellor. The second child, Jennifer, two years younger, matriculated, graduated and now conducts her own business, a fashion boutique, in Germany.
The third child, Louise Erica was born on 8 November 1958, so that she is about three and a half years older than the plaintiff. She matriculated, enrolled in a degree in social work which she discontinued after two years when she went overseas. In the United Kingdom she trained as a nurse and worked in that profession, also after her return to Australia. She has since completed her studies for a Bachelor of Commerce degree. She is currently employed by Qantas as a flight attendant.

The plaintiff was her parents' fourth child. A boy, Scott was the next born.
He drowned in a swimming pool accident at the age of three (when the plaintiff herself was five years old).

The sixth child, Kenneth, now aged about 26, matriculated and graduated as a structural engineer. The seventh child is Annabelle, now about 23 years of age and travelling overseas.

Given that family background, it was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that she would probably have undertaken tertiary study, probably at a university, leading to a career attracting a high rate of earnings. There are difficulties with that, however; in particular:-
The highly competitive entry (in the early 1980's and since) to most tertiary and all university training places.
By no means all who complete university or other tertiary education, find employment or a career directly related to their qualifications.
Not all such persons end up among the highly paid in the workforce.
The plaintiff was far short of the end of her secondary schooling when admitted to Chelmsford.
The plaintiff's academic record by no means demonstrates that she would have achieved university entry and (so the defendant submits) her aberrant behaviour during her school years is such as to raise a considerable doubt about that.

Alternatively it is submitted on her behalf that, even if she was unable to enter or failed to complete a tertiary course, she would have achieved a successful career in a field for which tertiary qualifications were not essential, and in such career would have attained at least the average weekly earnings of women in the community.

In fact the plaintiff's schooling was interrupted at the end of 1976 and into and although her treatment by way of DST/ECT occurred during that interruption it was clearly not the cause of it. I accept the plaintiff's case that the episode which triggered her first admission to Chelmsford was an isolated incident of extreme distress and was not symptomatic of any underlying disorder of such a nature as, if left untreated, was likely in any event to lead to the problems of adult life which she now seeks to attribute to her treatment at Chelmsford. Nevertheless, that incident and the fact that she required treatment, and the fact that she had by no means recovered from that incident by the time when the 1977 school year commenced, produced a significant interruption to her education. Even if she had not been treated with DST/ECT, she would have required appropriate treatment for her symptoms and I think realistically it has to be assumed that, had she been able to resume her education, she would not have resumed her schooling before the beginning of 1978 (and very likely even later) and then only at the point where she left off at the end of 1976, that is to say, her third year of secondary schooling would have been, at best, the year 1978.

I have already made clear that I prefer the opinions of Dr. Phillips and Dr.
Nothling to the opinion of Dr. Waters, in relation to the attempt at this late date to diagnose the plaintiff's pre-Chelmsford condition. Fully apprised of the available material as to her pre-Chelmsford behaviour and emotional state, each conceded the existence of a mild conduct disorder. But each remained of the view that it was a disorder likely to respond to appropriate treatment.
The probability is that if the plaintiff had not received DST/ECT, she would have been discharged from hospital and the probability is that since she had not responded to the treatment afforded to her by Dr. Herron at Chelmsford, her parents would have sought other advice and obtained appropriate treatment.
In the opinion of Dr. Phillips and Dr. Nothling the condition was likely to have responded to appropriate counselling. Even Dr. Waters recognised (even on his assumption, which I have rejected that she was suffering a quite severe conduct disorder) that "some girls and their families would be able to bring the behaviour under control". In his report, Dr. Nothling expressed his opinion in the following terms:- "As she did not suffer from a psychiatric illness prior to undergoing DST, her prognosis was the same as for any other adolescent female of her age at that time, which was 14 years. Many young female adolescents of her age at that time are involved in family crises and turmoil. Unless they develop a psychiatric disorder these matters are usually sorted out in due course often with the assistance of a psychiatrist or some other counsellor. ...

At the most she would have required outpatient psychiatric counselling, either using family therapy techniques or individual therapy, in addition to some assistance from her parents in working through the family conflict." 
In oral evidence given in the light of the additional material about her behaviour and emotional state which he had not elicited at the time of his interview with the plaintiff, in answer to my question "would you have anticipated that this girl ... was a patient who could have been satisfactorily dealt with in a way which would enable her to grow into a properly functioning adult", he said:- "Yes I believe that it is probable that if she had psychiatric outpatient treatment in the terms of some psychotherapy that was ongoing, or she had even had some family therapy, that would have improved the situation. I believe that is probable; but from what I have been told, I would also say it is probable that she would have probably had some behaviour like this going on for quite some time. In my experience they often get really into the early 20s before that type of behaviour tends to settle down with appropriate intervention. It is possible that it might have gone on and on past that, but
I think it is probable if she had appropriate intervention that it would have gradually resolved over that period of time.

PLAINTIFF'S COUNSEL: Q. Would you agree that it is not uncommon in psychiatry to encounter adolescents who display some conduct or behaviour disturbance in their early or mid-teens who later, with appropriate counselling, become active and normal functioning members of the community? A. Yes, in my experience we do - psychiatrists encounter people who do have a similar history to that who do, with appropriate treatment, and limit setting by their families, they eventually mature and come through that.

Q. Bearing in mind in her case the family from which she came including the fact that, on the one hand she had apparently a problem with her mother, but on the other the fact that all her siblings have gone on, both elder and younger than she, have gone on to the kind of occupations that you have set out on p.3 of your report, is it probable in her case that with appropriate counselling she too would have gone on to a satisfactory lifestyle and remunerative career. Would you agree with that? A. Yes I believe that it is probable that she would have gone on to have a satisfactory lifestyle and some career. Maybe, given her state of life there, she may not have achieved quite as much as her siblings. I think it would be fair to say that, but I couldn't be more specific than that." 
I accept that view.

Looking at all of that material it seems to me clear that the plaintiff has failed to show that there was any real prospect that she would have gone on to complete tertiary eduction. She gave evidence that she had, prior to
Chelmsford, an ambition to study science and become a marine biologist.
Accepting that that was a thought that she had at that time, she certainly does not appear to have had a firm commitment to such a career; if she had such, I would think it clear that she had abandoned it prior to DST/ECT.

However, I am satisfied that, but for DST/ECT, the probability is that the plaintiff would have found her way into a career where she would have earned at least the equivalent of average weekly earnings of all female workers and I think that her claim for loss of earnings to date and loss of earning capacity in the future should be assessed on that basis.

On the other hand, it is apparent from the evidence of Dr. Nothling and Dr.
Phillips, and in any event emerges from a commonsense consideration of the evidence about the plaintiff's behaviour prior to her admission to Chelmsford, that there did exist some risk that she would not outgrow her adolescent turmoil and that she would, on the contrary, become dysfunctional as an adult.
For that reason it appears to me proper to discount her claim for loss of earnings to take account of that possibility. Instead of applying a conventional 15% discount for vicissitudes, it appears to me that such sum as is calculated as representing the prima facie loss of earnings attributable to
DST/ECT needs to be discounted by a total of one-third.

Loss of earnings and future loss of earning capacity 
I see no basis on which the plaintiff can justify a claim for any loss of earnings before about 1 July 1981. Had she not received DST/ECT, she would not in any event have entered the work force earlier than the time when in fact she became employed by Ross Ainsley. Either she would have been back at school, or in receipt of counselling or other therapy. There is no basis to conclude that she suffered a loss of earnings during the period of that employment, nor after she left that job until about her 19th birthday, given that she was presumably paid the award wage for her age and given that, in any event, the alternative at that stage of her life was probably further education and/or training rather than a higher paid job.

I have found that between June 1979 and October 1986 she was not capable of working at any higher level than in fact she did nor of earning remuneration at any higher rate than in fact she did and that that limitation upon her capacity resulted from DST/ECT.

From 1 July 1981 to 31 December 1983, it appears to me to be appropriate to measure her actual earning capacity as $193 per week net, which is what she was in fact earning in her employ at Jands Electronics during the time she was employed there. During that period her loss is to be measured by the difference between that figure and "average weekly earnings" by which expression I refer to what she would have received, net of income tax, had she been employed at the average weekly earnings of full-time adult female workers.

From 1 January 1984 to 14 March 1986, she was disabled from work because of her heroin addiction and its consequences and I allow nothing for loss of earnings during that period.

From 15 March 1986 to 14 October 1986, she was working for Noogardie Pty. Limited and receiving an average of $241 per week net. Her loss is appropriately measured as the difference between that figure and average weekly earnings.

From 15 October 1986 to 30 June 1989, the period when she worked in various agencies of the New South Wales Government, other placements arranged by Small & Associates, and Allan Dale Real Estate, I think it proper to assess her actual earnings at $290 per week which I calculate as the approximate net amount she in fact received in the State Government jobs. Her loss is measured by the difference between that actual earning figure and average weekly earnings.

From 1 July 1989 to date, it does not appear to me that her actual earnings can be relied upon as a measure of her residual earning capacity, as reduced by the effects of DST/ECT. 
It is difficult clearly to identify the reason for the significant decline in the plaintiff's earnings from the time she left Allan Dale Real Estate. The plaintiff's own evidence in chief did not identify any difficulty which she commenced to experience, different from the difficulties she had encountered up to that date; nor did she describe any difference in her own condition.
Nothing seems to have changed except perhaps her ability to continue to cope with the difficulties that she was experiencing. It seems to me that she was finding it increasingly difficult to cope with her employments, because of her impaired cognitive functioning, and it got to the stage where the effort required was beyond her. I think there is little doubt that that reflects the effect of two factors. The first is directly attributable to DST/ECT: it includes her cognitive deficits, her depressive illness and the interaction between those, and her abuse of sedatives and tranquillisers as a response to her depression. The second factor is, in my view, a consequence of her heroin addiction, namely, the exacerbation of her cognitive deficits by the effects of the methadone which she was using; together with he effect of her heroin addiction and its unpleasant consequences (including prostitution, imprisonment, the lengthy and difficult rehabilitation process and the ongoing methadone programme) in causing a substantial diminution of her self-esteem and so contributing to her depression.

Because of my finding that her heroin addiction and its consequences were not caused by DST/ECT, it becomes necessary to arrive at a conclusion as to the extent to which the consequences of that deterioration in work performance and earnings is to be attributed to DST/ECT and to what extent not; and (later, for the purpose of the assessment of general damages to arrive at a similar conclusion in respect of the respective contributions of those factors to her loss of enjoyment of life). The plaintiff has the onus of proof. It rests upon her to demonstrate the detriments attributable to DST/ECT and, as it were, to push back the boundary between detriments thus attributable and detriments having some other origin, in particular in the circumstances of this case, her heroin addiction. In those circumstances, it becomes necessary, I think, to take a conservative view of the effects of DST/ECT as compared with the effects of heroin addiction and to be careful not to extend the boundary of the former any further than the evidence clearly justifies. Ultimately, the decision is somewhat arbitrary but I think the best conclusion I can come to is that probably the decline in the plaintiff's earning capacity and personal functioning which I will arbitrarily date from 1 July 1989, may be attributed as to one-third to the effects of DST/ECT and as to two-thirds to her addiction.

I propose therefore to assess damages for loss of earnings during that period in the following manner. The damages will include two components:-
During the period ended 30 June 1989, the plaintiff demonstrated a residual earning capacity of $290, resulting in a loss of earnings appropriately compensated by awarding her the difference between that figure and average weekly earnings. That loss has continued and she should continue to be compensated for it. To assess that compensation, the value of her residual earning capacity should be taken to have increased from the base figure of $290 each year by a percentage equal to the percentage increase in average weekly earnings during that year, to produce in each year what I will call her "adjusted residual earning capacity". The damages will include a sum equal to the difference each year between average weekly earnings and her adjusted residual earning capacity.
Additionally, she is to be compensated for so much of the further loss of earning capacity that has occurred since 1 July 1989 as is attributable to
DST/ECT, being, as I have found, one-third thereof. The amount of this component of her damages will be equal to one-third of the difference between her adjusted residual earning capacity each year and the following amounts which I find to have been the amounts she would have been able to earn over that period.

From 1 July 1989 to 30 June 1994 I find that the plaintiff was able to earn annually at the rate of $10,617 net ($204.17 per week net).

From 1 July 1994 to 30 June 1995 I find that the plaintiff was able to earn in her employment with HomeCare Services of New South Wales $12,722 net ($244.65 per week net).

From 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996 I find that the net amount which the plaintiff was able to earn in suitable employment was the sum of $12,722 increased by a percentage equal to the percentage increase in full-time adult female average weekly earnings between 30 June 1995 and 30 June 1996.

Since 1 July 1996 I find that the plaintiff has been able to earn at a weekly rate equal to the weekly rate thus determined in respect of the year ended 30 June 1996, increased by a percentage equal to the percentage increase in full-time adult female average weekly earnings from 30 June 1996 to 30 April 1997.

From the date of judgment to age 65. Her future loss of earnings is to be determined on the basis of a continuing loss equal to the difference between average weekly earnings at 30 April 1997 and the amount determined in accordance with the preceding paragraph as the amount she was able to earn in the period 1 July 1996 to 30 April 1997. The present value of that future loss is to be calculated for a period of 30 years using a multiplier of 1038. For reasons indicated earlier, the resulting figure is to be reduced by one-third.

Superannuation 
The award of damages for loss of earnings and future earning capacity carries with it also an entitlement to damages for loss of superannuation benefits, to be calculated in a manner comparable with the approach I have taken.

Interest 
The plaintiff claims interest on the damages awarded for past loss of earnings and no submissions have been put as to why she should not be entitled to same in accordance with the ordinary practice, the rates of interest being those derived from Schedule J in the Supreme Court Rules.

The need for future care and treatment 
I have reviewed above the evidence which satisfies me that the plaintiff does suffer significant cognitive deficits, in part organically determined and caused by the treatment by way of DST and ECT that she received at Chelmsford, and in part due to the depressive illness similarly caused, but exacerbated by her heroin addiction and her addiction to mogadon and other medications.
Despite those deficits and disabilities the plaintiff at present lives alone and although she is clearly hampered in some of the activities of daily living by her cognitive deficits, her emotional state and the demands of her methadone programme, it appears to me that she is coping. Dr. Phillips described her as coping only marginally, but it appears to me that she is doing really rather better than that. I accept that it is not always easy for her to do so and that she has to avail herself of such devices as reminder notes. Nevertheless, difficult though it is for her, she does cope. In the absence of any significant deterioration in her condition, there appears to be no reason why she should not continue to cope with the activities of daily living for the rest of her life or for at least as long as, in the ordinary course, people do manage that. It is, I suppose, realistic to expect that with increasing age, quite apart from any possible deterioration in her condition, she will find it more difficult to cope with her deficits and disabilities, but in my view the respective causes of her disabilities now are so much inter-twined and the role which her heroin addiction plays in their production is so significant, although obviously not precisely quantifiable, that it would be sheer speculation to attribute any probable future decline in her ability to cope to the consequences of DST/ECT.

There is a difference of opinion between Dr. Phillips and Dr. Watson as to the likelihood of any future deterioration. I note that Dr. Nothling, the court expert, was not asked by either party and did not give any opinion on the question whether the plaintiff was likely in future to need care and/or domestic assistance. That is unfortunate given the expense and effort that the parties have gone to to secure an independent expert opinion but I think that no inference is available to be drawn against either party from the fact that nothing was put by either to Dr. Nothling on this subject matter.

Dr. Phillips has expressed the view that she will, as time goes by, require a degree of personal care and assistance, partly because of cognitive decline, partly because of her mood disturbance and low self-esteem. He spelled out in some detail what he saw to be her likely future care requirements. He also proposed a regime of medical care aimed at preventing or delaying further decline in her overall functioning.

Dr. Phillips expressed the view that future deterioration was likely for either or both or a combination of two reasons. Firstly, there is likely to be further decline in her ability to function because of her mood disturbance and her low self-esteem (including, as I understand his evidence, the effects of her heroin addiction which in his view is a part of the consequences of
DST/ECT). In relation to a decline in her functioning ability by reason of such matters as that, he proposes that the prospect of such decline may be prevented by the institution of a programme of supportive psychotherapy, the nature of which was outlined in some detail at t.527 where he also offers an estimate of the cost. The rationale of that sort of psychotherapy is this, in his expression:- "I believe that she would probably be best assisted by an ongoing reasonably intensive supportive therapy which would hopefully prevent the further decline which I think is likely to occur, if not prevent it, but certainly slow it.
Within the therapy I have suggested a number of tasks. The first is a fairly important one and that is to allow Ms. Tweedale to try and put together, as best she can, the jigsaw of her life. I do not believe she has ever had the chance to do this and to try and put the Chelmsford experience in context.
That is going to take some time. The second would be to allow her to work out ways of best functioning in the future, what she can reasonably do and what she can't do and how she should go about it. In saying that I am not just talking about vocation. I am talking about her ability to relate with others, her social life, her relationship with her family, such as it is, to try and make the most of what is available." 
Dr. Phillips was not cross-examined about that part of his evidence and Dr.
Watson was not asked by the defendants' counsel to express an opinion nor (and for obvious reasons in the circumstances) did counsel for the plaintiff seek one from him. The reason why the opinion advanced by Dr. Phillips was not challenged may have been due to a misunderstanding of the first answer which he gave in cross-examination. At t.749, he was asked:- "In you report of 12 August 1996, you refer to the likelihood of increasing care requirements in the medium to long term? A. Yes.

Q. That is based upon your opinion that the plaintiff may well suffer the early onset of dementia at some time in the future? A. Yes." 
The last question is unfortunately ambiguous or at the least unclear. Counsel, no doubt, intended to seek from Dr. Phillips confirmation that his opinion that the plaintiff would have increasing care requirements in the medium to long term was based only upon his opinion that she may well suffer the early onset of dementia (to which opinion the defendant was able to offer a strong contrary view) and not at all on the other part of his prognosis, namely, a decline in function due to mood disturbance and low self-esteem.
Unfortunately, it seems to me quite clear in the light of his answer in evidence in chief, that Dr. Phillips, reasonably enough, did not understand the question to be seeking to establish that his opinion about dementia was the only basis for his opinion about future care need. It seems to me pretty clear that he understood the question to be seeking confirmation that that was one of the factors which led him to the opinion that she would need care. Be that as it may, the fact is that his earlier evidence to which I have just referred was left entirely unchallenged and entirely uncontradicted and I see no reason to reject it. The consequence of that is, as it seems to me, a conclusion that the plaintiff does require some regime of treatment along the lines propounded by Dr. Phillips.

The question is how she should be compensated for that given that her mood disturbance and low self-esteem, the indications for that treatment, are not the result alone of her Chelmsford treatment but are the result in part, at least, of her heroin addiction which I have found, contrary to Dr. Phillips' opinion, was not a consequence of DST/ECT. He found no need to distinguish the respective contributions of heroin addiction and Chelmsford treatment nor did either counsel invite him to do so.

Dr. Nothling was asked about her need for or the benefit which she might derive from, psychotherapy and he expressed the view that there was little point in embarking upon treatment of that kind unless she was able to cease her dependence on methadone. He thought it essential to any form of treatment that might be prescribed for her that she gradually withdraw from methadone but he thought it unlikely that she would be able to do that and he thought it was really pointless, as I would understand the thrust of his evidence, to embark on supportive psychotherapy unless the methadone addiction could be disposed of. However, when he was asked (t.649), "Would you agree that it would be worthwhile for her to have supportive psychotherapy in an effort to solve at least some of the problems that are amenable to solution?", his reply was:- "I pointed out to his Honour that if she was motived for psychiatric treatment and I have pointed out in my report, she's quite anxious or I described it as a phobic anxiety of psychiatrists, I think that would be a big negative in this case, but if she could be persuaded by her general practitioner that there was some advantage in it, yes, I believe it could be of some assistance to her. As I pointed out to his Honour, I think the first thing would be to try and sort out to see if she could reduce the narcotics, psychotherapy I would not see as a separate issue. It is all one part of the psychiatric intervention would be to provide advice and counsel to her with regards to trying to lower the narcotics if at all possible and providing support and therapy." 
He agreed that supportive therapy would need to be quite intensive but on the assumption that she were motivated for such treatment and would agree to continue, he gave an estimate of the extent of desirable treatment which is very much less than that propounded by Dr. Phillips.

Both Dr. Phillips and Dr. Nothling saw no realistic prospect of any improvement. The best that Dr. Phillips could hope for was that future decline might be arrested. Both, I think, took the view that she was never going to be any better than she is at the present time; and that is a view that I accept.
Nothing in the evidence of Dr. Watson was to the contrary.

I think that the plaintiff has made out a case that she needs further treatment to deal with her mood disorder but that treatment cannot be distinguished from the treatment which would be necessary to overcome her methadone addiction. I think the proposition advanced by Dr. Nothling that her methadone addiction is a basic problem that needs to be overcome and his assessment of the duration of treatment go hand in hand. I think that it is probably unlikely that she needs treatment as intensive and as lengthy as Dr.
Phillips propounds, but I do think she needs very intensive treatment in the short term. If intensive short term treatment is not effective, there will be little purpose in continuing treatment in the longer term.

Accepting that she needs treatment, the quantification of it has to be somewhat arbitrary in light of the different approaches taken by Dr. Phillips and Dr. Nothling. I think in those circumstances it is appropriate to estimate the need as being a need for treatment over about five years at a frequency lying somewhere between the two specialists' estimates. I propose to allow for consultations fortnightly for three years, then twice yearly for a further five years, then once yearly for life, at a 1997 cost of $157.50 each. I adopt the mode of calculations set out on p.8 of the plaintiff's Part 33 Rule 8A particulars and I arrive at $14,986.97 which I round up to $15,000.

It appears to me that the need for treatment cannot be apportioned other than arbitrarily between consequences of her Chelmsford treatment and consequences of her heroin addiction and I think that the sum I have arrived at ought to be apportioned equally so that the recoverable proportion of it is only one-half ($7,500). Further, it appears to me that that amount which would be otherwise awarded must be further discounted by 20% to take account of her phobia against psychiatrists and the substantial chance that she will not in fact choose to have such treatment, notwithstanding the recommendation of Dr.
Phillips and Dr. Nothling. The amount to be allowed under this head is accordingly $6,000.

The second part of the foundation of Dr. Phillips' opinion that the plaintiff will require care in the future is that which was affirmed in the cross- examination to which I have referred, namely his opinion that she may well suffer the early onset of dementia at some time in the future. Dr. Phillips expounded two bases for that opinion. First, he advanced the theoretical proposition that any brain insult which affects the nutrition of the brain and therefore causes death of neurones, which he said obviously happens in an hypoxic insult, is going to reduce the quantum of grey matter available in the brain and ultimately is going to make the person vulnerable to cognitive decline. In his opinion there was no relevant distinction between brain damage resulting from trauma to the head and brain damage resulting from anoxia.

Dr. Phillips also related Ms. Tweedale's case to the very large number of other cases of Chelmsford patients which he had seen and he said:- "It is my view, not only in Ms. Tweedale's case but others, that there's good clinical evidence to suggest that she and other patients have undergone a cognitive decline and will most probably undergo further cognitive deterioration." 
He made it very clear that his opinion about the link between hypoxic damage and the early onset of dementia was based upon his clinical experience with patients, particularly Chelmsford patients, as well as his understanding of the way in which neuronal death occurs and causes cognitive decline. He conceded that he was not able to identify any particular study which had demonstrated a link between an hypoxic insult to the brain and the onset of dementia.

I accept the evidence of Dr. Watson that there has been no major research study of any possible relationship between hypoxic or anoxic brain damage and early onset of dementia. In the absence of any research study, the question does not necessarily have to be answered adversely to the plaintiff. Dr.
Phillips based his opinion on his clinical experience and although Dr. Watson indicated some doubt as to the validity of that opinion, understandably in view of the fact that it has not yet been the subject of any peer review research paper, he simply is not in a position to dispute Dr. Phillips' opinion that he, having seen some 150 Chelmsford patients had found the larger number of them to have brain damage. I do not discount Dr. Phillips' clinical experience with patients of this kind.

The question whether his theoretical exposition of the way in which hypoxic brain injury may cause cognitive decline (as distinct from once only occurrence of cognitive defects) is a different matter. Dr. Watson was inclined to discount it, on the basis that there may well be a significant distinction between damage caused by hypoxia and damage caused by trauma but he could not affirm that that was in fact the case. He was also dubious as to the proposition that merely the loss of the number of neurones established the probability of decline in brain function later in life.

Ultimately, it seems to me, that Dr. Phillips' opinion is dependent upon his clinical experience of Chelmsford patients which he has interpreted in the light of his theoretical knowledge about the effect of brain damage on cognitive function and the number of neurones. It does not appear to me that his evidence is to be accepted or rejected according to whether or not I accept the theoretical basis which he propounds. Dr. Watson, as a neurologist, is perhaps better placed to comment on the process which may be involved, but it seems to me that he discounts the theory advanced by Dr. Phillips and Dr.
Phillips' ultimate proposition rather on the absence of any research demonstrating the validity of Dr. Phillips' position than on anything else, other than his doubt whether Dr. Phillips as psychiatrist can really judge whether brain damage has occurred. I have considered Dr. Phillips' explanation of the way in which he approached that question in this case. It does not appear to me that he was particularly influenced by the opinion of the psychologists but rather that on the basis of his own psychiatric examination of the plaintiff he reached a conclusion that she was affected by brain damage, and while, no doubt, he was assisted to that conclusion by his anticipation, in light of his contact with very large numbers of Chelmsford patients, that that would be the case, I do not doubt the validity of his conclusion which in this case certainly is borne out by the evidence of both psychologists.

The defendants did not put any questions to Dr. Nothling on the question of dementia or any other proposition relating to deterioration of the plaintiff's cognitive deficiencies; nor did plaintiff's counsel. In all of the circumstances, and particularly the unfamiliarity of the parties and the court with the relatively novel court expert process, I do not see that any inference should be drawn adverse to either party from the failure to put any such matter to Dr. Nothling.

Dr. Phillips was careful not to say that he thought it probable that Ms.
Tweedale would sustain premature dementia. What he did say, and this I accept, is that there is a real risk of that occurring:- "I believe Ms. Tweedale suffers a real risk of premature significant cognitive decline which ultimately will take the form of dementia." 
The evidence satisfies me that it is probable that the plaintiff is at risk.
The plaintiff is therefore entitled to be compensated for that risk but it is necessary that the court attempt to arrive at some reasoned estimate of the chance that the need will in fact arise. Dr. Phillips was not prepared to say that it is probable that the plaintiff will experience early onset dementia resulting in a need for care and assistance. I infer that the extent of the risk is somewhat less than 50%. If the plaintiff does develop in the future the need for domestic care and assistance along the lines which Dr. Phillips suggests will be necessary, the need for that will clearly not, in my view, be entirely attributable to cognitive decline but will be influenced also by the progress of her emotional condition and her addiction. That is to say, should the need arise, it will not be entirely attributable to her Chelmsford treatment and any allowance for the cost of it must be discounted to the extent that the need is the result of her heroin addiction.

It is difficult to determine the extent of the need because it depends so much on the extent to which the plaintiff's cognitive function deteriorates. Dr.
Phillips suggested that the function would best be fulfilled by a senior nurse because of the greater range of skills which such a person might have but his evidence falls well short, in my view, of establishing that the extent of the need is as the plaintiff ultimately submitted, a need for full-time live-in care. It seems to me that such need as the evidence establishes as likely to develop would be adequately met by the provision of a person available for about six hours a day, five days a week to organise and supervise the plaintiff's domestic life and to be alert for the development of any threatening situation. She is unlikely to need any care or assistance within the next five years or so and although the risk that she will require assistance may begin to be realised after about that time, what appears most probable is a gradual decline in her capacity over an extended period of time before there exists any actual need for care. In those circumstances it appears to me that the appropriate course is to calculate the approximate present value of the need for care over a period commencing 10 years hence (24
April 2007) and extending to the end of a period equal to the plaintiff's expectation of life, but reducing the expectancy figure drawn from the
Australian Life Tables (33 years) by about 10% (to 29.5 years) on the basis that if the need arises by reason of dementia, that same dementia will, according to Dr. Phillips, shorten her expectation of life to some extent. I propose then to discount the resulting figure by 60% to take account of the chance that the need may never arise, and to discount that result by 30% to take account of the fact that if the need arises it will be in part attributable to factors other than Chelmsford treatment.

I have extracted what I would understand to be the appropriate rate from the final paragraph on p.4 of Exhibit W and I assess the weekly cost on that basis at $485 per week. Allowing that sum, I apply a multiplier of 1027.10 (appropriate to 29.5 years) and a deferral factor of .744. Applying the 60% and 30% discounts explained in the preceding paragraph, the result of the calculation is $103,733.25 which I round up to $104,000.

General damages 
The consequences of her treatment by way of DST/ECT have been identified and do not require specific repetition. It is difficult to distinguish clearly the effects of those injuries from the effects superadded by her heroin addiction but they clearly entail a massive reduction of her enjoyment of life. She has been forced to struggle with the consequences of her cognitive deficits and her emotional injury and each of those conditions has exacerbated the other.
The impression the evidence gives is of a young woman whose life, leaving aside entirely the question of addiction, had become a constant struggle to cope and a life which involved little room for pleasure. Her perception of the consequences of her Chelmsford injuries and the direct consequences of those injuries upon her caused her to withdraw very largely from social contact, particularly the social contact with her work mates which provides a great deal of the pleasurable aspect of work. The DST/ECT treatment condemned her to a restricted life of that kind, and that would have been her lot in the future, subject to the very real prospect of decline in function in the years to come. I think it fair to say that she was gravely damaged. The intrusion of her heroin addiction makes it very difficult to determine how gravely, and the fact that the plaintiff bears the onus of proof demands, as I have pointed out above, that the court adopt a conservative approach to the assessment of her general damages to avoid inadvertently compensating her for the consequences of that heroin addiction.

I assess general damages at $120,000. She is entitled to interest on such part thereof as relates to the past. I allow interest on $80,000 at two percent per annum from 12 May 1977 to 30 April 1997, the date of termination of DST, that is, for 19.97 years, which interest amounts to $31,952.

Fund management 
The plaintiff claims the cost of obtaining expert advice in the management of her award of damages. She alleges that the injuries received as a result of
DST/ECT and the disabilities flowing therefrom produce the situation that she is not capable of managing her award. The relevant principles are clear and recently stated in Nominal Defendant v. Gardikiotis <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 450.] The defendants are not liable unless they caused an injury which rendered the plaintiff incapable of managing her own affairs. It is submitted on behalf of the defendant that the sole reason why the plaintiff might be found incapable of managing her affairs is her heroin addiction and her consequent propensity to spend money on her drug habit. It does not seem to me that that accurately summarises the situation. The plaintiff has, as I have found, significant cognitive deficits attributable in part directly to brain damage sustained because of DST/ECT, in part to depression, in part to the interaction between those two conditions and in part to her addiction in the sense that her addiction has increased the level of her depression. It is no doubt the case that her heroin addiction adds substantially to the need that she should be provided with assistance in managing her fund; but that conclusion does not negative the proposition that her other deficits and disabilities, which are attributable to the treatment by way of DST/ECT themselves create that need. I am persuaded that the need exists quite apart from the superadded consequences of heroin addiction and, the amount of the fund being determined, an allowance is to be made for the cost of managing that fund based on the charges levied by the Protective Commissioner and calculated in the manner indicated by Meagher, JA. in Government Insurance
Office of New South Wales v. Rosniak [(1992) 27 NSWLR 665] at -699. For the purpose of that calculation it appears to me that the whole of the amount assessed as compensatory damages would, in the circumstances of this case, form part of the fund, there being no reason why any portion of it should be excluded.

The answers to the questions 
The first question is:- "Did 'deep sleep therapy', either alone or in conjunction with electro-convulsive therapy, at the former Chelmsford Private Hospital cause or contribute to the injuries and disabilities of the plaintiff referred to in the plaintiff's Part 33 statement or any, and if so which, of them." 
I answer the question as follows: the plaintiff sustained injury by way of organic brain damage resulting in cognitive deficits particularly affecting memory functions, concentration and the ability to learn new material. The plaintiff sustained a psychological injury in the nature of a major depressive disorder in part caused directly by DST/ECT and in part resulting from her reaction to her perception of the consequences of her brain damage. To the extent that the plaintiff's cognitive deficits are not directly caused by organic brain damage, they are caused by her depressive illness. She has suffered a personality change, and has chronic low self-esteem and difficulties with inter-personal relationships, and generally an inability to experience pleasure in life. The plaintiff has become addicted to heroin but that addiction is not a compensable consequence of DST and/or ECT.

Question two is:- "If yes to question one, what is the amount of plaintiff's compensatory damages (excluding aggravated damages) in respect of those injuries or disabilities." 
At this stage I answer that question only provisionally as follows: the plaintiff is entitled to damages comprising:-
General damages $120,000.00
Interest on general damages $31,936.00
Future medical treatment $7,000.00
Future care and personal assistance $104,000.00
Past loss of earnings, interest on loss of earnings, future loss of earning capacity and loss of superannuation benefits to be calculated as indicated at pp.131-134 of this judgment.
Cost of fund management, to be calculated as indicated on p.146 of this judgment.

The matter will stand over to 1 May 1997 upon which date I would anticipate receiving an agreed statement from the parties of the result of the calculations of the damages to which the plaintiff is entitled in respect of past loss of earnings, interest thereon, future loss of earnings and loss of superannuation benefits. I will then finally answer the second question accordingly.
 * * * 
