

Monte Paschi Australia Limited versus Mura Matter No 10647/97 [1998] NSWSC 200 (24 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
MONTE PASCHI AUSTRALIA LIMITED versus MURA /97 April 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 4 March 1997. The defendant is the registered proprietor of land known as 16 Formosa Street, Drummoyne (the property). The plaintiff has made three loans to him. The repayment of moneys due under the loan agreements is secured by a Registered Mortgage (dated 11 February 1994). The plaintiff claims judgment for possession of the property founded on default under the Mortgage. 
A Defence was filed on 23 September 1997. It contained certain admissions and denials. An Amended Defence was filed in Court on 22 April 1998. It contains, inter alia, the following:- "2. In respect of paragraphs 4, the defendant denies that he defaulted under the mortgage but admits that he did suspend payments to the plaintiff.
In respect of paragraph 5, the defendant denies that he defaulted under the mortgage and claims that the non-payments by him do not amount to default under the mortgage. The defendant states that the Plaintiff has breached the terms of the Mortgage by continually overstating the balance due under the mortgage and by not accepting payment offered by the Defendant of the correct balance owing under the mortgage in order to discharge the mortgage.
In respect of paragraph 6, the defendant states that pursuant to its breaches the plaintiff cannot rely upon the mortgage to found an entitlement to enter upon and take possession of the property. Further, the mortgage relied upon by the Plaintiff is no longer in force as it has been superseded by a further contract, the relevant terms of which are pleaded in the cross- claim in these proceedings." 
A Cross-Claim had been filed previously on 16 March 1998. It pleads breach of an agreement allegedly made in or about May 1997. It alleges the suffering of loss and damage and claims exemplary damages.

On 17 March 1998, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion seeking summary judgment. The application for summary judgment was heard on 22 April 1998.

The plaintiff (which is now called Cassa Commerciale Australia Ltd) has relied on two affidavits. One was sworn by Mr Kendal (the Deputy NSW State Manager).
The other was sworn by Mr Barbati (the NSW State Manager).

The defendant (who is a solicitor) has relied on two affidavits. One was sworn by the defendant himself. The other was sworn by Mr Marcocci (the former NSW
State Manager of the plaintiff).

There was tender of documentation. Some brief supplementary oral evidence was given by the defendant.

The loan arrangements enable the claiming of penalty interest. As early as , disputes arose as to claims made by the plaintiff for penalty interest.
The plaintiff has withdrawn some of its claims, but has pressed others.

The dispute as to the claims for penalty interest which are still pressed has not been the subject of any detailed consideration. There is evidentiary deficiency. The amount involved has not been elaborated. It may well not be a large sum. The Court is not really in a position to embark on any consideration of the merits of the dispute and for present purposes, it is unnecessary to do so.

The defendant has made offers to pay principal and interest (excluding penalty interest) due under the Mortgage. The offers have not been accepted by the plaintiff. Save for a proposal discussed in early 1997, there has not been any indication of willingness to pay penalty interest. There has not been any tender of moneys.

Since June 1996, the defendant has not made any payments to the plaintiff. It is beyond argument that the defendant has been in default under the Mortgage since at least that time. The default gives rise to an entitlement to possession.

The plaintiff clearly has a prima facie entitlement to relief. The defendant contends that there are some arguable issues which should be allowed to go to trial. The submissions have been made in the most general of terms. I shall briefly mention some of them. It is said that the plaintiff should not be allowed to rely on the defendant's default because of its own default under the Mortgage. This default has been expressed in terms of continually overstating the balance owed and in not accepting offers of payment made by the defendant. There has been reference to Clause 4 of Memorandum W903525. The concept of unconscionability was invoked. Also, some faint argument was put in support of the contention that the Mortgage had been superseded by the agreement pleaded in the Amended Defence and Cross-Claim.

In my view, the material fails to throw up any real suggestion of an arguable defence. There are evidentiary deficiencies. The assertions of default on the part of the plaintiff are without substance. In any event, default on the part of the plaintiff would not necessarily excuse the defendant from performance on his part. No arguable case that he has been or should be relieved from those obligations emerges from the material. No proceedings have been brought to compel a discharge of the Mortgage. The assertion as to the making of an agreement that superseded the Mortgage is hopeless. The material does not support the contention that there is an arguable case that any agreement was made. Further, no action has been taken to have the alleged agreement specifically enforced.

The Court is left to deal with an unhappy situation. There seems to be a degree of intransigence between the parties. The defendant remains unwilling to pay the penalty interest that is still being claimed. He has allowed himself to fall into default since June 1996. He has not commenced any proceedings or taken other effective steps to have the dispute as to penalty interest resolved. He has simply continued to resist the claim for possession.
It seems that he may have the capacity to meet the plaintiff's monetary entitlement.

The attempts made by the Court to galvanise the parties into reaching some practical resolution of the problem proved to be fruitless. The parties proceeded to litigate the matter and the Court is left to determine the matter according to law.

The Court has a discretionary power to grant summary relief. It is exercised having regard to the circumstances of the case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The onus rests with the party seeking the relief.
There is abundant authority for the proposition that the remedy should be granted in what has been described as clear cases only.

In the circumstances of this case, the plaintiff has discharged the onus. I am satisfied that it is entitled to summary judgment. The Court is left with no other alternative.

I will hear further submissions from the parties on the question of the relief that should be given in the proceedings.
 * * * 
