

New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation versus Sydneywide Real Estate Co
Pty Ltd Matter No 1396/98 [1998] NSWSC 270 (2 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 `NEW SOUTH WALES LAND AND HOUSING CORPORATION versus SYDNEYWIDE REAL ESTATE CO
PTY LTD` `1396/98` `2 June 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The present dispute is essentially between a vendor and its estate agent about commission, though it is presented to the court in a slightly different form. 
The plaintiff was the registered proprietor of some vacant land in Sans Souci.
It wished to sell that land and entered into an agreement with the defendant, trading as L J Hooker Sans Souci, for it to sell the land on a commission basis. The agreement between the parties was a printed form headed L J Hooker
Sales Inspection Report and Auction Agency Agreement, which was completed in typewriting and hand.

The document is a copyright form of the Real Estate Institute NSW and it is surprising to see that it does contain some internal inconsistencies so that its construction is not completely clear.

Under cl 3(i) of the agreement, in the events which have happened, "the agent shall be entitled to a commission of 0.75 percent of gross sale price if during the agency period the property is sold ... ".

On 25 March 1993, being the last day of that period, the plaintiff entered into a contract to sell the land to Memfact Pty Ltd for $4.01 million, with the usual ten percent deposit, namely $401,000.

Clause 12 of the agreement is as follows: "12. The commission to which the Agent is entitled shall be due and payable on completion of the sale or upon demand if the sale is not completed owing to the default of the Principal after the parties have entered into a binding contract." 
The contract was not completed. The reason why it was not completed is shown in the unreported judgment of Brownie J given on 4 May 1994 in proceedings /93 Memfact Pty Ltd versus New South Wales Land and Housing
Corporation.

Essentially the problem was that the contract contained a disclosure that the local council might impose a contribution for drainage amplification and there was further annexed to the contract a <case> certificate which did not take into account the fact that the day before the contract was entered into the council had adopted a plan which involved the purchaser making a significant contribution.

Accordingly, Brownie J held that the evidence before him did not establish that the present plaintiff (as vendor) actually knew of the adoption by the council of the plan, but if it did not actually know, this could only have come about by gross negligence on its part. Nonetheless, his Honour ruled that
Memfact (the purchaser) was not entitled to relief at that stage. He thought the fact that the property seemed only to be able to be sold for $1.5 million showed that the purchaser was technically in breach and that the vendor's loss was such that it outweighed any hardship on the purchaser in respect of forfeiture of deposit.

The parties then put forward short minutes of order about three months later, which provided that the vendor had terminated the contract, was entitled to forfeit the deposit and in addition was entitled to judgment for a sum just over $1 million, plus $255,000 interest.

The judgment was really only a paper judgment because the material shows that
Memfact Pty Ltd was only a $2 company which was struck off the register shortly after the judgment.

In due course the property was resold for $3 million. Before it was, the plaintiff and the defendant in the instant case entered into another agreement in the same form as previously and in due course the defendant was paid its commission of $22,500 on the $3 million purchase price.

On 6 January 1997 the defendant accounted to the plaintiff for the deposit of $401,000 held in trust, together with interest that it had attracted of $85,000 and paid that sum over, less $30,075, the commission payable on the initial sale, and also less certain government duties.

The $30,075 was held in the defendant's trust account pending resolution of the dispute. The plaintiff by summons filed 17 February 1998 sought a declaration that that sum and, indeed, the government duties as well, were held on trust for it. The defendant defended the case on the basis that it was entitled to be paid that money as its commission, though there was no formal cross-claim. Alternatively, there was a claim for unjust enrichment.

There have been a myriad of cases dealing with disputes between principal and agent over the commission due on the sale of real estate. The cases show that courts must be very careful to actually look at the wording of the contract between the parties and not just to apply some rule of thumb because the wording used by the parties can make all the difference. The various cases are well digested by his Honour Judge Holt in Thane versus Hollings [(1952) 69 WN .] 
The instant case involves a contract that the agent shall be entitled to a commission when the property is sold. Prima facie the word "sold" seems to indicate that the parties have entered into a contract for sale which is specifically enforceable; see for instance Blue Mountains City Council v
Wincastle Pty Ltd [(1961) 80 WN 283.]
However, where the word "sale" is used together with an indication in the contract that the proceeds of sale are to be the prime or only source of the agent recouping his commission, then courts tend to construe the contract as being a contract whereby the commission is to be paid out of the proceeds of sale and unless there is the situation that completion has gone off because of the default of the principal, the agent is not entitled to commission.

This tendency comes through the cases, including Summergreene versus Parker <case>; [(1950) 80 CLR 304] and Boots versus E Christopher & Co [[1952] 1 KB .] See also Maddison Group Pty Ltd versus Goldstein [(1989) 1 WAR 569], a digest of which also appears in [(1990) ANZ ConvR 258.] 
It seems to me that the instant contract falls into this class. Clause 12 makes the commission due and payable on completion of the sale, except for an event which did not happen. The whole contract must then be construed as meaning that the commission never became payable.

The defendant argued that this was a case where there was a default of the principal and that is why the sale was not completed. It points to the fact that Brownie J found that there was gross negligence in and about the disclosure of the contribution payable to the council. However, in this sort of clause the word "default" means the wrongful refusal to proceed to completion; see Lang Estate Agency Law And Practice in New South Wales 4th ed (LBC Sydney 1991) p 393 and Caffrey versus Montano [[1968] 2 NSWR 182.]
Accordingly, the prime claim for commission falls.

I then have to consider the back-up claim of unjust enrichment. How this arises is that the plaintiff originally sold the land for $4.1 million. That contract failed. However, it forfeited the deposit of $401,000. It then sold the property for $3 million so that its total receipt was $3.401 million. Both purchasers were found by the defendant estate agent as a result of its efforts. The agent has been paid commission under its second contract on the $3 million, but if no further moneys were payable by the plaintiff the plaintiff would be enriched as a result of the defendant's efforts, in that it had received moneys but not had to pay any commission in respect of them.

There are powerful arguments against accepting this proposition. If one looks at what used to be the standard book in New South Wales on estate agents commission Joske and Lloyd Remuneration of Commission Agents in Australia and New Zealand 3rd ed (LBC Sydney 1957) at the index on p 249 one can see that there are twelve occasions where the learned authors make the statement that a claim in quantum meruit just cannot lie. However, the reason why those statements are made over and over again did not survive the reclassification of claims of quantum meruit in Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd versus Paul <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 221.] It used to be thought that such claims were based on an implied contract so that if there were an express contract there was no room for any implication.

Pavey & Matthews' case showed that implied contracts have nothing to do with the present type of claim, which is based on unjust enrichment, so that that excuse is not really available to counter the claim. 
There is another line of authority of which Bentall, Horsley and Baldry v
Vicary [[1931] 1 KB 253], 262 is an example, which simply says that there is no room for a quantum meruit claim for an estate agent because estate agents work on a very simple principle. Where they do make a successful sale they get over remunerated, but that is to pay for all the work they do when they have an unsuccessful sale. As, accordingly, the whole trade is worked on the basis that the agents will be remunerated in accordance with their contracts of sale that are completed, it is not unjust to permit vendors to keep damages for the loss of a contract of sale or to settle claims against purchasers on terms that the purchaser is released from the contract, even though that in fact enriches the vendor.

However, in Boots' case (supra) at page 98 Denning LJ said that if a vendor did get full damages for loss of a contract of sale, which included the amount of the commission he had to pay the agent, then the agent would be able to recover its commission in an action for restitution. That passage was considered with some sympathy by the majority of the Queensland Full Court in Bunney versus Halliday [[1956] St R Qd 450.] However, it has not been treated with much enthusiasm elsewhere.

The instant case is strange in the sense that I would have thought that the claim that the plaintiff really makes is a claim for money had and received, a simple common law claim, and that that claim should have been made in the local court within whose jurisdiction it clearly falls.

The justification for making the claim in this Court is that there was a trust involved, in that the money was in the defendant's trust account. I do not really consider that that is a sufficient reason. The mere fact that money is in a trust account does not stop it being the subject for a claim for money had and received; see in general Westdeutsche/Landesbank Girozentrale v
Islington LBC <case>; [[1996] AC ], 710.

However, the actual situation in this case is that the claim was brought in trust. That being so, the plaintiff is obliged to do equity. It has been compensated over and above the $3 million in connection with the sale of its land, both by the $401,000 it has recovered by way of forfeited deposit, as well as the $1 million judgment. However, the evidence before me is that the $1 million judgment is not worth the paper it is written on and unjust enrichment only deals with funds that are actually received.

It seems to me that although I might have some difficulty in allowing an unjust enrichment claim in the ordinary estate agent case, because even modern text books such as Bowstead and Reynolds on Agency 16th ed (Sweet &
Maxwell London 1996) par 7.024 consider that they do not lie, in the instant case because the matter can be imposed as a condition of an equitable claim I should follow what Denning LJ said. Indeed, to his credit, Mr Fordham who represented the plaintiff did not contend otherwise.

Accordingly, the $30,075 plus interest which is held by the defendant should be paid as to $27,000 to the plaintiff and as to $3,075 to the defendant. The interest should be paid as to 8/9ths part to the plaintiff and 1/9th part to the defendant. I have not included in that calculation the $244.60 deducted for government duties which I find the defendant is entitled to deduct from the amount it is due to pay the plaintiff.

As far as costs are concerned the plaintiff has succeeded, although not for the full amount of its claim. Normally the person who succeeds is entitled to costs. The defendant says that it was put through administrative expense for about a year in making a claim to the Department of Fair Trading for a certificate that the $30,075 was reasonable remuneration. Indeed, at the end of that process, it obtained that certificate.

The plaintiff alleged that there were two reasons for resisting the claim, first that the entitlement for commission only arose if the contract settled; and secondly that the defendant had already received its commission when the land was subsequently sold. This second reason was really a complete red herring as the agent had done the work on two sales.

I consider that those matters mean that the costs should be reduced. As I said during argument, when a claim that should be made in the local court is brought in the Supreme Court I find it customary only to allow the costs on the local court scale.

Accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to 90 percent of its costs, to be assessed as if this matter were brought in the Kogarah Local Court. The exhibits are to be retained.
 * * * 
