

Regina versus Caa Matter No Cca 60288/98 [1998] NSWSC 612 (4 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 December 1998 
REGINA versus CAA 
CCA 60288/98 December 1998 
Grove J, Levine J, Dowd J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Goldring DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60288/98 
DELIVERED: Friday 4 December 1998 
HEARING DATE: Friday 4 December 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus C.A.A. 
JUDGMENT OF: Grove J, Levine J, Dowd J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT: P D Rosser QC with M Hobart 
RESPONDENT: R Ellis 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT: Killin Richardson & Gardiner 
RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal allowed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SENTENCE - NO SPECIAL POINT OF PRINCIPLE 
NO OF PAGES: 6 
REGINA versus C.A.A.

JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentence imposed by Goldring DCJ in the Sydney District Court on 22 May this year. On that occasion the applicant appeared charged on indictment with two counts of aggravated sexual assault. The victim was a young girl, aged at the time of the offences a little less than 15 years, to whom the applicant stood in loco parentis. 
The learned District Court Judge was also asked to take into account on sentence one charge of possessing a firearm which was not authorised.

In the light of helpful submissions and concessions from the learned Crown
Prosecutor, it will not be necessary to dilate at length upon the facts and circumstances which are fully set out in the remarks on sentence of Goldring
DCJ.

The two counts involved digital penetration of the victim and it was submitted by Mr Rosser QC, who appeared for the applicant in this Court, that they could not be said to be representative of other conduct of an identical type.

The applicant himself, when first questioned by police, revealed conduct involving touching the victim, but not penetrative touching such as is comprehended within the charges in the counts. R versus Ellis [6 NSWLR ] is pertinent to some of the disclosures. I consider Mr Rosser's submission is well founded, and that the two counts in fact represent the two most serious incidents complained of by the victim.

As a matter of record, it should be noted that earlier today an application for leave to appeal against conviction was abandoned. It is conceded by the
Crown that we should, in the event that we are of opinion that the Court should intervene, approach the matter on the basis that those considerations which could be taken into account in favour of the applicant arising out of the pleas of guilty given at the District Court, should remain available for his benefit and that we should ignore the matters surrounding the abandoned application. In this particular case I think that is an appropriate course for us to take.

There is one matter of specific error complained of in the primary judge's findings, and that relates to the offence taken into account on a schedule.
His Honour said that although he did not attach a great deal of weight to it, he regarded possession of an unauthorised firearm as a very serious offence in ordinary circumstances warranting a custodial sentence on its own. The Crown
Prosecutor has acknowledged that that observation is incorrect.

The circumstances were that incidentally the applicant revealed to police that he had a rifle in his home. It had nothing whatever to do with these offences.
The Crown Prosecutor indicated that ordinarily one would expect to be dealt with by a magistrate and fined something in the order of $100 for such an offence. Thus, on that basis alone, it must be concluded that the assessment of sentence is tainted by error.

The principal thrust of the submission on behalf of the appellant, however, was directed to the towards the encompassing sentence itself. A total term of five and a half years penal servitude was imposed, divided into minimum and additional term components of three years, and two years and six months respectively.

We have been assisted by the production of statistics kept by the Judicial
Commission, and also those emanating from the records of the Director of
Public Prosecutions. It suffices to state that those statistics would reveal that this sentence is so high that it should be assessed as manifestly excessive.

The legislature has chosen to define sexual intercourse in broad and encompassing terms. Necessarily that means that a court must examine the quality and culpability of the acts which constitute sexual intercourse in any given case. Sexual intercourse for the purpose of the criminal law does not carry the same meaning as it does in common parlance.

In this case the submission is advanced that the misconduct of the applicant, although undoubtedly reprehensible, fell into the category of the less serious manifestations of such misconduct. That submission is not challenged by the
Crown. In my view the absence of challenge is well founded and I would, for myself, conclude that the conduct, although deserving condemnation and punishment, is not within the higher range of seriousness that can be encompassed within the definition of sexual intercourse.

Having regard to the statistics which have been presented and to which I have made reference, it can be observed that sentences generally have been imposed within a range much less than in this case for activities of greater seriousness.

In this case the applicant acknowledged his misconduct when first confronted with the matter. We have had tendered before us today, a letter written to the victim acknowledging his fault. This is not a case in which there is any suggestion that the victim was threatened by the applicant in any way; even the type of threat that one commonly encounters in such cases, where the adult tells the child that any reporting of the misconduct may lead to family breakdown or other forms of retaliation.

The applicant has a prior record consisting of one trivial matter for which he was fined 10 years ago. The learned District Court Judge treated that as irrelevant and in so doing his approach was, in my view, correct.

Taking into account all the matters which were examined in the District Court, but applying the information and observations to which I have earlier made reference, I would propose the following orders: The application for leave to appeal be granted, the appeal allowed and the sentence imposed in the District
Court quashed. In lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced as follows: On each count and on the first count taking into account the matter on the Form 1, the applicant be sentenced to a total term of two years penal servitude. In each case that sentence to be served concurrently. The sentences should be divided into minimum terms of one year commencing on 22 May 1998 and expiring on 21
May 1999, together with an additional term of one year commencing on 22 May .

The division of term takes into account and follows the findings of special circumstances made by the District Court Judge, in respect of which I would make identical findings.

I would order that the applicant be released to parole on 21 May 1999 and, whilst on parole, he be subject to the supervision of the Probation and Parole
Service.

LEVINE J: I agree. 
DOWD J: I also agree. 
GROVE J: The orders of the Court therefore will be as I have proposed. * * * 
