

Warren John Gregory and Anor versus Fertoza P/L [1997] NSWSC 7 (21 January )

WARREN JOHN GREGORY & ANOR v. FERTOZA PTY LTD /96 
TUESDAY 21 JANUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Warren John Gregory and Brian John Eschman have applied for interlocutory relief pending the determination of this suit for an order that the defendants be restrained from selling, dealing with or otherwise disposing of the goods set out in the schedule to the summons. It is common ground that there was a written lease from Fertoza Pty Ltd to the plaintiffs dated 10 September 1991 in respect of premises known as the Old Bank Cafe Vulcan Street Moruya. The lease contained many terms. The plaintiffs over a period fell into substantial arrears in their payment of rent and the materials suggest that they adopted an unreal attitude in relation to it. There was a history of negotiations whereby the company was seeking to obtain some security in relation to the payment of rent. Ultimately and particularly after a proposed mortgage of property did not eventuate and the property was sold, the defendant, not unnaturally, became fed up on and 30 November 1996 exercised its right of re-entry and took possession of the premises and changed the locks.

It was conceded by Mr Sanderson for the plaintiffs that the defendant was entitled to exercise its right of re-entry having regard to the substantial arrears of rent. As a result of the re-entry all the fixtures and fittings remained at the premises. Clause 3(22) provides that the lessee may remove his fixtures. Clause 39(c) provides that notwithstanding clause 3(22) in the event that rental or other monies are due by the lessee to the lessor or the lessee has committed any breach of the terms of the lease which is not being made good or remedied and whether the lessee is still in possession or not the lessee shall not remove any of its fixtures, fittings or plant from the premises and shall not be entitled by itself or its agents to enter thereon for the purpose of removing any of the said items.

Mr Sanderson, who appeared for the plaintiffs, made no claim to the fixtures and fittings in the sense that he did not suggest that they had any special value and that would appear to be correct. The plaintiffs' main concern related to the items in the schedule to the summons. These appear to be, in broad summary, works of art of various quality and items such as lamps and candlesticks, books and material said to be of some antiquity. Some of the items are said to have special or sentimental value. At the moment, and I am dealing with the matter on an interlocutory basis, there is some material which suggests that these have some special value but, as I mentioned in argument, until there is some competent or expert appraisal of them that is a question which remains very much to be determined at a final hearing.
Certainly further evidence would be required at the final hearing.

Mr Heath in his written and oral submissions put to me that before there could be any embargo upon levying of goods for non-payment of rent there had to be an existing demise. He referred me to the decision of Nicholson J in RAC
Finance Limited versus Fewton Pty Limited, 9 December 1993 (WA Sup Ct). That question is a very arguable one. The suggestion that distress one or two days before re-entry is prohibited but is permissible immediately after the re- entry raises a nice question. Such a distinction would seem to cut across the whole purpose of the abolition of distress. I express no final view on it. The question is arguable.

I don't think that clause 39(c) of the lease covers the items in the schedule to the summons. The items in the schedule do not fall within the words "fixtures, fittings or plant." 
Pending the determination of the suit the items in the schedule should, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, be held by the defendants pending the further order of the court. I order that pending the determination of these proceedings the defendant be restrained from selling, dealing with or otherwise disposing of the items in the schedule. This order is subject to the following provisos: (1) that the defendant is at liberty to remove the items in the schedule from the premises known as the Old Bank Cafe and store them elsewhere in safe custody subject to first giving the solicitor for the plaintiffs three days prior notice in writing. (2) In the event of the defendant notifying the solicitor for the plaintiffs in writing that it wishes the plaintiffs to collect, store and hold the goods pending the determination of these proceedings the plaintiffs are to collect, hold and store such goods in safe custody and not dispose of them or otherwise deal with them pending the determination of these proceedings. I will leave it to the parties to work out a suitable mechanism as between themselves and to bring in short minutes later in the day.

The future course of these proceedings is to be as follows: (a) the plaintiffs are to file and serve any further affidavits on which they propose to rely within 21 days (b) the defendant is to deliver any further affidavits on which it wishes to rely within a further 21 days; and (c) any affidavits in reply by the plaintiffs should be filed within a further period of 14 days. I direct that the plaintiffs, when filing their affidavits, are to include a statement as to the amount of rent which they concede to be due. It must not be overlooked that the defendant is entitled to judgment for arrears of rent and to enforce that judgment and the court would be reluctant in view of the position which exists and the history of this matter not to have the arrears of rental finalised before this suit is finally determined because there does appear to be a real risk of the plaintiffs wishing to keep the defendant out of its rental monies.

It is one of those cases where ultimately the defendant might obtain some form of Mareva injunction relief having regard to the past conduct of the plaintiffs. But that is a matter that can be resolved at a later stage. Costs should be costs in the cause.
 * * * 
