

Micah Management Services P/L versus Rice [1997] NSWSC 16 (3 February 1997) `MICAH MANAGEMENT SERVICES P/L & 2 ORS versus JEAN ANNE ROE` `011170/96` ``MONDAY 3 FEBRUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Jean Anne Roe, the landlord of the first floor, 712 Pittwater Road Brookvale obtained judgment against her former tenant, Micah Management Services Pty Limited (Micah) and two Guarantors, Peter Wood and Neale Marshall for $31,749.67. They have challenged two of the items, namely; $15,727 for rental and part of $5,202.86 for interest in their appeal by way of case stated from the magistrate's decision.

Wood and Marshall practised in partnership as solicitors from the rented premises and Micah was their service company. It entered into a lease for three years, expiring on 31 December 1991. The lease contained an option to renew for a further term but that option was not exercised. Micah continued in occupation with the landlord's consent under the holding over clause. The parties placed the lease in evidence, extensive reference having been made to it in the stated case.

The holding over clause reads, "16.06 Holding Over 
If the Lessee shall with the consent of the Lessor remain in occupation of the demised premises after the expiration of the term hereof the Lessee shall (in the absence of any express agreement to the contrary) be deemed to hold the demised premises as Lessee from month to month at a monthly rental equal to the aggregate of the monthly instalments on account of the rental and the operating expenses hereunder at the date of expiration of the said term (such rental being payable monthly in advance) but otherwise on the terms and conditions of this lease so far as they can be applied to a monthly tenancy.
Such tenancy may be determined by one (1) month's notice in writing from either party to the other given any time and to expire on any day." 
The Magistrate found, "2. Facts 
On 7 April 1992 the Plaintiff's Managing Agent, Kandt Management Services
Pty Ltd wrote to the Second Defendant in his capacity as partner of the firm
Wood Linden Marshall De Mestre, advising as follows: 'We refer to our telephone conversation last Friday, 3 April 1992, regarding your firm's ongoing occupancy of the above premises. As your firm has not exercised its option or negotiated a new lease at this stage, we confirm that your firm will now given a minimum of notice of six (6) calendar months should you wish to quit the premises. Should you wish to negotiate a new lease please give the writer a call and we will arrange a mutually acceptable meeting time to discuss same. Would you kindly sign and return the duplicate copy of this letter.' 
This letter became Exhibit '7' in the proceedings before me.

Attached to Exhibit 7 was a copy of the same letter, except for an endorsement at the foot of the letter in the following terms:'We hereby acknowledge that our firm will give a minimum of six months notice should we wish to quit the premises at 712 Pittwater Road, Brookvale.' This letter was signed by the Second Defendant and returned to the Plaintiff's Managing Agent,
Kandt Management Services Pty Ltd.

On 21 October 1993 the Defendants wrote to the Plaintiff's Managing Agent,
Kandt Management Services Pty Ltd, advising the Plaintiff that they had now located alternative premises and will terminate the tenancy as of 31 December .

This letter became part of Exhibit 9 in the proceedings before me.

On 25 October 1993 the Plaintiff's Managing Agent, Kandt Management
Services Pty Ltd wrote to the Second Defendant advising him that his firm had agreed to give a minimum of six months notice prior to terminating the tenancy.

On 1 November 1993 the First Defendant wrote to the Plaintiff's Managing
Agent, Kandt Management Services Pty Ltd in regard to the letter he had received on 25 October 1993 as follows: 'Mr Cousens made it clear that in discussing the correspondence and the possibility of our indicating the period of notice which would be given, he was not seeking legal commitment from our firm and, indeed, we do not believe that the correspondence created any such commitment. We had expected to be able to give at least three (3) months notice although when your letter was presented it sought six (6) months notice. In any case, our discussions took place early in 1992 and we have, in fact, remained in the premises for a year and a half beyond the period for which we were committed by the lease. ...in the circumstances, having regard to the history of our tenancy, we believe that the notice given is fair and reasonable.' 
This letter became Exhibit 'B' in the proceedings before me.

On 5 November 1993, the Plaintiff's Managing Agent wrote to the Second
Defendant denying that the Plaintiff was not seeking a legal commitment from the Defendants, when requested to endorse the letter of 7 April 1992.

This letter became Exhibit 'C' in the proceedings before me.

An internal file note was produced which stated the following: 'Check with Neale and Robbie to see if they are happy for us to send off the copy of letter, and if so send it off to Glen Cousins of Kandt Management. OK - NM 13/4. OK - RW 14/4' 
This became part of Exhibit '9' in the Proceedings before me." 
The letter of 1 November 1993 was headed 'Micah Management Services Pty Ltd
Lease from Roe'. The letter purports to be from Wood Linden Marshall Williams and to be signed by Peter Wood. The word 'we' is used throughout the letter and it embraces both the company and the firm of solicitors. The letter contains such terms as 'our tenancy'. It would be expected that the solicitors and the company would either adhere to their written promise as to notice or not resist the payment of damages for not keeping their promise. The defendants, however, seek to avoid liability.

Micah and the solicitors took a number of points. I was referred to cl 17.06 of the lease which provides, "17.06 Lease Contains Entire Agreement.

Each party hereby acknowledges that this lease is not entered into in reliance on any representation or warranty, express or implied, save as may be specifically set out in this lease and further that this lease embodies the entire agreement between the parties, any written or oral agreement between the parties having ceased to have any effect immediately prior to the execution of this lease. This lease may be amended only by instruments in writing executed by both the Lessor and the Lessee." 
It was contended that the phrase 'instrument in writing' should be construed by reference to the meaning of instrument in <case>(a) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). That is a definition for the purposes of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) and does not throw light on the meaning of the word in the lease. Furthermore, the statutory meaning, given its width, would be inappropriate in the context of the lease. I see no good reason to adopt the approach suggested nor do I accept the alternative submission that the letter with the acknowledgment does not constitute an instrument in writing.

It was submitted that the acknowledgment signed by Wood was insufficient to bind the company. It was not signed by the Lessee personally. I do not agree that the acknowledgment was insufficient to bind the company. Mr Wood was an agent of the company and of his firm. Semantic distinctions lacking substance should not be upheld.

It was further submitted that the combined effect of sections 41, 53, and 55A of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) was to require any written variation in the period of notice to vacate to be registered. I do not agree. Nor do I agree that such variation had to be in the form prescribed by the Act and Regulations.

We are not dealing with a lease for a period exceeding three years, nor the passing of any estate or interest. What existed after the lease was a tenancy from month to month with the tenant later agreeing to give six months notice of its intention to vacate. I should record that Mr Fernon submitted, and I think correctly, that <case> did not govern the situation: See <case>.

I think that the agreement of the parties concerning notice of termination exists independently of registration.

While there was reference by the Magistrate to Leitz Leeholme Stud Pty Ltd v
Robinson [(1977), 2 NSWLR 544], this is not a case where the plaintiff has to rely on equitable rights or equitable remedies. She sues for damages for breach of the agreement to give six months notice.

The solicitors contended that as the extension of the period of notice increased their liability from one to six months, their consent to the extension was required. They submitted that there was no evidence of any consent by either of them to the extension. They contended that the evidence was only capable of establishing the consent of the company. This seems artificial, particularly having regard to the terms of the correspondence and the substance of the matter. In my view the solicitors were consenting on behalf of themselves and the company.

It was submitted that once the lease expired the liability of the Guarantor ceased. It is true that by Cl 18(a), the solicitors guarantee the punctual payment by the Lessee of all rent, interest and other monies under the lease.

Cl 18(i) provides, "The expression 'the lease' where used in this covenant includes this lease as amended or varied from time to time and any renewal thereof." 
That causes some difficulties for the Plaintiff.

However, that is not the end of the matter because Cl 16.06 provides that the holding over shall, inter alia, otherwise be on the terms and conditions of this lease.

Thus the guarantee extends to the holding over and the consent variation extends the liability of the Guarantors to the varied notice arrangement. This was a straightforward case of damages for breach of an agreement by which the
Guarantors were also bound. The magistrate did not err in the result to which he came. The summons should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
