

Regina versus Wolff Matter No Cca 60708/96 [1997] NSWSC 251 (7 July 1997) ` 
Regina versus Graham Peter Wolff` ` 60708/96` `7 July 1997` `Gleeson CJ, James J, Sperling J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` `  `
 `60708/96 REGINA versus GRAHAM PETER WOLFF` ` JUDGMENT` `GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask James J to deliver the first judgment.` ` 
JAMES J: This is an application by Graham Peter James Wolff for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed on him in the District Court by his Honour,
Judge Nield on 24 October, 1996, following his conviction after a plea of guilty to one count of sexual intercourse without consent, an offence under s61I of the Crimes Act. The applicant was sentenced to a sentence of penal servitude for five years, consisting of a minimum term of penal servitude of two years six months commencing on 24 October, 1996, the date he was sentenced, and an additional term of two years six months. The applicant had been granted bail on 16 December, 1995, which was the date of the offence and the date he was arrested, and he had remained on bail until he was sentenced.` ` The applicant had originally been charged with a further offence of committing a common assault against the same victim but after he pleaded guilty to the charge under s61I of the Crimes Act the Crown did not proceed with the charge of common assault. ` ` It would seem that the application for leave to appeal was lodged out of time but as any delay was only slight and the Crown has raised no objection, I would propose that an extension of time be granted in which to apply for leave to appeal.` ` Under s61I of the Crimes Act, which was inserted in the Act by the Crimes
Act, 1989, the maximum penalty is penal servitude for 14 years.
The maximum penalty under the former s61D, which was similar to s61I and replaced by that section, was substantially less. ` ` The applicant and the victim, an adult woman whom I will refer to as the complainant or the victim, were both employed by a firm providing catering services to a mess of an Army base in Sydney. For nearly 12 months the applicant and the victim were in a relationship with each other which included regular sexual intercourse. For part of this period they lived together. In about November, 1995 the victim terminated the relationship with the applicant. The victim had already formed a relationship with another man who also worked for the same catering firm and to whom she became engaged to be married. I will refer to this other man as the victim's fiance. It is clear that the applicant deeply resented the termination of his relationship with the complainant and the entering by the complainant into a new relationship with her fiance. ` ` On 7 December, 1995, after they had stopped living together, there was a chance meeting between the applicant and the victim in which the victim confirmed that she and her fiance would be leaving Sydney and going interstate to take up an employment offer they had received.` ` On the morning of 16 December, 1995, the day on which the offence was committed, both the applicant and the victim were at their place of work. The applicant requested that the victim help him with some paperwork in an office at the base, which the victim agreed to do.` ` While they were both in the office, the applicant spoke abusively about the victim's fiance and then the victim. The applicant stated in gross terms his determination to have sexual intercourse with the victim. When the victim said that she was menstruating, the applicant asked her to perform fellatio on him.
The victim refused. The applicant then made several telephone calls to the victim's fiance, who was in another part of the base, but the victim cut off each of the telephone calls. She then said, "I'm not putting up with this.
Give me the paperwork. I'm going." She herself attempted to make two telephone calls to her fiance, each of which the applicant cut off. ` ` The victim then started to walk out of the office. The applicant pushed her from behind and she fell on to a lounge in the office. In an electronically recorded interview, the applicant denied that he had pushed the victim but the sentencing judge clearly accepted her account of what had happened. When the victim turned in the applicant's direction, she saw that the applicant had removed all his clothing below his waist. The applicant confined the complainant on the lounge by putting one of his legs on the arm of the lounge and his other leg against one of the victim's legs. The applicant then tried to push his erect penis into the victim's mouth. On the third occasion the victim, who was very frightened, opened her mouth and allowed the applicant's penis to enter her mouth. The applicant ejaculated into the victim's mouth.
When the applicant stepped back from the victim, she grabbed the paperwork and left the office.` ` After the victim had entered her car, which was parked outside the office, the applicant, who had followed her to the car, kissed her on the cheek. ` ` The applicant then telephoned the victim's fiance in another part of the base and said, "I've just had the best head job I have ever had." A little later, the applicant spoke on the telephone to a female friend of the victim, with whom the victim then was. The friend observed the victim to be crying, shaking and sobbing and described her condition over the telephone to the applicant as being "a mess". The applicant said:` ` "Good. I have succeeded in what I set out to do. . . I said a lot of things that upset her. It worked. I wanted to screw her but the bitch said she had her rags on but I forced a head job out of her and it was a good one." ` `He also said, "Go and tell X" (that is the victim's fiance) - "when he's finished with her tonight, send her over to me and I'll finish the job off properly." ` ` On the evening of 16 December, the police went to the applicant's home. When spoken to at his home, the applicant denied having sexually assaulted the victim. He was arrested and taken to a police station. ` ` At the police station he was told that statements had been obtained from the victim, the victim's fiance and the victim's friend. The applicant then said, "I'm guilty. I did it." He provided a sample of his blood to the police. He took part in an electronically recorded interview in which he made substantial admissions. He admitted that he had forced the victim to perform fellatio on him. ` ` In his answers in the interview he said, "I just wanted to make love to her because I love the lady." He also said, "I just wanted to hurt her as much as
I could hurt her because she hurt me." He referred to the victim's fiance as "this dickhead." ` ` The applicant was 45 years old at the time of the offence and 46 years old when he was sentenced. He had no prior criminal convictions whatever, except for one driving offence which the sentencing judge properly disregarded. ` ` He had a good employment record, first as a member of the Australian Army as a cook and then as an employee of the firm providing catering services to the
Army. His estranged wife provided a reference for him in the proceedings on sentence.` ` In the proceedings on sentence a report by a psychologist, Mr Kesby-Smith, was admitted into evidence and Mr Kesby-Smith also gave oral evidence. In his report, Mr Kesby-Smith expressed the opinion that the applicant's reaction to the loss of his marriage and the loss of his relationship with the victim so markedly interfered with his capacity to act appropriately that the applicant could be considered to be suffering from a mental disorder, which Mr Kesby-
Smith identified as an adjustment disorder with anxious and depressive features. Mr Kesby-Smith reported in his report that the applicant had told him that he was so distressed by his actions that he had attempted to commit suicide by ingesting garden poison.` ` In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge summarised the objective facts of the offence. His Honour concluded that it was "a disgusting episode.
It degraded and debased." His Honour concluded that the applicant's conduct was an exercise of power or dominion over the complainant. It was designed to punish her for having rejected him and for having taken another man. ` ` His Honour did not accept that the applicant had a mental disorder which had contributed to his commission of the offence. It will be necessary to return later in this judgment to this part of his Honour's remarks on sentence.` ` The sentencing judge referred to the applicant's age, the absence of any criminal history, the applicant's early admissions and his plea of guilty. His
Honour, with some reluctance, accepted that the applicant was contrite.` ` His Honour found that there were special circumstances within [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) (2) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) in that the applicant had never previously been to prison; in the probability of his rehabilitation; and in the need for a proportionately longer than usual period of supervised liberty.` ` On this application, in written submissions or in oral submissions, it was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the sentencing judge had erred in certain specific respects and that in any event the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge could be seen to be erroneous as being manifestly excessive.
It was submitted that the full term of five years imposed by his Honour was excessive; that an appropriate full term would have been less than five years; that his Honour had been correct in finding that there were special circumstances; and that a lesser full term than five years should have been divided in the same proportions as his Honour had divided the sentence of five years which he imposed.` ` It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the sentencing judge had erred in referring to the protection of women in the community as a matter to be taken into account in sentencing the applicant, when the offence has been committed in very special circumstances and there was little likelihood of the applicant re-offending. I do not consider that his Honour erred in making this remark. All that the sentencing judge was saying was that protection of the community or protection of society or protection of the class of persons within the community who are liable to be victims of an offence is a consideration in any act of sentencing, whether or not the particular offender is likely to re-offend. I do not read his Honour as suggesting that there was any likelihood of recidivism on the part of the applicant. The sentencing judge was alive to the facts that the offence had been committed in special circumstances and that the applicant was unlikely to re-offend, as it shown by his remark that specific deterrence was of minor importance in sentencing the applicant.` ` It was also submitted that the sentencing judge erred in rejecting Mr Kesby-
Smith's opinion that the applicant was suffering from a mental disorder at the time of the offence. His Honour said in his remarks on sentence: ` `"I do not think for one moment that the prisoner has a mental disorder which contributed to his commission of this offence. He knew what he was doing. He knew what he was doing was wrong."` ` It was further submitted on behalf of the applicant that in this part of his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge had wrongly limited the concept of mental disorder to a condition which would have provided the applicant with a defence of mental illness, whereas a mental disorder of an offender not amounting to a defence of mental illness can still be relevant in sentencing.
` ` I do not consider that the sentencing judge, in finding that the applicant did not have a mental disorder, wrongly limited the concept of mental disorder to a mental disorder which would provide a defence of mental illness. I am satisfied that his Honour decided to reject the opinion stated by Mr Kesby-
Smith, that the applicant had a mental disorder as described by Mr Kesby-
Smith. It was clear on the face of Mr Kesby-Smith's report that the mental disorder described by him could not have afforded a defence of mental illness.
In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge referred not merely to the applicant knowing what he was doing and knowing that what he was doing was wrong but also to the applicant knowing that his activities would degrade and embarrass the victim and to the applicant desiring those consequences and to the telephone calls the applicant made to the complainant's friend and fiance.
` ` Nor do I consider that this Court can interfere with his Honour's finding that the applicant did not have a mental disorder as asserted by Mr Kesby-
Smith. The jurisdiction of this Court to review findings of fact made by sentencing judges is limited. The sentencing judge obviously took Mr Kesby-
Smith's report into account and had the advantage of seeing and hearing Mr
Kesby-Smith give oral evidence in chief and then be cross-examined. It was open to his Honour not to accept Mr Kesby-Smith's opinion that the applicant suffered from a mental disorder and I do not consider that this Court could, or should interfere with his Honour's finding. ` ` It was submitted that the sentencing judge had erred in not taking into account in favour of the applicant the circumstances that the applicant had a very low intelligence, that the applicant had had a long career in the Army and that the applicant's career would be lost as a result of his conviction and sentence. ` ` There was no direct evidence of the applicant's intelligence quotient before his Honour. There was evidence that at school he had attended opportunity classes for slow learners and there was evidence that in certain cognitive functions he ranked between the ninth and fifteenth percentiles of the population. On the other hand, there was evidence that he had successfully remained in employment during the whole of his adult life. I do not consider that, on the evidence in this case the principles referred to in cases such as
R versus Engert [(1985) 84 ACR 67] are applicable.` ` In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge expressly referred to the applicant's service with the Australian Army. The applicant had in fact left the Army before the offence was committed, although he was working for a private catering firm supplying services to the Army. While on bail pending sentencing, the applicant had in fact obtained several jobs. ` ` It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the sentence of five years imposed by his Honour was manifestly excessive. It was pointed out that the offence was an isolated offence committed in special circumstances and unlikely to be repeated, by a man who had reached middle age with no previous criminal convictions, who had made admissions on the day the offence had been committed and who had pleaded guilty and who had other favourable subjective circumstances such as his employment record. ` ` It was submitted that the sentence could be seen to be excessive, by reference to statistics of sentences imposed between 1990 and 1996 collected by the Judicial Commission.` ` It was also submitted that the sentence could be seen to be excessive, by reference to a number of broadly comparable cases which had been before this
Court involving sentences in cases of sexual intercourse without consent. ` ` It is clear that the sentence imposed in the present case was a heavy sentence. However, a previous decision of this Court which was referred to was the case of R versus Balfour (unreported) CCA 23 July, 1996 in which, after conviction on a plea of guilty to one count of sexual intercourse without consent, a sentence of four and a half years, consisting of a minimum term of two and a half years and an additional term of two years, had been imposed. In
Balfour's case also the applicant had no previous criminal convictions. In
Balfour's case, this Court dismissed an appeal against sentence and in fact remarked that, apart from certain subjective circumstance operating in favour of the applicant, the court would have been of the opinion that a heavier sentence would have been justified.` ` In the present case I have concluded that, although the sentence imposed and particularly the full term was heavy, it should not be held to have exceeded the upper limit of the range of sentences within a proper exercise of his
Honour's sentencing discretion. In my opinion, his Honour was right to regard the objective circumstances of the offence as particularly serious and as calling for a condign penalty. The applicant committed an offence of sexually exploiting the victim, with the object and the result of punishing, degrading, humiliating and distressing the victim, and after he had done so, expressed pleasure to the victim, the victim's friend and the victim's fiance that he had achieved that object.` ` In my opinion, notwithstanding the circumstances which have been urged in favour of the applicant, while leave to appeal against sentence should be granted, the appeal against sentence itself should be dismissed and I would propose that the court make those orders.` ` 
GLEESON CJ: I agree.` ` 
SPERLING J: I also agree.` ` 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the court will be as proposed by James J.` * * * 
