

Boudebes versus Hovan [1996] NSWSC 220 (24 June 1996) 
BOUDEBES versus HOVAN /94; DC 18544/90 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE, SHELLER, COLE JJA 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - breach of contract -solicitor/client relationship - whether solicitor's advice negligent - weight given to evidence - credibility of witnesses 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: This is an appeal by the plaintiff, Samira Boudebes, from a judgment and verdict in favour of the defendant, George Hovan, in proceedings heard by his Honour Judge HH Bell.

The appellant, who was at the relevant time a self-employed hairdresser, sued her solicitor, the defendant, for damages for negligence and breach of contract.

The notice of appeal contained twenty-two grounds of appeal, but few of those have been relied upon on this hearing and indeed, with respect to whoever drafted the notice of appeal, it had all the hallmarks of a thoughtless exercise undertaken by somebody going through the judgment and picking out points thought to be unfavourable to the appellant and simply appealing against them. It is a course which in my view should be regarded with disfavour.

The issue in the proceedings was whether, during the course of three conversations between the plaintiff and the defendant, the plaintiff asked the defendant to arrange on her behalf a sickness and accident policy so that in the event of injury or illness the mortgage instalments in respect of a property that the plaintiff was purchasing would be met.

The plaintiff was at the time in the course of purchasing a dwelling house for $115,000 of which $103,000 was to be borrowed from Westpac, secured by the mortgage. It was common ground that no sickness or accident policy was taken out. After the mortgage had been entered into the plaintiff made instalment payments for a period of time until she was injured in a fall.

The witnesses in favour of the plaintiff's account of the conversations were herself and a Mr Iskandar. The defendant gave evidence and denied that the conversations or anything like them had taken place and in particular that he had ever been asked to arrange such a policy.

In a careful judgment, which I have read, and with which I entirely agree, his
Honour said that the plaintiff had not satisfied him that the conversations took place in the form alleged or anything like that form and, on that basis, gave a verdict for the defendant.

The grounds of appeal now relied upon as the basis for setting aside that verdict were as follows. The first ground was that in undertaking a weighing exercise between the evidence of the plaintiff and that of the appellant his
Honour came down in favour of the defendant on erroneous grounds and was too critical of the plaintiff and her witness. His Honour said that he found it very hard to choose between the plaintiff's evidence and the defendant's and it was therefore necessary to seek indications in the evidence to guide him on the probabilities. His Honour then carefully went through a number of matters.
One of these was the evidence given by Mr Iskandar. His Honour said that he thought Mr Iskandar seemed to harbour some grudge against the defendant following the defendant's severance of a relationship that his Honour described as symbiotic. His Honour then said: "The ethics of the arrangement by which the defendant and Mr Iskandar made use of one another seemed somewhat questionable. The defendant's professional methods, by which I refer specifically to his record keeping, left much to be desired." 
The second ground upon which the appellant relied takes exception to what his
Honour there said. I can only say that his Honour was there setting out what it seems to me are perfectly valid matters to be taken into account in engaging in the weighing process that he was undertaking.

Reference was also made to a passage in the judgment in which his Honour said: "If I accept the plaintiff's account of the conversations the defendant not only lied to the Court and disobeyed her instructions but also, at a time when it was not too late to restore the situation, lied to her alleging that he had already effected the insurance." 
Again this seems to me to be a matter which his Honour was perfectly entitled to take into account in weighing the evidence.

The third ground relied upon was that the defendant's evidence could be explained in some way by his misunderstanding of what mortgage insurance was.
We were taken to a passage in the cross examination of the defendant during which he was asked about mortgage insurance. He gave evidence which indicated that he understood it to be insurance for the benefit of the mortgagee but was not aware of the contingency. On the basis of this it is said, as I would understand it, that the defendant may have misunderstood the nature of the insurance that, according to the plaintiff, she was seeking to have him arrange.

It is as plain as can be from the evidence that the defendant squarely denied the conversations relating to sickness and accident insurance that the plaintiff gave evidence about. In my opinion there is no basis upon which it can be said that there was any misunderstanding so far as the defendant was concerned about what it was that the plaintiff claimed.

These matters seem to cover what is relied upon under the first ground of appeal which was advanced during the oral argument. I repeat that his Honour went through a process of weighing up the evidence which, in my opinion, is not open to any criticism.

This brings me to the final matter which was raised by the appellant. On the third day of the trial the plaintiff sought to amend the pleadings to make a claim based upon the defendant's alleged negligence in inducing in the plaintiff a misunderstanding about whether sickness and accident insurance could be or had been obtained. In the exercise of his discretion his Honour refused this application. He said that the plaintiff was now saying that the defendant ought to have advised her to take out insurance whereas her case had been that she had instructed him to take out insurance. The attempted amendment was quite a new case and quite inconsistent with the case that had been advanced by the plaintiff up to that point of time. No ground has been advanced by the appellant which would demonstrate any error by his Honour in exercising his discretion to refuse the amendment. On that basis, in my opinion, that ground of appeal fails.

For the reasons I have given, in my opinion, the appeal fails and should be dismissed with costs.

CLARKE JA: I agree.

COLE JA: I also agree.

CLARKE JA: The orders of the Court will be as I have indicated, subject to anything that now appears.

CLARKE JA: The costs order that was earlier made will be varied by inclusion of the following words, the costs payable in respect of the period from 24 May 1996 onwards are to be paid on an indemnity basis.
 * * * 
