

Regina versus Youssef El Mohamad [1997] NSWSC 179 (7 May 1997) 
REGINA v. Youssef EL MOHAMAD /96 
Wednesday 7 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Youssef El Mohamad seeks leave to appeal against the severity of sentences comprising a minimum term of two and a half years and an additional term of two and a half years for being armed with a metal bar he did assault with intent to rob, and a concurrent fixed term of two years for break, enter and steal.

About 11.15pm on 23 July 1995 the applicant and Mehmet Civici entered the
Caltex Service Station at Forresters Beach. Civici enquired if the victim had any parts for a Sigma, and there was then some discussion on that subject.
Almost immediately afterwards the applicant struck the victim over the head with the metal bar. It was a substantial blow, necessitating five stitches, and causing continuing headaches. The victim was knocked to the ground. He was required by the applicant to open the till but managed to escape.

The sentencing Judge expressed the view that the applicant was the principal offender. Mr Skinner, who appeared for the applicant, submitted that the judge had shifted his emphasis between sentencing the applicant and sentencing
Civici. This is not so. The judge expressly stated in Civici's case that the applicant was the principal offender but, in narrating the facts when dealing with the applicant, the judge referred to the applicant being the one holding the metal bar and striking the victim over the head, and the applicant being the person who damaged the video surveillance camera and the till.

There was scant material before the judge as to how the operation was planned but, on the material that was available, it appeared that the applicant was the principal offender.

The judge rejected the suggestion that Civici was to blame for the applicant taking a mixture of Clonazepam and alcohol prior to the Forresters Beach foray.

The judge rejected some of the applicant's evidence as that appeared to be far-fetched and untruthful. The judge felt that the applicant was trying to offload significant blame onto Civici.

The judge thought that it was ironic that the applicant should be seeking to obtain a discount for assistance. Having regard to the judge's views as to applicant's credibility, the judge had considerable reservations as to the value of that assistance.

A few hours after the Forresters Beach incident the applicant broke into premises at Long Jetty. Fortunately he was caught and all the property stolen was recovered. However, there was some damage to the premises.

O'Reilly DCJ sentenced both men, although at different times. His reasons for judgment in Civici show that he was aware of the parity issue. Civici was charged with attempted robbery, and one charge of break, enter and steal. It may well have been that the Crown felt some difficulty about being able to support a graver charge such as that to which the applicant pleaded guilty.

Counsel for the applicant has stressed that despite the different charges the judge was satisfied there was a common purpose to rob, and that the offences of both men arose out of the same incident. Whilst common purpose is significant in determining guilt, the court, when it comes to imposing a penalty, always has regard to the role of each offender as disclosed in the evidence.

The differences in the principal charges are substantial: one involves the use of arms and the other does not. There was the real question of Civici attempting to withdraw at a late stage from the incident at Forresters Beach.

The judge had regard to the different records of the applicant and Civici. The applicant's record contained a number of dishonesty offences, and two charges of assault. He was on two recognisances to be of good behaviour for three years. Civici's record was less serious and he was not on any recognisance.
The judge gave some discount for the applicant's offer of assistance, and the harsher custodial conditions under which the applicant would serve his sentence.

Attention at the hearing centred upon the Forresters Beach offence. The Crown submitted that as to the break, enter and steal offence, the heavier sentence imposed upon the applicant was justified because of his prior criminal record, including the previous break, enter and steal, and his being on two recognisances. The applicant's record, the recognisances, and one of the offences being a previous break, enter and steal, destroy any parity argument as to the break, enter and steal offence.

The judge took into account the subjective features in relation to both men when dealing with them in his separate remarks on sentence.

The argument based on parity, or perhaps more correctly considerations akin to parity, as to the Forresters Beach offence, is not made out. There were significant differences between the applicant and Civici.

The applicant submits, in any event, that the sentences imposed upon him were excessive and that the correct sentences were of the same order as those imposed upon Civici. The applicant contends that the judge could not have attached sufficient weight to these factors: the applicant's early plea of guilty; he had never served a custodial sentence previously; the harsher conditions for his imprisonment; his youth; his state of intoxication at the time of the offence; and his assistance to the authorities.

The judge would have been aware that this was the applicant's first time in gaol. He referred to the other factors in his reasons for sentence. The judge expressly took into account that the applicant had spent two months in pre- sentence custody. The judge recorded the applicant's family had and would support him.

The applicant's problem was that he not only carried the metal bar to threaten the victim, but he actually used it to strike the victim on the head, knocking him to the ground. This constituted a serious offence.

The judge gave careful consideration to the objective and subjective features of the case. The sentences imposed were not excessive. I would grant leave to appeal but dismiss the appeal.
 
BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
