

In the Estate of R L Ralston [1996] NSWSC 425 (12 September 1996) 
IN THE ESTATE OF RAYMOND LESLIE RALSTON /96 
Thursday 12th September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
HODGSON J.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Raymond Leslie Ralston died on 17th December 1994 aged 81. He was a widower, and he left four children: Barrie (now aged 60), Warren (57), Dianne King (51), and William (47). His estate consists of a house at Abbotsford said to be worth $250,000.00 (apparently subject to a mortgage of about $5,000.00), a motor vehicle said to be worth about $10,500.00, and just under $7,000.00 in a bank account. 
No will has been found, but Dianne King has applied by summons for administration of the estate on the basis of an alleged lost will, which gave the deceased's house to her and divided the rest of the estate equally between her three brothers. This application has been referred to me pursuant to Pt.61 r.2A of the Supreme Court Rules.

The evidence relied on by the applicant is briefly as follows.

In 1978, in the presence of the applicant, her husband, her brothers Warren and William, and a Dr. Duncan, the deceased said words to the effect: "I am leaving the house to Dianne for caring for me all these years". This is asserted in evidence from the applicant, her husband and William. No evidence has been put on by Warren or Dr. Duncan.

In 1979, according to the applicant, the deceased said to her words to the effect: "I have made out my will with a solicitor. I am leaving the house to you. In case anything happens to me, the solicitor's name is Mr. Sloan and he is located in Five Dock".

There is in evidence a card of J.D.K. Sloan, Solicitor of Five Dock, found among the deceased's possessions, showing an appointment for Friday 15th June at 2.00pm. There is also in evidence a cheque butt of the deceased dated th June 1979 showing payment of $35.00 to J.D. Sloan for "Solicitor (Will)".
There is also, from the effects of the deceased, a receipt dated 20th June for $35.00 received from the deceased by Mr. Sloan for "Drafting and engrossing of will".

Subsequently, according to the applicant and her brother William, the deceased said on a number of occasions words to the effect: "Dianne is to get the home and any money I have is to be divided equally between the boys". According to
Mrs. Joan Lester, a close friend and companion of the deceased for 33 years, the deceased made statements to her on a number of occasions to the effect that the home was to go to Dianne and whatever else he had was to be divided between the boys; and also on a number of occasions said to her words to the effect that "the will is with Mr. Sloan". There is corroboration as the contents of the will by Diana Bird, Mrs.Lester's daughter.

According to the applicant, the deceased said to her on a number of occasions words to the effect: "Contact Mr. Sloan when anything happens to me".

There is evidence from friends and neighbours of the deceased, John and
Lillian White and Bettie Roberts, that the deceased said to them on a number of occasions that Dianne was to get the house. There is evidence from Paul
Carrington, an acquaintance of the deceased through working with the Salvation
Army, that the deceased said to him, about three years ago, words to the effect: "Some years ago, I made a will to make sure Dianne inherits the house".

About one year prior to the death of the deceased, according to the applicant's brother, William, the deceased told him that his will was with Mr.
Sloan and that the house had been willed to the applicant.

A few days after the deceased's funeral, the applicant made enquiries and found out that Mr. Sloan had moved to Burwood. She spoke to Mr. Sloan, and faxed to hice that the will was executed, if admissible. However, his Honour went on to say that it was settled that such evidence was not admissible, this clearly being because of the hearsay rule. Furthermore, the effect of s.18A is that a will should be found to be valid and effective if it is either duly executed or satisfies the requirements of s.18A. In those circumstances, I think the first question to be considered in this case is whether I am satisfied that there was a document purporting to embody testa it be lodged at the bank for safe keeping".

Mr. Sloan was before the Legal Services Tribunal in April and May 1995, in relation to unrelated matters, and on 15th May 1995 the Tribunal ordered that his name be removed from the roll of legal practitioners: see Legal
Professional Disciplinary Reports, No.4, 1995.

Enquiries have been made of banks and of persons who might have information concerning a will of the deceased, with no success.

The three brothers of the applicant have given consent to the applicant being appointed administrator of the deceased's estate without security; but there is no other evidence from Barrie or Warren. The applicant's evidence does suggest that Barrie does have some psychological difficulties, and also that, at least initially, Warren did not agree that the applicant should receive the house. The consents of Barrie and Warren were subsequently provided in response to letters enclosing the affidavits relied on by the applicant, and advising that the applicant would be applying for "letters of administration of the lost will". Accordingly, their consents could be interpreted as being consents not merely to the grant of administration, but also to a declaration being made in favour of the lost will.

However, especially since the tentative view which I have reached in favour of the lost will is contrary to that reached by the Registrar, I think the best course would be to set out my reasons for this view, and to direct that a copy of these reasons be sent to the brothers prior to a grant being completed.
That would give the brothers one last chance to seek to put on evidence or submissions in opposition to a declaration in favour of the lost will. Of course, the making of a grant of administration and a declaration in favour of the lost will would not prevent any of the brothers making an application under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/), if they claim to have been left without adequate provision for their proper maintenance.

The Registrar reached his view against acceptance of the will, relying in part on decisions of McLelland, J. in Hunt v. Parker (4th July 1989) and Estate of Moore (21st July 1992), in which cases his Honour pointed to the need for clear and convincing proof of the lost will, its contents, and due execution and attestation. In the earlier of those cases, McLelland, J. dealt with the admissibility of declarations by the deceased to prove due execution; and he pointed out that in Gair v. Bowers <case>; [(1909) 9 CLR 510], the High Court of Australia decided that statements made by a person after the alleged execution of a will by him were not admissible as evidence of such execution.

However, there are now two important statutory provisions that are applicable to the case before me, which were not applicable to these cases decided by
McLelland, J.

First, s.18A of the Wills Probate & Administration Act commenced on 1st
November 1989, applying to wills of persons dying after that date. (In the
Estate of Moore, the deceased had died in 1935.) Section 18A is in the following terms: 
A. (1) A document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions of a deceased person, even though it has not been executed in accordance with the formal requirements of this Act, constitutes a will of the deceased person, an amendment of such a will or the revocation of such a will if the Court is satisfied that the deceased person intended the document to constitute his or her will, an amendment of his or her will or the revocation of his or her will.

In forming its view, the Court may have regard (in addition to the document) to any other evidence relating to the manner of execution or testamentary intentions of the deceased persons, including evidence (whether admissible before the commencement of this section or otherwise) of statements made by the deceased person.

Next, [s.63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s63.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) is in the following terms:- (1) This section applies in a civil proceeding if a person who made a previous representation is not available to give evidence about an asserted fact.

The hearsay rule does not apply to: oral evidence of the representation that is given by a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being made, or a document so far as it contains the representation, or another representation to which it is reasonably necessary to refer in order to understand the representation.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s63.html) is subject to [s.67](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s67.html), which requires notice of intention to use hearsay evidence to be given to other parties; but this appears to have no application in undefended proceedings.

It is clear that those two provisions mean that generally the hearsay rule no longer makes declarations by a deceased person concerning execution of a will inadmissible to prove due execution. I note that in Gair v. Bowers, at p.521, Griffith, C.J. remarked that the statement by the deceased, made days after the alleged execution of the will, that he had duly executed the will in the presence of two persons, would have been very strong evidence that the will was executed, if admissible: however, his Honour went on to say that it was settled that such evidence was not admissible. This assertion was clearly on the basis of the hearsay rule which, as noted above, generally no longer applies.

Furthermore, the effect of s.18A is that a will should be found to be valid and effective if it is either duly executed or satisfies the requirements of s.18A. In those circumstances, I think the first question to be considered in this case is whether I am satisfied that there was a document purporting to embody testamentary intentions of the deceased, either duly executed or satisfying s.18A, which the deceased intended to be his will.

As just noted, declarations of the deceased are now generally admissible in evidence in support of such a finding. However, I accept that the standard of proof required is as set out on p.6 of the judgment of McLelland, J. in
Estate of Moore, namely that there should be "clear and convincing proof similar to that appropriate to other classes of case where the Court is asked to give effect to parol arrangements in circumstances where the law requires, or the parties have chosen, that a particular matter be recorded in some formal way (see, for example, Pukallus v. Cameron <case>; [56
ALJR 907] at 911;
Blackney v. Savage & Sons <case>; [(1973) VR 385] at 389; Maks v. Maks [6 NSWLR 34] at 36; Whittet v. State
Bank of N.S.W. [24 NSWLR 146] at 151-4), or where the Court is asked to make a finding concerning a legal transaction by a deceased person (see, for example,
Birmingham v. Renfew <case>; [57
CLR 666] at 674, -2)".

However, this does not mean that what is required is other than proof on the balance of probabilities: cf. Neat Holdings Pty. Ltd. v. Karajan Holdings
Pty. Ltd. <case>; [(1992) 67 ALJR 170] at 170-1. In a case such as this, I believe that what is required is that the party bearing the onus of proof must be sufficiently diligent in calling available evidence, because the Court will not be prepared to act on material which it considers inadequate: cf. my article 'The Scales of Justice - Probability and Proof in Legal Fact Finding' [(1995) 69 ALJ ] esp. at 739-40.

In this case, the applicant has not put on evidence from Dr. Duncan or from two of the four children, but the two brothers in question are on notice of the proceedings, have not sought to put on evidence themselves, and will, following this judgment, have an opportunity to do so. The applicant has put on evidence from two of the deceased's children, the deceased's close companion of thirty three years, her daughter, and a number of friends and neighbours, and also all available documents from the relevant solicitor. In those circumstances, I consider that the applicant has been sufficiently diligent in providing the Court with available evidence.

The documents relating to the 1979 appointment with Mr. Sloan, coupled with the statements of the deceased, very strongly support the inference that, on th June 1979, the deceased went to see Mr. Sloan; that Mr. Sloan drafted a will and had it engrossed; and that on 20th June 1979, the deceased paid Mr.
Sloan $35.00 for drafting and engrossing the will.

Furthermore, statements by the deceased clearly support the inferences that the will drawn by Mr. Sloan left the house to the applicant and the residue of the estate among her three brothers; that the deceased believed he had validly executed the will and intended it to be his will; that the deceased believed that Mr. Sloan had the will; and that the will had not been revoked prior to about one year before his death.

In my opinion, all this does amount to clear and convincing proof that there was a document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions of the deceased, which the deceased intended to be his will, at least up to about one year before his death. Whether that document was duly executed or not, the effect of s.18A is that those findings would be enough for a declaration in favour of the will, unless there is evidence of revocation.

The next question is whether there is evidence of revocation. Non-production of a will, where the will is is traced into the custody of the deceased, gives rise to an inference of revocation. The only evidence that the will went into the custody of the deceased is its non-production by Mr. Sloan. There is positive evidence that the will was not revoked between 1979 and about late
There is no suggestion in the evidence of any circumstances suggesting a change of heart by the deceased during the last twelve months of his life.

As I have said, there is convincing evidence that, at least up to about one year before his death, the deceased believed the will was kept by his solicitor. If that belief was incorrect, then the most probable inference would be that the will was lost by the deceased some years ago. If the will was originally with the solicitor, then the available inferences seem to be that it was either lost by the solicitor or else picked up by the deceased in the last year of his life. We know that the solicitor had moved his office, that when spoken to by the applicant he was evasive and did not suggest that he had handed the will to the deceased within the last year, and that he was subsequently struck off the roll of solicitors.

In those circumstances, I consider that the balance of probabilities is in favour of non-revocation.

It is apparent that I have not yet decided one way or the other whether the will was duly executed. It is usual for a court, in granting probate of a will or making a declaration in favour of it, to make it clear whether this is on the basis of due execution or on the basis of s.18A. My opinion is that, since the legal consequences are the same in either case, it is not necessary for a court to specify on which basis the finding is made, and I do not propose to do so. However, in case that view is incorrect, I will proceed to consider the basis which I would specify, if I felt obliged to do so.

There is material to support a finding of due execution and attestation. It appears that the deceased believed that the will had been duly executed and attested. But the evidence does not show that the deceased was aware of what the legal requirements for due execution and attestation were. An inference is available that execution took place in the solicitor's office, but this is not certain. An inference is available that, if execution took place in the solicitor's office, the solicitor would have made sure that the execution and attestation was in accordance with the requirements of the law. Against this, there is a question as to the reliability of the solicitor, because it appears that the most probable explanation for the non-production of the will is that it was lost by the solicitor, and the solicitor has recently been struck off; and even if the execution did take place in the office of the solicitor, it is conceivable that it was not supervised by the solicitor himself, but by an employee. In all those circumstances, the inference in favour of due execution is by no means overwhelming.

The problem which this raises for a finding in favour of due execution is that a number of probabilities have to be combined: cf. 69 ALJ pp746-750. For the applicant to succeed on the basis of an unrevoked, duly executed will, the
Court has to find that there was a document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions of the deceased which the deceased intended to be his will, that this was not revoked prior to death, and that it was duly executed and attested. I note that the onus of proof is said to lie on anyone alleging revocation of a will; but it seems to me that, in the case of a lost will which may possibly have come into the hands of the deceased, it is appropriate to include the possibility of revocation among the overall probabilities of the case. When all those probabilities are combined in the present case, I am unsure that I would be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that all these conditions are satisfied together.

By way of illustration, suppose that the strength of my belief that there was a document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions of the deceased, which the deceased person intended to constitute his will, could be represented as a probability of 0.8; and that, given that there was such a document, the strength of my belief that it had been duly executed and attested could be represented by probability 0.7. Then, the strength of my belief that there was such a document which had been duly executed could be represented by probability 0.56, while the strength of my belief that there was such a document not duly executed but satisfying s.18A could be represented by probability 0.24. Suppose further that, given that there was such a document, the strength of my belief that it had not been revoked could be represented by a probability of 0.8. Then the strength of my various beliefs could be represented as follows: 
Belief Probability 
Duly executed will, unrevoked 0.448 s.18A will, unrevoked 0.192 
Never any executed or s.18A will 0.2 
Executed or s.18A will, revoked 0.16 
On that approach, although the probability of facts entitling the applicant to succeed would be 0.64, and that of facts which did not entitle the applicant to succeed would be 0.36, the probability of one or other particular ground for success would be less than 0.5.

Although I do not pretend that the strength of my belief in these respective matters can be precisely represented by these probabilities, they are approximations; and this calculation does show why I am unsure that I would be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that there was such a document duly executed and unrevoked.

If, contrary to the view I expressed before, it was necessary for me to state whether the basis of my order was that the document was duly executed and attested, or was that the requirements of s.18A were satisfied, there is a real question as to which basis would be appropriate. I am inclined to think that, even if the overall probability of there having been such a document duly executed and unrevoked is less than 0.5, it would still be appropriate for me to base my decision on that finding rather than on s.18A; because the probability of there being such a document not duly executed, satisfying s.18A, and unrevoked would be even less, and the plaintiff does not gain any additional relief or benefit from a duly executed will which is not gained from a s.18A document. On the other hand, if it had been the case that the plaintiff did gain some such additional relief or benefit, then the position would, I think, be otherwise; and, assuming the Court had to select a basis for relief, it would select the basis which gave the plaintiff the least relief to which the plaintiff was, on the overall balance of probabilities, entitled.

For these reasons, unless, within 28 days after service of a copy of this judgment on them, Barrie Ralston or Warren Ralston lodge in the Registry evidence or submissions for the Court to consider, I propose to make the following orders.
I declare that in about June 1979 there came into existence a document purporting to embody the deceased's testamentary intentions, and that I am satisfied that the deceased then intended this document to constitute his will.
I declare that the effect of this document was to give the deceased's house at Abbotsford to his daughter and the rest of his estate equally between his three sons.
I declare that, as at the date of death of the deceased, this will had not been revoked.
I order that, subject to compliance with the Rules of Court, the applicant be granted administration of the estate of the deceased to administer the said estate in accordance with this will, such grant being limited until such will or a copy thereof be proved.
I order that the Administration Bond be dispensed with.
I refer the matter to the Registrar to complete the grant.

At present, I make the following orders:
I direct that the applicant serve a copy of these reasons by posting them to Barrie Ralston and Warren Ralston at their last known addresses, with copies to their solicitors, under cover of a letter advising that, if they wish to lodge any evidence or submissions in opposition to my proposed order, they must do so within 28 days.
I order that, within 14 days of receipt of these reasons, the applicant file an affidavit showing compliance with the preceding order.
 * * * 
