

Cameron versus Chief Commissioner of State Revenue [2003] NSWSC 70 (14 February )

Last Updated: 25 February 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Cameron versus Chief Commissioner of State Revenue <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law Division 
Administrative Law List  
FILE NUMBER(S): 30102/02  
HEARING DATE{S): 14 February 2003  
JUDGMENT DATE: 14/02/2003  
PARTIES: 
Douglas John & Liane Cameron (Plaintiffs) 
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Dunford J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
A Johnson - solicitor (Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff in person 
IV Knight (Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Issue Estoppel  defence pleaded in District Court proceedings  those proceedings decided adversely to the plaintiff  plaintiff brings fresh proceedings raising same issue in this Court  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Summons dismissed with costs.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW LIST  
DUNFORD J  
Friday, 14 FEBRUARY 2003  /02 DOUGLAS JOHN CAMERON & ANOR versus CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF STATE REVENUE  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: By Summons filed 30 October 2002, the plaintiff seeks a number of what are referred to as "orders", but which are really declarations, to the effect that there has been no valid appointment of the Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue and, accordingly, that stamp duty cannot be paid to such Chief
Commissioner.  The Chief Commissioner, who is the defendant, has, by Notice of Motion filed on 12 December 2002, applied for summary judgment or, alternatively, that the proceedings be struck out, and the affidavit filed in support of such Notice of Motion details the course of proceedings in action no. 800 of 2001 in the
District Court at Parramatta, wherein the Chief Commissioner sued the present plaintiff for unpaid stamp duty.  The plaintiff filed a Notice of Grounds of Defence and, on 9 August 2002, her Honour Judge J C Gibson ordered that such defence be struck out and that summary judgment be entered in favour of the Chief Commissioner in the sum of $82,351.45 inclusive of interest, together with costs.  There is, in my opinion, a fundamental and fatal defect in the plaintiff's proceedings by reason of the principle of issue estoppel. As appears from her
Honour's judgment, at p 2, the "second basis for the defence (in the District
Court was) whether or not the Chief Commissioner has been validly appointed".  Her Honour rejected that defence, ruled that it was hopeless and, accordingly, ordered that it be struck out and gave summary judgment to the
Chief Commissioner in the amount claimed.  The principle of issue estoppel was authoritatively stated by Dixon J in
Blair versus Curran <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 464] at 531-32 as follows:  "A judicial determination directly involving an issue of fact or law disposes once and for all of the issue, so that it cannot afterwards be raised between the same parties or their privies."  and he went on to say:  "The distinction between res judicata and issue estoppel is that in the first the very right or cause of action claimed or put in suit has in the former proceedings passed into judgment, while in the second (ie issue estoppel), for the purpose of some other claim or cause of action, a state of fact or law is alleged or denied the existence of which is a matter necessarily decided by prior judgment, decree or order". 
See also Stewart versus The Government Insurance Office of New South Wales [(1996) 39 NSWLR 531], Spautz versus Butterworth [(1996) 41 NSWLR 1] at 19-20. I have also been referred to an article, Res Judicata: General Principles and
Recent Developments by Handley JA in (1999) 18 Australian Bar Review at 214.  In the present case, the validity of the appointment of the Chief
Commissioner was put in issue by the present plaintiff in his defence in the
District Court. The judgment of the District Court was a judicial determination directly involving that issue and so it disposed of that issue as between the parties once and for all, and it cannot afterwards be raised between the same parties or their privies in other proceedings.  Her Honour held that the amount in question was due and payable by the defendant (present plaintiff) to the Chief Commissioner. That necessarily involved a finding that the person acting as the Chief Commissioner was entitled to so act and to receive the amount claimed. That issue, therefore, cannot be re-litigated between the same parties in any other proceedings.  It is, of course, open to the plaintiff to seek to challenge that decision of the District Court in the Court of Appeal. To do so, he would require leave to appeal, having regard to the amount involved, and he would at this stage also need to seek leave to apply for leave to appeal out of time.  The plaintiff has drawn my attention to a number of passages in the transcript of argument where her Honour expressed the view that the District
Court did not have power to determine the issue of the valid appointment of the Chief Commissioner, and there is a passage on p 4 of her judgment to the same effect. In this regard, I am satisfied that her Honour was in error.  The issue of the appointment of the Chief Commissioner was expressly raised by the Notice of Grounds of Defence in the District Court, and was therefore an issue which was essential to the determination of the proceedings. The fact that her Honour failed to deal with it does not have the effect of entitling the present plaintiff to commence fresh proceedings in this Court. As I say, his remedy is to challenge her Honour's finding and reasoning in the Court of
Appeal.  Finally, I should refer to the case of Harpas versus The Commissioner of
Taxation <case>, <case>
In that case, the plaintiff was the defendant in pending District Court proceedings and applied to this Court for a declaration that the notice on which the District Court proceedings were based was invalid. I held the notice was valid and my decision on this point was upheld in the Court of Appeal.  However, Handley JA, speaking on behalf of the Court of Appeal, went on to say:  "Although the point was not taken by the Commissioner before Dunford J, the commencement of proceedings for a declaration in the Supreme Court when an action raising the same issue is pending in the District Court is totally inappropriate. If objection had been taken, the Supreme Court should have dismissed these proceedings without embarking on the merits. If anyone else is tempted in the future to take proceedings in the Supreme Court for a declaration when an action raising the same issue is pending in the District
Court, the Court itself or the Commissioner should object to that procedure."  For these reasons, I am satisfied that this is a case for summary judgment and, accordingly, I order that the Summons be dismissed with costs.  
LAST UPDATED: 19/02/2003 * * * 
