

L K Smith versus D Smith [1996] NSWSC 525 (1 November 1996) 
LINDA KAREN SMITH v. DEAN SMITH & ANOR /91 
FRIDAY 1 NOVEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Linda Karen Smith, claims damages for negligence in respect of injuries sustained by her in a motor vehicle accident on 19 April 1990. Liability was admitted by the defendants. Her damages are to be assessed in accordance with the provisions of the Motor Accident Act 1988.
 . The accident and the immediate aftermath 
The accident involved a head-on collision which occurred despite the plaintiff's strenuous effort to avoid the other vehicle by steering her vehicle onto the extreme left hand side of the roadway. In the result, the front right hand portion of her vehicle was crushed and the vehicle itself was jammed against a tree on the near side with the result that the plaintiff was trapped in the vehicle for about 30 minutes before being released by members of the police rescue squad. She did not lose consciousness and I have no difficulty in concluding that the period before she was released from the wreckage was frightening, distressing and probably painful. In the course of the rescue, an ambulance officer fell onto her fractured left arm. She says she lost consciousness, but I am satisfied that what probably happened is that she fainted because of pain.

She was taken by ambulance to Campbelltown Hospital. On arrival she was complaining of pain on the right side of her face (which was the site of lacerations including a dreadful tear of the right ear), her neck, the right ribs, the left humerus and forearm and the left knee. It is recorded that she was anxious and distressed. Late that night the plaintiff was taken to the operating theatre for suturing of the lacerations under general anaesthetic.

It is clear from the nursing notes that over the following days she suffered a great deal of pain, particularly in, but by no means limited to, the fractured left arm, for which she was given regular injections of morphine and pethidine. Among other complaints recorded are complaints of pain in the back of her head and later of headache (treated by panadeine from time to time); of pain in the left foot; and of pain in both knees; but quite clearly the major source of pain at that stage was the left arm. X-rays revealed a mid-shaft fracture of the left humerus with some postero-lateral displacement of the distal fragment and an undisplaced cracked fracture at the junction of the middle and distal third of the ulna. X-rays of the neck, right ribs, right knee, left knee and left ankle revealed no bony injury or joint abnormality but x-rays of the right ankle and foot were suggestive of an undisplaced minor cracked fracture of the inferior articular margin of the talus and possibly also of the posterior tubercle of the talus. A later x-ray of the left foot and ankle revealed "avulsion fractures ... at the base of the first proximal phalanx and at the base of the distal phalanx of the first toe." No associated subluxation or dislocation was noted. The notes are silent as to any complaint of injury to or pain in the right hand; but an x-ray of her hand was ordered: no doubt for good reason. No bony abnormality was found.

On 23 April 1990 she was transferred to Campbelltown Private Hospital for treatment of her orthopaedic injuries. There she was taken to theatre for open reduction of her fractures of the left arm by Dr. Giblin and both fractures of the arm were plated. Her right leg was placed in a below knee plaster. Sutures were progressively removed from the various wounds, and physiotherapy was instituted. As before, the plaintiff's major complaints were in respect of her left arm and she was given regular injections of pethidine over several days (which may well have produced the consequence that other parts of her body which were the site of injury were not in fact perceived by her as producing pain).

The plaintiff was discharged from the hospital, to her home in the care of her mother, on 8 May 1990. Because of her ankle and foot injuries, she was unable to walk; because of her arm injuries, she was unable to use crutches. In consequence, she had to utilise a wheelchair for some two or three months.
When she needed or chose to leave her mother's home, she had to go by car, transporting the wheelchair in the boot. From about late July until about the end of the year, she had to use crutches.
 . The plaintiff before the accident 
The plaintiff was born on 21 August 1967 so that she was 22 at the date of her accident, and 28 at the date of trial. She did well at school. Her secondary education was at Hurlstone Agricultural High School and in her final year she obtained her HSC at a level sufficient to secure admission to the University of Sydney where, in 1986, she commenced a degree course in Agricultural
Economics. That was designed as a four year course so that the expectation would be that she would be in her fourth and final year in 1989. However, in , she suspended her Agricultural Economics degree studies in order to undertake a number of courses in the Faculty of Science in order to facilitate a transfer from the Faculty of Agriculture to the Faculty of Veterinary
Science. In the result, however, she was not accepted for entry into the latter faculty and continued in her original degree course. The result was that it was in 1990, the year of the accident, that she entered what should have been her fourth and final year.

During her school and university years up to the date of the accident, the plaintiff had engaged with a considerable measure of success in a range of extra-curricular activities. In 1984, when she was in Year 11, she was appointed as a prefect at her school; in the same year she was selected to participate in a youth exchange programme to New Zealand organised by Lions
International. Each year she participated actively in equestrian activities, competing with conspicuous success in dressage, hacking and show jumping contests including at the Campbelltown Show and at the Royal Easter Show. At university she became involved in athletics and was a member of the Sydney
University intervarsity athletics team competing in a range of events, in some of which she was successful. In 1987, she was chosen Miss Campbelltown
Showgirl and in the following year was runner-up in the Miss New South Wales
Sportsgirl Quest organised by the Royal Blind Society. In 1989, she was elected as a student representative on the Academic Board at the university and she was involved in tutoring at two of the university colleges. In the same year, she was selected to represent Australia in the International
University Student Equestrian Games in Toronto and New York, but chose not to go, so as not to interrupt her studies.

During 1989, she undertook vacation employment (work experience) with Hassall & Associates, a well known firm of agricultural consultants and economists, and Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation. During the summer vacation 1989-1990, she worked for the National Farmers' Federation under the direction of Professor Augustus Hooke in a research project in which it was her function to collate data for a model to permit forecasts of production and consumption of wheat worldwide. I shall return to Professor Hooke's assessment of her work and ability when I come to consider the contention that she would have obtained First class honours and would have enjoyed in consequence a very substantial earning capacity. In 1990, she was awarded the Royal Agricultural
Society's Young Achiever award, and at the Royal Easter Show a few days before her accident was selected to lead the Grand Parade at the show on her horse,
Lancashire Lad.
 . The plaintiff in 1990 
There is not much doubt that throughout the year 1990, the plaintiff was substantially disabled by her physical injuries. It is obvious and not in contest that she was quite unable to continue her university studies during that year. It is clear that throughout that year the plaintiff's ability to engage in any of her wide ranging extracurricular activities was suspended.
Indeed I am satisfied that until late in the year, even the day to day activities of daily living were, if not completely beyond her, matters of great difficulty. In so saying, I do not overlook the evidence that on 10 June the plaintiff travelled to New Zealand for nine days, a trip she had, before the accident, won as part of the intervarsity athletics team. I accept her evidence that she was in a wheelchair and carried on otherwise assisted by her travelling companions. I am satisfied that, because of her injuries and (at that stage obvious) disabilities, the pleasure of the prize trip was much diminished.

There is, I think, no doubt that she was greatly distressed both by the interruption of her university studies and her concern as to the effect that might have on her career ambitions, and also by the disruption of her sporting and community activities. She displayed very little emotion during the time when she gave evidence, except for increasing anger in her responses to cross- examination and her manifestations of pain from time to time, but she was visibly distressed, early in her evidence in chief, when asked about her reactions to her initial awareness of injury (t.21) and its likely effects upon her (t.25). I have no doubt that she was genuine in that and I have also no doubt that in those first few months the seeds were sown of the extreme emotional reaction to her injury and its aftermath, which has become a marked feature of her condition and which, as it seems to me on the whole of the evidence, has much to do with her complaint of continuing disabilities.

At the very least, the accident and its aftermath delayed by 12 months the plaintiff's graduation and entry into the workforce, and she would be entitled at the very least by way of damages for economic loss to a sum equal to one year's earnings appropriately assessed.
 . The psychological and emotional effect of the injury 
Frequently in the medical reports and indeed from a very early stage, there have been references to an emotional reaction on the part of the plaintiff. As early as 24 July 1990, Dr. Lowy expressed concern about the mental stress aspects of her injuries, the possibility of post-traumatic stress syndrome and her emotional upset and anger; and recommended professional counselling. On 14
February 1991, he saw no signs of post-traumatic stress disorder but did identify what he referred to as "psychological depression which would benefit from psychotherapy by a clinical psychologist". In his oral evidence, Dr. Lowy said:- "It was clear by 1994 that Miss Smith had entrenched anger, serious entrenched anger, as angry as one - as I have seen a person really, and I think this was by far a dominant situation. I have been - the second point is that Miss Smith - well I have to use the word `lapsed' into what I call chronic pain behaviour. She locked herself into a chronic pain cycle, chronic musculo- skeletal pain - whether it's here or there; it's another clinical situation which is clearly recognisable to a person like me. So we are looking at something else." 
Descriptions of her emotional state have ranged from "some element of post- traumatic depression" (Dr. Oakey, 8 March 1991) through "chronic pain behaviour" (Dr. Lowy, supra), to a "post-traumatic anxiety syndrome", a "post- traumatic stress disorder" and an "extreme grief reaction" (Dr. Malcolm Dent, May 1994, 1 August 1995). It has always been part of the plaintiff's case, though not pitched in terms of a specific psychiatric illness, that she has experienced as a consequence of her injuries, depression, anxiety and irritability and severe mood changes. Consequently, both parties arranged for the plaintiff to be assessed by psychiatric experts qualified for the purpose - Dr. Malcolm Dent was called by the plaintiff; Dr. Rodney Milton was called by the defendant.

I have to say that I found Dr. Milton's evidence of very little assistance. It is abundantly clear that he struck up no rapport whatsoever with the plaintiff. While I have no doubt that was as much her fault as his, perhaps more her fault than his, it remains the fact. He noted her statements that she was "very upset" at the time of the accident and thereafter, and her unwillingness to talk about the emotional aspects of her problems; he concentrated particularly, it seems to me, on the anger engendered in her by the attitude adopted by the insurance company (as she saw it) in relation to arranging for and paying for treatment; but seemed to give little weight to another aspect of her anger, her anger at the driver at fault, and at her loss of the opportunity to continue her pre-accident activities, to live the lifestyle that she was accustomed to and to pursue her considerable and not unreasonable ambitions. In his written report Dr. Milton was not particularly forthcoming about the interaction between himself and the plaintiff. Under the heading "Presentation" he reported:- "The interview was not an easy one. Miss Smith was resentful of having to attend and did not volunteer information. It was necessary to ask specifically about virtually everything. There was a barely perceptible scar on her right temple and unsightly scars on the left upper limb. Her principal affect during the interview was anger. Sometimes she got up and moved about. She often cried. ..." 
He denied any psychiatric diagnosis and thought that "her failure to improve as anticipated ... is principally to do with adopting an attitude of resentment and blame"; and he seemed to assume, rather than demonstrate, that the adoption of that attitude has been a matter of deliberate choice on her part, rather than a reflection of the nature of the personality of the person who was injured; although he does acknowledge that:- "People who have been significantly injured suffer a feeling of loss and have to grieve this loss over a period of time. Someone whose achievements were considerable and who have the prospect of achieving more in future has a lot of feeling to work through".

In his perception, she "had chosen" to "take an angry and blaming attitude and find fault with the world". It is of course clear that she has become angry and that in her thinking about the accident, she gives a prominent place to the attribution of blame to others; but it is by no means self-evident that that is a matter of personal choice rather than an aspect of the effect of the accident upon such a person as she was.

It became increasingly clear as Dr. Milton's oral evidence proceeded that he was very much affected by the plaintiff's attitude towards himself, of anger and resentment, and that his own self-esteem was affronted by Miss Smith's attitude towards him. He was offended by her failure to treat him with what he regarded as the level of courtesy and respect which he thought was his due. To a degree that comes through in the actual words of his evidence in pp.294-295, but it came through even more so in his demeanour and his tone of voice. I regret to say that I did not have any confidence that his opinions were arrived at or expressed objectively, and I find myself unable to place any reliance upon his overall assessment.

Dr. Dent clearly did have a closer rapport with the plaintiff although he was, if I may say so, as it seemed to me, a little too ready to attach psychiatric jargon tags to a reaction on her part which in his written reports he fairly clearly identified in terms that make a great deal of sense from a lay point of view - namely the identification in her of substantial emotional distress stemming from her recognition of the extent of what she has lost in terms of lifestyle and career, a loss to which she has been unable to adapt because of a degree of emotional rigidity stemming from her earlier extreme level of independence and competence. To say that she is frustrated and depressed and distressed seems to me to be to describe her condition in understandable lay terms not involving any particular psychiatric diagnosis; although I would qualify that by adding that one did perhaps need the assistance of a psychiatrist to identify (as did Dr. Dent and, indeed, Dr. Milton) her reaction as in part a reaction in the nature of grief, which has to be worked through over a period of time as does grief arising from any other source, for example bereavement. Although from time to time, Dr. Dent did use some of the jargon terms that I have mentioned -"symptoms suggestive of post-traumatic anxiety disorder" (report of 4 May 1994) "elements of post-traumatic stress disorder" (report of 1 August 1995) - it was not ultimately my understanding of his evidence, that he attributed to her any specific psychiatric diagnosis of that sort. However, whether or not the symptoms of anxiety and depression, associated with the frustrating consequences of the accident itself and of her physical injury, support a diagnosis of an anxiety state or a depressive illness (I do not think Dr. Dent went that far either, although in his report of 4 May 1994, he referred to psychological testing suggesting the existence of "a moderate to severe depression with quite high anxiety levels"), it is sufficiently clear that her emotional reaction to her injury is at the very least a very substantial emotional reaction which is in its own right distressing and a source of disability.

It is a condition clearly likely to impede recovery from her physical injuries, if only because her personality makes it difficult for her to accept such counselling or other treatment of a psychological sort which has the capacity to assist her. I accept Dr. Dent's evidence to the effect that her feelings of bitterness and anger, of devaluation and of loss, contribute to (although I would not accept that they wholly explain) her tendency to claim and describe a level of pain and disability which goes beyond that which can objectively be explained by reference to her physical injuries. It seems clearly to be the opinion of Dr. Lowy, who is vastly experienced in the assessment of the consequences of injury, that she continues to suffer from a disabling and genuine chronic pain syndrome and that he maintains that opinion notwithstanding that he is satisfied that there was, at least on his later examinations of her, considerable exaggeration.

Furthermore, it seems to be the case that the persistence of her emotional reactions or, putting it in terms of her grief response as both psychiatrists were prepared to do, the prolongation of the period during which she must work through her grief, is itself influenced by the persistence of physical disability and pain (to the extent that such does indeed continue). That is to say there is, as so often one finds in cases of this sort, an inter-reaction between the persistence of physical symptoms and the persistence of emotional or psychological symptoms.

Consequently, the prognosis for recovery from the emotional impact of the accident is influenced by the extent to which she has already recovered from or adapted to continuing physical problems, and the extent to which such physical problems as still trouble her today will continue to trouble her in the future. I accept the opinion of Dr. Dent that she would benefit from counselling in that it would assist her in dealing more effectively with her pain. I accept also his opinion that that is going to be a long term problem, at least (I would interpose) so long as her genuine physical disabilities continue. What is required, as I would understand his evidence, is a counsellor and a counselling programme which recognises the nature of her personality, her tendency to reject a relationship which would put her in a position of dependence, but which takes advantage of her obvious intelligence so as to assist her to understand the purpose of psychological intervention and the likely outcome if she co-operates in it, and which allays her concerns about it. She needs, as I understand it, to be brought to an acceptance that to involve herself in such counselling is not an admission of weakness but a recognition of a genuine need, the existence of which is not due to any fault on her part but recovery from which requires her to harness all of her personal resources.

As will be seen, it does not appear to me upon a consideration of the whole of the evidence, that her physical disabilities are as severe as she has, in the course of the trial, represented them, although I am of the view that they continue to have (perhaps largely through the influence of her psychological state) a disproportionate effect upon her ability to function as she might wish. I am satisfied that in order to achieve such recovery as is possible in her case, she will require quite intensive counselling and/or psychiatric consultations and/or involvement in a pain management programme, followed by maintenance therapy for a long time thereafter. It will be appropriate to make due provision for this in compensating her for future treatment and medical costs. However, whatever sum is allowed must be discounted both for the possibility that, antipathetic to treatment as she is, the plaintiff will not have such treatment, and for the likely delay before she has it, if she does.
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted (very conservatively, on the evidence) that the sum of $6,240 (undiscounted) should be allowed. Accepting his primary submission, but discounting appropriately, I will make an allowance in this respect of $5,000.
 . The credibility of the plaintiff 
The defendant made a sustained attack on the plaintiff's credit, and it has been in part successful - but not to the extent that I am able to accept the defendant's submission that the plaintiff's evidence on any issue should be rejected unless adequate corroborated. That appears to me to be a simplistic approach which ignores some of the realities of the case.

Enough has been said already to demonstrate both the nature of the plaintiff's lifestyle, capacities and ambitions before the accident, and the devastating effect of the accident upon her; and what I am satisfied is and has been a genuine, distressing, and to some extent disabling, emotional reaction to her physical injuries and their effect upon her.

A feature of that emotional reaction is undoubtedly anger: especially at him who caused her injuries; at his insurer who, as the plaintiff perceives it (I see no need to attempt to determine whether her perception has a foundation in fact) has not met its obligations to her, or has done so only dilatorily and grudgingly; and at the unfairness (as she perceives it) that she should, by reason of the accident, have lost so much of what she had and reasonably hoped to have. In one respect at least I find myself in agreement with Dr. Milton - her attitude now is one of resentment and blame. This was, I think, apparent throughout her evidence but particularly in her cross-examination.

Except in one respect (which I do not need to enlarge upon but which will be apparent from the transcript) the defendant's cross-examination, although forceful and aggressive, was in no way unfair. The defendant had a great deal of material which could properly and effectively be used in cross-examination (and which was so used), but, alongside that, the cross-examination was marked by the pursuit of topics which were really of no substance (the thesis question to which I shall come later, the plaintiff's academic record generally, and a rather pointless challenge to her claim of mobility problems at a time when her leg was in plaster). Not only was that wasteful of court time but it very largely contributed, in my judgment, to the increasingly unco-operative response of the plaintiff to cross-examination. Her demeanour in the witness box was extremely difficult to assess, but I have no doubt that in relation to some aspects of her continuing disabilities, she has given evidence which was actually untrue. However, accepting as I do that she has developed a genuine and disabling psychological and emotional reaction to her injury and its devastating consequences, the pursuit of these insubstantial matters in cross-examination had the effect of antagonising the plaintiff and producing from her responses which the defendant has characterised as evasive but many of which were, in my judgment, not to be so construed. I have no doubt that the plaintiff, had she been more forthcoming and had the cross- examiner not fed her obvious anger arising directly from the accident, could have given adequate, straightforward answers in explanation of many of the matters put. That she did not do that, but chose to be excessively precise, often unforthcoming and sometimes even sarcastic, reflected not so much unwillingness to answer frankly for fear of damaging her case, but a refusal to assist what she regarded as a futile exercise.

It is necessary (but very difficult) in assessing her evidence to distinguish two sorts of reactions to cross-examination - her hostile reaction when she thought she was being pointlessly pursued over matters of no substance, as was often the case, and the evasive reaction where clearly she perceived that an honest, frank answer would not advance her case. I have no doubt that the latter accurately describes her reaction at various stages of the cross- examination. However, I think it appropriate to record that my impression on many such occasions was that her deliberate exaggeration and her refusal to concede the same were more often motivated by a desire to make sure that the defendant and its insurer were punished by the largest possible award, rather than by a specific wish on her part to increase her own compensation (albeit the one would be the consequence of her successfully achieving the other). The fact remains that whatever the reason, some of her evidence was dishonest, and much of it was unreliable.

This is one case where, having had a very full opportunity through a very long course of evidence to observe the plaintiff's demeanour closely, I am driven to conclude that what can be derived from it is of limited value. It confirmed to my mind the genuineness of her distress at the impact which the accident undoubtedly had upon her, upon her lifestyle and upon her ambitions; it fully confirmed the opinion of the psychiatrists that she has become depressed, frustrated and angry; but it has been of little assistance in determining the credibility of her evidence particularly in her description of the extent of her continuing physical disabilities. Her demeanour in the witness box was appropriate and impressive and convincing during her evidence in chief, but it became progressively less so as the cross-examination proceeded. I am satisfied that an attempt to assess her credibility only by reference to her demeanour and a resulting assessment which was entirely adverse would be wrong as failing to take account of these matters that I have just discussed; furthermore, the skilful manner in which the cross-examiner took advantage of those aspects of her case and her condition created a situation in which, when the time came to confront her with video evidence seemingly inconsistent with much of what she had said before, the plaintiff was in such a state of emotion and seething anger as was likely to convey a quite misleading impression about her generally.

As to the credibility of her description of her continuing physical disabilities, there is evidence in the form of video tapes showing certain activities of the plaintiff on 30 November 1994, 17 December 1994 and 19
December 1994, and in many respects the picture appears to give the lie to the plaintiff's complaint of continuing disability. I say "appears to" because, in questioning after the videos were shown, the plaintiff denied that the effect of the video was as on the face of it appeared. Her blanket denials were not, however, accompanied by any explanation or any convincing explanation in most respects nor did her counsel choose to attempt to elicit further explanation from her.

I shall deal with particular aspects of the video evidence when I come to deal with particular injuries and the plaintiff's claim of continuing disabilities resulting therefrom. I should, however, make it clear at this stage that I regard the video evidence as raising a very grave doubt as to the veracity of the plaintiff's complaints of continuing physical disabilities, particularly as at and after the time when the video was taken, but obviously also, in respect of some period of time earlier than that - precisely what period will vary from one injury to another and according to the cogency of the medical evidence in relation to each.

Apart from the video evidence, there were other matters on which the defendant relied as undermining the plaintiff's credit. I merely mention them at this stage and will give some of them closer attention when I come to discuss particular aspects of her claim. They included claims that she had failed to disclose relevant pre-existing physical problems in her low back and her right knee; that she had exaggerated the level of her pre-injury achievements; that she had failed to disclose the extent of her post-accident equestrian activities and in particular the occurrence of a riding accident in March ; the asserted inconsistency between her equestrian activities and her post-accident travel with her complaints of ongoing pain and disability; and her claim of a continuity of symptoms, particularly in her neck, right shoulder and right arm, throughout periods when there is no record of any such complaint to medical practitioners by whom she was being seen. Some of those matters I will touch on specifically in relation to particular injuries; whether or not I specifically refer to all of them again, all of them have so been considered in my assessment of the credibility of her evidence at every stage. While I reject, as I have said, the defendant's submission that the plaintiff's evidence on every issue should be rejected unless adequately corroborated, I certainly accept that on every issue her evidence needs to be scrutinised with some care, and that in relation to some specific complaints of disability, so far as the same are apparently contradicted by the video, I should reject what she says.
 . The plaintiff's academic prospects and performance 
It was the plaintiff's case that but for the accident she would have achieved First class honours in her university degree in Agricultural Economics; that that would have opened the way to post-graduate study, probably overseas; and that that turn in would have placed her throughout her subsequent career in a significantly higher salary band than has been open to her in fact. The fact is that she graduated with a Second class honours degree, and such employments as she has since engaged in have been at salaries significantly below what, it is claimed, would have been the earnings otherwise available to her.

In the Faculty of Agriculture at the University of Sydney, honours at graduation are awarded on the basis of examination marks obtained in years two, three and four. The method is explained in Exhibit BB which provides inter alia:- "For the assessment of an aggregate mark for the award of honours at the end of fourth year:- 
Each of the courses required by the bye-laws to be passed in second and third years shall be weighted according to unit value and weighted mean obtained. The combined examination results of the second and third years shall be given a weighting of 50%.

The fourth year mark shall be given a weighting of 50%." 
For the award of First class honours, a student must achieve a minimum aggregate mark over the three years of 75 and a minimum weighted average mark in the second and third year courses of at least 70. The plaintiff's weighted average mark in respect of her second and third year courses was 75.4 so that she needed to achieve in her final year a mark of 75 to qualify for the award of First class honours. In her fourth year, the plaintiff was required to complete the subject Agricultural Economics III and in addition to attending lectures, tutorials and seminars on the subjects specified in the Faculty
Handbook, the plaintiff was "required to undertake an independent research project and to prepare a thesis thereon". I have referred earlier to the work experience which she undertook in the summer vacation 1989 to 1990 under the direction of Profession Hooke. It was the plaintiff's intention to base her thesis in her final year on that work. The Faculty had accepted that as her thesis topic. It is clear from the evidence of Professor Hooke that the work which she had done was of high quality and his expectation was that she would produce a "very outstanding piece of work". He said:- "We had discussed it and defined the project and collected the data and she had given me every indication that she was one of the few people who might cope with a fairly complex piece of work like that." 
Once completed, the work would have been of particular significance and value.
It had, however, an associated time constraint because of its relevance to a specific project known as Grains 2000, for which it had to be completed during the year 1990. In effect, as I understand the evidence, by the time she was able to resume her university studies in 1991, the chosen topic was out of date. The Faculty was no longer prepared to approve it for the 1991 academic year and she was required to choose a new thesis topic.

I have no doubt of the plaintiff's enthusiasm for and dedication to her academic course. She had achieved a very satisfactory level of performance such that she was on course for the award of an Honours degree subject only to satisfactory completion of the requirements of her final year, and she had achieved that notwithstanding her wide ranging extra curricular activities. I accept that she had previously, when necessary, been prepared to sacrifice her extra-curricular activities in favour of her academic progress (for example her declining in 1989 to travel to North America for an international student equestrian contest). Given her many years of high achievement, her enthusiasm and dedication, and the level of her ability as revealed not only by her exam results but particularly by the evidence of Professor Hooke, I am satisfied that she had the capacity to achieve the necessary mark in 1990. Furthermore, having been formally advised of her weighted average mark for the second and third years, she must have been aware of precisely what was required of her in her final year - she had a specific target to aim for. I am satisfied that there was no more than the tiniest that she would not have succeeded in achieving First class honours.

The defendant sought to suggest otherwise and relied upon three matters in particular. The first was an aspect of the general attack on the plaintiff's credit which was linked particularly to her academic prospects, by reference to her insistence, despite counsel's attempt to get her to concede otherwise, that what was required of her in her final year in Agricultural Economics III was a major project designated a thesis. The cross-examination was based on a clear misunderstanding of the requirements for an Honours degree, stemming from the use of a more recent edition of the Faculty Handbook which did not contain the provisions relevant to the plaintiff's course. Exhibit AA, which is a copy of the thesis eventually submitted by the plaintiff, demonstrates the extent of the defendant's under-estimation of what was involved. I have commented adversely on some aspects of the plaintiff's credit but I find no reason not to accept her evidence in respect of this particular topic.

The second matter was the proposition that the plaintiff would in any event have been at a disadvantage in regard to the award of honours, and in particular as to the grading and ranking of her degree, because, it was suggested, she had taken four years to complete the first three years of the course. That, I think, clearly reflected a misunderstanding of the Faculty regulations and of the circumstances in which the plaintiff was not entering her fourth and final year until 1990. I am satisfied that she had suspended her Agricultural Economics degree studies in order to take courses in the
Faculty of Science, that she had done so with the consent of the Faculty, and that accordingly her situation was that she had undertaken only three years study in the Faculty of Agriculture, during which time she had completed all of the requirements for the first three years of the Agricultural Economics degree. The additional year was not in the Faculty of Agriculture but in the
Faculty of Science. My understanding of the documentation, therefore, is that she was not a person who had taken four years to complete the first three years of the course, within the meaning of paragraph (3) of the Faculty
Resolutions set out in Exhibit BB which reads as follows:- "All candidates are formally eligible to be considered for honours.
Notwithstanding s.6 of the Senate Resolutions for the degrees of Bachelor of
Science in Agriculture and Bachelor of Agricultural Economics, students who complete the first three years of the course in four years, and who by virtue of the weighted average marks would otherwise qualify for the award of honours, will be so considered. Such candidates may however be disadvantaged in terms of honours grading and ranking." 
Counsel for the defendant sought to make something of the fact that the plaintiff had not called anybody from the university to testify on this issue.
It seems to me that the position is so clear when one considers her academic record in light of the Faculty requirements that there was no need for the plaintiff to call any such witness. If the interpretation on which the plaintiff relied, and which appears to me to be the obvious one, was for some reason not correct, then it was open to the defendant to demonstrate that by calling some appropriate witness. In as much as the defendant did not do so, the inference is open that any witness whom the defendant might have been able to call from the university would not have assisted the defendant's case on this issue. The plaintiff does not, however, need to rely on any such inference for the position is, as I have indicated, in my view clear on the face of the documents.

The third matter on which the defendant relied was the undoubted fact that throughout her university course the plaintiff had, on a very large number of occasions, submitted written applications for special consideration on medical grounds, in respect of particular periods and/or particular examinations or assignments. The details are in Exhibit 4. Particular instances included her contracting glandular fever in September 1986, causing tiredness and inability to concentrate, which might impact on her ability to study and perhaps on her examination performance; in July 1987 an upper respiratory tract infection and possibly bronchitis; in July 1988, mild concussion and blurred vision after she was kicked in the face by a horse; an injury to her right knee during the period leading up to and during the period of the exams in November of that year (in respect of which she underwent surgery by way of arthroscopy on 6
December 1988); and, in April/May 1986 and again in November 1989, back pain making it very difficult to sit or lie for long periods, affecting in 1986 her ability to study, and in 1989 necessitating that she have special examination conditions enabling her to interrupt her examination in order to rest her back. There were also some occasions in which she sought special consideration by reason of personal and/or family problems.

I do not regard any of this material as particularly significant. It is clear to me that the plaintiff sought special consideration by reason of her various problems from time to time in case her performance should, in consequence of such problems, fall below the standard which she hoped and expected to achieve, but the position clearly is that, despite the problems revealed by the documents in Exhibit 4, she in fact did manage to achieve at the requisite level. The material seems to me to add nothing to the present issue. It does not cause me to doubt that the plaintiff, but for the accident, have completed her university degree in the year 1990 with First class honours at graduation.

There is a further matter which is relevant to the question whether the plaintiff was likely to achieve First class honours and that is the level she in fact achieved in 1991 (a mark in Agricultural Economics III of 71, leading to the award of Second class honours, Division 1), which she achieved notwithstanding the continuing effects of her injuries. I accept her evidence that her ability to concentrate was adversely affected by pain and discomfort and by headaches; that her studies were disrupted by the time taken up by treatment including in particular physiotherapy; that she was inconvenienced by her lack of mobility which required her to obtain a special permit in order to driver her car from point to point on the university campus; and that sitting, studying, writing and using keyboards aggravated symptoms in her neck and her low back. To have done so well under those difficult circumstances provides a further measure of her capacity and reinforces the view that without those impediments, she would readily have achieved the mark necessary for a First class honours degree.

The prospect that she would not have done so can be assessed as negligible.
 . Progress of the plaintiff's injuries 
Neck, upper limbs 
The obvious major injury to the left arm progressed satisfactorily, the fractures uniting in good position and by the end of the year with a good range of movement. However, in January 1991, the plaintiff was complaining of pain in the area of the fracture of the upper arm and Dr. Pollack found a firm, soft tissue swelling near the proximal end of the surgical incision which was slightly tender. Those symptoms and the accompanying physical signs continued intermittently throughout 1991 and, indeed, until the plates were removed at a further operation in October 1992. At the time of that operation, the plaintiff was totally unfit for any kind of work from 11 September to 24
November 1992. While she was under general anaesthetic for the orthopaedic operation, Dr. Mears took the opportunity to revise the scars. There remain very extensive prominent, pink coloured scars on the outer aspect of the plaintiff's upper arm and the posterior aspect of the forearm and, notwithstanding that there has been an excellent result from the plastic surgery thus far, they represent at the present time an obvious significant and clearly distressing cosmetic disability. They continued to be slightly tender at least until about the middle of 1995 but seem now to have reached a final state. Dr. Giles, plastic surgeon, suggests that laser treatment may improve the appearance. The plaintiff gave evidence, which I accept, of her intention to have such treatment. Unfortunately her lawyers have not adduced any evidence of the likely cost. Her counsel suggested, in final submissions, an allowance of $2,000 but offered no justification of that sum. For all I know, the treatment involves no more than one or two brief visits to a practitioner's rooms, or one hour or two in a Day Treatment Centre. I will allow $500.

By 2 May 1995, the plaintiff was making no complaint about her left arm (as distinct from her left shoulder) other than a complaint of tiredness in the left wrist when using a keyboard. There appears to be some slight residual loss of movement at the elbow joint but this appears to be of little significance.

The plaintiff's major complaints about her left arm have usually related to the shoulder. There is no doubt whatsoever, from the evidence of the fractures, that the left arm was subjected to very severe force quite capable of transmission to and of causing injury to the shoulder. I do not think that much can be made of the absence of any specific complaints about the left shoulder in the early time after the accident, when the left arm itself had been so seriously injured and was the focus for so much attention. Any complaint about the shoulder at that time would reasonably be attributed to the indirect effects of the fractures and indeed it appears to me that that is what occurred. Notwithstanding the absence of specific complaint about the left shoulder to Dr. Lowy on 24 July 1990, he did note her complaint of pain in the left shoulder when he saw her again on 14 February 1991 and he accepted the genuineness of her complaints, finding on examination limitations of movement at a time when he was well satisfied that she was "trying maximally".
Dr. Millons in September 1991, recorded that her movements in all directions were restricted by stiffness, and at that stage he anticipated a permanent disability of the left shoulder. (Notwithstanding those findings, he recorded in his report of that examination that she had a "good range of movements"; but he himself in his report of February 1992 drew attention to that as a matter requiring correction.) In the later report he confirmed that at the previous examination she had had a considerable restriction of movement, and that she was now stiffer than before.

Since then, an ultrasound examination (on 21 June 1995) has confirmed the existence in the left shoulder of supra-spinatus tendon tears and slight thinning of the sub-scapular tendon; and the general medical opinion seems now to be quite clear that she has a continuing pathology in the left shoulder, probably attributable to the accident. Indeed, on the whole of the history, I am satisfied that that injury was occasioned by the accident, notwithstanding the absence of specific complaints at an early stage.

The plaintiff has also complained, certainly since mid-1992, of significant symptoms in her neck and right shoulder. There is an issue as to whether those parts of the body were injured in the accident. It is the fact that there was reference to a neck injury when the plaintiff was initially admitted to hospital and x-rays were ordered although no bony injury was revealed.
However, none of the doctors who saw the plaintiff during 1991 has recorded any complaint in relation to the neck or the right shoulder.

The significance of that is doubtful, because it is abundantly clear that the need for treatment was focused on the specific orthopaedic injuries including the jaw injury and the references of the plaintiff by her general practitioners to specialists were focused on those. The plaintiff herself maintains that she was experiencing symptoms in the neck and had very great difficulty in moving either shoulder. The whole right arm, she said, was severely bruised from the shoulder to the wrist. I accept that evidence, notwithstanding the absence of express reference to it in any medical record.
It is entirely consistent with the nature of the accident, although by the time she saw Dr. Lowy on 24 July, the bruising was no longer apparent and all that remained to physical examination of the right arm was tenderness at the elbow. She was at that stage, complaining of neck symptoms; Dr. Lowy noted that although she had a full range of movements there was slight pain at the extremes and some clicking.

In evaluating the plaintiff's claim that she sustained injuries in the motor vehicle accident to her neck and both shoulders it is in my view important to bear in mind that right up to the time of the accident she was obviously fit, and regularly engaged in vigorous sporting activity of a kind calculated to reveal any significant problem in any of those parts of her body. Furthermore, while it is apparent that she had from time to time suffered relatively minor injuries, the fact is that she continued over those years to engage in her very demanding physical activities; so that it may reasonably be inferred that before the accident she was not a person given to make much of fleeting episodes of pain or discomfort. This again, as it seems to me, reinforces the view that it is entirely possible that during the initial period after the accident, her attention was focused only on those injuries which were a source of major pain and disability, matters of less moment at that stage being disregarded or even not noticed.

Allowing all of that, the fact remains that apart from the record of a complaint of neck pain at Campbelltown Public Hospital (followed by the ordering of an x-ray and the prescription of analgesics) and a relatively non- specific report of neck pain to Dr. Lowy on 24 July 1990, there is no further record of a complaint of neck pain in any medical report until 26 August 1992.
On that date, she saw Dr. Hogg, her local doctor, who has a note that the plaintiff was complaining of neck and shoulder pain which "flared up over the past three weeks"; she prescribed physiotherapy. She saw Dr. Hogg again on 31
August 1992 when the physiotherapist found it impossible to treat her because of a muscle spasm in the mid-trapezius region.

The first occasion on which Dr. Waddell, who seems to have become the treating doctor at that stage, made any record of a complaint in relation to the neck was in the report dealing with his examination of 14 September 1992. At that stage:- "She was complaining of increasing pain involving her right shoulder and her neck. This mainly radiates from the side of her neck to the shoulder. It is aggravated by attempting to rotate her head or to look upwards." 
Dr. Waddell found clinical evidence of a musculo-ligamentous irritation of the cervical spine and right shoulder, apparently (as I read his report) confirmed by x-rays which demonstrated "distortion of the normal lordosis due to muscular contraction". He was prepared to relate that to the motor vehicle accident, presumably on the basis of the history which she gave, and he instituted treatment by way of bed rest and cervical traction. Thereafter, problems of the neck and right shoulder continued to be a feature of her complaints to Dr. Waddell.

Obviously that opinion is sustainable if it be accepted that there was a continuity of symptoms from the time of, or soon after, the accident because, as Dr. Waddell pointed out in oral evidence, the way in which the accident occurred was consistent with the infliction of trauma to those areas of the body and the development of what has since been diagnosed (and it does not appear to me there is any real issue about the diagnosis) as "an impingement syndrome of the rotator cuff tendons" in the shoulders, bilaterally. He said:- "Being the driver and gripping the steering wheel - in the time of an incident like an accident, people tend to brace themselves with the steering wheel and the impact they take is transmitted up the arms to the shoulders. The left arm was broken but the right arm is consistent with that type of injury." (There was in fact early evidence of injury to the right hand although the nature of it is left unclear; and the plaintiff has always complained of symptoms in the right hand and elbow, which are supported by objective findings recorded by several medical experts).

He said that the initial symptoms would not be as severe as those generated by the fractures, which might account for some delay in her recognition of the shoulders as an area of injury but it is, I think, clear upon a reading of the whole of his evidence that, in order to relate the injuries to the shoulders to the accident, it is necessary to accept her history of some on-going symptoms during the intervening period. In the absence of any such history, he conceded the possibility of some intervening cause. He agreed that the injury to the super-spinatus muscles, forming part of the rotator cuff, could occur by reason of a sudden jerk of the arms such as could happen in horse riding.
Particularly, he thought, might that be so if a competent medical practitioner in 1990 and 1991 had found a full range of unrestricted movements affecting the right arm and shoulder.

The plaintiff was remarkably unforthcoming about her equestrian activities in the couple of years following the accident. Initially she said that she had tried horse riding, for the first time after the accident, at some time in and abandoned the attempt because it was too painful. It eventually emerged, but very grudgingly, in cross-examination that she had engaged in competitive equestrian events including show jumping. She appeared to be extremely reluctant to give any clear or detailed evidence about the extent of her equestrian activities and I find it impossible to be satisfied that she was completely frank with the court about it. What did, however, clearly emerge is that on 1 March 1992, whilst participating in a show jumping event at Queanbeyan, she suffered an injury when, as I would understand it, there was a violent collision between her face and the neck of the horse in consequence of which she suffered an undisplaced fracture of the nasal bone.
There was a suspicion that she might have fractured facial bones as well; x-rays were ordered but revealed no abnormality. The fracture was reduced by a doctor in his rooms without the necessity for admission to hospital. When she saw her own doctor on 9 March 1992, a note was made that she had not been knocked out but appeared to have suffered concussion. However, it was specifically recorded that there was no neck stiffness at the time of the horse injury.

It seems to me to be entirely too much of a coincidence to suggest that each shoulder should manifest signs of the same sort of injury as the ultrasound examination on 21 June 1995 demonstrates, and then to suggest that those conditions were differently caused. Reasoning backwards from the common medical acceptance that there is a bilateral super-spinatus tendon tear and injury to the rotator cuff, I have come to the conclusion that, notwithstanding the difficulties raised by the absence of complaint and the intervention of the Queanbeyan horse riding accident, I should find on the balance of probabilities that the right shoulder also was the site of injury in the motor vehicle accident. Given the early complaint of neck pain and the difficulty, as it seems to me on the evidence, of disentangling the neck complaints from the right shoulder complaints, I come ultimately to the conclusion that the plaintiff did sustain injury to the neck and right shoulder as well as to the left shoulder in the motor vehicle accident.

The disability in both shoulders is confirmed by the most recent orthopaedic report, that of Dr. Goldberg who saw the plaintiff on 11 December 1995. He is an orthopaedic surgeon who specialises in shoulder and elbow conditions. I accept his opinions. He found her neck to be tender and irritable. Noting her complaint of a catching sensation in the left shoulder, he found a limited range of shoulder motion consistent with the ultrasound report of rotator cuff tears and he found her right shoulder to be wasted and very irritable indeed, with a very abnormal glenohumeral rhythm restricting the range of shoulder movement and a positive impingement sign, again entirely consistent with her complaints and with the ultrasound report. All things considered, I am persuaded that she sustained injuries to both shoulders and the neck and that there exists specific pathology which is capable of accounting for the symptoms of which she complains. Again, the real question becomes one as to the extent of her disability and as to that, once more, one is thrown back to a consideration of the plaintiff's credibility.

Lower limbs 
The right ankle was kept in plaster for some five months, after which it was subjected to intensive physiotherapy treatment. The fractures united, but by the end of the year there was still considerable restriction of movement, and the plaintiff experienced pain and swelling of the forefoot, particularly when walking on uneven surfaces or rough ground. It was pretty clear by the end of that the ankle was the site of post-traumatic degenerative changes. The plaintiff claims that the ankle is still a source of pain and difficulty in movement; it is sometimes stiff on first rising and she has to wear an ankle guard from time to time depending on the pain and the weather. There is certainly plenty of medical evidence to justify those continuing complaints, but there remains an issue as to the real extent of any continuing disabilities. I accept on the basis of the whole of the orthopaedic evidence that there is a real possibility that the plaintiff may need a sub-talar fusion - whether and when she might come to such an operation will depend on the extent to which the symptoms trouble her as she gets older. That will be to a degree a function of the level of her activity and the amount of stress she places upon her ankle. Once again, the plaintiff's lawyers have not adduced evidence of the likely cost. Somewhat arbitrarily I propose to allow a sum of $3,500 to cover a few days in hospital, surgical and other fees, a short course of physiotherapy, and a few weeks off work, all fairly heavily discounted for the chance that she will elect not to have surgery and for the likely delay before she has it, if she does. Whether or not she comes to operation, I accept that there is a probability that she will require, from time to time, physiotherapy and analgesic treatment in respect of it and I will take that into account later in making an inevitably arbitrary allowance for future physiotherapy and medications.

The lacerations to the plaintiff's knees duly healed, but both knees continued to be a source of pain, the left being significantly worse than the right. In
November 1990, the plaintiff was still experiencing clicking in both knees and, in the left knee, actual giving way. She complained of inability to kneel on either knee. Dr. Pollack diagnosed damage to the left anterior cruciate ligament and on 3 January 1991 when she was in hospital for surgical treatment of the injury to the left big toe (to which I will shortly refer), he took the opportunity to examine both knees under anaesthetic and found a degree of anterior laxity of the left knee, possibly consistent with an injury to the anterior cruciate ligament, and a similar but less significant finding on the right side.

It is the fact, as the plaintiff conceded when it was put to her, that she had suffered injury to the right knee in about November 1988, for which she underwent an arthroscopy; but reference to her athletic and equestrian activities from that time to the date of the accident seems to refute any suggestion that the present right knee symptoms are attributable to anything other than the motor vehicle accident. There is no medical evidence to the contrary. This is the convenient place to remark that I do not regard the plaintiff's omission to mention the earlier right knee injury in her evidence in chief as reflecting her unreliability. I am satisfied that for her, as for many active sports persons, injury unless greatly disabling is soon forgotten.

Dr. Waddell reported that both knees were affected by patello-femoral irritation which might respond adequately to physiotherapy. Dr. Ireland agrees with that opinion. Dr. Millons, in February 1992, confirmed the diagnosis of a ligament injury to the right knee but found no particular abnormality in the left side. I am satisfied that there is in each knee an organic basis for the plaintiff's continuing complaints and find that she has continuing symptoms, at least intermittently, attributable to the motor vehicle accident. The extent of those symptoms and any resulting disability, however, depends not so much on the medical evidence as on the plaintiff's own account. It is a question to which I will return later.

The left big toe continues to be a source of pain and there is, I think, no issue that it became the site of degenerative changes. The plaintiff has complained continually of pain in the under side of the toe, particularly when walking or standing on rough or uneven surfaces or at any time when she is not wearing prescribed orthotic devices inside her shoes. Dr. Pollack operated on the toe on 3 January 1991, excising an ununited fragment of the fracture of the base of the proximal phalanx. The operation appeared to be successful and the wound healed well, and she then undertook an exercise programme. She has, however, continued to complain of symptoms and there seems little doubt on the whole of the medical evidence that those are attributable to post-traumatic arthritis. There is nothing to suggest that the symptoms of which she presently complains will ever resolve. Accepting, as I do, that she has such symptoms as she complains of, it still remains a question to what extent those symptoms represent a source of disability, as contrasted merely with discomfort, and that is a question to which also I shall return.

Injuries to face and jaw 
The facial lacerations required extensive suturing at Campbelltown Hospital, including a substantial reconstruction of the right ear which was very badly torn. That injury healed in due course without any significant cosmetic or other disability, but I accept that it was a source of considerable pain, anxiety and discomfort for quite some time. When she saw Dr. Okey on 21 June , she complained about a foreign body which she felt was prominent in the front of the ear. Dr. Okey thought that was probably a piece of glass and arrangements were made for surgical removal of it. However, before those could be carried out, the piece of glass came out of the ear of its own accord and when Dr. Okey next saw her on 1 August 1990, it had healed up satisfactorily.

There were multiple small lacerations of a punctate type on the plaintiff's face which fortunately healed up without leaving any disfigurement. There was a major laceration, some 10 centimetres long, more or less J shaped, extending from within the hair on the right side of forehead adjacent to the temple, more or less vertically down to the plaintiff's eyebrow, then curving back up again. It has healed well but there is a fine pale scar which is readily visible if the plaintiff's hair is pulled back. Apart from the cosmetic defect represented by that scar, the facial injuries do not represent the source of any continuing disability. They are, however, evidence that she suffered a substantial injury to the right side of her face.

As well, she sustained a fracture of the left lower incisor tooth and another lower tooth not precisely identified in the evidence. When she saw her dentist, Dr. Ng very soon after her discharge from hospital, he recorded a complaint of extreme sensitivity to touch, percussion, heat and cold, and she has continued to complain of symptoms of that kind, notwithstanding treatment carried out. Dr. Gregory Charlesworth confirmed that complaint at examination on 26 June 1995 and thought the condition was unlikely to improve in the future, unless with specialist endodontic treatment for which he had referred her to an appropriate specialist.

The defendant attacked the veracity of the plaintiff's claim in that regard, suggesting that she was not merely exaggerating but lying when she made the claim that since her injury her teeth have been distressingly sensitive to heat and cold. I would have thought there was a considerable measure of obligation in the assessment, by such experienced practitioners, of a claim of sensitivity. Neither was required for cross-examination. Professor Norman, who was called to give evidence about her jaw condition, is, of course, highly qualified in dentistry as well as medically, and could be expected to have been able to comment usefully on the proposition that her claim of sensitivity was false; but although the subject was touched on (t.255) in cross- examination, no suggestion of fabrication was explored. The defendant's case in this regard rests particularly on the video evidence showing, as the plaintiff concedes, her eating an icecream. I have to say that my impression of the video is that it does not show her biting the icecream (which is one of those kinds mounted on a stick) but rather sucking chunks from it, which appears to me to be quite consistent with her evidence.

I am satisfied that she has a continuing painful condition of the teeth which requires treatment. However, in view of the fact that she has not chosen to undergo such treatment to this time, for which there is no explanation offered, I infer that the pain and distress caused by this condition is not great; and I am not persuaded that it is appropriate to make any provision in her verdict for the specific cost of such treatment, because it appears to me highly unlikely that she will ever choose to have it.

When, soon after her discharge from hospital, the plaintiff attended for dental treatment to repair the teeth damaged in the accident, her dentist, Dr.
Ng, was concerned about the evident pain and restriction of movement in her tempero mandibular joints bilaterally, and referred her to Dr. Charlesworth who saw her on 25 September 1990 and who referred her on to Professor Norman the same year. Each diagnosed a severe internal derangement of the jaw on each side. The opening was substantially restricted by reason of the disruption of the joint mechanism, and this was both a source of pain and discomfort in itself, and a serious impediment to the carrying out of ordinary dental repair and hygiene work.

The plaintiff has manifested a continuing deterioration of the condition of her jaw, in that the gape has been found on successive examinations by Dr.
Charlesworth, Professor Norman and Dr. Austin to be getting progressively smaller. I reject the suggestion advanced on behalf of the defendant that she exaggerates in this regard, a suggestion which the defendant did not attempt to support by any expert evidence. On the contrary, the evidence, of Professor
Norman particularly, as to the nature of the injury to the jaw, readily explains the progression of her symptoms. I also reject the suggestion that any present problems in the jaw could be attributable to the horse riding accident in March 1992 for which she had medical treatment in Queanbeyan. The evidence of Professor Norman in cross-examination (t.253-255) does not support it. The fact is that the jaw restriction was clearly established much earlier than that.

I accept the evidence of Professor Norman that she requires surgery to the jaw, bilaterally, and, accepting his evidence as to the likely cost of that, and her evidence that she will have that operation, I propose to include in the verdict an amount of $10,000 in respect of the cost of such treatment. I accept also his evidence that she will require a period of convalescence of 14 to 21 days, and I propose to include in the verdict an appropriate allowance for loss of earnings during such a period.

Headaches 
The public hospital notes record complaints of headache within a day or so of the accident and, which may or may not be an associated complaint, pain in the back of the head (which may perhaps have more to do with the neck injury the plaintiff alleges). The plaintiff complains that headaches have continued from that time to this, occurring with considerable frequency, not, as I understand her evidence, disabling but a significant matter nevertheless; especially, they were significant when she was completing her university studies. There is no neurological evidence to explain the persistence of that symptom and the defendant asserts that it is fabrication.

The plaintiff was cross-examined (tt.67-68) in an attempt to cast doubt on her complaint of headache, apparently on the basis of something said to a doctor where she had complained that the wearing of a hat caused pain or discomfort when it placed pressure on the scar on her forehead. It seems to me clear that she was talking about two quite different conditions; one affecting her when she wore a hat that exerted pressure on the scar, and the other a headache as more commonly understood, sometimes associated with blurred vision and coinciding with the onset of pain in her neck.

In the absence of any clear medical diagnosis, the most likely explanation of the complaint of headaches is perhaps that it is related to her emotional state. Her complaint has been consistent over the years and notwithstanding my expressed reservations about her credibility generally, I do not doubt her evidence in this respect. If indeed the headaches are related to her emotional state then the prognosis for them must also be linked to that.

Low back 
For a period after the accident, but not commencing immediately after it, the plaintiff complained of pain in the lower thoracic and upper lumbar spine. That does not appear to have been a complaint that she has made in recent times. The existence of any injury to that area is disputed and there is certainly nothing at an early stage to suggest such an injury occurred. In effect the plaintiff's case is that it is a problem which became apparent to her particularly when she resumed studying, and when she attempted in the following year to ride a horse again, and when she was working in the Department of Finance in Canberra at a desk or keyboard. There is medical support for the possibility of such an injury, but the absence of early complaint obviously raises a real issue as to whether it can reasonably be attributed to the accident as a matter of probability.

When she saw Dr. Pollack on 2 September 1991, she complained of "increased" back pain over the last few weeks (although I have not observed any earlier reference to back pain in Dr. Pollack's reports). She said that the symptoms had apparently been aggravated by her periods of study and writing (this was, of course, the year in which she resumed her university studies) and on examination he found her back to be tender from the mid-thoracic to the lumbo sacral region, more so in the right para-vertebral area. Forward flexion was not reduced but lateral flexion was. He prescribed a contoured back support for improved comfort while sitting but offered no diagnosis of her back trouble.

Exhibit 4 reveals two episodes of back pain prior to the accident. If it be assumed that those might provide evidence of some on-going condition or vulnerability rather than just the fleeting effects of acute injury, it is entirely possible that the accident should have aggravated that condition, creating symptoms once more in an area that had for some months been free of them. But to implicate the accident as a course of later back trouble, whether by way of aggravation or fresh injury, would seem pure speculation in the absence of some continuity of symptoms.

The plaintiff's complaint that she developed back symptoms when she resumed study and other activities during 1991 is entirely believable but given the history of back problems prior to the accident and the delay before any onset of symptoms after it, I am not satisfied that any such symptoms are attributable to the accident.
 . The plaintiff now - the extent of residual disability 
The plaintiff claimed at trial still to have a lot of pain and difficulty with movement in both shoulders; and there is as already indicated a clear medical diagnosis capable of accounting for the symptoms of which she complains. I accept that she does experience frequently discomfort and sometimes pain in the shoulders associated with use of the arm but the video evidence shows that she is capable of much more extensive movements of her arms than she was prepared to concede in her oral evidence. It was in August 1992 that Dr.
Waddell diagnosed an impingement syndrome in the left shoulder and described what I would call "trick movements" overcoming the problem (see t.205). It was not, however, apparent to me when I was watching the video of the plaintiff's activities that she was utilising any such trick movement when she did (as often she did) use one or other arm to adjust her hair or to flip it back from her face. She has failed to persuade me that her shoulders represent a source of present significant disability.

So too her neck. Her complaint of restricted neck movements is not borne out by the video evidence. It well may be the case that she experiences discomfort and sometimes pain on neck movements and that from time to time those movements are thereby restricted. But the neck movements demonstrated on the video appear to be full and free, undertaken without hesitation and without any manifestation of discomfort. It may well be the case that had she been more forthcoming in the course of her evidence, she would have explained that the condition of her neck and of her shoulders varies from time to time. The closest she came to it was at p.45 of the transcript when she said that the condition of her neck was "intermittent - some days quite difficult to move it" and movements limited and "other days it is not bad and it depends on what treatment I have had". Yet she would not in cross-examination about the video concede that her neck movements there displayed were apparently full and free.
A concession that she is on occasions pain free or virtually so would have made more credible a complaint that on other occasions her symptoms were severe and disabling. Her refusal to make any such concession is completely at odds with the video evidence and the consequence, unfortunately for her, of her lack of frankness in this regard is that I am unable to be satisfied that there is any significant problem in her neck or that such problems as she in fact has in her neck and her shoulders, occasioned by the bilateral rotator cuff syndrome, represent substantial disability. However, given the presence of the demonstrated pathology, I am satisfied that the probability is that the neck and shoulders will, from time to time, be the source of more severe symptoms. Particularly they are liable to be exacerbated should she attempt to return to any substantial equestrian activities; and the probability also is that her neck symptoms will be exacerbated from time to time by her work which evidently sometimes requires long periods at a desk or keyboard. For those reasons she is likely to require some treatment from time to time by way of analgesics or physiotherapy and some allowance in a fairly general way needs to be made for that. Otherwise it does not appear to me that her neck and shoulder complaints will significantly impede her physical activity although I am satisfied that it is unlikely that she would ever again achieve the same level of success in equestrian competition. It appears to me on a consideration of the whole of the evidence that the probability is that the condition of her neck and shoulders had stabilised by about the end of 1993 and have been since then in much the condition they are in now and in much the condition they were in at the time the video recordings were made.

The plaintiff's complaints of pain and difficulty in movement by reason of the various injuries to her legs (both knees, right ankle, left great toe) are as noted consistent with the pathology clearly present in each of those parts of her body. It is entirely consistent that she should sometimes limp, or at any rate walk with a modified gait, be unable to run far or at all, be unable to kneel and unable to squat. Yet the video evidence appears to demonstrate an ability to flex each knee rapidly and freely, and an ability to walk with an apparently normal gait; and in those respects it is inconsistent with her complaint. She has failed to persuade me that such symptoms as she may experience are the source of any significant disability at this stage. In reaching that conclusion I take into account cross-examination of her as to her ability to squat and her rather (typical) unforthcoming and unco-operative response to cross-examination on that subject; but I did not find the video demonstration of an ability to squat inconsistent with the evidence which she gave on that topic, having regard to the particular posture which she adopted when seen to squat on the video. On the other hand, as she squatted even in that modified way, she did, as it appeared to me, demonstrate not only an ability but a willingness to move freely and fluidly as though without any anticipation of pain or discomfort, and I am satisfied that her complaints about the symptoms in her lower limbs, as her complaints in respect of other parts of her body, are much exaggerated. I think it appropriate to make provision in a general way in respect of the cost of a future ankle operation but taking into account the relatively low probability that she will need such. It is necessary to provide also some allowance for the cost of future physiotherapy and analgesia; and for the cost of the orthotic devices which she is required to wear. Again the situation is that the undoubted pathology appears to produce at present no more than discomfort and occasional pain and to represent no real diminution of function. I am not satisfied that it has done so since, at latest, mid-1994. It is, however, likely that should she engage in equestrian or other vigorous activity to any large extent her symptoms may be exacerbated and indeed the existence of pathology in her lower limbs forms part of the basis for my general conclusion that she is unlikely to be able to resume equestrian activity at anything like the level which was within her grasp prior to the injury.

The condition of the plaintiff's jaw represents a significant source of disability, pain and discomfort at present but it appears to be surgically treatable and there is a strong probability that such treatment will significantly if not entirely relieve her symptoms. Some allowance needs to be made for the chance that recovery will be less than complete.

I am satisfied that, underlying the obvious and often deliberate exaggeration of her condition, the plaintiff does suffer from a genuine and substantial continuing psychological disability arising from her emotional reaction to her accident and its aftermath. Given that the plaintiff does have specific pathology in various parts of her body which continue to produce some level of symptoms, it must, I think, be accepted as a matter of probability both that because of that psychological or emotional reaction to her injuries, her subjective experience of symptoms will continue to be greater than the pathology present would warrant; and also that the persistence of the physical symptoms will prolong the period of recovery (already very lengthy) from her psychological and emotional state. Indeed, given that some of her symptoms appear likely to be permanent and perhaps from time to time in the future quite severe, there is, as it appears to me, a substantial risk that she will always continue to experience some psychological distress attributable to the accident, particularly if she cannot be induced to undergo appropriate psychotherapy or counselling.
 . The assessment of damages 
Non-economic loss 
The Motor Accidents Act, s.79 requires that I determine the severity of the plaintiff's non-economic loss as a proportion of a most extreme case. In making that assessment I have derived little assistance from the submissions from counsel on either side, counsel for the plaintiff having, in my view, significantly overstated and counsel for the defendant ridiculously understated the seriousness of the plaintiff's plight. The assessment needs to take account of the circumstances of the accident itself and the physical pain and suffering which was obviously considerable in the early stages, which continued with some abatement over two or three years and which is not entirely at an end. Particularly it needs to take account of the distress and frustration experienced by the plaintiff by reason of the loss of the chance to obtain First class honours at graduation and the blow which that represented to her hopes and ambitions. That is reflected in and continues in the form of her gross and very distressing psychological and emotional reaction. She is left with physical pathology, the presence of which is itself a matter attracting compensation even though I am not at this stage persuaded that she has significant ongoing disabilities. It is necessary to allow for the probability that from time to time her symptoms will be more severe. It is particularly necessary to take into account the many years that she has experienced a painful and embarrassing and distressing condition of her jaw, and the probability that she will undergo surgery for that with all its attendant risk and unpleasantness. It is necessary to take account of the scars which, although not hideously disfiguring, represent a significant cosmetic disability to a single woman of the plaintiff's age. They have been a cause of distress to her from the time of her discharge from hospital and they will continue to be a source of embarrassment and discomfort in the future. It is necessary also to allow for the chance that suggested treatment of her jaw injury and ankle injury, laser treatment of her scars and psychological counselling may (one or all of them) be less than completely successful. When all of those things are brought into account it appears to me that it is appropriate to assess the plaintiff's non-economic loss on the basis that her case represents 70% of a most extreme case and that assessment entitles her to damages for non-economic loss in the sum of $164,500.

Economic loss 
Capacity to earn since the accident 
The assessment of economic loss is particularly difficult. I deal first with the question of her capacity to earn following the accident. Clearly, she is to be regarded as having no earning capacity at all from the date of the accident until early 1992 (but of course, would not in any event have been earning during 1990).

Before she resumed her university studies, the plaintiff, no doubt fearful of the ongoing effects of her injuries on her previous ambitions and expectations, negotiated a cadetship with the Federal Department of Finance which, as I understand it, provided her with some sort of stipend or allowance during her final year of university, and the opportunity of working for that department after graduation. In fact she commenced employment with the department on 11 February 1992 at a gross salary of $24,400 per annum, representing about $386 per week net. Her performance was in many respects regarded as satisfactory but she lost some time from work because (as I am satisfied was the case) of the physical and emotional effects of her injury.
On one occasion she lost some time for a reason unassociated with the accident (the facial injury sustained while riding on 1 March 1992). During 1992 she was by no means totally disabled (she was able to drive her car to Canberra to take up her employment, she took her horse with her, soon after her arrival she attempted to resume her equestrian activities) but I am satisfied that during the periods when she was absent from work, she was in fact incapacitated, and I reach that conclusion notwithstanding the evidence (on which the defendant placed, as it seemed to me, undue emphasis) that in June she took a nine day holiday trip to Tonga.

She went off on sick leave on 26 August and on that date Dr. Hogg prescribed physiotherapy for her neck and shoulder. In the course of that treatment she experienced a severe exacerbation of neck and shoulder pain. On 3 September
Dr. Hogg found her to have severe cervical and thoracic muscle spasm. I think she was still off work for that reason when she went into hospital for the operation to remove the hardware from her fractured arm and she was totally unfit for work following that operation until 24 November 1992. She lost time from work for the purpose of attending a rehabilitation programme at Mount
Wilga; and it was during this time that she had a brief episode of counselling in respect of her psychological problems. On 23 December 1992, an Australian
Government medical officer found her unfit for duties. He regarded her disability as having both physical and psychological aspects, and recommended a pain management programme and a rehabilitation programme. Dr. Den also recommended a pain management programme at about the same time. It is unfortunate that neither the plaintiff's treating doctors (who were presumably advised of Dr. Dent's views, by the plaintiff's solicitors) nor the insurer seem to have done anything positive towards implementing that accommodation (vide ss.37-39 of the Motor Accidents Act). Perhaps the defendant was influenced by the apparent failure of the short rehabilitation course at Mount
Wilga, and the obstacle to a successful pain management programme raised by the plaintiff's psychological and emotional reaction (it is to be noted that the defendant made no submission founded on s.39 of the Act).

There is no doubt that, overall, she was not really fit during the year 1992 for the work that she was doing and it is, in my view, to her credit that she stuck it as long as she did. In February 1993, on the anniversary of her employment, she was dismissed from that job.

For the next six or seven months she was unemployed but made many job applications without success. During that time she made two overseas trips to the United States. I am unable to attribute to that the same significance as the defendant's counsel sought to do. It is not the plaintiff's case that she was bed-ridden, wheelchair-ridden or house-bound. It is her case that she was during those months experiencing significant pain and discomfort but she was fit (or as fit as she had been in 1992) for the kind of work that she had been doing and fit for the kind of work which eventually she came to do, but that work was not available to her. I entirely fail to see how her indulging herself with two overseas trips even for a total period of something over three months reflects adversely upon her, at least in the absence of any evidence that there was or even any suggestion that there was particular employment available to her which she avoided or declined. She did in fact eventually find work as from 23 September 1993, employed by McPherson
Consulting who had an agricultural economics consulting contract in Zimbabwe.
That employment, originally understood to be for three months, was in fact terminated after two months because of the completion of the contract. The plaintiff returned to Australia and resumed her search for employment, without any immediate success.

Eventually, in May 1994, she obtained employment with the New South Wales
Farmers Association and she has continued in that work to the date of trial.
The work appears to be appropriate to a person with her qualifications but is far less challenging than the work to which she might have aspired had she attained her First class honours degree. The fact that she is thus engaged somewhat below her real capacity (as I find to be the case) is itself a source of frustration to her and forms part of the ground for an assessment of her non-economic loss at a relatively high level. The plaintiff has generally speaking managed to carry out her employment but I accept her evidence that she has done so only with considerable difficulty. It well may be that that difficulty is more the result of her psychological and emotional reaction to her physical injuries than to the physical injuries directly, but either way it is clearly attributable to the motor vehicle accident. She has taken some holidays and availed herself of the opportunity to travel to Japan and to embark on a cruise to Hawaii but I reject the defendant's submission that those circumstances in any way undermine the credibility of her claim to have difficulty with her employment and to suffer some continuing disability.

Towards the end of 1995 the plaintiff claims to have had increasing trouble with her work. She had until then endeavoured to conceal from her employer the kind of difficulties that she was having but found herself unable to continue to do so. She consulted her local doctor, Dr. Wergerhoff who recorded a complaint of tension headaches and recommended that she reduce her hours of work. From November (see Exhibit 3) she reduced her working week from five days to three. I accept the evidence of Dr. Wergerhoff about the need for that reduction of hours and the need for medication. The suggestion was made (but without any foundation in the evidence so far as I could see) that she negotiated a reduction in her working week for the purpose of bolstering her case. She rejected that suggestion and so do I. She was treated by her doctors by way of anti-depressant medication with good effect, and she in fact resumed full-time work only a week before the trial If her purpose had been to inflate her claim, as counsel for the defendant suggested, she could have elected to remain on part-time work right up to the date of trial. I accept her evidence that at the end of a day's work during that first week she was exhausted, but she gave no indication at the time of trial of any expectation that she would not be able to continue in that job. It is agreed between the parties that in fact between 1 July 1991 and the date of trial, the plaintiff earned a total of $75,523 net in her various employments (figures extracted from Exhibit KK.
I disregard the sum of $5,200 received in the six months to 30 June 1992 when she was at the university and in receipt of a stipend from the Department of
Finance). From the agreed figure of $75,523, I deduct a similar sum ($5,200) in respect of the second half of calendar 1991. I am satisfied that the resulting figure ($70,323) fairly represents her ability to earn during the period 1 January 1992 to the date of trial.

In her present employment her net earnings from 1 July 1995 to the week before the trial averaged about $508 per week (Exhibit KK) and accepting as I do that she was attaining that level of earnings only with some difficulty, I am of the opinion that that is a reasonable representation of her present capacity to earn and of the capacity which she is likely to have in the future to earn, subject however to intermittent interruptions occasioned by proposed treatment to her jaw, possible treatment to her orthopaedic injuries, loss of time due to intermittent temporary exacerbations of her physical condition, and loss of time due to her engagement in psychotherapy and counselling.

Probable earnings if not injured 
I accept the evidence of Professor Hooke that the achievement of First class honours at graduation was a necessary qualification for a person who aspired to the highly lucrative work available to economists employed by such international institutions as the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund and also an essential qualification for engagement as a consultant hiring out his or her services from an Australian base to overseas clients. I am satisfied that by reason of her loss of the chance of obtaining First class honours, the plaintiff also was deprived of such chance as she might otherwise have had of entering that very lucrative field of employment.

The difficulty is to assess the chance that the plaintiff, had she obtained a
First class honours degree, would have been successful in obtaining employment with some such international organisation. I give full weight to the evidence of Professor Hooke as to the plaintiff's potential. The positions to which she aspired, however, would be the subject, as it seems to me, of intense competition from graduates not only from Australian but from overseas universities and it seems to me to be impossible to say with any precision how good were her prospects of obtaining such a position. In the absence of better evidence than is available as to the number of positions of the kind to which she aspired and the number of applicants for each such position, it is impossible to assess her prospect of obtaining such employment as any more than about 10%.

There was a second less exalted area of employment which might reasonably have been thought to be open to the plaintiff had she acquired First class honours, and that is employment with one of the agricultural consultancy firms referred to by Professor Hooke. It seems to me reasonable to assess her prospects of obtaining employment of that kind, had she achieved First class honours, as in the order of 75%.

In employment of the first kind, she may have aspired to employment overseas at least for some years at perhaps $50,000 to $60,000 clear of income tax. I say for some years because there is no indication in the evidence that the plaintiff would have wished to leave Australian permanently; and had she done so, she would no doubt have become liable for income tax elsewhere. Of course, if she returned to Australia after a period of experience of work of that kind, she would have been excellently placed to obtain employment with a consultancy and indeed her prospects of engagement in a position of that kind might then have been thought to have been in the order of 90%.

The evidence is unclear as to what net earnings she might have aspired to in a consultancy position. Dr. Hooke estimated earnings at $500 to $600 a day, for perhaps six days per week during the period of any particular consultancy contract but as the plaintiff's counsel concedes, it would be only realistic to assume that there would then be some substantial periods, in between contracts, without specific earnings.

Notwithstanding his general evidence about the availability of such high earnings in particular fields and particularly in private consultancies,
Professor Hooke's evidence about the salaries in fact paid to persons employed in his own consulting firm showed a much lower salary level and it appears to me that unless the plaintiff had secured employment by some international organisation, the chances are that for quite some years after graduation she would have reasonably aspired to a salary of no more than between $40,000 and $50,000 per annum (about $29,600 - $32,200 net) - at least for some years before she moved up into the private consultant area.

On the hypothesis that the plaintiff had obtained First class honours and as she hoped to do, a scholarship to enable her to undertake some years of overseas study, she would not in fact have commenced to earn at the high salaries available to First class honours graduates until about the beginning of 1994. To the date of trial, she would have had approximately two years earning as a First class honours graduate. In fact, in the time from graduation to the date of trial, she earned net just under $81,000. In those circumstances it appears to me to be a matter of pure speculation to suggest that there was any actual loss of earnings assessable by reference to the difference between earnings as a First class honours graduate and earnings as she is. I therefore make no allowance for past loss of earnings on that basis.
She did, however, lose earnings in the kinds of employment which were within her grasp by reason of her inability to fulfil the demands of the work at the
Department of Finance in which work, but for her injury, she would have continued to the date of trial (unless she had chosen to seek employment elsewhere as ultimately she did). Her only complete year of employment was that ending 30 June 1995 when she earned net about $24,000. In each of the years ended 30 June 1992, 1993 and 1994, her earnings fell far short of that totalling in those three years about $36,000 as against a likely $72,000 had she been able to maintain full-time employment in the Department of Finance or at the National Farmers Federation or in some other work of similar kind. I therefore allow in respect of past loss of earnings $36,000.

I have referred to the uncertainties affecting the assessment of compensation for future loss of earnings. The probability is that the plaintiff will continue to earn at something like her present level and given her innate ability will probably rise above that level as time goes on. She will clearly not, however, ever achieve the level of earnings which might have been open to her but for her injury. The uncertainties I have referred to make it unrealistic, I think, to attempt to approach the assessment of the plaintiff's future loss of earnings in the consultancy area or in employment by some international agency on the basis of some annual or weekly loss which can be reduced to a present value by the application of the conventional tables.
Although that approach can and should be applied in assessing the loss she will sustain by reason of being limited to the kind of work she is no doing and being excluded from more lucrative employment in a consulting firm, the loss over and above that by reason of her exclusion from employment by international agencies and from employment as a contracting private consultant can only be compensated by a lump sum rather arbitrarily assessed.

Assessment 
In assessing damages for future (including from date of trial to date of judgment) loss of earnings in employment, I propose to utilise the figures in
Exhibit CC, in the graph on p.64, which appear to be consistent with the conclusions I have stated earlier. On that basis I assess damages for future loss of earnings as follows:-
From 29 February 1996 (last day of trial) to plaintiff's th birthday (21 August 1996) (say 25 weeks) - - probable net weekly earnings if uninjured $603.00 - actual earnings (as found) $508.00 - weekly loss $95.00 - loss for period $2,375.00
From 21 August 1996 to age 64, 21 August 2032 (a period of 36 years, 5% tables, multiplier 868) - - probable net weekly earnings if uninjured (gross $1,064) $728.70 - likely actual earnings as found $508.00 - weekly loss $220.70 - loss to age 65 $191,568.00 - less vicissitudes 15% $28,735.00 - Future loss $162,833.00
Lump sum compensation for loss of the opportunity to work as a contract private consultant and/or for an international organisation $100,000.00 
The total sum awarded for loss of earnings, past and future, is thus $313,390, made up as follows:- - loss before trial $36,000.00 - interest thereon (11.125% for three years) $12,015.00 - loss from trial to judgment $2,375.00 - interest thereon (12% for seven months) $167.00 - future loss in employment $162,833.00 - loss of chance $100,000.00 $313,390.00 
Past out of pocket expenses 
The total incurred is agreed (despite Exhibit FF) at $61,740. The defendant submits that that figure should be discounted by a substantial amount because:- part appears to relate to treatment for conditions not attributable to the accident; the exaggeration of symptoms has led to excessive treatment.

I find in the evidence no basis for the latter submission. Exaggeration of disability is proved - but that is not the same as exaggeration of symptoms. I am satisfied that the plaintiff's various physical injuries have required treatment although not disallowing to the extent she has asserted. Indeed, it is likely that it is only because of such treatment that her level of disability has been reduced. The former submission can be sustained only in relation to the claimed back injury. There is nothing in the evidence to allow any precise apportionment. No doubt some physiotherapy attendances specifically related to the back; more often, the plaintiff probably received treatment to several parts of her body in the same visit. Analgesics prescribed for one complaint of pain would no doubt relieve pain in other parts of her body also. I allow $60,000 for past out of pocket expenses.

Future out of pocket expenses 
The amounts claimed are set out in Exhibit JJ and Exhibit LL. As to the medication referred to in Exhibit JJ, a broad brush approach is appropriate, for it is by no means clear:- that all the medications referred to are necessary because or only because of the accident; nor that the need for most of the others would continue lifelong.

On the contrary, as treatment and time have their effect, the need for most or all of the medication will probably cease; although the plaintiff will no doubt need some analgesics always. I allow for future medication, $7,000.

I have already identified the following as treatment costs that should be allowed:- - psychological counselling etc. $5,000.00 - scarring (laser treatment) $500.00 - ankle (surgery/wage loss) $3,500.00 - jaw (surgery) $10,000.00 - jaw (wage loss) $1,525.00 
There should also be an allowance for periodic physiotherapy, initially twice a week but with diminishing frequency. The plaintiff claims for two consultations a week for 20 years. I think that considerably overstates the need. I allow $16,500.

I allow nothing for dental work (the claim for a splint) because, as I understand the evidence, the need for such will disappear after jaw surgery.

I allow nothing for hydrotherapy/swimming. These activities in effect provide a sport/exercise alternative to other activities which would, in any event, have been accompanied by some expense.

I allow $3,000 for orthotic devices, discounting the claimed sum of $9,927 because allowance has been made for surgery which, if successfully performed will, as I understand the evidence, obviate that need.
 . Final Assessment 
I have now dealt with all those heads of damage pressed by the plaintiff's counsel in final submissions. The assessment of damages includes the following items only:- - Non-economic loss $164,500.00 - Loss of earnings $313,390.00 - Past out of pocket expenses $60,000.00 - Future out of pocket expenses $47,025.00 
There will be judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $584,915.00. The defendant is to have credit for amounts paid by it in respect of out of pocket expenses. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
