

Environment Protection Authority versus Daracon Engineering Pty Ltd Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 10 (10 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 April 1998 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v DARACON ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED /97 March 1998 
Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Case Stated by Talbot J in the Land and Environment Court 
FILE NO/S: 60211/97 
DELIVERED: Tuesday, 10 March 1998 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday, 3 September 1997 
PARTIES: ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY versus DARACON ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART J, SIMPSON J, SPERLING J 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: S J Rushton * Respondent: T S Hale 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: Stephen Garrett * Respondent: Paul Hines 
CATCHWORDS: 
SEDIMENT FENCE - SEDIMENT POND - TREATMENT - FILTERING - S 19 CLEAN WATER ACT - SECTION 20 [CLEAN WATERS ACT ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Case remitted 
NO. OF PAGES: 23 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v. DARACON ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED 
HEADNOTE 
During the reconstruction of a road, D, without a pollution control approval, installed sediment fences (to reduce the flow velocity of sediment-laden water and filter out coarse sediment from such water) and a sediment pond (to catch, store and remove sediment from sediment-laden water). The trial judge was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that these were for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge into the waters of a nearby creek.

Held - a sediment fence is a work within the meaning of [s 19(1)(a)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) of the [Clean Waters Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) . - a sediment pond is a work within the meaning of [s (1)(a)(ii).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) - sections 19 and 20 of the Act are not mutually exclusive; an apparatus may be both `apparatus, equipment or works' within <case> and `control equipment' within <case>.
 - reduction in the quantity of pollutants to be discharged, or a change in the nature of the pollutants, or a combination of both, amounts to treatment within ss 19 and 20 of the Act where the reason for treatment is the discharge of the pollutants into any waters.
 - filtering is a method of treatment.
 - the judge's view of the effect of ss 19 and 20 was incorrect and resulted in him adopting an incorrect approach at law in making his ultimate findings of fact.
 - the trial judge's ultimate conclusions of fact were adversely affected by his incorrect construction of the Act and could not reasonably be supported on the facts contained in evidence accepted by him.

Observations on the use of the stated case procedure.

ORDER 
Case stated remitted to the Land and Environment Court to be dealt with in accordance with the answers to the reformulated questions raised in that case.

ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v. DARACON 
ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: The Environment Protection Authority (EPA) has appealed by way of case stated under [s 5A(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5a.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against the decision of the Land and Environment Court whereby it dismissed, in the exercise of its summary jurisdiction, a summons alleging that Daracon Engineering Pty Ltd (Daracon) installed works for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge into any waters contrary to [s 19(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) of the [Clean Waters Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) . 
The works were particularised in the Summons as sediment fences and sediment pond, the pollutants as inorganic matter and the waters as Bow Bowing Creek.
The offence was alleged to have occurred between 1 and 10 November 1995.

The stated case raised three questions which were slightly reformulated following argument as follows: (a) whether (b) and (c) below raise any question of law; whether on the facts I have found the sediment fences are works within the meaning of [s (1)(a)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) of the [Clean Waters Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) ; whether on the facts I have found the sediment pond is works within the meaning of [s (1)(a)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) of the [Clean Waters Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) .

The judge annexed to the stated case a copy of his written reasons for judgment. These reasons set out the facts and the judge's findings and provide the background which is necessary to understand the issues which arise and to explain what is contained in the stated case. The stated case deals with these matters very briefly and emphasises the conclusions which the judge reached on the major points.

Daracon relied heavily on its submission that no question of law arose and that the EPA was raising questions of fact. EPA acknowledged that there were very limited circumstances in which findings of fact can be disturbed. It relied upon the classic statement of principle of Jordan CJ in the Australian
Gas Light Co v. Valuer General (1940) 40 SR 126 at 137-138, contending that the judge's findings of fact could be disturbed because to reach them he had misdirected himself in law.

In 1995 the New South Wales Roads and Traffic Authority (RTA) awarded a contract for the reconstruction of Narellan Road, between Blaxland Road and
Appin Road, Campbelltown to Daracon. The works comprised bridge works, re- inforced soil walls and road works. During October 1995 an RTA Officer and
Daracon's Project Manager were advised by Mr M Parmenter, the EPA's regional operations officer, that a formal pollution control approval (PCA) for erosion and sediment control works would be required prior to commencement of works on the site.

An application for a PCA was lodged on Daracon's behalf on 17 October 1995 but the supporting reports were not completed and lodged until 14 November 1995. A
PCA under the Pollution Control Act 1970 covering the installation of works for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge into any water in relation to (presumably near) the bridge over Bow
Bowing Creek and Main Southern Railway Line was not obtained during the period -10 November 1995. On his site inspection on 8 November 1995 Mr Parmenter was told that commencement of the erosion and sediment control works occurred on 2 or 3 November 1995.

There were 3 to 4 sediment fences crossing a drain at several points. They were on either side of a pipe which allowed the creek water to flow through the creek crossing and also next to a pile of soil or dirt. Sediment or silt fences serve to reduce flow velocities of any sediment laden water and to filter out coarse sediment from sediment-laden water. When properly installed these fences reduce the amount of sediment in run-off leaving the site but do not prevent all sediment from leaving a site during rainfall.

One of the sediment fences was not effective to filter out sediments. The position of another fence made it of little value.

There was a sediment pond on the site. Such a pond "is designed to capture and store sediment laden water run-off which contains large amounts of soil, sediment and similar matter in the event of rain" (Parmenter). Once rain had finished any suspended material gradually sinks to the bottom of the pond.
Ponds are not designed to remove all suspended matter.

As at 8 November 1995 the sediment pond at the site had a break in one of its walls which substantially reduced its storage capacity and, thereby, its effectiveness. Outside the sediment pond, near the break in the bank of the pond, there was a green sediment fence. Mr Parmenter thought that the fence would have served little purpose as the sediment- laden water from the sediment pond could have passed around it in the event of rain.

The long title of the [Clean Waters Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) is "An Act to make provisions with respect to the prevention or the reduction of pollution of certain waters; and for purposes connected therewith." 
Section 16(1) provides that a person shall not pollute any waters. This is re- inforced by <case> which provides, amongst other things, that a person shall be deemed to pollute waters if the person places any matter in a position where it is likely to fall, descend, be washed, be blown or percolate, into any waters and in other places such as the dry bed of any waters, any drain, channel or gutter and the matter would, had it been placed in any waters, have been likely to pollute those waters.

Section 16(3) prohibits a person causing any waters to be polluted, whether intentionally or not and <case> prohibits a person permitting any waters to be polluted.

Section 16 is the leading provision of the Act and in subs (1)-(4) inclusive endeavours to prohibit the pollution of waters as a result of the activities or lack of activity of any person. The prohibitions are far-reaching.

Section 19 is an important ancillary provision and the one under which the
Summons is laid. Section 19(1) and (2) provide: "(1) A person shall not: install, construct or modify any apparatus, equipment or works for: the discharge of pollutants into any waters, the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge into any waters, or the storage, treatment or disposal, in a prescribed manner or in prescribed circumstances, of matter of a prescribed class or description, or carry out any work that constitutes the beginning of, or any subsequent step in, the installation, construction or modification of any apparatus, equipment or works of the nature referred to in paragraph (a), except in accordance with a pollution control approval or in accordance with a requirement under the regulations made pursuant to section 36 (1) (f1).

A reference in subsection (1) to the discharge of pollutants into any waters includes a reference to the discharge or other disposal of pollutants so that they fall, descend, are washed, are blown or percolate, or are likely to fall, descend, be washed, be blown or percolate, into any waters or onto the bed of any waters, when dry." 
The judge was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Daracon had installed or constructed works. Thus this element of the offence charged had been proved.

The EPA next sought to prove that the works were for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge into any waters (Bow Bowing Creek). Under <case>, "pollutant" has a corresponding interpretation to "pollute". Under para (c) of the definition, "pollute", in relation to any waters, means: "to place in or on, or otherwise introduce into or on to, the waters (whether through an act or omission) any matter, whether solid, liquid or gaseous, that is of a prescribed nature, description or class or that does not comply with any standard prescribed in respect of that matter." 
Regulation 2(2)(b) provides that, for the purposes of para (c) of the definition of "pollute" in <case> of the Act, the following matter is prescribed as matter: "(iii) inorganic matter of any description including ashes, ballast, soil, earth, mud, stones, sand, clay residue or washings from any mineral processing or extractive operation or soil, spoil or washings from any dredging operations;" 
It is apparent that introducing any soil or earth into the waters of Bow
Bowing Creek is to pollute those waters. It does not matter that the soil or earth is being carried in or by water. It was the proof of this element which was much in contest. The judge, who dealt with this element at some length, was not satisfied that it had been proved beyond reasonable doubt that the works (the sediment fences and the sediment pond) were for the treatment of pollution. Much turned on what "treatment" meant in the context.

The judge noted the third element which the Crown had to prove was that the construction took place prior to the issue of a PCA on 27 November 1995. That had been proved having regard to the evidence which the judge accepted and which was uncontested. It was unnecessary for the judge to make a formal finding on this third element having regard to the views which he formed on the second element.

The judge in the stated case, has recorded these findings: "(c) ... any soil which escapes through the filter fabric of the sediment fence does not do so after treatment.
 ... neither the sediment fences nor the sediment pond can be regarded as works which are constructed for the specific purpose of facilitating a discharge.
 ... the sediment fences and the sediment pond both represent an intervention in or interruption in the natural flow of water to retard or inhibit discharge of the pollutants and in that sense they are to be properly regarded as a device used or designed to prevent the pollution of waters more in the nature of control equipment defined in section 20 of the Act rather than works of the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge within the meaning of <case>.
 ... I was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the sediment fences or the sediment pond were works which were constructed for the purpose of discharging pollutants into Bow Bowing Creek.
 ... I was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the purpose of the sediment fences or the sediment pond was to treat pollutants prior to and for the purposes of discharge into any waters." 
In his reasons the judge emphasised a distinction between [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) and [20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s20.html) of the [Clean Waters Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) .
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s20.html) provides that the occupier of any premises in or on which any control equipment, being any apparatus or device used or designed to prevent the pollution of waters or to regulate or monitor the pollution of waters, is installed must maintain equipment in an efficient condition and operate it in a proper and efficient manner. The use of the word "regulate" is important.

The judge held that the distinction to be drawn was between works for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of discharge and a device used or designed to prevent the pollution of waters. The judge further said: "Mr Parmenter's references to the purpose of the fences as being to filter out coarse sediment and to the design of the ponds as being to capture and store sediment laden water point strongly to measures intended to prevent the pollution of waters rather than the treatment of pollutants prior to their discharge. The prosecutor offers no explanation of any process by which pollutants are treated prior to their discharge. The inference to be drawn from the evidence, such as it is, is that the captured soil will be collected and transported off the site. Any soil which escapes through the filter fabric does not do so after treatment. If that is the case, then the works cannot be regarded as being for the discharge of the pollutants after treatment.

Neither the fences nor the pond can be regarded as works which are constructed for the specific purpose of facilitating a discharge. Rather, they both represent an intervention in or interruption of the natural flow of water to retard or inhibit discharge of the pollutants. In that sense they are properly to be regarded as a device used or designed to prevent the pollution of waters more in the nature of control equipment as defined in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s20.html) rather than works for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge within the meaning of [s (1)."](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) 
Both the coarse sediment and the finer sediment are soil and both are therefore pollutants. On the judge's findings the purpose of the filters and the pond is to collect and retain some if not most of the coarser sediments.
The finer sediments, and probably some of the coarser sediments, would be discharged into the waters of Bow Bowing Creek. Neither the filters nor ponding are fool-proof. The ponding method would be limited in its effectiveness.

Both the sediment-laden water and the sediment in the water could be classed as the pollutant. For present purposes, it is not necessary to take this matter further.

Daracon's Submissions
The case stated does not raise any question of law within <case>(1A) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1970 . The EPA is appealing against the judge's findings of fact that he was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the sediment fences or sediment ponds were works constructed for the purpose of discharging pollutants into Bow Bowing Creek. No error of law arises from these findings.

It cannot be said that there is no evidence to support the finding (Azzopardi v. Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] per Glass
JA at 156-157.

Nor can it be said that the primary facts are necessarily within the statutory description of <case>(a)(i), (ii), Azzopardi at 156C-D; Hope v.
Bathurst City Council <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 1] at 10.

Question 4(a) should be answered "no".
Even if a question of law were disclosed, questions 4(b) and (c) of the stated case should be answered "no". On the facts the judge was correct in finding that the sediment fence and sediment pond were each constructed for the purpose of retarding or inhibiting the discharge of sediment which might otherwise be discharged off the site and into the creek through the natural flow of water, essentially rain water. Thus the works were not constructed for the purpose of discharging pollutants within <case>.

Counsel for Daracon drew attention to the key role which <case> plays in the Act and the supportive role played by <case>. We were reminded that the [Clean
Waters Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) works in conjunction with the Pollution Control Act. Counsel for Daracon relied on the legislative history of the [Clean Waters
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) and the amendments to it. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) in its original form provided that a person shall not install, construct or modify any apparatus, equipment or works for the discharge of pollutants into any waters except with approval. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) in its present form has been widened by the addition of [s (1)(a)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html) and (iii) and [s (1)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s19.html)
Thus, there is now a prohibition on installing etc works for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge into any waters except in accordance with a pollution control approval. It is not necessary to discuss the other enlarging provisions. In the present case the effect of the filter fences is to reduce the sediment in the waters being discharged. The ponds have a similar effect by encouraging some sediment to settle.

The legislative history reveals an understandable desire to prohibit the installation, construction or modification of not only any unapproved apparatus, equipment or works for the discharge of pollutants into any waters but also those for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge. The legislative history does not assist Daracon.

The EPA contended that the judge's conclusions emanated from an incorrect approach based on an incorrect interpretation of the Act. I accept the EPA's submission that the words "for the purpose of their discharge into any waters" in 19(1)(a)(ii) refer to the reason for "treatment" and do not prescribe the nature or purpose of the relevant works. A person who installs works for the treatment of pollutants for the purpose of the discharge of those pollutants into any waters by any means following their treatment commits an offence if the installation of such works is carried out otherwise than in accordance with a pollution control approval. Section 19(1)(a)(i) catches the installation of works for the discharge of pollutants into any waters. Section (1)(a)(ii) deals with installation of works for the treatment of pollutants prior to, and for the purpose of, their discharge into any waters.

The judge approached the consideration of <case> upon the basis that the provisions of <case> assisted in understanding what is intended by <case>. The judge had regard to the definition of control equipment in <case>, namely, that it "means any apparatus or device used or designed to prevent the pollution of waters or to regulate or monitor the pollution of waters." The judge thought that the definition of control equipment in <case> made it plain that any apparatus or device used or designed to prevent the pollution of waters was to be distinguished from the apparatus, equipment or works regulated by <case>. The judge added: "It can be readily appreciated that where an actual discharge of pollutants is fore-shadowed, parliament intended that the works should be the subject of an approval. However, where the prospect is that the equipment is intended to prevent pollution, then no approval is required but nevertheless the Act imposes a sanction for failing to maintain or operate the equipment properly and efficiently. The policy behind the distinction presumably can be found in a desire for the approval authority to be involved in the approval of any activity that has, as a part of its function, the discharge of pollutants into water. On the other hand, where the purpose is to prevent pollution absolutely, the onus rests with the occupier to ensure the efficient function of the equipment or risk the prospect of prosecution." 
The definition of control equipment in <case> includes not only any apparatus or device used or designed to "prevent" the pollution of waters but also any apparatus or device used or designed to "regulate" or "monitor" the pollution of waters. Thus an apparatus which is used to treat a pollutant and thereby regulate the pollution of waters will be governed by both <case> and s (1)(a)(ii).

I am unable to share the approach of the judge to ss 19 and 20. The apparatus must not be installed without approval and, when installed, it must be maintained and operated in an efficient condition and manner. Section 19 is prohibitory in form and specifies that a person must not take the action without approval. Section 20 imposes a duty of efficient maintenance and operation of control equipment.

Under <case> regulations may be made: "(d) requiring, or empowering the Authority to require, the installation, maintenance and operation of apparatus or equipment for the measuring, sampling or analysing of pollutants ...
 ...
 requiring, or empowering the Authority to require, that measures be undertaken (including, but without affecting the generality of the provisions of this paragraph, the provision, installation, maintenance or operation of traps, arrestors, separators, screens, filters, walls, dams, embankments, trenches, and areas for the treatment, dispersal or disposal of any matter) so as to prevent or reduce, or be likely to prevent or reduce, the discharge or likely discharge of pollutants into waters from any premises." 
What emerges from the Act is a duty placed on all persons not to pollute any waters, prohibitions on people taking the anti-pollution measures of installing etc works described in <case> without approval, the occupier's duty of efficient operation and maintenance under s 20 and a power in <case> to require by regulation persons to take the anti- pollution measures there mentioned. Such regulations have been made.

The EPA contended that the judge erred in holding that because the fences and ponds retarded or inhibited discharge of pollutants they were properly to be regarded as devices used or designed to prevent the pollution of waters more in the nature of control equipment as defined in <case> rather than works for the treatment of pollutants prior to and for the purpose of their discharge within <case>.

By "inhibited" I take the judge to be referring to the sediment collected behind the filter fences and which did not find its way into the waters of Bow
Bowing Creek. The stated case and the judgment (and possibly the evidence) do not disclose what happened to the filtered sediment. The pond tends to have a retarding effect.

I do not regard ss 19 and 20 as mutually exclusive or antithetical. Section 20 is a natural progression once apparatus is installed with approval under <case> in that it has to be efficiently maintained and operated. In the light of the views expressed, the approach of the judge, that the sediment fences and sediment ponds are to be regarded as a device used or designed to prevent the pollution of waters more in the nature of control equipment defined in <case> rather than works for the treatment of pollutants within <case>, is incorrect. That is not the distinction on which the prosecution should have been decided.

The critical question is what does "treatment" in <case>(a)(ii) mean. Because of the distinction which the judge drew and his mistaken view of the help which <case> provided the judge did not deal with this question.

A helpful general discussion of the meaning of the word "treatment" is to be found in Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Hamersley Iron Pty Ltd [(1981) ALR 595.] That case considered the First Schedule to the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935 (Cth) which exempts from sales tax: "Item 14. Machinery, implements and apparatus (and parts therefor) for use in the mining industry in carrying out mining operations and in the treatment of the products of those operations." 
The company purchased parts for stacking equipment used at its mines and shipping installations. The equipment was used in stockpiling and loading ore in such a way as to mix different types of ore to produce ore of a more uniform type which then met the specifications agreed by the company and its customers. It was held that the function of the equipment was the treatment of the products of mining operations.

At 605-607 Lush J discussed the meaning of "treatment" with useful illustrations from the cases. One example was Hines v. Eastern Counties
Farmers Co-operative Association Ltd [[1931] AC 477] at 481 in which there was treatment of seed by separating good seeds from weed seeds and dirt.
Lush J held that to determine the meaning of treatment it was necessary to decide what were the products of mining. It was held that the product was bulk iron ore and not the individual pieces of ore emerging from the tertiary crusher. The goods so identified were shown to have been subjected to a desired change. Lush J said: " ... the change in the goods justifies the application of the word treatment to the mode of producing the change. If it be necessary, it should be held that in the context of item 14 chemical change is not of the essence of treatment." (at 607) 
Thus the operation of blending was held to be treatment. The word "treatment" included not only some chemical change but also a physical change of the product designed to make it more marketable. Brooking J made additional observations as to the identification of the product the subject of the mining operations. He too held that it was not the individual pieces of iron ore of manageable size but that the product was iron ore viewed as a commodity or bulk iron ore. He had regard to an appreciable number of rating cases. Many of these dealt with the issue of what was an "adapting for sale". He relied (at ) on these remarks of Lord MacDermott LCJ in Commissioner of Valuation v.
McAllister [(1954) NI 54] at 63: "Has there been an `adapting for sale' of the eggs in bulk? I must confess that I can see no reason why, speaking generally, the process of sorting and segregating a mass of items that together constitute an `article' should not be capable of being an `adapting for sale' even though the items all remain physically unaltered when the process is completed." 
Counsel for the EPA drew attention to how diverse the treatment could be by reference to the cases cited by Lush J and Brooking J and their analysis of those cases. Counsel invited us to recall that this was a case of a considerable quantity of sediment in the water, the separation generally of the coarser and finer sediment and the retention of the coarser particles or, at the very least, of some of the sediment and the discharge of a lesser quantity of sediment or, if the pollutants be regarded as the sediment-laden waters, then the discharge of waters with a lesser quantity of sediment. There had been a change in the quality of the water discharged as a result of some of the sediment being removed.

In the present case it must be kept in mind that the reason for installing any works is for the treatment of pollutants prior to, and for the purpose of, their discharge. Reduction in the quantity to be discharged, or a change in the nature of the pollutants, or a combination of both, amounts to treatment where the reason for treatment is the discharge of the pollutants into any waters. This is the correct construction of "treatment" in the context in which the word is used. It is envisaged that the treatment will reduce either the quantity of the pollutants or render them less harmful or both. Filtering is a method of treatment.

I have not overlooked that the meaning of an ordinary English word is a question of fact. Treatment is a word capable of many meanings. Frequently, and in the present case, the context helps to determine the true meaning of the word. The decision of the High Court in Collector of Customs v. Agfa-
Gevaert Ltd <case>; [(1996) 71 ALJR 123] is a reminder of the need not to take a rigid approach. After an informative discussion the Court observed: "The meaning attributed to individual words in a phrase ultimately dictates the effect or construction that one gives to the phrase when taken as a whole and the approach that one adopts in determining the meaning of the individual words of that phrase is bound up in the syntactical construction of the phrase in question.

In R v. Brown [[1996] 2 WLR 203] at 218, ...
Lord Hoffman said: `The fallacy in the Crown's argument is ... to treat the words of an English sentence as building blocks whose meaning cannot be affected by the rest of the sentence ... This is not the way language works. The unit of communication by means of language is the sentence and not the parts of which it is composed. The significance of individual words is affected by other words and the syntax of the whole.' " 
In the rating case of Hope v. Bathurst City Council <case>; [144 CLR 1] the issue was whether certain land was used for carrying on the business of grazing. It was held that the question whether certain activities were a "business" within the meaning of <case> of the Local Government Act 1919 was a mixed question of law and fact. On the facts found, the occupier's activities were a business but it could not be determined on the findings made whether it was a grazing business.

At 7, Mason J, with whom the other justices agreed, said: "Many authorities can be found to sustain the proposition that the question whether facts fully found fall within the provisions of a statutory enactment properly construed is a question of law." 
Mason J referred to the remarks of Fullagar J in Hayes v. Federal
Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1956) 96 CLR 47] at 51 in which he reiterated the distinction between the ultimate fact in issue and the facts adduced to prove or disprove the ultimate fact in issue and explained that where the ultimate fact in issue involves a term used in a statute, the question whether the accepted facts establish the ultimate fact in issue will generally - so far as he could see, always - be a question of law.

Mason J continued: "However, special considerations apply when we are confronted with a statute which on examination is found to use words according to their common understanding and the question is whether the facts as found fall within these words." 
Mason J described the judgment of Kitto J in NSW Associated Blue-Metal
Quarries Ltd v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1956) 94 CLR 309 as illuminating. Kitto J said that the question whether certain operations answered the description "mining operations upon a mining property" within s of the [Income Tax Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) was a mixed question of law and fact. First, it was necessary to decide as a matter of law whether the Act uses the expressions "mining operations" and "mining property" in any other sense than that which they have in ordinary speech.
Answering that question "no" the common understanding of the word had to be determined as a question of fact. The next question was whether the material before the court reasonably admits of different conclusions as to whether the taxpayer's operations fell within the ordinary meaning of the words as so determined; and that was a question of law. If different conclusions were reasonably possible, it would be necessary to describe which was the correct conclusion; and that would be a question of fact.

Mason J at 8 proceeded to apply the reasoning of Kitto J. Mason J pointed out that it was common ground that "business" was used in its ordinary meaning in s 118(1) of the Local Government Act but that in truth it was the popular meaning of the word as used in the expression "carrying on business" rather than the popular meaning of the word itself which is enshrined in the statutory definition. He continued "It is the words `carrying on' which imply the repetition of acts ... and activities which possess something of a permanent character. This conclusion serves to emphasize that it is necessary to engage in a process of construction in order to arrive at the meaning of the word in s 118 (1)". He proceeded to engage in such a process. The observations of
Mason J are a precursor to the approach taken by the High Court in Collector of Customs v. Agfa in the passages earlier quoted. That case represents a development of the ideas of Mason J and an express statement of the relationship between the meaning of ordinary words and the context in which they are used and the interaction which occurs.

Mason J concluded that, on the facts as found, Mr Hope's activities "amounted to a business and that no other conclusion was reasonably open" (at 9). Hope's case was an appeal by case stated from the Land and Valuation court. Mason J said "the primary judge arrived at a conclusion which cannot reasonably be supported, having regard to the meaning which I ascribe to "business" in the statutory definition, for on the facts as found the appellant's activities manifested the essential characteristics required of a business" (at 10).

To exclude filtering by sediment fences as a method of treatment within s (1)(a)(ii) is incorrect as a matter of law and gives <case>(a)(ii) a construction which is far too restricted. The judge has arrived at a conclusion which cannot reasonably be supported on the facts contained in the evidence of Mr Parmenter accepted by the judge as to the purposes of sediment fences, namely, reducing the flow velocities of any sediment-laden water and filtering out coarse sediment from sediment-laden water. The fact that the sediment fences installed were of little or no use demonstrates why it is important that those installed should be approved.

The EPA's case as to the sediment pond is not so strong. The accepted evidence of Mr Parmenter was that a sediment pond is designed to capture and store sediment laden water run off which contains large amounts of soil, sediment and similar matter in the event of rain, that once the rain had finished, any suspended material gradually settles to the bottom of the pond and that ponds are not designed to remove all suspended matter as this would be impracticable. The sediment pond reduces the amount of sediment in the sediment laden water which is discharged and accordingly the amount of the pollutant. It does not matter that the sediment pond is primarily designed to be of assistance in respect of rain water. What is important is that the sediment in the sediment laden run off water is reduced. Given the facts accepted by the judge, a conclusion that this does not amount to treatment cannot be reasonably supported.

In reaching these conclusions I have followed the reasoning of Mason J in
Hope and Kitto J in Associated Blue-Metal.

The matter does not stop here. The judge's findings in the stated case are findings of ultimate fact and not findings of primary fact. The judge intended that this Court should go to his judgment for any primary facts. One problem is that his finding of ultimate fact as to treatment involves a term used in a
Statute.

Questions of law do arise where a judge in making his ultimate findings adopts an incorrect approach at law. That occurred in the present case because of the judge's view of the effect of ss 19 and 20. As a result he did not correctly explore and rule upon the meaning of "treatment" in the light of its context.

The judge did not have the benefit of Mr Rushton's submissions and his exposition of them.

I would answer the reformulated questions thus: 
Yes.

Yes. This follows from the true construction of the sub-clause.

Yes. This follows from the true construction of the sub-clause.

In Hope Murphy J deplored the use of the stated case procedure and the time, expense and difficulty which that procedure occasions. Stated cases are rarely drafted correctly. It is not until the hearing is reached that the issues are refined and settled. Murphy J and many other judges regard that procedure as moribund. It is an unnecessary and inappropriate vehicle for appeals from the
Land and Environment Court where the judges give detailed reasoned judgments.

The stated case should be remitted to the judge with the answers proposed to be dealt with according to law.

ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v.

DARACON ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
SIMPSON J: I agree with the judgment of Justice Smart and with his reasons therefor. 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v

DARACON ENGINEERING PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: I also agree. * * * 
