

Acerose Pty Limited versus Workcover Authority of New South Wales and Anor
Matter No 30072/97 [1998] NSWSC 707 (30 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 `ACEROSE PTY LIMITED versus WORKCOVER AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ANOR` `30072/97` `30 July 1998` `Carruthers AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: When I gave judgment in this matter on 22 June 1998 I said this: "In so far as the question of costs is concerned, I think that I should take into consideration the omission by the Authority to deal with the matter raised by the plaintiff under the first limb of its case before this Court.
Accordingly, I propose to dismiss the summons and order that each party pay its own costs." 
At the time of delivering judgment, I informed the parties that as the question of costs had not been debated before me, if the Authority wished to submit that an order that each party pay its own costs was not just, the solicitor for the Authority should inform my associate accordingly within 48 hours. The Authority took the benefit of this invitation and gave my associate the appropriate notice. Accordingly, the matter was listed before me this morning to hear a submission by the Authority that the Authority was entitled to and should be granted an order that Acerose pay its costs; alternatively, it is entitled to an order that Acerose pay at least a proportion of its costs.

The Authority was wholly successful in the proceedings before me. However, it is well established that in an appropriate case it is proper for the Court to make an order other than that costs follow the event. (See Morosi versus Mirror
Newspapers Ltd [[1977], 2 NSWLR 749] at 809)
Thus it is well established that although a party may be entirely successful it may be required to pay its own costs, or, that only the costs of certain issues be paid.

The relevant facts, are set out in my judgment of June, however, I will record, for the sake of good order, that there were effectively two limbs to the substantive argument by Acerose before me.

The first limb was that the Authority should have determined that there was, at the time of the Acerose application to it, an insurance policy on foot under which the premium was fixed by reference to classification 666 in the
Insurance Premiums Order. Thus it was not open to the insurer to claim a higher premium, namely that based on classification 568, whilst a policy was on foot.

The second limb of Acerose's argument was that there had been a denial of natural justice by the Authority in that it did not give Acerose an adequate opportunity to be heard on particular matters central to the decision which the Authority made; namely whether the tradepersons with whom the plaintiff,
Acerose, dealt with in the course of its business were themselves insured for workers compensation liabilities.

Now, it is true that the Authority did not decide, as a critical preliminary question, whether as a matter of contract between the plaintiff and its insurer, Mercantile there was a binding agreement between them as to the amount of the premium payable for the year in question, which it was not open to Mercantile to disturb.

This aspect of the Acerose case had been raised right at the outset. In its original application to the Authority, it had stated: "We object strongly to this increase after the inception/renewal date (sic) our subsequent payments to Mercantile Mutual." 
That letter, interestingly, was addressed to Mr Robert Heal, Manager, Premium
Services Unit of the Authority. A complaint of the same nature was reiterated on 7 March 1997 when Acerose asserted: "In addition to the above reply we also request the matter of a reassessment of Premium after the issuing of Notices still to be addressed." 
It is relevant to note that effectively the present case before me was a test case involving the insurer and various other franchisees of Spinners, who were taking the same point before the Authority, in relation to an asserted right on the part of the insurer to increase a premium whilst a policy was on foot.

As I indicated in my judgment, the Authority, understandably, does not follow the curial process in resolving disputes between insurers and insured employers when it exercises its jurisdiction under <case> of the [Worker's
Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) . In the instant case the Authority held that the appropriate classification in accordance with the Insurance Premiums Order for the relevant policy was 568.
Thus, objectively, the insurer was entitled to charge the higher premium which it claimed. However, the Authority did not address at all in its
Determination, the submission made to it on more than one occasion by Acerose in which it objected to an increase in the premium, by reference to a different classification under the Insurance Premiums Order, whilst a policy was on foot.

Although certain documents were discovered by the Authority in these proceedings it is not clear at all whether the above submission received any consideration at all during the course of the decision making process by the
Authority up to the issue of the Determination. We do know, however, that after the Determination was handed down Mr Knight, on behalf of Acerose, on 9
April 1987 (which was a couple of week after the Determination was handed down) rang Ms Benton, who was effectively handling the matter within the
Authority, leaving a message on her voice mail, the contents of which we are not aware.

In any event, she sent a memorandum to Mr Heal who, as I have already indicated, was the Manager, Premium Services Unit of the Authority and the recipient of the original letter from Acerose, informing him of Mr Knight's call.

On 21 April Mr Heal sent a memorandum to Ms Benton, the contents of which are set out on pages 15 and 16 of my judgment. Para 2 of that memorandum I will repeat: "The employer has raised issues about the timing of the change from 666 to
He says that this has occurred after the assessment which may not be allowed (although can be allowed under some circumstances). This issue needs to be addressed in the considerations of the appeal. It is my understanding that the insurer can change their rating after the renewal date provided that the employer has not already accepted the insurers previous offer of a lower rate (confirm this with 
Craig)." 
This is very interesting because although Mr Heal did not seem to have been involved in the actual decision making process, he was an extremely senior officer within the Authority, and he seems to have been of the understanding that an insurer can only claim a different rate after the renewal date, provided the employer has not already accepted the previous offer of a lower rate.

That view is inconsistent with the view which I have expressed in my judgment of 22 June. However, it is of significance because it demonstrates that an officer, obviously with much experience and responsibility in so far as the administration of the Authority is concerned, had a view which was consistent with the submission that Acerose had made to the Authority. It supports the view that Acerose's contention was at least arguable.

In my view the Authority was required in the proper exercise of its statutory function to deal with the submission that Acerose had made to it, that it was not open to Mercantile to claim the higher classification while the policy was on foot.

I think it was a submission which went to the heart of its jurisdiction under s 170, which, I might add, is a section that is not free of construction difficulties.

Ms Henderson has put to me that the Authority was perfectly entitled not to deal in its Determination with Acerose's submission because, in her submission, it was a purely irrelevant matter. She contended that the only issue for the Authority was, objectively speaking, the correct classification and the fact that the policy contained a lower classification was irrelevant.
However, I am strongly of the view that Acerose had an arguable point, in the light of the existing law, and they were entitled to a ruling from the
Authority on it.

Ms Henderson referred me, in support of her argument, to the judgment of Deane
J in Sean Investments Pty Limited versus MacKellar <case>; [(1981) 38 ALR, 363] at 374-375. In that decision Deane J stated, when dealing with the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act, that: "A failure to take a relevant consideration into account in the exercise of a power is, under s 5(1) and (2)(b), a permissible ground for attacking a decision pursuant to s of the Act." 
However, his Honour stated that: "This does not, however, mean that a party affected by a decision is entitled to make an exhaustive list of all the matters which the decision-maker might conceivably regard as relevant and then attack the decision on the ground that a particular one of them was not specifically taken into account." 
That principle was later enshrined in the judgment of Mason J in Minister for Aboriginal Affairs versus Peko Wallsend Limited & Ors [(1985-86) 62 CLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281985%2d86%29%2062%20CLR%2024 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 39.

I am completely unpersuaded, however, that the submission by Acerose in the subject case (made on more than one occasion)falls within that principle.

I do not consider that at the time that this matter was being dealt with by the Authority, the submission by Acerose could be dismissed out of hand as an irrelevant matter. Indeed, it was certainly exercising the mind of Mr Heal, and it was the subject of very considerable debate before me on 15 and 16
April 1998 and required a very carefully considered judgment to resolve the matter.

I do not seek by expressing these views to criticise the Authority which obviously very carefully considered the factual aspects associated with the question of the correct classification. However, it did not address this fundamental threshold question and in my view it should have done so.

During the course of debate my mind has fluctuated as to whether the correct order for costs would be that Acerose pay a proportion of the costs of the
Authority bearing in mind that it also failed on the second limb of its argument. The second limb was an argument which seemed to me to carry lesser emphasis in Acerose's submission to this Court and, of course, one does not know what would have happened if the Authority had dealt with the threshold matter raised by Acerose.

I must also, of course, take into consideration a natural human disinclination to change one's mind. That, of course, is necessarily a troubling aspect of approaching a matter such as this where one has formed a predetermined view about the matter.

There are other aspects of the matter which justify consideration. The
Authority, in the exercise of its difficult administrative and semi-judicial function, now has the benefit of a ruling from this Court which must be viewed as of considerable value. It certainly has resolved the doubts in Mr Heal's mind. Also these proceedings are, as I have already indicated, by their nature a test case as far as other Spinner's franchisees are concerned, and I take into consideration the line of authority applied in decisions such as that of
Cummins J in Lyster versus Camberwell City Council [(1989), 69 LGRA 250], where his
Honour was dealing with the construction of certain Local Government by-laws.
His Honour there deviated from the general rule that costs should follow the event because the matters which were debated before him were matters of much general interest in so far as Local Government administration was concerned.

Thus, for these reasons, I confirm the conditional order which I made in my earlier judgment that each party is to pay its on costs.

I order that each party pay their own costs of the proceedings of today.
 * * * 
