

Kelly versus Narrandera Shire Council and Ors; Gio Workers Compensation 
Ltd versus Mercantile Mutual Insurance (Australia) Ltd Matter Nos R 400081/95; R /97 [1997] NSWSC 307 (14 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Kelly versus Narrandera Shire Council & Ors 
R400081/95 
GIO Workers Compensation Limited versus Mercantile Mutual Insurance (Australia) Limited 
R400020/97 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
R400081/95 - Kelly versus Narrandera Shire Council & Ors 
R400020/97 - GIO Workers Compensation Limited versus Mercantile Mutual Insurance (Australia) Limited 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These two proceedings are being heard together. I have ordered that the questions of liability and quantum be separately determined. I shall now proceed to deal with the questions of liability. 
The plaintiff (in proceedings No. R400081/95) suffered personal injury in an accident which occurred at about 7.15am (Eastern Standard Time) on 25 October
He was employed by the Narrandera Shire Council (the Council) as a general labourer (which included part-time plant operation) at a Depot off
Barellan Road, Narrandera. In the course of his employment, he was driving a front-end loader. The front-end loader collided with a wheat train at the
Whitton Street level crossing in Narrandera. The plaintiff sues the Council, the State Rail Authority of NSW (the SRA) and the driver of the train (Mr
Bamford).

The other proceedings concern a dispute between insurers. The question in issue is a matter of indemnity.

At the commencement of the hearing, the time for the trial of the question of liability was estimated to be in the order of 2-3 days. The trial proceeded slowly and extended over six days.

Many witnesses have been called. Many documents have been tendered. This material includes photographs, statements, plans and reports.

The credibility of various witnesses has been a matter of considerable importance. I have closely observed the witnesses. In assessing credibility, I have taken into account matters of demeanour and evidence.

I shall now refer to certain matters of fact and to certain of the evidence.
This reference is not intended as an exhaustive statement of the relevant matters of fact and evidence.

On the day of the accident, the plaintiff commenced work at the Council Depot.
He was allocated his duties. They involved the use of a front-end loader. It was to be driven to the work site (the aerodrome). He had held a licence to drive such a vehicle for about 20 years. The aerodrome is located about 6 kilometres from the Council Depot.

It was one of the duties of the plaintiff to check the front-end loader to see that it was in working order. He ascertained that it needed to be refuelled.
There were established procedures for refuelling.

In the past, the refuelling had been done from a fuel tank at the Depot. This practice had been discontinued about twelve months prior to the accident because of an underground leak in the fuel tanks. On some occasions, the refuelling was still done from a mobile tank at the Depot. This facility was not available on the day of the accident. For the purposes of refuelling the front-end loader, the plaintiff was proceeding to Mathieson's Shell Depot. It was located about 1.1 kilometres from the Depot. The shortest route to that
Depot involved driving the front-end loader across both the Newell Highway and the level crossing. There was an alternative route which was much longer. The process of driving the front-end loader to the Shell Depot was familiar to the plaintiff (it was generally done about three times a week). Since the accident, there have been changes in the refuelling procedures. However, the
Shell Depot is still used.

The location of the level crossing has been described in the following terms:- "At that location the railway track runs almost due east-west. The uninterrupted passage of trains approaching from the east can be seen from the northern and southern sides of the crossing when at a distance of over 3 km from the crossing. Trains approaching from the west can similarly be seen when at a distance of 600 metres from the crossing.

The crossing is located within the town limits of Narrandera on a local road known as Whitton Street with a posted road speed limit of 60kph. The railway track speed limit is 100kph. The Narrandera grain silos and siding are located just to the east of the crossing on the southern side of the line.

On the northern side, the crossing is approached along a bitumen road which runs at right angles to the crossing from the adjacent Newell Highway, which in turn lies parallel to the railway some 35 metres to the north." (See Exhibit 4A) 
The "signage" at the level crossing has been described in the following terms:- "At the date of the accident, the crossing was fitted with regulatory `STOP' signs in accordance with the ruling Australian Standard AS1742 Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices; Part 2-1978 Application of Traffic Control
Devices to Traffic Situations. In addition, reflective boards had also been attached to the position signs." (See Exhibit 4A) 
In the same Exhibit, the plaintiff's approach to the crossing has been described in the following terms:- "It is understood that the vehicle approached the crossing from a short section of gravel road on the northern side of the Newell Highway, which links
The Barellan Road with the Newell Highway, directly opposite the said crossing.

The approach to the Newell Highway is controlled at this point by a `Give Way' sign. Any vehicle driver would not be expected to observe trains at this location for two principal reasons. Firstly, priority would have to be given to observing road traffic on the Newell highway which had to be crossed by the
Plaintiff. Secondly, there is a continuously planted row of mature trees along the southern side of the Highway, which would have effectively obscured the approach of any train.

However, having crossed the Highway and entered Whitton Street on the northern side of the crossing, a driver is immediately thereafter afforded a clear view of the railway lines in either direction. The crossing itself is controlled by `STOP' position signs on either side of the crossing. Australian Standard
AS1742.7 requires that a `STOP' line shall be marked on the pavement at a minimum distance of 3.5 metres from the nearside rail. At Whitton Street, the line was marked 6.25 metres from the nearside rail, thus providing additional safety clearance for a vehicle such as a front end loader.

It would appear that the Plaintiff should have been fully familiar with the crossing and the position of the sun in relation thereto. The writer notes the
Plaintiff's home address as being 15 May Street, which is only some 400 or 500 metres away on the south western side of the crossing. It would also appear that the Plaintiff regularly used this crossing in connection with his work responsibilities.

At the time of the accident the weather was noted as `fine and dry'. The sun would have been low in the sky behind the train and could have affected the low loader driver's vision." 
It was common ground that the level crossing was governed by Regulation 69A of the Motor [Traffic
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/), 1935 and Regulation 13(6)(aa) of the General [Traffic
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/), 1916.
In substance, after stopping, there is a requirement not to proceed until it is safe to do so.

The level crossing was used by a variety of motor vehicles. The traffic has been described as being fairly busy. The crossing was a distance of about 1 kilometre from Narrandera Station. There was a clear view had from the train (at least as far back as the silos - see Exhibit B). The usage by trains was relatively infrequent. It was not unusual for motor vehicles to disregard the "signage". There had been one previous accident in the early 1980's. The crossing had been in operation for over 30 years.

The train had a weight of about 252 tonnes (it was comprised of two locomotives and 13 bulk wheat carriages). It was large and easily visible (see photographs). The locomotive was red with two headlights which were on at the time. It was difficult to stop. It was travelling about 68kph at impact. It was travelling from Junee to Yanco. It was to stop at Narrandera for the purpose of changing the staff (a metal staff).

The front-end loader had a weight of about 8.5 tonnes (which had a bucket and cabin - see Exhibit C). It was a registered motor vehicle. It has been described as a Caterpillar 920 rubber-tyred front-end loader registered No.
MWU 349. It was manufactured in 1984. It was a "slow moving plant". It had a top speed of about 22-25kph. It had flashing lights. It had a ROPS cabin. It was not fitted with a seat-belt. There was no legal requirement for it to be fitted with a seat-belt. It had anchorage points (a drilling in each side of the base of the seat to accept the mounting bolt) for the fitting of a lap seat-belt. A lap-belt could have readily been fitted. It was a noisy machine.
The cabin is designed to be noise suppressant. It was owned by the first defendant.

The right side front of the train struck the left side of the front-end loader (bucket and front wheel). It has been said that it came to a stop about 100 metres past the level crossing after the brakes had been applied 124 metres before the crossing. The damage to the loader may be seen in photographs (inter alia, Exhibit F). Damage is described in the report of Dr Henderson (Exhibit O).

The impact caused the front-end loader to turn in a clockwise direction in an order somewhat less than 360 degrees. The plaintiff was thrown out of the front-end loader through the rear window. He landed on the ground several metres from the front-end loader. There is evidence that he landed on his side. He suffered various injuries (including injuries to his head, left thigh and fractures of the lumbar vertebrae). The most serious injuries were those to the spine which resulted in paraplegia.

A number of lay witnesses have been called. The plaintiff himself has given oral evidence. He has called Mr Sibraa, Mr Kelly (the plaintiff's brother),
Senior Constable Lapworth and Mr Mathieson (the owner of the Shell Depot). The first defendant has called Mr Metcalf (the overseer of the plaintiff).

On behalf of the second and third defendants, Mr Bright was called. Mr Bamford was not well enough to give evidence. His Statement has been admitted (Exhibit
D).

There have been a number of experts called. The plaintiff has called Mr
Simpson, Dr Yeo, Dr Henderson and Mr Corben. The first defendant has called Mr
Moir. On behalf of the second and third defendants, Mr Cowling has been called.

Neither the GIO Workers Compensation Limited (GIO) nor Mercantile Mutual
Insurance (Australia) Limited (MMI) has called any evidence.

Three witnesses gave evidence of observations made as to the accident. The plaintiff has given a version of the accident (see, inter alia, Transcript pp -10, 14 and 23). He has no recollection of what happened subsequent to impact. Mr Sibraa made certain observations relating to a period shortly before impact. Mr Bright was one of the two employees of the SRA aboard the train.

I shall first refer to the version of the accident given by the plaintiff during his evidence in chief. He said that he approached the level crossing at a speed of about 5-10kph and stopped at the Stop sign. There were cars behind him. He then looked both ways. He saw a vehicle cross over from the other side of the level crossing. He then looked left and right. As he looked left, the sun was shining in his eyes. He couldn't see anything. He "then thought it would be right to go, as the car had just gone across the road". "When I started to move, I collided with the train." He did not hear any noise.

During cross-examination, it became clear that the plaintiff had not seen the train until immediately prior to the impact. He said that, when he looked to the left, he couldn't see anything for the sun. Despite this, he proceeded across the level crossing because he assumed that it was safe to do so. This is because he had seen the vehicle cross from the other side.

He was wearing what he described as a cowboy hat. It provided some shading for his eyes. He does not remember using his hand to provide any shading for his eyes. He saw at least two vehicles stationed behind him prior to his attempt to proceed across the level crossing. He did not hear the train. He did not hear any train horn.

On 30 December 1994, he gave a version of the accident to the police. The
Statement has been tendered as Exhibit 3. In the Statement, he said that he stopped at the Stop sign. The Statement does not contain any reference to looking to the left or the right prior to proceeding across the crossing or to the presence of the car coming from the other side of the crossing. It does refer to an awareness of and a looking around to cars behind him. It does contain a reference to the sun (the sun was rising to his left, the same direction as the train was coming). It does not say that the sun impaired his vision. It contained these words, "I did not see the train or hear it until it was just about to hit me". He reckoned that he would have travelled about 5 feet only when he was hit by the train.

There are aspects of the plaintiff's evidence which are in conflict with other evidence. There are differences between his oral evidence and the version given to the police. There are aspects of his evidence which I do not regard as being reliable. Accordingly, I do not accept some of his evidence.

Mr Sibraa was another Council employee. He saw the collision. He was about 50 metres away. He had driven along the Newell Highway (as it ran parallel to the railway line). He said that the sun was rising over the top of the hill and was in his eyes. In his evidence in chief, he gave a version of what he observed at the time of the accident. He said:- "Q. You tell us then. When you heard the horn, you looked across? 
A. I heard the horn, looked across and the middle part of the loader, which consisted of the cabin, would have been about two metres away from the actual railway line and the bucket, the end of the bucket, would have been nearly on the line.

Q. Whereabouts was the train? 
A. The train was probably about 5 metres away, roughly." 
He said that the front-end loader "was moving at the time but very very slowly". In cross-examination, he said that the sun wasn't a problem when he was driving along Ferrier Street and the Newell Highway (Transcript pp 45-46).
He later said that it was so low that it caused him some difficulty (p 53). It was in his eyes going along the first section of the Highway, but not the second section (p 54). He said that, after hearing the sound of the train horn, he saw the front-end loader still moving out towards the railway tracks.
When he first saw it, it had passed the Stop sign. It was moving and appeared to slow down. The brake lights were on. He had no doubt about that. They were on all along. He was positive about that. He did not see it in a stationary position. He was quite sure about that.

During his cross-examination, it emerged that he had given a version to the police (Exhibit 1). In that version, Mr Sibraa said the following:- "I noticed that the loader had slowed almost to a stop and that the brake lights were on the loader, the train at this stage was only about 5 metres away from the crossing. The loader appeared to come to a stop short of the crossing however it seemed to roll forward with the bucket and the front half of the front left-hand tyre coming into the path of the train." 
This Statement made no reference to the sun. On 1 November 1994, he made another Statement (Exhibit H). It contained these words:- "It was a clear dry day at the time of the accident, but at that time of the day the sun is coming up over the hill and would have been in the loader drivers eye if he had looked in the direction of the train." 
In cross-examination, he agreed that, if you looked up the hill, you would expect to see a train coming at least a kilometre away. On that morning, you could see to just past the silos. He later added that he thought he had said "to the silos". He said that the way the sun reflects off the top of the hill obliterated a lot of the area past the silos. Before the silos you would still be affected by the sun. You wouldn't have a clear view. He said that he knew
Mr Kelly and felt sorry for him. In cross-examination, he agreed that there were no cars crossing the railway line going in the opposite direction (Transcript p 58). In re-examination, he said that he could not assist as to whether any vehicles travelled across the line going north (Transcript p 85).

I formed the view that Mr Sibraa was a witness sympathetic to the plaintiff's case. There was some confusion reflected in his evidence. I felt that certain of his evidence should be viewed with caution.

The plaintiff called Senior Constable Lapworth. He had attended the scene of the accident at about 7.20am. He formed the view that the accident had taken place at about 7.15am. He carried out certain investigations. He ascertained that the front-end loader finished up in a position of about 9 metres from the point of impact. He ascertained that Mr Kelly finished up in a position of about 6 metres from the front-end loader. He took certain statements. Certain entries from his notebook are in evidence (Exhibit 1). He prepared the P4 Form (Exhibit L).

He gave evidence as to observations made by him in relation to the affect of the sun on the visibility had by Mr Kelly of the approaching train. He said, inter alia, that the sun restricted the view.

He was not an impressive witness. There were aspects of his evidence that were unreliable. I shall make specific reference to one area. The evidence given as to the affect of the sun was based on his recollection and not on documentation prepared by him following the accident. This evidence was not consistent with what had been recorded in the P4 Form. His evidence on these matters was not convincing. It lacked plausibility.

Mr Bright was the observer and assistant driver. He was positioned on the right-hand side of the train. The driver is positioned on the left. The level crossing is approached through a cutting in a ridge about 3 kilometres from
Narrandera. There is a gently sloping grade between the cutting and the crossing. On the approach to Narrandera, there are indicators ("a landmark and a homestick").

When the train was about 1000-1500 yards from the level crossing, Mr Bright saw cars going across the crossing. The cars were coming from right to left.
There were at least three cars. It was observed that the crossing was a bit busy that morning. The train whistle was blowing continuously up to the crossing. He saw a front-end loader. It was coming from the right. It came into view as the last car was going across the crossing. It was travelling slowly. It stopped at the crossing. The train was then close to the crossing.
He then noticed that it started coming again. He gave this evidence:- "Q. Then what happened? 
A. I said - just as I told him the loader had stopped, we looked like being all right, I said `Christ sake, hit the brakes, he is coming again'." 
At the time of impact, the train was coming to a stop. The emergency brakes had been applied.

During cross-examination, Mr Bright said that this particular train was required to observe a maximum speed of 65-70kph. This speed was maintained as the train approached the level crossing. The brakes were applied "Off and on" as the train descended down the hill. It did not reduce speed because of the presence of the cars seen at the crossing.

The train is fitted with a Hasler tape. It records various things (including brake application). It seems that the tape is in the possession of the SRA (I should add that it has not been tendered in evidence).

Further, in cross-examination, Mr Bright said that the first of the three cars was seen when the train was about 1 kilometre away from the crossing. There was a gap between the cars (a few seconds apart). Mr Bright gave the following evidence:- "Q. How long between the last of them and the time that the front end loader proceeded onto the line, a few seconds? 
A. As the last car cleared the crossing, I saw the loader approaching. That is when I told the driver we had another car approaching the crossing and to hold onto the whistle." 
It was not unusual for there to be a bit of traffic. It was expected at every crossing. It was normal for cars to disobey the signals. When cars were seen to disobey the signals, it was normal to keep going at the same speed, "You blow the whistle".

Mr Bright did not see any cars crossing from the left-hand side of the train.
He was quite sure of that. He was also sure that there were no vehicles behind the front-end loader. He kept watching the crossing as the train approached it.

By and large, the evidence given by Mr Bright was not the subject of significant challenge during cross-examination. The version of the accident provided in the statement given by Mr Bamford is largely similar. Mr Bright impressed me as an honest and reliable witness. I accept his evidence.

I have not sought to make specific reference to all of the evidence given in respect of the matters agitated by the parties. For example, the question of the effect of the sun on visibility has been raised with various witnesses (including Mr Metcalf).

There has been expert evidence on a variety of matters (including the question of the effect had by the sun in impairing visibility of the approaching train). It included evidence given by Mr Cowling (whose evidence I accept, inter alia, on this matter).

Mr Simpson gave evidence in support of the plaintiff's contention that a seat- belt should have been fitted to the loader. Mr Moir disagreed with his views.
Mr Simpson did labour under a misconception as to legal requirements. However, he expressed a view which he made clear was independent of legal requirements.
He considered that a lap-belt would have restrained the plaintiff to the operator's seat (hence, he would not have been flung around the cabin or out through the rear window of the machine). Dr Henderson was not as certain that the plaintiff would have been prevented from being flung around the cabin.

Dr Henderson has said that a lap-belt would not have prevented the plaintiff suffering his head injury. There is expert evidence from witnesses called by the plaintiff which supports the view that the plaintiff suffered a flexion (forwards bending) injury after he had been ejected from the cabin of the front-end loader. This is the injury which resulted in paraplegia. There is evidence which supports the view that a lap-belt would have prevented the plaintiff's ejection from the vehicle and his suffering of his spinal injuries (see, inter alia, Exhibit O). Mr Moir has presented a contrary view. He has said, inter alia, that a lap-belt would have been powerless to prevent ejection from the cabin of the vehicle. There is a question as to whether or not the spinal fractures took place in the cabin or after the ejection of the plaintiff from the cabin. The views of the experts are expressed in detailed and lengthy reports. The reports have been supplemented by oral evidence and tested by cross-examination. The taking of the expert evidence has occupied some days of hearing time. These issues excited less than full argument. For present purposes, it is not necessary to become embroiled in the detail involved in this evidence.

It seems to me that the liability issues in this case can be determined without resolving these seat-belt issues. However, for the assistance of the parties, I will make certain observations. The use of a fitted lap-belt would not have prevented the plaintiff from suffering injury. The question of whether or not it would have prevented him from sustaining his spinal injuries is a complex one on which I am left in some doubt.

I should add that, during the taking of the evidence, many questions were agitated. The conduct of the trial was made difficult because of problems encountered in ascertaining the real issues. When the stage for the taking of submissions had been reached, a number of the questions agitated during the evidence had ceased to be live issues.

At the commencement of submissions, Counsel for the plaintiff handed up a
Summary of Plaintiff's Allegations. It is in the following terms:- "As between the Plaintiff and the First Defendant.

The Plaintiff alleges the First Defendant failed to take reasonable care for his safety in that:
It failed to provide the Plaintiff with a seat belt and/or
It required the Plaintiff to drive the front end loader on a public road ie. the Whitton St Railway Crossing via an approach on which there was no notice of the crossing - in a ROPS Cabin in which the Plaintiff's ability to hear a train horn was eliminated or reduced; - at a time when the sun was rising in the east and liable to obstruct the
Plaintiff's view to the east at the crossing - with no dogman or guide or assistant to direct him - with no seatbelt - with no train timetable - with no warning of the risk of injury in the circumstances that is to say:- the risk associated with familiarity the risk associated with sound elimination or reduction the risk associated with crossing without a clear view - with no instruction as to what to do in the event of the sun obstructing his view to the east at the crossing and/or
It failed to have repaired the fuel tank located at the Council Depot or direct the Plaintiff to use the railway overpass.
 - thus exposing the Plaintiff to the unnecessary risk of injury 
As between the Plaintiff and the Second and Third Defendants 
The Plaintiff alleges the Second and/or Third Defendants failed to take reasonable care for his safety in that:
The Third Defendant - travelled at a speed that was excessive in the circumstances - failed to respond or respond adequately to the presence of vehicles at or near the crossing by braking
The Second Defendant - allowed trains to travel at a speed that was excessive in the circumstances - failed to provide means of excluding the public from entry onto the railway crossing by erecting boom gates or hinged gates." 
Largely, these were the allegations which the plaintiff pressed against the three defendants.

Apart from the summary, other Counsel have handed up written submissions. Both in oral argument and in the written submissions, reference has been made to a host of decided cases (including The Council of the Shire of Wyong versus Shirt & Ors <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47; March versus E & M H Stramare Pty Limited & Anor <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506] at 515;
Sibley versus Kais <case>; [(1967) 118 CLR 424] and Australian National Railways Commission versus Walker [(1994) 20 MVR 226).] 
I will first turn to the claim made against the first defendant. The allegations are presented in three categories. Generally speaking, all of the categories relate to the question of the risk of injury involved in the use of a registered motor vehicle on a public road.

In substance, it is said that there should have been facilities at the Council
Depot enabling refuelling to be effected at that place. It is then said that the absence of such facilities on the day of the accident saw the plaintiff being required to take the front-end loader onto a public road and to cross the railway level crossing for the purposes of refuelling the vehicle. The vehicle was not fitted with a seat-belt. This was said to expose him to unnecessary risk.

It is common ground, that the front-end loader was, at all relevant times, a duly registered motor vehicle and that, as a matter of law, seat-belts were not required to be fitted to the vehicle. I am informed that, for such a vehicle, this still remains as the legal position. Compliance with a direction to have it refuelled at the Shell Depot merely required the driving of a registered motor vehicle on, inter alia, a public road. The plaintiff had had considerable experience in driving such a machine.

The performance of his duties required the plaintiff to regularly drive registered vehicles along public roads (including the Newell Highway) for many kilometres. Front-end loaders were driven on public roads not only to effect refuelling but also to reach the allocated worksite. Vehicles were driven to various locations in Narrandera so as to enable the carrying out of Council functions. On the day of the accident, the front-end loader was to be driven to the aerodrome after refuelling had taken place (a distance of about 6 kilometres). Drivers were told to stay off the Highway and take another route wherever possible (because it was big machinery). The plaintiff was familiar with the level crossing and its "signage". It was located between his home and the Council Depot. He used it on workdays to get to and from his place of work. The suggested alternative route (via the overhead bridge) was twice as long. It involved the use of public roads and passing through at least three intersections. It is the plaintiff's evidence that, prior to the accident, he stopped at the level crossing because of his awareness of the Stop sign.

It is common ground that railway level crossings are potentially dangerous.
This crossing was fairly busy. Vehicles disobeyed the signs (this was well known). Despite these matters, this particular crossing had been the scene of only one accident in a period of over 30 years.

I should now return to the seat-belt issue. There are other matters relevant to it. These are referred to in the evidence given by the experts. The evidence throws up a variety of considerations. Historically, operators of heavy earthmoving equipment have not generally worn seat-belts. There was a belief that the seat-belt detracted from safety. It has been generally thought that, in the event of an emergency, where there was a danger of the machine being caused to roll over, it was safer for the operator to be able to jump clear. The advent of ROPS cabins saw a change in approach. The case was conducted on the basis that a lap-belt was the seat-belt that should have been fitted to this vehicle. The fitting of seat-belts to such vehicles has been controversial. The main benefit of the lap only seat-belt is in preventing ejection from crashing vehicles. One of the disadvantages of the fitting of a lap-belt, is that the belt itself may cause injury (such as in the case of frontal and near frontal collisions). The injury so caused may be fatal (see, inter alia, the evidence given by Dr Henderson). Lap only belts are less efficient overall because they allow free movement of the upper torso which may then come into contact with the interior of the vehicle. The evidence on various of these matters has been left in a less than satisfactory state.

The duty owed by the first defendant to the plaintiff is that of an employer.
In Mihaljevic versus Longyear (Australia) Pty Ltd [(1985) 3 NSWLR 1] at pp 17-18,
Mahoney JA (as he then was) observed as follows:- "The relevant principles are well settled. They were stated in one of the cases referred to by Slattery J viz, Hamilton versus Nuroof (WA) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1956) 96 CLR 18] at 25; and those principles were applied in the other case to which his Honour referred: viz, Foufoulas versus F G Strang Pty Ltd <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 168] at 173. They have been reaffirmed recently by Gibbs CJ in
Turner versus South Australia [(1982) 56 ALJR 839] The Chief
Justice (at 840; 670-671) said: `... The principles of law to be applied are clear, but their application presents some difficulty, as the conflict of judicial opinion in the Supreme
Court illustrates.

The duty of an employer is to take reasonable care to avoid exposing his employees to unnecessary risk of injury: Hamilton versus Nuroof (WA) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1956) 96 CLR 18] at 25. The employer is not an insurer of his employees against danger. `For a plaintiff to succeed it must appear, by direct evidence or by reasonable inference from the evidence, that the defendant unreasonably failed to take measures or adopt means, reasonably open to him in all the circumstances, which would have protected the plaintiff from the dangers of his task without unduly impending its accomplishment.': Vozza versus Tooth &
Co Ltd <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 316] at 319. When the employer does unreasonably fail to take a precaution against danger, the plaintiff cannot succeed unless he satisfies the court that if that precaution had been taken the injury would probably have been averted, or, in other words, that the safety measures would have been effective and that he would have made use of them if available:
Duyvelshaff versus Cathcart & Ritchie Ltd [(1973) 47 ALJR 410] at -417, 419.
 ... Was it unreasonable to fail to employ such a system? On the one hand, the degree of risk of injury occurring was not shown to be great, and the way of avoiding injury should have been obvious enough to any employee. On the other hand the remedial action suggested involved little or no difficulty or expense. Where it is possible to guard against a foreseeable risk which, although perhaps not great, nevertheless cannot be called remote or fanciful, by adopting a means which involves little difficulty or expense, the failure to adopt such means will in general be negligent.' " 
In Bankstown Foundry Pty Limited versus Braistina <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 301] at 308, the majority (Mason J, Wilson J and Dawson J) digressed to remark upon the formulation preferred by Windeyer J in Vozza v
Tooth & Co Limited <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 316.] The following remarks were made:- "This passage has been repeated more than once in recent decisions of the
Court: Raimondo versus South Australia [(1979) 23 ALR 513], at p 518;
McLean's Roylen Cruises Pty Ltd (1984) 58 ALJR, at p 425. It seems right to us to caution the reader against interpreting the concluding phrase in the citation, that is, `without unduly impeding its accomplishment', as furnishing an additional qualification to an employer's liability independently of the question of what is reasonable in the circumstances. If protective measures are reasonably open to an employer then ordinarily they will not unduly impede the accomplishment of the task. The extent to which the proposed measures would unduly impede that accomplishment will bear directly on the question whether it was reasonable to expect them to be undertaken." 
When the relevant principles are applied to the facts of this case, I am not satisfied that there has been breach of duty on the part of the first defendant. If I had formed a different view on this question, I would not have been satisfied that there was the necessary causal link between the damage claimed by the plaintiff and the alleged breach of duty.

The hearing saw the agitation of certain other questions of fact. These arose out of the evidence given by the plaintiff and were agitated against all defendants. Firstly, there was his evidence relating to the effect had by the sun in preventing him from seeing anything. Secondly, there was his evidence of seeing a vehicle crossing from the other side of the level crossing which formed the basis of his assumption that it was safe for him to cross. Thirdly, there was his evidence that there were cars behind him before he proceeded across the crossing.

It became common ground that the sun may have had some effect on visibility.
The question that remained in dispute was the extent of any such impairment of vision. When regard is had to all of the evidence placed before me, I am not satisfied that the sun would have prevented the plaintiff from seeing the approaching train.

On the other two matters, also, I do not accept the evidence of the plaintiff.
I am not satisfied that there was a car which came from the other side of the crossing. I am not satisfied that there were cars behind the plaintiff at the time he proceeded across the level crossing.

I should also mention one other matter. The plaintiff has said that he did not hear the train. He was aware that the loader was a noisy vehicle. He should have been aware that, whilst within the cabin, his ability to hear external noise was significantly impaired.

All defendants have made allegations of contributory negligence against the plaintiff. The allegations made by each of them are of similar nature. As the claim against the first defendant has failed, contributory negligence remains relevant only to the case advanced against the second and third defendants. I shall return to a consideration of that matter in due course.

The principal allegation made against the second and third defendants is that the train was being driven at a speed that was too fast in the circumstances.

In Sibley, the particular circumstances of the case were different. The
Court was faced with a case involving the collision of two vehicles at the intersection of two public roads governed by a traffic regulation requiring a driver approaching the intersection to give way to a vehicle on his right hand.

Although the circumstances were different, the Judgment of the Court contains observations which are helpful in this case. At p 427, it was said:- "These regulations in nominating the vehicle which has another vehicle on its right as the give way vehicle are undoubtedly salutary and their breach is deservedly marked with criminal penalties. But they are not definitive of the respective duties of the drivers of such vehicles to each other or in respect of themselves: nor is the breach of such regulations conclusive as to the performance of the duty owed to one another or in respect of themselves. The common-law duty to act reasonably in all the circumstances is paramount. The failure to take reasonable care in given circumstances is not necessarily answered by reliance upon the expected performance by the driver of the give way vehicle of his obligations under the regulations; for there is no general rule that in all circumstances a driver can rely upon the performance by others of their duties, whether derived from statutory sources or from the common law. Whether or not in particular circumstances it is reasonable to act upon the assumption that another will act in some particular way, as for example by performing his duty under a regulation, must remain a question of fact to be judged in all the particular circumstances of the case.

Therefore, it is, in our opinion, rightly said that the "`right hand rule' is not the be all and end all in relation to questions of civil responsibility".
The obligation of each driver of two vehicles approaching an intersection is to take reasonable care. What amounts to `reasonable care' is, of course, a question of fact but to our mind, generally speaking, reasonable care requires each driver as he approaches the intersection to have his vehicle so far in hand that he can bring his vehicle to a halt or otherwise avoid an impact, should he find another vehicle approaching from his right or from his left in such a fashion that, if both vehicles continue, a collision may reasonably be expected." 
I shall mention some of the circumstances of this case. The level crossing is located within the town limits of Narrandera. Both Messrs Bamford and Bright had an excellent view of the level crossing as it was approached by the train.
The train was to stop at Narrandera. The maximum speed for this particular train was in the order of 65-70kph. It was a speed that was maintained as the train approached the level crossing. It was the practice to maintain this speed despite the fact that it was regarded as normal for vehicles not to obey "signage" at the crossing. As the train was approaching the crossing, it had been observed to be a bit busy that morning. Three vehicles had been seen to cross the crossing. They had crossed without stopping at the Stop sign. The blowing of the train whistle had not led to obedience to the signs. The train continued in its approach at about its maximum speed. The first car had been seen when the train was about 1 kilometre from the crossing. The gap between the cars involved a few seconds. The front-end loader was seen coming towards the crossing as the last of the three cars was seen going across it.
Conversation had between the driver and his assistant suggests that there was an apprehension of potential danger which looked as though it had passed when the loader was seen to stop. No attempt was made to reduce the maintained speed until it was observed that the front-end loader was moving forward from its stopped position towards the railway line. The emergency brakes were then applied. By then, it was too late to avoid the collision. Because of the speed that had been maintained, the train was unable to stop in time.

Every case will fall to be determined on its own particular circumstances. In the particular circumstances of this case, I am of the view that the train continued in its approach to the crossing at a speed that was too fast in the circumstances. It was not reasonable to act on the assumption that the "signage" would be observed. The train should have reduced its speed, on this occasion, in its approach to the level crossing. In my view, there has been negligence on the part of the second and third defendants (it is accepted by their Counsel that both of these defendants stand in the same position). There has been breach of duty which has caused damage (personal injury) to the plaintiff.

It is not easy to stop such a train. The front-end loader moved forward shortly after stopping. It proceeded at a slow speed. It could have stopped after crossing the Stop line.

The plaintiff was bound to comply with the traffic regulations. The plaintiff does not suggest that he has not breached the relevant traffic regulations.
Although he stopped at some stage prior to impact, he proceeded on to the crossing when it was unsafe to do so. The fact of stopping is indicative of an awareness of both the "signage" and the potential danger involved in proceeding across the level crossing. It is conceded that matters (such as the effect of the sun and the crossing of the other vehicle) do not excuse his breach. I have already made findings on these matters. I have not accepted the plaintiff's evidence on any of them. In any event, he should not have proceeded across the crossing if he was unable to see and/or if his ability to hear external noise was significantly impaired. Commonsense would suggest that, if he was faced with such a difficulty, he could have taken other steps (such as, inter alia, shading his eyes, opening the cabin door and/or alighting from the vehicle) and he would have then been in a better position to assess the situation. Whilst the latter matters were not put to the plaintiff in cross-examination, it was accepted that they represented an obvious response in such a situation. He proceeded across the crossing when he should not have done so and the loader was hit by the train. If he did look in the direction of the train, he should have seen it. I am not satisfied that he did look (at least until it was too late to avoid the impact). It may be that there was an application of the brakes before impact. If the brakes were applied, the purpose of such an exercise was not explored in evidence.

Clearly, the plaintiff has been guilty of contributory negligence. He did not obey the traffic regulations. He did not keep a proper lookout. He did not take proper care for his own safety. If he had done so, he would not have suffered damage.

In the light of this finding, it becomes unnecessary to determine the other heads of negligence that have been agitated by the plaintiff against the second and third defendants. These matters have been explored in the report from Mr Cowling and in his evidence. For the assistance of the parties, I will add that I do not regard the other matters which have been advanced by the plaintiff as measures which satisfy the applicable principles in the circumstances of this case.

I now turn to the question of apportionment. The relevant principles are well settled (Podrebersek versus Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 59 ALR 529] at 532-533; McCutcheon versus Muir [(1989) 8 MVR 202] and Talbot-
Butt versus Holloway [(1990) 12 MVR 70).] The Court has regard to the relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage. The significance of the relevant elements will vary from case to case.

The approaches taken by the parties are far apart. The second and third defendants see the plaintiff's responsibility in the order of 85%. The plaintiff sees his own responsibility as being modest. In the circumstances of this case, I consider that the plaintiff's responsibility extends to 75%.

I dismiss the claim made against the first defendant. In respect of the claim made against the second and third defendants, the plaintiff is to have judgment for damages to be assessed on the basis that he is 75% responsible for the damage suffered by him.

The first defendant has brought a Cross-Claim against the second and third defendants. The second and third defendants have brought a Cross-Claim against the first defendant. In substance, relief was sought pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/), 1946. In the light of the findings that have been made, no entitlement to indemnity or contribution has been demonstrated. Accordingly, both Cross-Claims are dismissed. The parties are to bear their own costs of the Cross-Claims.

I now turn to the claim made by GIO against MMI. The plaintiff is the insurer pursuant to a policy of insurance in the form provided under the Workers'
Compensation Act, 1987 (as amended) of the Council in respect of liability under that Act for injury received by workers arising out of or in the course of their employment with the Council. The defendant is the insurer of the Council under a policy of insurance indemnifying in respect of its liability under the Motor Accidents Act, 1988 for injury caused by the fault of the owner or driver of the motor vehicle (being the front-end loader) in its use or operation. Counsel for the defendant has prepared a written outline of argument. In the light of the findings that I have made, this claim fails.
It is common ground that a liability for relief arose only if a finding of liability on the part of the Council was made.

I dismiss the Statement of Claim in proceedings No. R400020/97. The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings.

The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
