

Johns Transport Co Pty Ltd (In Liq) and Anor versus Anz Banking Group Ltd and
Anor Matter No 3544 /94 [1998] NSWSC 19 (11 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 31 March 1998 
JOHNS TRANSPORT CO PTY LTD (IN LIQ) & ANOR v ANZ BANKING GROUP LTD & ANOR /94 February 1998 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Johns Transport Co Pty Ltd was wound-up by an order of this Court on 20 March 1989 and Mr Peter David Rodgers the second plaintiff is its liquidator. The proceedings relate to entitlement to $72,000 which at liquidation was held in account no. 2193-30821 at the Annandale branch of the first defendant Australia New Zealand Banking Group Limited entitled "Johns Transport Co Pty Ltd Provisional Liquidator appointed." The second defendant the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation claims priority in the liquidation under ss.221P and 221YHJ of the [Income Tax Assessment Act 1936](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) for sums much greater than any funds which could on any outcome be available to pay creditors. 
When the account was opened on 13 February 1989 the company was in provisional liquidation under an order of this court made on 9 December 1988 on the application of its directors, and Mr Rodgers was Provisional Liquidator. The money was the balance of the proceeds of sale by Mr Rodgers of the business of the company to Serrada Holdings Pty Ltd, which had been one of the company's principal customers; the sale was settled on 9 February 1989 for $112,000, and the proceeds were reduced by legal costs, provisional liquidator's remuneration and in other ways.

Counsel accepted that there is evidence that the company made deductions of group tax totalling $61,877.99 and prescribed payments totalling $228,518.11 which it failed to remit to the Commissioner; that is to say, the deductions were made by the Company within s.221P and 221YHJ and were not paid to the
Commissioner.

The company gave the bank a registered charge over all its assets on 25 May .

By cl.17 of the mortgage debenture, the charge was to be a fixed charge with respect to a wide range of property including "goodwill, freehold and leasehold property, fixtures, engines, machinery, plant and other chattels (other than stock-in trade)", and was to operate as a floating security with respect to other assets. Floating security was to be fixed upon the money secured becoming payable.

The subject matter of the sale of the company's business by the provisional liquidator (Exhibit A p147) was: 
Vendor's equity and leased plant fittings and chattels $32,109 
Goodwill $ 1 
Plant and fittings (unencumbered) $79,834 
Unused stationary $ 146 
All of these items were subject to the fixed charge created by cl.17.

By cl.18, "the moneys hereby secured shall at the option of the bank ...
immediately become due and payable and the security hereby created shall immediately become enforceable ..." upon a number of events, including "(a) presentation of a petition for winding-up the company;" and this happened on 9
December 1988.

For the moneys secured to become payable under cl.18 the bank must exercise the option there conferred; no demand or notice is necessary. There is no evidence of the exercise by the bank of this option.

By cl.19, "At any time after the moneys hereby secured become payable" the bank may appoint a receiver. The receiver is to have wide powers of enforcement. The receiver's position is further dealt with in cl.20.

By cl.21, "Notwithstanding a receiver may or may not have been appointed as aforesaid it shall be lawful for the bank at any time after default by the mortgagor in the payment of any moneys hereby secured or in the observance or performance of any covenant or agreement on the part of the mortgagor herein contained and without giving any notice to exercise all or any of the powers, authorities and discretions conferred on a receiver as aforesaid." There is no evidence that the bank itself at any time exercised or intended to exercise any of the numerous powers conferred on a receiver by cl.19.

The bank took other security from principals of the company including guarantees and a mortgage over a private house. The evidence does not show whether any other security has been realised or whether payments have been made by guarantors.

The company and other companies in some way related to it were known to the bank as the Crowes Group and conducted parcel delivery and related business.
The company's account was conducted in a very unsatisfactory way, with overdrafts often or perhaps usually in excess of agreed limits, and required continuing management attention; and, as retrospectively appeared, the company's principals did not deal frankly with the bank about its affairs and about their dealings with property under security. There were many signs of trouble including dishonour of cheques payable to the Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation, and on 13 September 1988 the manager noted a decision made on behalf of the bank "that account is to be forced from our books." Before that could happen the company on the application of its directors went into provisional liquidation. At about that time the bank was given a copy of affidavit evidence in support of the application which showed a very poor financial position including a large liability to the Australian Taxation Office. With these events the bank became entitled to take control of the company's assets, by appointing a receiver or indeed by acting directly itself. The bank had the right and the opportunity to use the overwhelming strength conferred on it by its charge and its powers thereunder, but did not make a positive intervention.

After a meeting of persons concerned, including Mr Montague Smith, a chartered accountant who was a member of Mr Rodger's firm, and some bank representatives, Mr Smith reviewed the possibilities of realising the assets of the company. A significant part of the context was that there were large liabilities to the Australian Taxation Office for which there would be a priority entitlement in a liquidation, and in some way the Commissioner of
Taxation was maintaining or it was thought that he would maintain that he had an entitlement to priority payment in a provisional liquidation.

In truth, as the parties later came to see, there was no entitlement of the
Commissioner of Taxation under s.221P and s.221YHJ to priority in payment of debts in the provisional liquidation; a provisional liquidator is not a trustee within the meaning of that section. This had been established by the decision of the Queensland Full Court in Re Obie Pty Ltd [[1985] 1 Qd R ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1985%5d%201%20Qd%20R%20464 "View LawCiteRecord" ), followed and applied by the Court of Appeal of New South Wales in Deputy
Commissioner of Taxation v. Access Finance Corporation Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 31 FCR 222] at 233-234. Priority entitlement arose with liquidation.
However, concern and uncertainty in the provisional liquidation about the
Commissioner's entitlements were natural enough in the early stages as liquidation was obviously likely.

On 19 December 1988 the provisional liquidator's firm Messrs Love and Rodgers wrote to the bank and referred to the sale or proposed sale of the business, and the prospective exchange of contracts and application to the court for approval. They said "We would appreciate an acknowledgement by facsimile that your bank consents to the sale taking place as set out in the offer document."
In reply the bank sent a facsimile message of 22 December 1988 saying "With reference to the letter from Love and Rodgers dated 19 December 1988 regarding sale of the above business ... Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited now consents to the proposed sale. Consent is given on the basis of sale proceeds being directed to the bank, less costs of the provisional liquidator." The meaning of the last sentence was debated, but in my view it means that the basis of the consent was that the proceeds would be paid to the bank for the credit of the bank in reduction of its secured debt and that the requirement for proceeds to be "directed to the bank" did not merely require that the proceeds be held in an account at the bank.

The arrangements made on 13 February 1989, when $72,000 was deposited to open account No.2193-30821, departed from the terms of the consent. The bank was entitled by its security to be treated as the owner of all the assets of the company including its business, and to receive the proceeds of sale. The substance of what the bank did by granting consent was that instead of acting itself to exercise its powers it availed itself of the services and readiness to act of the provisional liquidator to achieve a sale. The requirement that the proceeds be paid to the bank was no more than a statement of the bank's entitlement to the proceeds of sale of every asset, moderated by the need to pay the provisional liquidator's costs were the bank to have the facility of his conducting the sale. The bank's rights were recorded in rather than created by the condition of its consent.

It was contended that the factual context shows that the rights of the parties are not established by the condition on which the deposit was made.

The bank's counsel contended that the events relating to the consent of 22
December 1988 constituted an agreement between the provisional liquidator and the bank to the effect that the bank consented to the sale and Mr Rodgers agreed to pay the proceeds of the sale of the disputed assets less his costs as provisional liquidator to the bank. It was further contended to the effect that by giving this consent and agreeing with Mr Rodgers as alleged, the bank elected that the moneys owing should become due and payable, and in the exercise of its powers in the charge appointed Mr Rodgers as its agent for the purpose of selling the assets. These analyses are in my view not supported by the communications relating to the consent. Mr Rodgers did not in any way agree or promise to pay the proceeds of the sale to the bank, naturally enough because of the limits of his powers, and he was not asked to; the bank purported to impose a condition on its consent unilaterally. If the consent had been necessary for the exercise by Mr Rodgers of powers of sale there might have been some basis for an implication of an agreement to comply with the condition, but his powers were conferred by the Code. There is nothing in the communications anywhere which supports the idea that it was the intention of the bank to confer or of Mr Rodgers to accept and act under agency authority from the bank; all communications proceed on the footing of his acting in the character of provisional liquidator. The bank's later conduct on February 1989 shows that the disposition of the proceeds of sale was not contractually committed by any arrangement made on 22 December, and that the bank did not think that it was.

Mr Rodger's conduct in reporting the progress of the sale to the bank is not, in my view, any indication that such an agreement exists.

In my finding there were no agreements and agency as alleged.

The terms on which the account was opened and $72,000 was to be held by the bank were established by an exchange of correspondence between Mr Rodger's firm, Love & Rodgers Chartered Accountants, and Mr Peter Marotta, the manager of the Annandale Branch. The significant passages in the correspondence are as follows: 
Provisional Liquidator's letter 13 February 1989: "It is proposed that the provisional liquidator pays a cheque amounting to $72,000 to your bank today on the condition and only on that condition, that the sum be held by your bank pending the determination of our claim upon the Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation, that the Commissioner has no priority of claim over your bank, further, that the moneys be returned to the provisional liquidator should the
Commissioner not concede your authority, and further, that so long as the funds are held by your bank, a full interest offset be allowed against the debt owed to your bank by the company and the guarantors of your mortgage debenture. Your acceptance of this offer in writing, is requested." 
Bank's reply 14 February 1989: "Thank you for your letter dated 13th February 1989. Will you please provide details of legal, provisional liquidator costs and funds received for our records. Funds are held with full interest set-off pending outcome of your inquiries with the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation." 
It took a surprisingly long time for the Commissioner of Taxation to state to the effect that he did not concede the bank's authority to receive the moneys, but by 7 March 1990 the Commissioner had done so and had claimed priority over the bank of payment in the liquidation in reliance on what were then the
Commissioner's rights under s.221P of the [Income Tax Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/). Later the Commissioner lodged proofs of debt, the final claim for priority for group tax deducted but not remitted in a proof dated 2 August 1990 (Exhibit A p206) being $228,518.11, with a further claim for additional tax for late payment which does not have priority.

At the time of liquidation the terms on which the money was held by the bank were contractual terms established by the arrangements recorded in the correspondence. In accordance with those contractual terms the company in the person of its liquidator became entitled to return of the moneys when it was established that the Commissioner did not concede the bank's authority to retain them.

The bank disputed that the arrangements of 13 and 14 February 1989 had this contractual effect. The bases of dispute included a suggestion to the effect that the money was received and the account was opened for the credit of the bank and not of the company, and a suggestion that the authority of the manager, Mr Marotta, was limited in some way which precluded him from binding the bank contractually to the conditions stipulated in the letters. Mr Marotta suggested in evidence that the account was not an account containing moneys held as banker for the company as customer, but was a manager's account containing moneys held for the credit of the bank. This suggestion is not borne out by the documents contemporaneous with opening the account, or indeed by any documents.

Mr Marotta described the account in his diary as "a new account styled Johns
Transport Co Pty Ltd provisional liquidator appointed." The diary note does not say that it was a Manager's Account, or in any other way say to the effect that the money was held for the benefit of the bank. The events surrounding opening the account contradict the view that the bank appropriated the funds when received to its own credit in reduction of the company's debt. If the company's debt had been reduced, the interest accruing would have been reduced correspondingly and there would have been no place for arrangements to set off interest.

Mr Marotta's suggestion is contradicted by the terms of the exchange of letters, and also shown to be wrong by other bank documents. The original deposit slip includes the statement "deposited for credit in cheque of Johns
Transport Co Pty Ltd Provisional Liquidator appointed". Bank statements rendered to the company in the following months showed the company as the customer and referred to the account as a "business cheque account". No cheque book was issued for the account, and as only one transaction was contemplated this was appropriate.

In a letter of 22 February 1989 giving a summary of receipts and payments
Messrs Love and Rodgers referred to the sum in a list of payments and described it as "ANZ Bank Limited - in reduction of debt". This brief narration was obviously not an attempt to state the whole of the rights which existed and was not inaccurate in that the contemplation of Mr Rodger's partner, Mr Montague Smith, and the bank on 13 February was that the
Commissioner would concede his lack of priority, the deposit would never be repayable and the interest arrangement would mean that the payment had the effect of reducing the company's debt as of 13 February.

Mr Montague Smith's evidence of some oral exchanges contemporaneous with the deposit, which I accept, bears out that the true arrangement is recorded in the correspondence and that there was no arrangement for the money to be held for credit of the bank except in accordance with the workings of the condition in the letter of 13 February.

Several pieces of correspondence from the bank in 1989 and 1990 appear, not in altogether clear ways, to proceed on the basis recorded in the correspondence of February 1989 and the bank did not contend until July 1990 (Exhibit A p203) that the funds were lodged in reduction of the company's debt and were to be retained by the bank as secured creditor.

Although Mr Marotta asserted that his authority was limited so that he could not bind the bank, no evidence established any limitation on the authority impliedly and ostensibly conferred on him by his holding office and acting as manager of the branch. A clear demonstration would be needed of any limit on his authority to do such a simple thing as to receive a deposit on account of a customer, open an account and agree to the conditions on which the account was to be held. In my finding there was no relevant limitation.

For the bank to receive the money from the Provisional Liquidator's firm when its member Mr Montague Smith had made the statements which he made orally and in the letter of 13 February, yet not regard itself as subject to the conditions in the letter but as holding the money to its own credit, would not have been in accordance with common honesty. Common honesty would have required that the deposit be declined.

When Mr Smith approached the bank with a deposit of $72,000 on 13 February it was open to the bank to refuse to deal with him, or to refuse to agree to his conditions, and to set about enforcing its rights under the charge to the proceeds of sale, as to any other asset of the company. However the bank did not act in that way, which would have required an initiative which the bank had not then taken of embarking on action to enforce its rights and could well have involved a conflictual encounter with the Commissioner of Taxation.
The bank took a different course, and agreed with the company in the person of its provisional liquidator in the terms established by the correspondence. The legal rights between the company and the bank established by the charge were modified by that agreement, and stood in that modified state at liquidation.
When it became known in March 1990 that the Commissioner of Taxation did not concede the bank's authority to retain the funds for its credit the company in the person of its liquidator was entitled to repayment of $72,000 by the bank.The liquidator can enforce those modified rights and recover the deposit.

The bank's counsel raised questions of facts as follows: 
Whether at the meeting at the Annandale branch between Messrs Veldhuys,
Smith, Marotta, Parsons and Dalton on 13 December 1988 there was any discussion about any liability of the company to the Commissioner.

Whether there was a telephone conversation on 13 February 1989 between
Messrs Smith and Marotta in the terms alleged by Mr Smith.

Whether there was a statement made by Mr Smith at the meeting of the
Annandale branch on 13 February 1989 between Messrs Velthuys, Smith and
Marotta in the terms alleged by Mr Smith.

The probabilities strongly support the finding that the persons present adverted to and spoke of the question of possible liability of the company to the Commissioner on 13 December 1988. In the company's circumstances the question whether there would be any priority claim under s.221P can hardly have failed to have occurred to most of those present, and to have been mentioned. Even if it was not mentioned, the possibility that the Commissioner might intervene and claim available funds is highly likely to have occurred to those present. I find issue (a) against the bank.

The effect of the arrangement made on 13 February 1989 is recorded in correspondence. I accept Mr Smith's evidence about the terms of the related conversation. This disposes of issues (b) and (c).

This disposes of the first claim in the Summons but leaves for consideration the second claim about what the liquidator should do in the administration of the liquidation and whom he should pay.

The question of control of property by a trustee referred to in subs.221P(1) relates to the time of the winding-up order. Where (as in this case) it happened that because he was the provisional liquidator earlier, the liquidator was in control of the property earlier, it is not significant for the application of subs.(1) to consider when and how the property earlier passed into his control. At the time of the winding-up order the property of the company included the deposit which had been made at the Annandale branch on 13 February 1989; indeed there is no sign of any other property at that date. The assets which the provisional liquidator had already sold before then are not property within subs.(1). Subject to the condition established by the letter of 13 February, the property was, as is usual with deposits in banks, a debt owing by a bank to the company, but its repayability was conditional, and when the condition was fulfilled with the Commissioner's statement of his position, became repayable to the company as any other bank deposit would be.

From 9 December 1988 until he sold the business the provisional liquidator stood in the same position as the company with respect to the property rights of the bank in the business assets; that is to say the company was the legal owner, but the bank with its equitable fixed charge was the equitable owner and was in a position to intervene and exercise its ownership rights at any time by acting under cl.21 of the mortgage debenture. If the bank had exercised the option in cl.18 it could also have appointed a receiver under cl.19. The position of the provisional liquidator were he to agree to sell property of the company was precarious indeed, but he was empowered by the
Companies Code to do so. It was clearly no more than common prudence and well understandable that he should feel a need to ask for the bank's consent to a sale. The bank's consent to the sale was not the source of the provisional liquidator's power to sell. It does not appear to me that there was any legal requirement that he obtain the consent, but the prudence of his doing so is plain. In the events the bank did none of the things which would have disrupted his course; did not exercise its option for payability, appoint a receiver or exercise its power of sale or any power itself, and the bank consented to what he did. As it happens, the consent was subject to an express condition requiring payment of the proceeds to the bank with which the provisional liquidator was not empowered to comply, as the provisional liquidation was no more than a protective measure and did not extend to winding-up the company's affairs and paying its debts.

The rights of the bank under the mortgage debenture have to be taken with the rights in respect of the deposit created by the agreement of 13 February. It may well be that, if before there was a liquidation the Commissioner had conceded that he had no priority and the funds had passed back to the provisional liquidator, the bank would have been entitled to intervene and claim them; even though they were in the provisional liquidator's hands they, like all other assets of the company, would be subject to the bank's equitable charge. However that may be, obtaining the bank's agreement for the money to be paid back to the provisional liquidator was seen by the provisional liquidator as an appropriate protection for his own position. For whatever reason the arrangement existed, it was in existence at the time of the winding-up order.

Whatever the bank was entitled to do, its conduct fell far short of exercise of proprietorship over the business of the company, or over the sum of $72,000 when deposited in the bank account; its conduct in consenting to a sale by the provisional liquidator and in opening the bank account is altogether inconsistent with exercise of the dominion of a proprietor, and even if evidence had shown that the bank did exercise its option in cl.18 of the mortgage debenture it did not exercise the powers which doing so would have conferred.

While the provisional liquidation continued, the opportunity of the bank to exercise dominion over the bank account under its security continued to exist, with the qualification that the bank had made an arrangement with the provisional liquidator, later in time than the mortgage debenture, for repayment to the provisional liquidator if the condition was fulfilled by an unfavourable indication from the Commissioner of Taxation. If the condition had been once fulfilled, the bank could have repaid the money but immediately made its intervention and regained it. The situation was greatly changed by the winding-up order which brought s.221P to bear on the conduct of the liquidator, as the money in the bank account was part of the property control of which passed to the liquidator and the opportunity to intervene under the security was no longer effective; see Re Mzimba Pty Ltd [(1989) 94 FLR .] 
The relevant facts of this matter have a general similarity to the facts of
Re Alspar Pty Ltd [(1990) 2 ACSR 702.] In that case the charge was a floating charge over the company's business. In this case deposits in banks are made subject to a floating charge by cl.17 of the mortgage debenture. In this case as in that case the debt was payable and powers of realisation were exercisable at the option of the bank, and there is no finding that that option was exercised. Unique to the present case are the features that the business (subject to fixed charge: cl.17) was sold and converted into money during the provisional liquidation, and that the bank agreed that the proceeds would be held in an account with it on a condition as to repayability which had neither failed nor been fulfilled by the time of the winding-up order and which was later fulfilled so that the money was repayable by the bank. There was an extensive citation of authorities, but no cited case had these two features.

The bank's counsel contended to the effect that the outstanding equitable entitlement of the bank produces the result that the right to the deposit did not pass into the control of the liquidator on winding-up. In the absence of an actual intervention by the bank, I do not think that this is correct.

The mortgage debenture, while fixed as to some classes of assets and floating as to others, is not a charge over specific property and is a charge of the kind which, since the decision in Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Card <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 177] has been regarded as not preventing the passing of control of property to a liquidator.
In Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v. AGC (Advances) Limited & Ors [[1984] 1 NSWLR 29], the security was a charge specific to the company's book debts and in this basal respect the facts differ from the present fact. There was a diversity of grounds for the conclusion reached and expressions in the judgments which could be understood as supporting the view that the control referred to is de facto control must now be understood to be incorrect, having regard to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v. Brooke & Ors [(1995) 30 ATR 100.] 
I find that the control of the property of the company passed to the liquidator on liquidation and that the bank deposit as being or as part of that property falls within subs.221P(1). The liquidator had control over it according to its nature as a bank deposit repayable on a condition. The property was no less in the control of the liquidator in that the condition had to be fulfilled before he could actually receive it . No one else could receive it and if the condition was not fulfilled he never would, but insofar as control over it could exist, the liquidator had control over it.

On recovery of the deposit the liquidator should proceed with his liquidation in the ordinary course, but having regard to the amounts involved it is inevitable that any money available for distribution to creditors will be distributable to the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, in priority to the bank having regard to the priority conferred by subs.221P(2).

Orders: 
Declarations 1 and 2 in the Summons.

Orders 3 and 4 in the Summons.

Order 5 in the Summons.

Order that the plaintiffs pay the second defendant's costs of the proceedings.

Order that the costs payable to the plaintiffs under Order 3 include costs payable by the plaintiffs under Order 4.

Dismiss the Cross-claim with costs.
 * * * 
