

Regina versus Bowhay (No. 3) Matter No 70074/97 [1998] NSWSC 660 (12 November )

Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
REGINA versus ADAM JOHN BOWHAY (NO. 3) /97 November 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT - On admissibility of photographs; see p 190.

HIS HONOUR: Objection has been taken to the tender of a number of photographs of the deceased's body when it was found in situ. These include some particularly vivid photographs of the stab wounds to the deceased's throat and show a large area of blood. They also show the width and, to a degree, the depth of at least the major wound, and to a lesser degree of some of the others. 
The basis of objection is under [s.137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) on the ground that the probative value of the photographs is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.

Mr Conditsis, solicitor for the accused, has opened that the accused will give evidence that he did not intend to kill the deceased, which the Crown sets out to prove. But, of course, the Crown does not have to prove an intent to kill.
It is sufficient if the Crown proves an intent to cause grievous bodily harm.

It would be open to the jury to infer from the nature and extent of the wounds that there was such an intent, either to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm and, therefore, a proper description of the wounds is necessary. Photographs of the wounds merely make vivid the description and has been said in R v
P.C. Allen (unreported - CCA - 1 December 1972) at p.3, "They make clear to the jury what no amount of the oral description can make clear and they are direct evidence of the injuries which they are tendered to prove".

Moreover, this is a case where it has been indicated that the accused will rely on the defence of diminished responsibility. In many cases the nature and viciousness of the attack has been considered by the psychiatric experts to be relevant on this issue. However, Mr Conditsis argued that the accused has no recollection of the stabbing and it is, therefore, open to the Crown to allege the attack was as vicious as it wishes. The fact that the accused will say that he has no recollection of the stabbing is only relevant to a degree. The jury may disbelieve, may not accept that part of his evidence. Moreover, if it is open to the Crown to allege the attack is as vicious as it wishes, these photos do no more than show the viciousness of such attack.

The photographs, therefore, vivid and all as they are, have a very high probative value.

Unfair prejudice to an accused involves two factors; not only "prejudice" but that it is "unfair" prejudice, that is, prejudice which may cause the jury to misuse the evidence; and it is also important to bear in mind, as pointed out in Allen's case, that the prejudice which "accompanies" the probative value of the evidence is a different thing to prejudice which "outweighs" the probative value of the evidence.

In my view the photos are relevant. They have a high probative value, and in this day and age where people see "blood and guts" on the television and on the movie screen day after day and week after week, I fail to see how it could be expected the jury would misuse this evidence.

Accordingly, I will admit the photos.
 * * * 
