

Regina versus Benjamin Matthew Jones [1996] NSWSC 124 (13 May 1996) 
REGINA versus Benjamin Matthew JONES 
No. 70032/95 
Monday 13 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
SPERLING J 
Catchwords: CRIMINAL LAW - murder - the order in which to decide the element of specific intent in the offence , the partial defence of diminished responsibility and the defence of mental illness 
Gomaa (Badgery-Parker J, 27 April 1994, unreported) 
Li (Simpson J, 19 August 1994, unreported) 
Issa (Sperling J, 3 November 1995, unreported) 
Hawkins <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 500] 
Lainson (Hunt CJ at CL, 21 June 1995, unreported) 
CRIMINAL LAW - partial defence of diminished responsibility - requirements whether defence made out 
Tumanako [(1992) 64 A Crim R 149] 
CRIMINAL LAW - defence of mental illness - element of `defect of reason' in the defence not satisfactory - need for change in the law [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s18.html), [23A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23a.html) 
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1990 <case> 
Gomaa (Badgery-Parker J, 27 April 1994, unreported) 
Issa (Sperling J, 3 November 1995, unreported) 
M'Naghten's Case <case>; [(1843) 10 CL & F 200] 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
On 29 April 1996, Benjamin Matthew Jones was indicted before me on the charge that, on 12 January 1995, at Merrylands in the State of New South Wales, he did feloniously and maliciously murder Carl Howard Jones.

The accused had elected, pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s32.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) , to be tried by a judge alone. The accused pleaded not guilty. The trial proceeded on 29 and 30 April 1996. I reserved my decision.

Opening statements 
It was apparent from the Crown's opening and from an opening statement by counsel for the accused that it was common ground that, at the time of the alleged offence, the accused was suffering from schizophrenia. He was eighteen years of age at the relevant time. The deceased was his father.
 
It was also apparent from the opening statements that the partial defence of diminished responsibility and the defence of mental illness were also common ground.

Statutory provisions 
The following provisions of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) are in point: "18.(1)(a) Murder shall be taken to have been committed where the act of the accused, or thing by him omitted to be done, causing the death charged, was done or omitted with reckless indifference to human life, or with intent to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm upon some person, or done in an attempt to commit, or during or immediately after the commission, by the accused, or some accomplice with him, of a crime punishable by penal servitude for 25 years.

Every other punishable homicide shall be taken to be manslaughter." "23A. (1) Where, on the trial of a person for murder, it appears that at the time of the acts or omissions causing the death charged the person was suffering from such abnormality of mind (whether arising from a condition of arrested or retarded development of mind or any inherent causes or induced by disease or injury) as substantially impaired his mental responsibility for the acts or omissions, he shall not be convicted of murder.

It shall be upon the person accused to prove that he is by virtue of subsection (1) not liable to be convicted of murder.

A person who but for subsection (1) would be liable, whether as principal or as accessory, to be convicted of murder shall be liable instead to be convicted of manslaughter.
 . . . 
Where, on the trial of a person for murder, the person contends - that he is entitled to be acquitted on the ground that he was mentally ill at the time of the acts or omissions causing the death charged; or that he is by virtue of subsection (1) not liable to be convicted of murder, evidence may be offered by the Crown tending to prove the other of those contentions, and the Court may give directions as to the stage of the proceedings at which that evidence may be offered." 
Sections 38 and 39 of the Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1990 are as follows: "38. If, in an indictment or information, an act or omission is charged against a person as an offence and it is given in evidence on the trial of the person for the offence that the person was mentally ill, so as not to be responsible, according to law, for his or her action at the time when the act was done or omission made, then, if it appears to the jury before which the person is tried that the person did the act or made the omission charged, but was mentally ill at the time when the person did or made the same, the jury must return a special verdict that the accused person is not guilty by reason of mental illness.
If, on the trial of a person charged with an offence, the jury returns a special verdict that the accused person is not guilty by reason of mental illness, the Court must order that the person be detained in strict custody in such place and in such manner as the Court thinks fit until released by due process of law." 
In <case>, "mentally ill" means, on authority, mentally ill in the sense of the
M'Naghten Rules <case>; [(1843) 10 CL & F 200], relevantly (at 210): "(T)o establish a defence on the ground of insanity, it must be clearly proved that, at the time of the committing of the act, the party accused was labouring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing; or, if he did know it, that he did not know he was doing what was wrong." 
The questions and their order 
It was common ground at the bar table that the questions which arose for determination and the order in which they should be decided are as follows: 
Whether, apart from any partial defence of provocation or diminished responsibility or any defence of mental illness, the charge of murder was made out.

If so, there being no evidence of provocation, whether the partial defence of diminished responsibility was made out, thereby reducing the crime to one of manslaughter, subject to the defence of mental illness.

Whether the defence of mental illness was made out.

This accorded with the decisions in Gomaa (Badgery-Parker J, 27 April 1994, unreported) and with Li (Simpson J, 19 August 1994, unreported). It also accorded with my decision in Issa (3 November 1995, unreported), in which I distinguished the decisions in Hawkins <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 500] and Lainson (Hunt CJ at CL, 21 June 1995, unreported).

Diminished responsibility: legal principles 
The requirements for the partial defence of diminished responsibility were stated in the following terms in Tumanako [(1992) 64 A Crim R 149], at 159-60: "(T)he accused must establish on the balance of probabilities each of three matters - first, that at the time of the act causing death he was suffering from an abnormality of mind; secondly, that such abnormality arose from one or more of the several causes specified in <case>; thirdly, that such abnormality of mind so arising was such as substantially impaired the mental responsibility of the accused for what he did: Purdy [[1982] 2 NSWLR ]; [(1982) 7 A Crim R 122.] 
Abnormality of mind, it has been said, means: `A state of mind so different from that of ordinary human beings that a reasonable man would term it abnormal. It appears . . . to be wide enough to cover the mind's activities in all its aspects, not only the perception of physical acts and matters, and the ability to form a rational judgment as to whether an act is right or wrong, but also the ability to exercise will-power to control physical acts in accordance with that rational judgment. The expression `mental responsibility for his acts' points to a consideration of the extent to which the accused's mind is answerable for his physical acts which must include a consideration of the extent of his ability to exercise will-power to control his physical acts" (Byrne [[1960] 2 QB 396] at 403; [(1960) 44 Cr App R 246] at -253).

Accordingly it is necessary that the accused who relies upon a defence of diminished responsibility establish not only an abnormality of mind but that the cause of that abnormality of mind is one of those causes specified in the subsection. In Purdy, Glass JA (at 966; 126) said in respect of those parenthesised matters: `It seems to me that they are not only expressed in such manner as to exhaust all possible causes of mental abnormality but also to make it clear that disabling passions of an ephemeral kind are not to count.' 
The first two elements in the defence must be established by evidence; but where there is evidence fit to go to the jury that the accused was suffering an abnormality of mind, and that that abnormality of mind resulted from one of the specified causes, the question whether his mental responsibility was thereby substantially impaired may be left to the jury although there is no evidence directly bearing upon that issue: Purdy, per Glass JA (at 966; )." 
If the defence of mental illness is ultimately made out (see following), it would appear that the partial defence of diminished responsibility will also, necessarily, have been made out. As will appear, I am satisfied that the defence of mental illness is made out in this case (for the reasons which I will give). That obviates the need for close consideration of the requirements for the partial defence of diminished responsibility in this case. However, as will also appear, the medical experts adverted directly to this partial defence and gave evidence directed to the content of the defence as expounded in Tumanako (supra).
 
Mental illness: legal principles 
I reviewed the legal principles relating to the defence of mental illness in
Issa (3 November 1995, unreported). There is no need to repeat that review here. It may be taken to be incorporated in this judgment. In summary, <case> of the Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1900 picks up the
M'Naghten Rules. There must be a disease of the mind causing such a defect of reason that the accused did not know the nature and quality of the act he was doing; or, if he did know, that he did not know he was doing what was wrong. The more recent authorities throw the emphasis under the second limb of the Rules onto a capacity to reason calmly about the wrongfulness of the act. I referred to the observations of Badgery-Parker J in Gomaa (27 April , unreported), where his Honour referred to cases involving fixed and operative delusions. I went on to express some dissatisfaction with having to follow the traditional line of authority in such a case.

Having now observed further expert witnesses doing their conscientious best to deal with such a case according to the principles that have been formulated, I perceive more acutely the need for a change in the law (whether by the appellate courts or by legislation). My reasons for this view are as follows.

The problem is that the M'Naghten Rules operate only in relation to a "defect of reason", which it is assumed (under the second limb of the Rules) may preclude a mentally ill person from knowing that what he is doing is wrong. It is "defect of reason" as a necessary element that is the cause of the trouble. I will endeavour to explain why, in my view, this is so.

To kill an innocent person, who has done one no harm and threatens one with no harm, would never be contemplated by a sane person. To a sane person, the idea of reasoning about whether such an act is right or wrong would be nonsensical, let alone reasoning about it calmly. The act is simply not to be countenanced, nor even contemplated as a possibly legitimate course of action. Reasoning does not come into it. There is nothing to reason about. If one were to ask the man in the street if it was right or wrong to kill someone without cause, he would say it was a silly question. He might have difficulty articulating the reason for that response. The reason is that there is no occasion to exercise a judgment - to "reason" - about right and wrong in the absence of a moral dilemma, and killing without cause poses no dilemma. Killing without cause is self-evidently wrong.

To develop the point further: for the psychotic, there may be an important reason for killing, which is responsive to a delusional belief. The need to kill may not arise in a way that would be rational to a sane person who has a realistic basis for such a belief. For example, an insane person might have a delusional belief that his spouse is trying to poison him. A sane person with such a belief, held for good cause, would go to the police and/or urge his spouse to seek psychiatric treatment and/or leave home. He would not kill his spouse to protect himself. But an insane person, holding such a delusional belief, may think that it is necessary to kill his spouse in order to protect himself. That is because of disordered thinking which is an aspect of the illness. In such a case, the insane person kills because of his mental illness. Nothing could be clearer: The belief on which he acts is delusional.
His response to the belief is the product of disordered thought. Both are integral to his mental illness. To have to analyse such a case in terms of capacity to reason about right and wrong (let alone reason calmly) should be unnecessary in order to find such a person not guilty by reason of mental illness.

Absent authority, I would construe <case> to mean that, where the conduct of the accused would otherwise constitute the crime charged, the accused should be found not guilty by reason of mental illness if the accused did what the accused did because of mental illness. The impediment to such a straightforward approach arises from the phrase "mental illness" having been construed as incorporating the M'Naghten Rules and the reference to "defect of reason" in the Rules. "Defect of reason" should not be a necessary element in the defence. It would then be possible to hold, in a straightforward way, in cases such as the present case, that a mentally ill person did not know that what he was doing was wrong because it was not self- evidently wrong to him in the way it would be to a sane person and, for that reason, the accused should be found not guilty by reason of mental illness.

In the present case, as will appear, the expert witnesses managed to fit the square peg into the round hole. They should not have to do that. Nor should the Court.

Agreed facts 
A statement of agreed facts was tendered pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s191.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) . The section provides as follows: "191.(1) In this section: "agreed fact" means a fact that the parties to a proceeding have agreed is not, for the purposes of the proceeding, to be disputed.

In a proceeding: evidence is not required to prove the existence of an agreed fact, and evidence may not be adduced to contradict or qualify an agreed fact, unless the court gives leave.

Subsection (2) does not apply unless the agreed fact: is stated in an agreement in writing signed by the parties or by lawyers representing the parties and adduced in evidence in the proceeding, or with the leave of the court, is stated by a party before the court with the agreement of all other parties." 
The agreed facts were as follows: "1. That on 12 January 1995 Carl Howard Jones died.
That the cause of death was a single stab wound to the chest which penetrated the heart.
That such stab wound was inflicted by the accused using a kitchen knife at about 8.45 pm on 12 January 1995 at premises at 71 Excelsior Street
Merrylands.
That after the wound was inflicted, the accused left those premises in a
Tarago Van belonging to the deceased.
That at about 2 am on 13 January 1995, the accused was arrested by
Constable Newby at a park adjoining Orlick Street Rosemeadow.
That at the time of his arrest the accused was carrying a back pack containing five knives including the knife that inflicted the wound to the deceased.
That at about 6.40 am on 13 January 1995 the Tarago Van was located by police off Appin Road Rosemeadow about one and a half kilometres from the scene of the arrest of the accused." 
The evidence 
Typed statements signed by the following persons were admitted into evidence without objection: Mrs B A Jones (the accused's mother), A H Jones (the accused's youngest brother), Ms R K Goodwin (the accused's girlfriend), Mrs M
Giancarlini (a neighbour), Constable J Wigfall, Constable First Class M K
Stroud, Constable J E Newby, Detective Sergeant A Duncan, and Dr T M D Hughes.
Also tendered without objection were a series of fifty-three photographs taken by Constable Stroud, a forensic medical report by Dr P S J Ellis, an initial record of interview in typed form taken by Constable M W Francis, two video cassettes (being evidence of an electronically recorded further interview) together with a typed transcript of that interview, and a report by Dr B
Westmore (forensic psychiatrist).

Of these persons, the following gave oral evidence in the Crown case: Mrs
Jones, Detective Sergeant Duncan and Dr Westmore.

In the defence case, reports by Dr W A Barclay (forensic psychiatrist), Dr W E
Lucas (forensic psychiatrist) and Ms A Robilliard (psychologist) were tendered without objection. Of these, Dr Barclay also gave oral evidence.

There was no evidence called in reply by the Crown.

Crown evidence, except for psychiatric evidence 
I will now review the evidence adduced by the Crown, in the first instance without covering the psychiatric evidence.

In her statement dated 13 January 1995, Mrs Jones said that in January , she lived at 71 Excelsior Street, Merrylands with her husband, Carl, and their three sons, Benjamin (the accused) then eighteen years old, Luke, then sixteen years old and Aaron, then thirteen years old. The accused was born on April 1976. Since he had turned eighteen in April 1994, he had become more and more defiant. He left school in 1992, halfway through year 11, did a farm technology course at Sydney Technical College and then took up an apprenticeship with Ryde Council as a gardener in 1993. He became lethargic, sleeping in in the mornings and had to be hassled to get to work on time. He would mostly miss his lift to work and Mrs Jones would have to drive him to
Ryde. She and her husband took the accused to see a psychiatrist, Douglas
Keir, in June or July 1994. The accused was resistant to counselling. After the second session, he refused to go again. The accused then started to abuse
Mrs Jones verbally. He began to accuse her of putting something in his lunch.
He became intimidatory. On 27 August 1994, his girlfriend spent the night in his bedroom. This was inconsistent with the family mores. It was the last straw for Mrs Jones. She broke down in tears. She and her husband discussed the situation, and Mr Jones told the accused that he would have to find somewhere else to live. The accused became obstreperous and the police had to be called to settle him down. The accused then left the house with his belongings. Mrs Jones kept herself informed concerning her son by contact with his employer. The accused called on his parents occasionally. He refused to say where he was living. He looked unhealthy and was losing weight. There was further contact on Christmas day, when the accused was well-behaved. On 27
December 1994, Mrs Jones was told by the accused's girlfriend that he had "rolled" his car and was in Campbelltown Hospital. Mr and Mrs Jones decided to invite the accused to return to the family home. He returned on Sunday 8
January 1995. Soon after, Mrs Jones noticed that a particular knife was missing from the kitchen drawer. She asked the accused if he had seen it, and he said he had not. The accused went to work each day that week. On 12 January , he came home from work. Mrs Jones was giving his room a spring clean in readiness for him to bring home his belongings at the weekend. The accused played Sega. He made a phone call to a friend about a party he was going to on the following Saturday. While she was cooking the evening meal, Mrs Jones noticed the accused standing in the doorway of his room. He seemed to have a blank look on his face as if he was thinking about something. Mr Jones was painting the main bedroom, so the family had dinner without him. The accused finished his meal and took his plate to the kitchen sink. Mr Jones came to the table and, at Mrs Jones' suggestion, the accused joined them. Mr Jones finished his meal and the family left the table. The accused followed Mrs
Jones into his room, and asked why she kept going into his room. Luke took the dog for a walk. Mrs Jones went to the kitchen to clean up. The accused went to his room. Mrs Jones saw that Aaron was watching something on television she did not think was suitable. She changed the channel and walked out to the dining room with Aaron. When they got to the back verandah, she heard her husband call out "Ben, what are you doing? Ben, what are you doing?" Through an opening into the kitchen, she could see the accused and her husband. This appears to have been after the stabbing. At all events, there is nothing to indicate it was before. When she next looked, her husband had picked up a wooden chair and was holding it out in front of him. The accused was standing in front of Mr Jones, holding a knife in his right hand. She recognised this as the missing kitchen knife. The accused lunged at Mr Jones, trying to push the chair away. Mr Jones was saying, "Ben, why are doing this to me?" Mrs
Jones called out to the accused, "Stop it". Mr Jones said, "Ring the police".
As she turned away, she fell over a lounge chair. She regained her feet, and she and Aaron ran out of the front door to the house across the road. She tried to ring "OOO", without success. She asked the householder, Mrs
Giancarlini, to ring them and ran back. Mrs Jones saw the accused running through the carport with his blue bag in his hand. He jumped into the driver's seat of the family vehicle, a Tarago van, and locked the door. Mrs Giancarlini stood in front of the car. Mrs Jones pulled her out of the way. The accused drove off. Mrs Jones found her husband on the floor in the doorway of the kitchen and family room. There was blood around. There was an incision above
Mr Jones' left nipple. The ambulance was called.

In her oral evidence-in-chief Mrs Jones said that, at the time Mr Keir was consulted, she thought that the accused's behaviour was due to smoking marijuana. Mr Keir never said that the symptoms could possibly be schizophrenia. The accused had complained about her putting something in his lunch over a period of months. That started not long after they consulted Mr
Keir. The accused said "You've got to be putting something in it; it tastes funny". Mrs Jones tried to reason with him but without avail. On the accused's visits to the house in the period September 1994 to January 1995, there was no problem between Mr Jones and the accused; they did not talk to each other because there had been a communication breakdown over a period of time. It was
Mr Jones who invited the accused to return home after he lost his car, because it would be easier for him to get to work. Mrs Jones had, on earlier occasions, seen the same blank expression on the accused's face as he had after he came home from work on 12 January. Prior to hearing her husband call out "Ben, what are you doing? Ben, what are you doing?", Mrs Jones had not heard any argument or conversation or discussion taking place between her husband and the accused. There were keys to the family vehicle in a cupboard on the back verandah, where the accused could easily have obtained them.

In cross-examination, Mrs Jones said that there was quite a dramatic change in the accused after his eighteenth birthday. His behaviour was quite different from what it had been, so much so that they had sought professional help. The accused's symptoms at that time were that he tended to sleep in, was very difficult to get to work, had to be driven to work constantly to get him there on time. His lethargy was getting worse. When he started work at Ryde Council in 1993 he showered morning and afternoon. Now he would fall asleep on his bed in his work clothes. He just stopped showering. He gave no reason why he would not shower. He started sleeping with his work clothes on. He wore heavy clothes all the time. When chastised about driving too fast, he said the driving instructor told him to follow the speed limit signs. Mrs Jones showed him the book of driving rules. He insisted that he was doing what the instructor had told him to do. He believed that he had to drive at 100 kph in a 100 kph zone. Before he left home in September 1994, the accused would not eat at home because of his belief that Mrs Jones was putting something in his food. On one occasion she told him to take the plate of food to the police station and to have it analysed. He just screamed and turned the plate over on the table. The only reason he gave for his belief that she was putting something in his food was that it tasted funny. Mr Jones was never an aggressive person, always a negotiator. He did not even retaliate on an occasion when the accused became angry and pushed him. The accused told Mrs
Jones that he had given up cannabis, but she did not believe him because the symptoms were persisting. When he returned home in January 1995, the accused appeared to be unusually flat; he was very quiet and stared blankly. It continued to be a problem to make him shower or change his clothes and he continued to sleep in his clothes. He was restless, walking in and out of rooms, in and out of the house. Mrs Jones knew that on 4 May 1995 the accused was forcibly given medication in gaol. Within a week, he was talking to her for the first time since he had been taken to gaol. He is slowing turning back to the way he was before he was eighteen, coming to show affection towards her.

Ms Goodwin said in her statement that she had been the accused's girlfriend since August 1994 (a period of about five months prior to the stabbing episode). The accused had told her that he had been anally raped at work when he passed out after smoking cannabis and drinking alcohol. He offered as his reason for that belief that when he woke up his backside hurt. The accused also told Ms Goodwin that he thought his workmates had laced his cannabis and cigarettes with heroin as a means of causing him to black out so they could do what they did to him. Thereafter, the accused had always been very moody and withdrawn. He came to believe that people were trying to poison him and was very wary about buying take-away food or cigarettes, believing that the shop owner was in league with his workmates. Because of this, she generally cooked whatever he ate. The accused had told her that whenever he blacked out he was probably being sexually assaulted by people including his father. He said that everyone was doing it to him. The accused also said that he could read minds and that everyone lied to him. He said he heard voices of friends and strangers in his head, sometimes laughing out loud in her presence at what the voices were saying to him. He sometimes told her what he believed other people in the streets were thinking. In October or November 1994, the accused told Ms Goodwin that her voice had come into his head and told him that she had contracted AIDS. He thought he had AIDS too and became very depressed. While waiting for his own test results (which proved to be negative) he had written out something like a will because, he said, he would rather be dead than have AIDS. On the afternoon and evening of 12 January 1995, Ms Goodwin spoke twice to the accused on the telephone while he was at his parents house. She detected nothing untoward, saying that he appeared to be in good spirits. Ms Goodwin had never seen the accused display an aggressive attitude towards anyone.

Aaron Jones said in his statement that he was thirteen years of age at the time of the stabbing episode. He saw the accused holding the knife in his right hand at shoulder level, with the knife near his shoulder and the point towards Mr Jones. Mr Jones was already bleeding; there was blood over the front of his shirt. Aaron saw his father pick up the chair. He was trying to use the chair to ward the accused off. The accused was trying to get around the chair to get at his father. Mr Jones was backing away. After Mrs Jones had been across the road to call the police, Aaron had a conversation with the accused from outside the house, through the flyscreen door, in which the accused said, "Don't worry Aaron, I won't touch you." Aaron next saw the accused in the backyard. The accused was looking around the yard, as if looking for something or someone. The accused stared at Aaron. Shortly after, Aaron saw the accused come from the house and walk towards the family Tarago van which was parked in the street. He did not see the accused again that night.

Mrs Giancarlini said in her evidence that she saw the accused go to the family vehicle. Mrs Giancarlini stood in front of the vehicle and asked him to stop. The accused told her, "Move, or I'll hurt you." Mrs Jones pulled her out of the way. The accused got into the vehicle and drove away. 
Constable Newby said in her statement that she was patrolling in a police vehicle with Probationary Constable Francis at about 2 am on Friday 13 January 1995. She apprehended the accused in a reserve. He was sweating profusely and was carrying a sports carry bag and a back pack. He was asked to remove his boots and a small knife was seen inside one of them. The accused said he was carrying it for protection. Four further knives were found in the back pack. One of them had red coloured stains on the blade near the handle. The accused said they were for his work. Car keys were found in the carry bag. The accused was arrested (for carrying the knives) and taken to Campbelltown Police Station by Constable Newby and Probationary Constable Francis. In an interview carried out at about 3 am on Friday 13 January 1995 (which was tendered in typed form), the accused confirmed that he carried the knife in his boot for self-protection and said he did not know this was against the law. Asked for the purpose for carrying the other knives he said, "Just to transfer from house to house, they're for my work." Asked about the car keys, the accused said he was just transferring them. He then identified some of the keys as belonging to a Toyota owned by one David Last. Asked what he was doing at 2.10 am in the reserve at Rosemeadow, the accused said he was stopping to go to the toilet. He said he had been left by "Dave" near the Rosemeadow Shopping Centre and he had walked from there. He said he had intended to go to another friend's house, named Mike. He said he was in the Campbelltown area just to visit his friend.

Detective Sergeant Duncan said in his statement that he spoke to the accused at Campbelltown Police Station at about 7.30 am on 13 January 1995. The account of that conversation, as it appears in Detective Sergeant Duncan's statement is as follows: "I said to the Defendant, `Do you know why we are here to talk to you?' He said, `I guess it's about being arrested in the park.' I said, `No. We want to talk to you about the incident with your Dad that occurred at your home about pm last night.' He said, `Nothing happened that I can remember.' I said, `We want to talk to you about the stabbing of your father.' The Defendant made no apparent reaction or reply to my statement. I said, `There's no easy way to tell you this, I believe that you stabbed your father in the chest with a knife and as a result of that your father had died in hospital. Do you understand what I'm saying?' He said, `Yeah, I understand, but I don't remember anything like that happening.' I said, `Before you say anything further, I will caution you that you are not obliged to say anything further about this matter unless you wish, as anything you say may be recorded and later used in evidence. Do you understand that?' He said, `Yes'." 
In is oral evidence, Detective Sergeant Duncan said that, during that conversation, the accused appeared to be dazed, emotionless and "on another plain". In his experience, the lack of response was unusual. It led him to think that the accused might be suffering from schizophrenia. (That, of course, was not an expert opinion but it conveyed the observation that the accused's flat emotional state was outside the norm in the witness' experience.) 
The electronically recorded interview carried out by Detective Sergeant Duncan (and the typed transcript of the interview) was consistent with Detective Sergeant Duncan's impression. The accused spoke in a soft and monotonous tone of voice. He maintained the same posture throughout the interview, hardly moving from beginning to end. He gave a rather patchy account of the mealtime events which preceded the stabbing episode. This was broadly consistent with Mrs Jones' account of those events. He maintained throughout that he had no recollection of any altercation with his father or of the stabbing. He gave a rather incoherent account of his movements between leaving the house and being apprehended some hours later. This amounted to little more than that he had allegedly met up with a friend who had driven him to a point close to where he was apprehended. This was inconsistent with the family vehicle having been found nearby, as was the fact. He did not recall driving the family vehicle that night. He did not recall leaving the house. His first recollection was being in David Last's vehicle, driving round. The accused's response to questions about the stabbing was as unemotional as it was to the more mundane matters about which he was asked.
 
Constable Stroud described the premises in his statement. He took the photographs which were tendered in evidence. He also undertook other routine police procedures.

Constable Wigfall's evidence is not material.

Dr Hughes, whose statement was tendered, attended Mr Jones at Westmead Hospital when the deceased was brought there by ambulance. There was no cardiac output. The chest cavity was opened but nothing could be done. Mr Jones was declared dead.

Dr Ellis performed a post-mortem examination. There was a single stab wound located on the left anterior chest wall. It was situated above the left nipple. Further details of the wound were provided. The estimated depth of the wound from the skin was 10.5 cm. It terminated within the right ventricular cavity of the heart so that the exact terminating point of the wound could not be determined. A full depth of approximately 12 to 13 cm was estimated. Apart from bruises, no other injury was observed. Dr Ellis' opinion was that death had occurred as a result of blood loss from injury to the heart caused by a stab wound to the chest.

Finding of murder, absent defences 
There is no material inconsistency between the various witnesses concerning the events of 12 and 13 January 1995. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that those events occurred in the manner recounted by them.

No-one witnessed the actual stabbing. That the accused stabbed Mr Jones is, however, agreed (and would, in any event, have been inferred). That Mr Jones died as a result of the accused's act is also agreed (and is, in any event, clear beyond question). What then of intent? There is the actual stabbing to the chest. There are Mr Jones' words, which bespeak attack rather than any question of accident. There is the accused's conduct, immediately after the stabbing, in trying to get at Mr Jones again with the knife. I would be satisfied that the accused very probably intended to kill Mr Jones. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he intended at least to cause him really serious injury (that is, grievous bodily harm).

It follows that, absent a partial defence of diminished responsibility and a defence of mental illness, the elements of the crime of murder are made out.

Evidence relating to defences and primary findings 
Each of the psychiatrists whose reports were tendered in evidence (Dr
Westmore, Dr Barclay and Dr Lucas) had incorporated in their reports elements of history from various sources including the accused, his mother and his girlfriend. These passages in the reports were tendered, without objection, as evidence of the truth of what was stated and not merely as an assumed history upon which the medical experts had formed their respective opinions. There was substantial consistency between the histories. They contained the following elements: 
Prior to the stabbing episode, the accused believed that people, including his mother, were trying to poison his food with heroin and fly spray. He thought they were trying to kill him. When he had eaten, he felt as if body was not there. He avoided eating much for this reason and, in consequence, lost a lot of weight. He also thought his cigarettes were being poisoned because they did not taste right.

There were times when the accused lost awareness of time passing. He believed that during those times he was sexually molested by his father and by workmates. He had no actual memory of being molested. Afterwards, he felt sick inside and his body felt weird.

He came to believe that he had contracted AIDS as a result of being molested and that he had transmitted the disease to his girlfriend. This had resulted in suicidal thoughts.

The accused heard other people thinking abusive thoughts about him.

On an occasion, when his mother complained that he had been driving too fast, his response was that his instructor had told him he had to drive at whatever speed was specified by the speed limit signs.

He ceased to shower regularly, to the point where he became smelly. He also took to sleeping in his clothes. He explained this conduct as being a deterrent against sexual molestation. He also wore inappropriate clothes and unnecessary layers of clothing.

He had given up using cannabis because he thought that might have been the cause of his delusional ideas. His aberrant mental experiences lessened as a result, but did not cease.

Subsequent to the stabbing episode he had improved markedly on medication, but his abnormal mental experiences had not completely resolved.

There is a consistency between the histories obtained by the psychiatrists and the evidence of Mrs Jones and Ms Goodwin concerning the accused's behaviour prior to and subsequent to the stabbing episode (including the accused's statements concerning his own mental processes which are recorded in the histories). Finding: I am comfortably satisfied, certainly beyond a mere balance of probabilities, that the accused's behaviour and his mental processes were as they appear from the evidence of Mrs Jones and Ms Goodwin and from the histories.

Mental state: expert evidence and findings 
I will now review the opinion evidence of the expert witnesses concerning the accused's mental state.

The following is an extract from Dr Westmore's report of 11 April 1996.
 "Mr Jones suffers from a schizophrenic illness. The differential diagnosis is that of a drug induced psychosis. This second diagnosis is unlikely as there would be no active substance (cannabis) in his system at this time and the recurrence of his symptoms, after so many months of being drug free, makes it almost certain he has a schizophrenic primary process illness. The use of cannabis, heavily over several years, more likely than not precipitated the acute onset of his illness and probably aggravated the psychotic condition.
Nevertheless, there seems little doubt on the history he provides that he does have a primary process schizophrenic illness.

While he can provide little clear history to link his illness to his offending behaviour, he has no clear recollections to enable us to do that, in a retrospective sense he reports believing, for a number of months, that his father was sexually interfering with him and apparently had the same views regarding a number of other people. He also acknowledges that there were pressures at home and he was being asked to leave home, presumably due to the family conflict.

My view would be that this man does have the defence of mental illness available to him, he has a disease of the mind, schizophrenia. It is likely at the time he would have been deprived of the capacity to know that his actions were wrong, this on the basis that he was suffering the delusional belief that his father was sexually interfering with him and, indeed, there were attempts, possibly by his mother, to poison him." 
In his oral evidence-in-chief, Dr Westmore was asked about the accused's claim that he had no recollection of the stabbing episode. The doctor said that this was explicable as a feature of the psychotic disturbance or as unconscious repression of a painful memory.

The doctor was asked about the partial defence of diminished responsibility.
He agreed that the accused was suffering from an abnormality of the mind which would have substantially reduced his mental responsibility for his actions.

The doctor acknowledged that there was some evidence that the accused knew he would get into trouble after his behaviour, but it did not follow that the accused understood that his behaviour was wrong in a moral sense. Dr Westmore also agreed that the accused could not reason about that matter with a moderate degree of sense and composure. The doctor said that the accused was deprived of the ability to think and reason as an ordinary person would because of his mental illness.

In cross-examination, Dr Westmore agreed that the accused was suffering from an abnormality of the mind, consisting of a disease, which substantially impaired his mental responsibility for his acts. He further agreed that the accused was delusionally driven to commit the act and that his ability to exercise willpower to control his physical acts was grossly impaired.

Dr Westmore further agreed that because of the delusions, the accused was incapable of reasoning about right and wrong according to ordinary standards, and that he was incapable of taking into account considerations which go to make right and wrong.

Dr Westmore agreed that, on the history, the accused's mental symptoms were not due to cannabis use or alcohol but were due to his illness of schizophrenia.

Dr Barclay wrote two reports concerning the accused which were tendered in evidence. The first dated 1 April 1995, related to an examination on 14 March 1995. The second dated 24 January 1996, related to an examination on 11 December 1995.

On the second occasion, the accused had commenced medication and had gained some insight into his condition. The following are extracts from Dr Barclay's second report: "Ben cannot remember any particular argument with his father on the night he stabbed him. Up to that time most of the history we have is of paranoid ideas about his mother putting something in his food. He now gives a history, however, that links his father into his paranoid ideas and establishes the reason for him stabbing his father. He says that just as he believed that during his periods of unconsciousness brought about by whatever was being put in his food and his cigarettes he was being sexually interfered with at work, the thought had come into his head that his father was sexually interfering with him during those periods of time. Ben can provide no explanation why he had those thoughts and certainly he makes no suggestion, nor is there any suggestion, that this is true in any way, or that there was ever any sexual interference by the father with the boy. This is clearly a delusional thought and the product of the young man's schizophrenic illness and is as certain as one can be the delusion that underlies the reason for Ben stabbing his father.
 . . . 
Ben has suffered auditory hallucinations, he has had paranoid delusions, thought disorder, impairment of mental functioning with deterioration of motivation, deterioration of personal care and deterioration of inter-personal relationships. The diagnosis is schizophrenia aggravated by marijuana. This constitutes a disease of the mind. He had a specific delusional idea about his father. At the time of commission of the act of stabbing his father Ben was suffering a disease of the mind, was under the influence of his delusions and was, at the time, unable to reason as would a normal man about the rightness and wrongness of his act. In my opinion Ben meets the requirements of the so called McNaghten Defence of not guilty on the grounds of mental illness." 
In his oral evidence in chief, Dr Barclay said, concerning the electronically recorded police interview, that the accused appeared to be remarkably immobile and lacking in expression of emotion. This was a recognisable psychiatric feature called "flatness of affect" and was indicative of a disordered mental state. Detective Sergeant Duncan's observations, when recounted to the doctor, were indicative of the same condition.

Dr Barclay agreed that the accused's claimed inability to remember the episode was consistent with acute psychosis.

As to the partial defence of diminished responsibility, Dr Barclay was of the opinion that the accused was suffering from an abnormality of the mind, arising from schizophrenia, which was a disease of the mind, which probably also arose from a genetically mediated abnormality of brain function, and which substantially impaired the accused's mental responsibility for his act.
Dr Barclay said that, in this case, "the (accused's) willpower was overwhelmed by his delusional beliefs; he was acting in accordance with the delusional beliefs that he held so that he was not able to control his physical acts by his willpower as a normal man would be expected to be able to do".

As to the defence of mental illness, Dr Barclay agreed he was satisfied that the accused would have understood the nature and quality of his act but would not have been able to reason about the wrongness of it with a moderate degree of sense and composure. He agreed that, because of the delusions, the accused was incapable of reasoning about rightness or wrongness according to ordinary standards.

Dr Barclay also discounted the possibility that the accused's abnormal mental processes were attributable to cannabis or alcohol.

Dr Barclay also agreed that, in this case, even if one could not identify the precise delusional belief which led the accused to think it was necessary or at least important to kill his father, there was an overwhelming probability that such a belief arose from some compelling delusional idea. He agreed that, in the absence of some rational reason appearing from the circumstances of the case, the overwhelming probability was that it was some delusional idea that was the driving force, even if one could not identify precisely what that idea was.

As to the particular delusion that his father was molesting him, Dr Barclay agreed that the delusion would have been present at the time of the stabbing episode.

Dr Barclay adhered to his view expressed in his report, concerning the specific delusional belief of molestation by the father. He said that was the most likely explanation for what had occurred and was, more probably than not, the true explanation.

The following are extracts from Dr Lucas' report of 8 April 1996.
 "Mr Jones is suffering from schizophrenia. Its date of onset is difficult to determine but is likely to have been during 1993. The onset is best described as insidious and without any florid psychotic symptoms noted by others. During Mr Jones made statements to his mother indicative of some of his paranoid beliefs but he made no frank revelation of his symptoms until he discussed some with his girlfriend late that year. Clearly, he suffered paranoid and persecuting delusions, ideas of reference and disturbances of thought. As well, there was depression and lability of mood.
 . . . 
The principal psychosocial factor leading to the stabbing of his father was Mr Jones' schizophrenia and his paranoid beliefs regarding in his food (sic) causing blackouts and rendering him vulnerable to sexual tampering which he was unable to remember.

During the period leading up to his father's death Mr Jones was suffering from an illness which in itself was a major psychosocial stressor. His paranoid beliefs were very disturbing and perplexing to him. I would describe his illness as a severe psychosocial stressor.
 . . . 
Mr Jones is suffering from schizophrenia. I have been asked to consider if he has a psychiatric defence to the charge of murder. In my opinion Mr Jones has the defence of mental illness. Schizophrenia is a major psychiatric disorder which amounts to a disease of the mind. At the time he stabbed his father it would appear, on the information available from Mr Jones and from other sources, that he was suffering from a defect of reason due to this disease of the mind. Although he is unable to recall the stabbing I believe it is reasonable to in a sense fill in the gaps from what we know of his illness and its particular symptoms. If we do this, I believe it is reasonable to say that Mr Jones would have been aware of the physical nature and quality of his act but would not have been able to reason about its wrongness with a moderate degree of sense and composure. He believed that drugs were being put into his food, both at home and in food purchased from retail outlets, and that at work and in his home the drugs thus consumed had caused him to have blackouts during which he was sexually tampered with by workmates and on occasion his father. He was unable to remember the sexual assaults he believed he had been subjected to. His return home was accompanied by increased anxiety about drugs in his food but he thought he could not refuse food offered by his mother. His pattern of symptoms and his behaviour as described by Mr Jones, his mother and his girlfriend, supports the opinion I have given." 
Dr Lucas was not called to give oral evidence.

Ms Robilliard is a psychologist. She interviewed the accused twice in February 1995, and once in April 1995. Her report dated 12 May 1995 was tendered. The following are extracts from that report.
 "Ben is a very quiet and non spontaneous young man who has maintained a pathologically flat affect throughout the course of our meetings. He does respond to questioning but very seldom volunteers any information of his own volition.
 . . . 
Ben is of average intelligence.
 . . . 
I am also of the opinion that Ben is suffering a mental illness, possibly of schizophrenic type. He described worrying auditory hallucinations and persecutory thinking over the preceding year, and I believe he continues to be troubled by these phenomena which he does admit. I think it quite likely Ben's mental state also prohibits him from recalling details of the alleged offence.
 . . .

Ben's continued inability to register any significant emotional response to his father's death is commensurate with a pathological lack of emotional response, often encountered in schizophrenia. I believe Ben probably did entertain some paranoid delusions concerning his father at the time of the alleged offence, however he is unable to describe what they were." 
The expert opinion evidence was substantially consistent as between witnesses.

Findings: I am comfortably satisfied, beyond a mere balance of probabilities, that the accused's mental state and mental processes were as these witnesses have deposed, with one exception. That is this: I am not satisfied that the operative delusion was the accused's belief that his father was molesting him while he was unconscious.

I accept that the accused has no memory of the incident and, accordingly, no memory of his own state of mind at the time. So there can be no direct evidence of the accused's state of mind at the time. In these circumstances, I am not comfortable with the expert evidence that the operative delusion is likely to have been that Mr Jones was molesting the accused.

However, there is no explanation for the accused's conduct other than being actuated by a delusional belief of some kind. The accused had not been behaving violently. There was no rational reason for him to do so arising from the circumstances of the day. He and his father did not have a relationship characterised by violence. Quite the contrary: Mr Jones was a pacifist and a negotiator by nature, and had displayed that character in his dealings with his son. The relationship had also been distant rather than intimate due to a break down in communication between the two. No incident had occurred to account for a violent response by the accused. The accused had been in a rather flat mood that day and for the week before. He was anything but agitated. He suffered from schizophrenia. This involved a propensity to generate delusional beliefs, some of which are known. Others may not be known.

The only reasonably plausible explanation for what occurred is that the accused's conduct was driven by a delusional belief which led him to think, in his disordered state of mind, that it was necessary or at least very important to kill or disable his father. Dr Barclay agreed that there was an overwhelming probability that this was so even if a specific delusional belief could not be identified as the operative cause. I so find.

Defences: ultimate findings 
I make the following findings in view of what I have thus far recorded.

I find that, at the time of the act causing Mr Jones' death, the accused was suffering from such abnormality of mind, that is, the disease of schizophrenia, as substantially impaired his mental responsibility for the act. The partial defence of diminished responsibility is, therefore, made out. Accordingly, whereas the accused would otherwise have been convicted of murder, he may not be so convicted and the crime would be reduced to one of manslaughter subject to the defence of mental illness.

As to the defence of mental illness, I find that the accused was mentally ill at the time when he did the act charged, in that the accused was acting under such a defect of reason from disease of the mind, that is, schizophrenia, that he could not reason calmly about the moral quality of what he was doing. On authority, it follows that he did not know he was doing what was wrong. The defence of mental illness is, accordingly, made out. There must then be a special verdict that the accused is not guilty by reason of mental illness and an order pursuant to <case> of the Mental Health (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1900 .
 
Orders 
I direct the entry of a verdict of not guilty on the ground of mental illness.
Pursuant to <case> of the Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1900 , I order that the accused be detained in strict custody in the Long
Bay Prison Hospital, Sydney, or in such other place as the Mental Health
Review Tribunal may later determine, until released by due process of law.
 * * * 
