

R versus Georgel George Alexandroaia No. 60353 of 1995 Criminal law and procedure [1995] NSWSC 12 (28 August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL, GROVE AND DUNFORD JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 30 June 1995 #DATE 7:7:1995 #ADD 28:8:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    Dr G.D. Woods QC and C. Pike 
Solicitors for the Appellant:   T.A. Murphy, Legal Aid Commission 
Counsel for the Crown:      W.G. Dawe QC 
Solicitors for the
Crown:     SE O'Connor, Solicitor for Public
Prosecutions
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL, GROVE AND DUNFORD JJ: The appellant (Georgel George
Alexandroaia) is presently standing trial with one Robert James
Rowe before
Sully J and a jury on joint charges of murder and of kidnapping. He appealed to this Court pursuant to [s 5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against the refusal of the trial judge to discharge the jury and to adjourn the further hearing of the trial until he has had the opportunity to carry out further investigations. Sully J gave a certificate that his interlocutory judgment was a proper one for determination on appeal, and hence leave was unnecessary for the appellant to bring his appeal. At the conclusion of the hearing we ordered that the appeal be dismissed, and stated that our reasons would be given later. These then are our reasons.
This is the second trial of these charges, the jury at the first trial last year having failed to agree after a trial lasting two months.
The Crown case, stated briefly, is that on 8 June 1993 the two accused murdered one
Ronald Middleton and that on the previous day they unlawfully and by force took and carried Sharon Martin away against her will. The two victims lived in a de facto relationship.
Ms Martin gave evidence at the first trial that, after she had been kidnapped, the two accused returned to the place where they were holding her and boasted to her that they had shot Middleton. When she was released a week later, Martin went to the police and she was interviewed by
Det Inspector Davidson. On 14 June, the police arrested the two accused who have remained in custody since then.
The police subsequently searched Rowe's house, and Det Const McGrath found in a filing cabinet in Rowe's bedroom four photographs of a Uzi machine pistol. The next day, Rowe telephoned a couple named Gusic from custody and instructed them to dispose of a quantity of material which he had left with them. That material included the Uzi weapon (which upon testing has been shown to be the murder weapon) and some further photographs of it.
The case for the accused at the first trial was one of denial, including a denial that Martin had been kidnapped by anyone. Both the circumstances in which Martin gave her statements to Det Inspector Davidson and the evidence of
Det Const McGrath were disputed. The accused sought to raise the reasonable possibility that Middleton, who was said to be a drug dealer in the Kings
Cross area, was murdered by someone else in the drug scene who had then set the accused up in relation to that murder. Martin, who was a drug addicted prostitute, obtained her drugs from one Alex Mattar at the Budget Hotel and elsewhere in the Kings Cross area. We were informed that the Crown had led evidence at the first trial that it had been the plan of the two accused to murder Mattar as well as Middleton.
The new trial was fixed to commence on 26 June last, and it is expected to last for ten weeks. On 28 May, Ms Martin died as a result (it is thought) of a drug overdose, although the pathologist has not yet issued a final report of the postmortem examination. On 15 June, Det Const McGrath (who had given evidence of finding photographs of the murder weapon in Rowe's filing cabinet) fell to his death from the seventh floor of an inner city apartment block, apparently committing suicide. In the meantime, the Royal Commission into the
NSW Police Service being conducted by Wood J has been hearing evidence of police corruption involving the Kings Cross drug scene. A witness known by the pseudonym KX11 gave evidence that Mattar (from whom
Martin purchased her drugs) has been involved in a "marketing dispute" concerning the "right" to sell drugs at the Budget Hotel, and that he had the support of police officers in the "Sydney South" Police Region in his illegal activities. It has been disclosed that these allegations had earlier been investigated - apparently unsuccessfully - by Det Inspector Davidson (who had taken Martin's statement).
Both Inspector Davidson and Const McGrath were in the "South Sydney" Police
Region.
From this melange, the following theory has now been put forward: Mattar had arranged the death of Middleton, and Martin was involved with Mattar in that murder.
Police officers assisted Mattar to set the accused up for that murder. The appellant was selected for that purpose because he, too, had formed a relationship with Ms Martin (having picked her up as a prostitute), and Rowe had been associated with the appellant for some time. Martin was murdered by the administration of a lethal dose of drugs (called a "hot shot") in order to prevent her giving evidence which would have revealed information embarrassing to, it seems, the police and Mattar. Det Const McGrath had committed suicide rather than face another cross-examination in relation to his false evidence of finding the photograph's in Rowe's filing cabinet and, it seems, being forced to disclose the existence of an unlawful protection racket in which the police were involved.
In order to strengthen this theory, the appellant and Rowe sought an adjournment of the new trial until the coronial inquiries into the deaths of
Martin and McGrath were completed and until the Royal Commissioner had reported to the Governor. The latter was qualified during the hearing of the appeal, so that the adjournment was sought until "a point when these matters became a bit clearer (in the Commssion)." Hope was expressed that the inquest into Martin's death would reveal that she was murdered, and by someone "associated with the Kings Cross underworld", that the inquest into McGrath's death would reveal that he had been under pressure of "some kind relating to police impropriety or it may be that he has some connection with criminal conduct of an unconventional kind for a police officer", and that evidence in the Royal Commission would establish that the accused had been set up as result of a conspiracy between "Martin, Davidson, McGrath, possibly Mattar and other police and civilians unknown".
A request was made of the Royal Commissioner for material which could help the appellant in his case or an indication as to when it may be disclosed at the inquiry. A reply stated that the Commission was - "... unable to assist with the provision of any material that might assist in your client's defence, nor is it able to release any material or information that might be relevant to an application for an adjournment of the trial."
Although the appellant believes that he knows the identity of the informant KX11 who gave evidence before the Commission, he may be incorrect and in any event (it was said) KX11 was being kept under wraps and could not be traced.
It was frankly conceded that what was sought was the opportunity to conduct a fishing expedition, in the sense that the appellant was unable to say just how he would or could be assisted by such inquiries, but he nevertheless wished to investigate in order to find out whether or not there was anything there which may assist him in his trial. ((1)1 cf Associated
Dominions Assurance Society Pty Ltd versus John
Fairfax and Sons Pty Ltd [(1952) 72
WN 250] at 254) It was accepted that it was speculative that anything at all would be found, but it was nevertheless asserted that, in order that justice should not only be done but be seen to be done, ((2) Rex versus Sussex Justices; Ex parte McCarthy [(1924) 1 KB 256] at 259) the adjournment should have been granted to enable the appellant (and those advising him) to be satisfied that all had been done in his defence.
It is, of course, basic to the rules of natural justice that an accused must be given a reasonable chance to present his case, which necessarily includes a reasonable opportunity to prepare that case before being called upon to present it. ((3) Regina versus Thames Magistrates' Court; Ex parte Polemis [(1974) 1 WLR 1371] at 1375)The appearance that justice has been done is particularly important in a criminal trial, although it is important to stress that a new trial will not be ordered even where an adjournment has been wrongly refused unless a resulting miscarriage of justice has also been established in relation to the trial which then took place. ((4) McInnes versus The
Queen <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 575] at 590-591)
But even the need for an appearance of justice requires some limitation to be placed upon the right of an accused to delay his trial in order to conduct further investigations. It is where the line should be drawn which was debated in this appeal.
On behalf of the appellant, it was urged that the recent events leading up to the new trial date had the effect of generating a "reasonable possibility" that material was available which would be of "substantial assistance" to the case of the two accused. Upon that basis, it was said, they were entitled to an adjournment. On behalf of the Crown, it was submitted that a "real possibility" of such availability had to be shown, although it was concededthat the difference was possibly only a semantic one.
We do not believe that it is possible to formulate any hard and fast rule as to where the line should be drawn in every case. Each case must really depend upon its own circumstances. Nor do we think that it is profitable to apply directly to an application for an adjournment the tests expressed in relation to whether a party may inspect a subpoenaed document, where that party is required to identify expressly and with some precision the legitimate forensic purpose for which access is sought. ((5) Regina versus Saleam [(1989) 16
NSWLR 17] at 18) In a criminal case, that test is approached liberally, by asking (for example) whether it is "on the cards" that the documents would materially assist the accused. ((6) ibid (at 18)) But the need to prevent fishing expeditions in relation to documents in the possession of persons who are unwilling to allow them to be inspected is not quite the same as the nature of the investigation which is necessary even before the stage when subpoenas are issued. The extent of that investigation must by its very nature be wider than inspecting documents of which a legitimate forensic purpose to inspect can be shown.
In the present case, we are content to adopt the test proposed by the appellant as being appropriate. Was there a reasonable possibility that material of substantial assistance to his case would be obtained if the trial were delayed until the three inquiries were completed (or, so far as the Royal
Commission was concerned, until it was at least at a stage when its investigation into police corruption in relation to the Kings Cross drug scene was completed)? The test is not, of course, whether there is a reasonable possibility that the material obtained would provide a successful "defence" for the accused. Nevertheless, the strength of the theory being propounded by the accused is relevant to the test as we have stated it, although too much weight should not be afforded to that issue as it is usually impossible to judge the "defence" fairly in the absence of a proper investigation into the evidence available to support it.
Whether or not an adjournment should be granted is a matter which lies within the discretion of the trial judge. ((7) Conroy versus Conroy (1917) 17 SR at 682)
An appeal based upon the judge's refusal to grant an adjournment is thus one against the exercise of a discretion, and it will be allowed only where it has been established that the judge has erred in the proper exercise of that discretion. ((8) Ibid (at 684);
Collier-Garland (Properties) Pty Ltd v
Northern Transport Co Pty Ltd (1964) 82 WN [(Pt 1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s1.html) 125 at 127) There is a strong presumption in favour of the correctness of the decision, but that presumption will be overcome where it is shown that the judge has acted on some wrong principle, or has given weight to extraneous or irrelevant matters, or has failed to give weight or sufficient weight to relevant considerations, or has made a mistake as to the facts. Even if the precise nature of the error may not be discoverable, it is sufficient that the result was so unreasonable or plainly unjust that the appellate court may infer that there has been a failure properly to exercise that discretion. ((9) House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55
CLR 499] at 619-620) An appellate court may not, however, substitute its own findings of fact for those of the primary judge unless there was no evidence to support a particular finding, or the evidence is all one way or the judge has misdirected himself in relation to those facts. ((10)
Regina versus O'Donoghue [(1988) 34 A Crim R 397] at 401) If the appellate court is satisfied that there has been an injustice to one of the parties as a result of the judge's exercise of discretion, it is under a duty to review the order made. ((11) Maxwell versus Kenn [(1928) 1 KB 645] at 653; Collier-Garland
Pty Ltd versus Northern Transport Co Pty Ltd (at 127); Bloch versus Bloch <case>; [(1981) 37 ALR 55] at 330).
Three separate applications were made to Sully J for an adjournment two during the week which preceded the commencement of the trial and the third on the fourth day of the trial, the day before the appeal was heard by this
Court. The judge expressed the test which he applied in various ways at different times, but (put in their proper context) we do not accept that he posed the test in any way significantly different to the way we have accepted to be the appropriate test in the present case. He said, for example, that he was being invited to conclude that: " ... there is reason to think that the proceedings in the Royal
Commission will bring to light evidence which, if available to the accused, would assist them in their retrial..."
On another occasion, he said that what was being put forward was that: " ... there is a real likelihood that the continuing inquiries of the Royal
Commission will bring to light evidence upon the basis of which it will be possible, at the very least, to put before the jury in the present trial an hypothesis to the effect, in substance, that the murder of Mr Middleton can be sourced back, as it were, if not directly to Mr Mattar, then at least to some person or persons actively related to the criminal milieu in which, so it is postulated, Mr Middleton was himself an active participant.
On a third occasion, the judge said: "If I thought that there was to hand serious and credible evidence from which it might be reasonably supposed that any one of the three hypotheses I have summarised might be made out, I would be disposed to grant the application now made." .
As we have said, when put in their proper context, we do not understand those passages to mean other than the judge was looking to see whether there was a reasonable possibility that material of substantial assistance to the accused's case would be obtained if the trial were delayed in the way sought.
It is true that the judge expressed strong views as to the strength of the "defence" based upon the theory being propounded, describing it at one stage as "a very resourcefully spun web of pure speculation", and at another as "conjecture and speculation unsupported ... by any apparently credible evidence". (The third of the passages which we have quoted is based upon a similar view.) There are other such expressions, but the prospects that the "defence" will be successful do, as we have also said, have at least some relevance to the test as to whether an adjournment should be granted.
In the end, the judge refused the adjournment because (as he said more than once) he could not see: " ... that the material put forward is of such an obvious strength as would entitle this Court to find reasonably as a fact that there is so proximate a likelihood of one or other of those three alternatives being in fact established as would make it proper thereupon to adjourn the present trial."
Admittedly, taken from its context, that statement could be misunderstood. But once again, in its proper context, we interpret the judge there to be saying no more than that, upon the material before him, the reasonable possibility that the two accused would discover material to support their theory was not of such a strength as to warrant an adjournment. That is a finding of fact which was open to the judge, and it is not one which could be disturbed on appeal.
It is correctly conceded by the appellant that the judge was entitled to take into account (as he did) the strong public interest that, once fixed for hearing upon the basis that the parties were ready to proceed, a criminal trial should proceed with expedition without being deflected by collateral inquiries such as the three to which reference has been made. We regard as perhaps unfortunate the judge's insistence in his first refusal that "something wholly compelling, clearly and immediately cogent" was required before a second trial would be adjourned, but we understand from the subsequent judgments that the judge recognized the peculiar circumstances in the present case whereby each of the deaths and the disclosures in the Royal
Commission were very recent events which could not have been foreseen when the second trial date was fixed.
Accordingly, we could see no express error in the exercise of the discretion of the trial judge to refuse the application for an adjournment.
Nor do we accept the argument that the result was so "unreasonable or plainly unjust" that we should infer that there was nevertheless such an error made by the judge. We should add that, had the occasion arisen for this Court to have exercised its own discretion, ((12) [Criminal Appeal Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), [s5F(5)(b))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) we too would have refused the adjournment sought.
It was upon the basis of those conclusions that at the conclusion of the hearing we ordered that the appeal be dismissed. The order made by Sully J is affirmed.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/12.html  
