

Borg versus Howlett [1996] NSWSC 153 (24 May 1996) 
BORG V HOWLETT /95 
Wednesday 24 April 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a motion for summary judgment. 
The plaintiff commenced these proceedings for specific performance of an agreement to sell a horse. The defendant's defence essentially is mistake.
Although the plaintiff nowhere says, as is customary in these matters, that he does not know of any defence to the claim, it is clear that the plaintiff takes the position that there is no defence to his claim.

The undisputed facts are that the defendant is a horse breeder. He breeds between 12 and 20 foals a year. He keeps most of them but sells those which are surplus. He entered four horses in the "Foster's Australian Gold Series V
Yearling Sales". Horses which were entered in that sale were eligible for two of Australia's richest races. The defendant says that accordingly he entered four horses in the sale, but it was never his intention to sell three of them.
He did, however, intend to sell a colt whose sire was Southern Gentleman and whose dam was National Chimes and who appeared as Lot 109 in the Sale
Catalogue. One of the horses he desired to retain was listed in the Catalogue as Lot 101, the sire again being Southern Gentleman, but the dam, Max's
Desire. The sale took place by auction on 6 March 1994. The plaintiff's agent was the successful bidder for the horse described as Lot 109. The horse which was delivered was Lot 101. There is evidence from the plaintiff's agent that he would not have bought Lot 101 because "I am not a fan of horses from Max's
Desire as they seem to have a trade mark of `hitting their knee'". The defendant says that he only found out in February 1995. He shortly thereafter had a telephone conversation with the plaintiff's agent and explained the mistake. He offered to refund the purchase price and on 14 March 1996, shortly before the hearing, sent a cheque for the purchase price plus interest. The cheque was not accepted.

The plaintiff wants specific performance and to have the horse sired by
Southern Gentleman whose dam is National Chimes delivered to him.

Although relatively unusual, it is competent for the Court to give summary judgment in proceedings for specific performance in a proper case, see Jones and Goodhart on Specific Performance (Butterworths London 1986) pp 192 and following. However, as with all cases of summary judgment, the Court will only give such a judgment if the plaintiff is unarguably entitled to it, and even then, may in its discretion refuse an order if it can be seen that the circumstances of the case are such as to require closer investigation: Miles v Bull [[1969] 1 QB 258.] See also Spellson versus George [(1992) 26 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281992%29%2026%20NSWLR%20666 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Counsel for the parties addressed me on the law of mistake. They used terms such as "unilateral mistake" and "mutual mistake", but with respect, it was clear from the way they employed those terms that they had been reading different textbooks! It is probably best to avoid use of tags and to deal with the actual vitiating factor which is relied upon to resist the plaintiff's claim.

The plaintiff says the matter is quite simple. Mr Bellanto QC, who appeared with Mr John Bryson, for the plaintiff, says that the plaintiff made no mistake. He always sought to buy the colt whose dam was National Chimes. He did not know at the time of the sale that the defendant had made any mistake and the defendant is now bound to honour his contract. The defendant says that he made a mistake. He does not allege that the plaintiff knew about the mistake, but says that the mistake is sufficient to amount to a defence to the plaintiff's proceedings for specific performance.

Mr Adrian Gruzman for the defendant, also puts the defence another way. He says, in effect, that there was never any contract because there was never any meeting of the minds of the parties as to what was being bought and sold. His client intended to sell the horse whose dam was Max's Desire and the purchaser sought to purchase the horse whose dam was National Chimes. There is thus no contract and accordingly no basis for granting specific performance.

In reply, the plaintiff says that no-one can rely on his own mistake to avoid a contract, at least in the circumstances where the "innocent" party had no knowledge of the mistake at the time when it was made.

In Taylor versus Johnson <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 422], the High Court analysed a number of cases of mistake. It said that there were two lines of authority that govern the situation where one person makes a mistake which the other person, without necessarily contributing to that mistake, either knew or ought to have known that the other was making a mistake. Under one line of authority the contract is void both at law and in equity, but under the other, it was merely voidable and could be repudiated by the mistaken party or set aside in equity. The High
Court considered that the second line of authority should be followed.

As Jones and Goodhart say at p 68, "In some early cases, specific performance was refused even though the plaintiff had not contributed to the mistake and there were no other special circumstances, (Malins versus Freeman <case>; [(1837) 2 Keen 25]; [48 ER 537]; Manser versus Back <case>; [(1848) 6 Hare 443]; [67 ER 1239]; Day versus Wells <case>; [(1861) 30 Beav 220]; [54 ER 872]; Wycombe Railway Co versus Donnington Hospital [(1866) 1 Ch
App 268] at 273, per Knight Bruce LJ), and in one such case it was said: `That a person shall not be compelled by this court specifically to perform an agreement which he never intended to enter into, if he has satisfied the court that it was not his real agreement, is well established,' (Wood versus Scarth <case>; [(1855) 2 K & J 33] at 42; <case>; [69
ER 682] at 686) ...
It seems clear, however, that those decisions go too far and that where the plaintiff has not contributed to the mistake the defendant will be ordered to perform the contract unless `a hardship amounting to injustice would have been inflicted upon him by holding him to his bargain, and it was unreasonable to hold him to it' (Tamplin versus James [(1880) 15 Ch D 215] at 221, per James LJ. See also Hexter versus Pearce [[1900] 1 Ch 341] at 346)."
Spry on Equitable Remedies 4th Ed pp 154-155 discusses these and other cases on the subject to the same effect.

The cases were reviewed by the High Court of Australia in Slee versus Warke <case>; [(1949) 86 CLR 271.] In that case, Slee owned a hotel. He agreed to lease it to Warke and give Warke an option to purchase to be exercised during the first year of the lease provided that the sale was not to be completed before the end of that year. That proviso did not form part of the formal agreement, nor was it known to the purchaser. Warke sought a declaration and also specific performance, though abandoned specific performance at the trial. The High
Court (Rich, Dixon and Williams, JJ) referred to the passage in Wood v
Scarth which I have quoted and said at 277 that the passage must be read in the light of the facts of that case and that Page Wood VC evidently considered it would be a hardship on the defendant to compel him specifically to perform the contract. The Court said at 278, "Where there is a unilateral mistake on the part of the defendant not contributed to by the plaintiff, the question whether the Court should in the exercise of its discretion make a decree for specific performance or leave the plaintiff to sue for damages must, we think, depend on the circumstances of the particular case. But the general rule governing the exercise of the discretion is, we think, that laid down by
James, LJ in Tamplin versus James [(1879) 15 Ch D 215] at p ." 
However, there is a decision of the Court of Appeal in Boulas v
Angelopoulos (1991) 5 BPR 11477 in which Kirby, P with whom Samuels, JA agreed, relied on Day versus Wells as authority for the proposition that there was a "principle that a Court of Equity may, in its discretion, decline to make an order for specific performance of a contract for the sale of land where an auctioneer and a vendor are at cross purposes as to the reserve price for the property." The Court of Appeal considered (at 11490) that a Court of
Equity could, where one party is labouring under an honest mistake not contributed to by the other party, decline to grant specific performance but protect the purchaser by an order for costs as happened in Day's case at
ER 874. The Court does not appear to have been referred to Tamplin versus James or Slee versus Warke. Nonetheless, the decision is that of a majority of the
Court of Appeal. The third Judge, Gleeson, CJ, decided the appeal without reference to this point.

There is also authority for the proposition that the Court will never, even in a case of hardship, refuse specific performance if the misconception is due entirely to the defendant's own carelessness: Dell versus Beasley [[1959] NZLR .] 
The defendant was given one final chance by Windeyer, J to put his pleadings into a proper form. That chance was taken up at the last hour by the defendant, though he did not give the appropriate notice to the plaintiff of the amendments as required by Windeyer, J, but the plaintiff makes no point about this. The defence, however, does not rely on hardship. It merely asserts a mistake was made by the defendant and thus, it says, the defendant is not bound by the agreement and alleges that the defendant has sought to rescind the contract. It also alleges that the contract is void or voidable ab initio for mistake.

If the only defence is mistake plus hardship as laid down in Tamplin v
James and Slee versus Warke, then the present defence is inadequate. On the other hand, if there is a broader principle as found by the Court of Appeal in the Boulas case, then there may be a defence. Although to an academic, not bound by precedent, the Boulos case may seem to be out of kilter with modern authority, it is a decision of the Court of Appeal and it does not seem to me that I can merely disregard it. In the light of the decision of the
Court of Appeal in Boulos' case, the principle must be (until the High
Court or the Court of Appeal says otherwise), that whenever a mistake is made by a party to a sale transaction, Equity has a discretion as to whether to enforce specific performance or to leave the parties to their remedy at law.
However, it is far more likely for Equity to exercise that discretion against specific performance where either the mistake has been contributed to by the "innocent" party, or alternatively, where there would be hardship to the "guilty" party.

On this principle, as the exercise of the discretion must depend upon the facts as they are held to exist by the trial judge, it is inappropriate to grant summary judgment.

I should now deal with some other matters which came out in the oral argument.
The first is whether specific performance lies for the sale of a race horse.
Mr Bellanto QC and Mr Bryson put that because there is no chance of going into the market place and buying a horse that is anywhere near the equivalent of what the purchaser thought he was buying, the sale of the horse is in the "special chattels" category. No authorities were cited. I would have thought there is a lot to be said for the proposition that a race horse of a certain breeding was a special chattel within the meaning of the term as discussed by the Hight Court in Dougan versus Ley <case>; [(1946) 71 CLR 142] at 151. However, strangely enough there does not appear to be any reported case on horses being the subject of specific performance decrees.
Indeed, it is to be noted that not even in the leading book on the subject,
Pannam's The Horse & The Law 2nd Ed (LBC 1986), is there any mention at all of proceedings for specific performance for the sale of a horse.
Although my research has not been exhaustive, I have not come across any reported instance of specific performance of a contract for the sale of a horse in Australia, New Zealand or England.

Furthermore, cases such as Pearne versus Lisle [(1749) Amb 76]; [27 ER 47] at 48 tell against it. In that case, Lord Hardwicke declined to grant specific performance of a contract to provide negro slaves. His Lordship used the analogy of stock on farm and indicated that there was nothing special about the subject matter.

Whilst the exact words used by his Lordship are now outdated, and, indeed, the whole thrust of what he said would now be considered abhorrent, the general principle he espoused tells against the plaintiff's proposition. Of course there are considerable distinctions between a thoroughbred horse and a manual worker. In any event, it will be necessary for the Judge at the hearing to consider whether, in the light of the time that has passed since the contract was made and the way in which the defendant has trained the horse, that it may be inappropriate to grant specific performance. At least part of this is caught up in the defence of laches which the defendant has pleaded. This seems to me another reason why I should not grant summary judgment.

The next problem is the plaintiff's assertion that the defendant cannot benefit from his own wrong. Although this maxim is found in many aspects of law, when properly analysed it is actually a tag to describe a discrete number of legal principles which may be relevant in various situations. It is certainly not universally true. One has to see in the individual case whether there is a defence, for instance, of unclean hands, or a defence of illegality, or a person seeking to rely on non-performance of a condition because of his or her own default. In the instant case, the probable application of the "own wrong" principle is that stated in Dell versus Beasley supra, that if the misconception of the vendor was due solely to his own carelessness, then equity is unlikely in its discretion to refuse specific performance. However, if such a principle is to be relied on, I would have thought it would need to have been pleaded in a reply. There is no reply on the Court file making this allegation. Once a reply was filed, then the onus of proving the fact would be on the plaintiff and it would not appear to be a case for summary judgment.

The final matter which I should consider is the allegation by the defendant that there is no contract because there was no consensus ad idem. The allegation made by the defendant is that he intended to sell the colt whose dam was Max's Desire, but the purchaser thought that he was buying the colt whose dam was National Chimes.

There is some authority in the early cases that this type of situation may lead a court to conclude that there is no contract. In the well-known case of
Raffles versus Wichelhaus <case>; [(1854) 2 H & C 906]; 159
ER 375 (a very slightly fuller account of the case is published in [(1864) 33
LJ Ex 160)], the Court of Exchequer held that there was no contract where purchasers said that they meant to purchase the cotton off a ship named "Peerless" sailing from Bombay in October and the seller said that he intended to sell the cotton arriving by another ship called the "Peerless" which sailed from Bombay in December. The same result occurred in Massachusetts in Kyle v
Kavanagh [106 Mass 356]; [4 Am Rep 560] (1869). In that case the plaintiff agreed to sell to the defendant four lots of land in Prospect Street, Waltham. The plaintiff sued to recover the price of the land. The defendant pleaded that he had intended to purchase land on another Prospect Street, Waltham, in no way connected with what was in the deed of conveyance. The trial judge directed the jury that "If the defendant was negotiating for one thing and the plaintiff was selling another thing, and if their minds did not agree as to the subject-matter of the sale, they could not be said to have agreed and to have made a contract."
The jury returned a verdict for the defendant and the plaintiff appealed.
Although the appeal was upheld, the appeals court considered that the Judge gave the correct direction to the jury on the current issue, saying at p 563 of the American Reports, "This ruling is in accordance with the elementary principles of the law of contracts, and was correct. Spurr versus Benedict [99
Mass 463] (1868)." (Spurr versus Benedict is not available in Australia as far as I am aware).

Those cases were decided at a time when the subjective theory of contract was still in vogue. The history and the abandonment of the subjective theory are discussed in the High Court's judgment in Taylor versus Johnson supra. When the objective theory came to hold sway, Holmes, J tried to translate the Raffles v Wichelhaus doctrine into the new circumstances by saying in his lecture on
Void and Voidable Contracts in the Common Law (M Howe edition 1963 at p ), "The true ground of the decision was not that each party meant a different thing from the other ... but that each said a different thing. The plaintiff offered one thing, the defendant expressed his assent to another." 
The matter was also considered in Frigaliment Importing Co Ltd versus BNS
International Sales Corp [190 F Supp 116 (US] District Court New
York) (1960). In that case, there was a problem with the word "chicken"; did it refer to a chicken suitable for broiling and frying or stewing chicken as well. Friendly, J followed Holmes' dictum and held that "chicken" was used in the narrower sense. However, the same Judge in Dadourian Export Corp v
United States <case>; [291 F (2d) 178 (Second] Circuit) (1961) shows a movement away from Holmes' position. Dadourian involved the question as to what was a cargo net?
Friendly, J dissented, indicating that whilst he was of the view that if the seller intended to sell surplus no matter what its description, and the buyer only intended to buy a net made of manilla rope and the error is discovered before the goods are delivered, there is a lot to be said for the view which his Honour thought had been taken in English law that there was an entitlement for the buyer either to rescind or to terminate the contract. His Honour is not sure whether the Raffles versus Wichelhaus principle means that there is no meeting of minds objectively, or whether release should be by way of breach of condition. He cites, inter alia, Varley versus Whipp [[1900] 1 QB 513] and Cotter v Luckie [[1918] NZLR 811.] I can leave this line of authority alone because there is no suggestion in the pleading that there was a sale by description and that the goods which were delivered did not conform with the description. Nor do I think there really could be such a case because the present is a case where the buyer is seeking specific performance, not to terminate the contract.

Another illustration of the Raffles versus Wichelhaus principle is provided by the decision of the United States Court of Appeals District of Colombia
Circuit in Zlotnick versus Crisp <case>; [185 F (2d) 502] (1950). In that case Mr Zlotnick had occupied Apartment 102 in the Broadmoor Apartments for 20 years. It and the adjoining Apartment 100, originally had one bedroom each, but in 1931 the bedroom of 100 was detached and added to 102. The landlord sought to restore the building largely to its original condition and sell the apartments to individuals. The landlord had
Apartments 100 and 102 as two separate one-bedroom apartments. Zlotnick agreed to buy Apartment 102 thinking he was buying a two-bedroom apartment. The landlord thought he was selling a one-bedroom apartment. The Court held that there was no contract.

Raffles versus Wichelhaus was analysed by Professor Grant Gilmore in his "The Death of Contract" (Ohio State University Press, 1974) pp 35 et seq. A W Brian Simpson in his "Leading Cases in the Common Law" (Oxford University Press (1955)) p 162 says "Absolutely everything Gilmore said about the case is wrong ... ". Both Gilmore's and Simpson's views may have to be considered if and when the final hearing takes place if this issue is still live. 
The law generally is reviewed by Professor William F Young Junior in his article "Equivocation in the Making of Agreements" (1964) 64 Colombia Law
Review 619 and following. The Professor considers that the Raffles v
Wichelhaus principle only applies where the parties have used what he calls "Janus" words rather than "accordian" words. The former is a word which means one of two or possibly three distinct things, but an accordian word is merely a vague word whose meaning can be any one along a continuous spectrum of meanings. Thus, "The Ship Peerless" is a Janus phrase, but "pink" would be an accordian word because there are various shades of pink. "Peerless" however can only refer to one or more particular ships and there are no different shades of meaning in between. In other words, the Raffles versus Wichelhaus doctrine applies only where there is an equivocation, not where there is mere vagueness in the use of a particular word. The Professor says (at 642) that in
Raffles versus Wichelhaus there was no contract because the problems of interpreting the equivocation were so serious that the gap which the parties had left could not be filled. See also in general Kessler Gilmore &
Kronman, Cases and Material on Contracts, 3rd Edition (Little Brown & Co
Boston 1986) pp 869 and following.

I believe I should follow Professor Young's general approach. In doing so, one can see that in the instant case there does not appear to me to be an equivocation, though I can see the argument that it might be so. The resolution might well be left to the final hearing. The horse which was put up for sale was either Lot 109 or a colt whose dam was National Chimes. There is nothing equivocal in either of those descriptions of what was being sold.
Accordingly, it does not seem to me that Raffles versus Wichelhaus is a doctrine which will be relevant in the trial of this case at all. However, if it is, there will need to be a consideration of the factual material to see what an objective reasonable person would have considered was the subject matter of the sale.

Accordingly, this is not a case where there should be summary judgment. The motion for summary judgment should thus be dismissed with costs.

Shortly after dictating the above, I became aware that a four day case at the end of May had settled. Accordingly, on 10 April 1996 I notified the parties and announced in open court a memorandum decision dismissing the motion with costs, indicating the reasons would be delivered later. I then fixed the final hearing before me on 23 and 24 May 1996. I also notified the parties shortly afterwards that the matter would be in my list at 9.30 on 14 May 1996 for directions. In case anyone wishes to issue subpoenas, I also directed that any subpoenas may be made returnable before the Registrar on Wednesday 1 May 1996.
 
BORG versus HOWLETT /95 
FRIDAY 24 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff seeks specific performance for a contract for the sale of a racehorse.

The plaintiff was the successful bidder for a horse at the Foster's Gold
Series V Yearling Sales on 6 March 1994. The plaintiff thought it was buying
Lot 109. Lot 109 was described in the sale catalogue as a bay colt registered
S3920300 whose sire was Southern Gentleman and whose dam was National Chimes.
The purchase price was $2,000. The sale was made on behalf of the defendant.

The Foster's Gold Series V Yearling Sales is a particular type of horse sale.
All horses in the sale are sold, but some, perhaps many, are bought back by the persons who tendered them for sale. This is within the terms of the auction and, indeed, is expected. The reason why this happens is that horses which are entered in that sale are eligible to participate in some races which are considered very rich races, and the horse breeders find it worthwhile to pay the commission and buy their horse back so it will be eligible for these races.

The defendant entered four horses in the sale and he says, and I believe him, that he never intended to sell three of them. He was going to buy them back.
He did, however, intend to sell a colt whose sire was Southern Gentleman and whose dam was Max's Desire and who appeared as Lot 101 in the catalogue. One of the horses that he desired to retain was the horse whose dam was National
Chimes.

The evidence is that shortly after a foal is born it is freeze branded. This is evidently a process where a very cold brand is put on the horse which kills the follicles of the hair and makes a permanent mark. The freeze brand is made using the modern Australian equivalent of ancient Babylonian cuneiform by a series of wedge marks, one of which stands for each of the ten digits in the
Arabic numeral system. Thus the brand is a type of code, though the clues to the code are easily accessible to anyone who wishes to enquire. As the foal grows the hair of the mane covers the freeze brand so that it is not immediately able to be viewed. To view it one has to shave a bit of the mane, expose the brand and then decode it.

The system means that it is always possible to identify one horse from another.

After the auction the plaintiff took away the horse which he thought was the horse whose dam was National Chimes. It was discovered, but only in February , that the horse which the plaintiff had taken possession of was in fact the horse whose dam was Max's Desire. It is incontrovertible that this is the case.

The plaintiff commenced proceedings for specific performance in this Court on March 1995 seeking that he be delivered the horse out of National Chimes, offering to surrender the horse out of Max's Desire. The defendant resisted that application. The plaintiff applied for summary judgment, which I refused, but was able to fix the final hearing of the case at an early date. I heard the evidence yesterday, considered the matter overnight and in view of the relative urgency of the case have given judgment this morning.

The defendant raised at least eight defences to the claim. I will list these and then deal with them one by one.

There was no contract because there was no meeting of the minds in fact; there was no contract because an objective bystander would not have considered that there was a meeting of the minds of the contracting parties; there was no contract because there was a common or mutual mistake; (4) if there was a contract at law Equity would set it aside because it would be unconscionable for the plaintiff to enforce the contract knowing of the mistake the defendant had made; (5) the real contract was to buy the horse out of Max's Desire as inspected, and the plaintiff got what he contracted for; the terms and conditions of the auction sale, particularly condition 8(f), preclude the plaintiff from mounting a successful action for specific performance; (7) Equity does not grant specific performance in this type of contract; and (8) the Court should in its discretion refuse specific performance.

I dealt with this matter in my judgment of 24 April 1996 and it is of little point to repeat where I there said. I there examined the history of the law that led up to Raffles versus Wichelhaus <case>; [(1852) 2 H & C 906]; 159
ER 375, together with the cases which have followed it. That analysis, I think, made it quite clear that the subjective view, that there is no contract if the two parties to the contract do not intend to buy and sell the same thing, whilst initially attractive to the lawyers last century had been discarded by early this century. If it still survived, it was finally discarded by the High Court in Taylor versus Johnson [(1983) 152 CLR .] 
The subjective theory referred to in (1) was replaced by an objective theory. The question is, accordingly, whether a reasonable bystander would have thought that the parties were intending to make a contract and that there was a consensus ad idem. Despite what Mr Gruzman, for the defendant, put in his skilful submissions, it would seem to me as a matter of fact that at this particular sale, where something was advertised in the catalogue and when there was an inspection, and when there was a successful bid at auction, it is very difficult to say that the parties did not intend to make any contract at all. Unless one does get into the Raffles versus Wichelhaus situation, I would consider that there was a meeting of the minds and an intention to buy a horse. The real question, which may be a question of construction, is which horse? 
Raffles versus Wichelhaus recognises, however, that there are some situations where there is an appearance of a contract but no contract in fact.
It is also clear from some of the older cases that this will be so in cases of res sua or res extincta, that is cases of a person buying property which he or she already owns or which does not exist. Raffles versus Wichelhaus was exhaustively dealt with in my previous judgment. I gave reasons there why
Courts should follow the view expressed by Professor William F Young Jnr in his article "Equivocation in the Making of Agreements" (1964) 64 Colombia Law
Review 619 especially at 642. That view is that unless one has such serious problems of interpreting the contract, and the equivocation is so serious that the gap which the parties had left cannot be filled in, then there is a contract and the contract must be enforced as interpreted by the Court. In the instant case, I said in my earlier judgment that the present does not appear to be one of equivocation. I left, however, that question to the final hearing in case some of the facts which I had to decide would impinge on the matter. I adhere to the view that there is no equivocation in this case and this is not a case where Raffles versus Wichelhaus supplies the solution. There was a contract and it is merely a matter of working out what was the subject matter of the contract, which is a task that is not out of the ordinary and can be done from the documents and the conduct of the parties.

In modern times there has not been so much emphasis on whether there is a contract existing at common law but rather whether, assuming that such a contract exists, Equity would set it aside. This trend was given impetus by the High Court's decision in Taylor versus Johnson.

It is quite clear that in some cases where there is a binding contract at law,
Equity will set the contract aside or will refuse specific performance where there has been an operative mistake.

I analysed these cases at pp 4 and following of my earlier reasons for judgment. The general rule is set out by James LJ in Tamplin versus James [(1880) 15 Ch D 215], 221. There the English Court of Appeal took the view that even if there was a mistake by the vendor, if the plaintiff had not contributed to the making of that mistake, the vendor would still be ordered to perform the contract, unless there was: "a hardship amounting to injustice [which] would have been inflicted upon him by holding him to his bargain, and it was unreasonable to hold him to it." 
The High Court approved that general rule in Slee versus Warke <case>; [(1949) 86 CLR 271], 278. The High Court, however, said that it was always a question of the circumstances of the particular case and for the exercise of the discretion in each case. As I pointed out in my earlier decision, there are cases which go more favourably to the vendor than would be expected if the general rule were strictly applied. One such is Boulas versus Angelopoulos BPR 11477, 11490.

There is also authority for the proposition that the Court will rarely, even in a case of hardship refuse specific performance if the misconception is due entirely to the defendant's own carelessness; Dell versus Beasley [[1959] NZLR .] 
In the instant case it is quite clear that neither the plaintiff nor his agent, Mr Cini, is in any way to blame for the mistake that happened. Blame was attempted to be put on them by saying that Mr Cini should have examined the brand, but at least at that time (the facts of this case may have meant that other things might have tightened up since) I am satisfied that it was not the practice of buyers and sellers at auctions to shave or part the mane and examine the freeze brand. There was no other way in which one could have found out about the mistake at the date of the auction on the evidence that is before me in this case.

The mistake would appear to have been made solely by some mix-up and probably the mix-up was carelessness on the part of the stud master employed by the defendant. The mistake may have been made at some early stage in the horse's career between the time it was freeze branded and the time it was entered in the auction. However, it is clear that the mistake was solely the mistake of the vendor, in which the plaintiff/purchaser had no part.

There is very little evidence of hardship. Certainly there is evidence from the vendor that he saw that the horse out of National Chimes had distinguishing physical attributes which were described as "A big wide chest and built like a brick...outhouse." Certainly the defendant never intended to sell that particular horse to a third party: he intended to buy it back. He certainly intended to give or sell half of that horse to a friend so that the friend and the defendant's wife would be able to raise him as co-owners, as is shown by the fact that when an application was made to register the horse under the name of Lincher the mistake was found by the New South Wales
Registration Authorities. However, I do not consider that these matters constitute hardship in the normal sense of this particular rule.

Being guided by what was said in Tamplin versus James, but looking to all the circumstances and facts of this case, I cannot see sufficient material here to justify either setting aside the contract or refusing specific performance on the ground of mistake.

I should add that there was no formal cross-claim to set aside the contract and Mr Bellanto QC, who appeared with Mr John Bryson for the plaintiff, made it clear that they would have something to say if such an order were contemplated, but I do not need to deal with this objection because even had the matter been pleaded this would not have been a case to set aside the contract in Equity.

What then was the contract, was it to buy the horse out of National Chimes or was it to buy the horse as inspected? 
Mr Gruzman for the defendant, says it must be the latter. The plaintiff employed an agent to purchase the horse on his behalf, a well recognised expert horse trainer, Mr Louis Cini. Mr Cini, as was the custom, inspected the horses which were offered for sale, he felt their legs and he made other tactile contact with the horse in order to satisfy himself that it was a sound animal and one he should purchase. He did not check on the identity. He did not look at the brand. Indeed, he indicated that he would have had to get an expert to look at the brand because he personally did not understand the code.

The vendor also did not check the identity of the horse or the freeze brand on either Lot 101 or Lot 109. The procedure adopted, as deposed to by Mr George
Aiken, the auctioneer, was in the months leading up to the auction the owners registered their horses together with breeding particulars, which were entered into the catalogue. Mr Aiken and his staff then notified the owners of the lot numbers applicable to their horses and sent them a catalogue. The horses were allocated stalls at the auction with a number on the stall corresponding to the lot numbers in the catalogue. The owners are given rump stickers which are held in the auctioneer's office until the morning of the action, which the owners place on the horses for identification. Although the auctioneers do provide staff to take the horses out into the ring, it is quite often the owners themselves or their employees who actually lead the horses around the ring and it is the owner's responsibility to place the rump stickers on the horses on the morning of the auction and place them in the correct stall. At least at the time of this auction the auctioneers took no part in checking the freeze brand of the horses or checking identification.

Clause 8(f) of the general conditions of sale is as follows: "The Auctioneer and the Selling Agent accept no responsibility for nor shall be held responsible to any person for any statements in the Sale Catalogue concerning the horses listed therein for sale or for the identity or any stated engagements of horses or any other representation or warranty concerning any such horse; the Vendor shall be the responsible party for the identity all stated engagements statements representations and warranties in respect of this horse. The Selling Agent shall endeavour to have all pedigrees and engagements correctly stated but shall not be responsible for any errors or omissions. Buyers shall therefore rely on their own enquiries to verify identity, statements of engagements, statements, representations, warranties and any other information in the Sale Catalogue and must pay attention to the
Auctioneer's announcement at the sale." 
It is probably appropriate at this stage also to set out clause 7(a), which is as follows: "As soon as practicable after the fall of the hammer and within twenty-four hours from the day of the sale the buyer shall examine the horse purchased and if any warranty, representation or guarantee is challenged the buyer shall immediately give written notice thereof to the Selling Agent and comply with the provisions of clause 7(b) hereof." 
The catalogue contains, I would think, about 250 pages. There is one page for each of the horses entered into the auction. Each page of the catalogue contains a very detailed curriculum vitae of the horse, including the record of racing of its sire and dam and other particulars which would guide buyers to be able to judge how much they would offer for the horse.

Mr Cini gave evidence and it was quite obvious that although he was a little nervous, and although that nervousness tended to make him argue with counsel, he was a transparently honest witness. He said that he relied on the vendor, he did not check the freeze brand and he never thought it was the practice to do so. He certainly admitted that no-one in their right mind who knew about horses would buy a horse without physically checking it over, but the impression I got from his evidence was that this was incidental and that the main object was to look at the horse which was described in the catalogue. Mr
Aiken really gave similar evidence. He said to Mr Bellanto QC in re- examination that he would not check the freeze brand but would rely on the vendor, and that one would have to clip the horse in order to see the brand to identify it. He again gave me the impression that it was the catalogue and the description which were the most important considerations when working out what horses one would buy. Again, however, he acknowledged that it was only the amateurs who would buy a horse without actually making a physical examination.

I have no doubt that on the facts of this case the subject matter of the sale was not the horse which was physically inspected but the horse which was set out in the catalogue with all its details, that is, the subject matter of the contract was the horse whose dam was National Chimes.

Mr Gruzman relies on clause 8(f). I, with great respect, could not see much comfort for the vendor in clause 8(f). Certainly there is a statement that "Buyers shall therefore rely on their own enquiries to verify identity", but those words are not contractual words, they are merely the announcement of a caveat as to what a buyer should do. No-one could sue a buyer for breach of contract if the buyer did not comply with the last sentence of clause 8(f).
The real purpose, to my mind, of clause 8(f) is that the auctioneer is to be held harmless from any mistake in identity or in the particulars given in the catalogue and the focus of clause 8(f) is the statement, "the Vendor shall be the responsible party for the identity...". It seems to me that the whole system which is implicit in the conditions, as well as occasionally explicit, was that the vendor was to supply the horse as detailed in the catalogue, the purchaser was able to purchase it from the catalogue and that the auctioneer was not to be sued if there was some mistake.

Again, I do not consider that clause 7 helps the vendor at all. First of all, it is significant that clause 7(a) does not refer to identity, so one could, if need be, apply the expressio unius rule, but in any event it would seem to flow from the words of clause 7(a) that it does not cover a latent defect, such as the wrong horse being supplied under the contract. Accordingly, I do not consider that clauses 8(f) or 7(a) give the vendor a defence.

As I said in my earlier judgment, it is strange that there has never been, as far as my research and the research of counsel have gone, any reported instance of specific performance of the contract for the sale of a racehorse.

Mr Gruzman directed my attention to an unreported decision of my own,
Coleman versus Jones, 18 November 1986, where I had to consider a lease of a racehorse "Miss Mellie". I there said that Miss Mellie was not a very expensive horse to buy and had not won that much money. Furthermore, her owners said the only thing special about the horse was that they got a lot of fun racing her and were attached to her. I said that I did not consider that "Miss Mellie" had sufficient uniqueness to qualify as a special chattel, but went on to say: "It is trite law that specific performance is only granted in respect of land or chattels of special value and that if one can just go into the market place and buy a substitute then the chattel is not of special value. I could well see how, as a matter of fact, it would be determined that a horse of very good bloodline or one that has won major races would be so classed, but I am not at all sure that it can be said to be the position with other racehorses." 
Although this case tends to support Mr Gruzman's position that the Court leans away from granting specific performance in respect of a contract for the sale of a horse, it does not go very far along that line and, indeed, contemplates that if one had a horse whose value was different than that ascribed to "Miss
Mellie" by her owners, one might indeed have a chattel of special value.

Mr Bellanto QC took me through a series of cases, which are as follows Pusey v Pusey <case>; [(1684) 1 Vern 273] (an ancient horn); Duke of Somerset versus Cookson <case>; [(1735) 3
P Wms 391]; [24 ER 1114] (silver altar piece); Fells versus Read <case>; [(1796) 3 Ves 70]; [30 ER 899] (silver tobacco box); Taylor versus Neville (cited in Buxton v Lister <case>; [(1746) Atk 26](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281746%29%203%20Atk%2026 "View LawCiteRecord" ) ER 1020); Adderley versus Dixon (infra); Stevenson versus Clarke (1854) 4
Grants Chancery Reports 543 (Ontario) (specially marked saw logs); Faulcke v
Gray <case>; [(1859) 4 Drew 651] (two China jars); McIntosh versus Dalwood (No 4) <case>; [(1930) 30 SR 415];
Dougan versus Ley <case>; [(1946) 71 CLR 142] (taxi plate); Dalton Potteries Ltd versus Bronotte [[1971] 1
NSWLR 591] (die used in manufacture of pipes); McKeown versus Cavalier
Yachts Pty Ltd [(1988) 13 NSWLR 303] (yacht); see also article by Aitken [(1994) 68 ALJ 263.] 
None of those dealt with livestock. Mr Bellanto QC submitted that the cases tended to show three categories of situations where Equity would consider that damages were not an adequate remedy; (a) where there was a chattel of sufficient uniqueness; (b) where failure to decree specific performance would disrupt the business; and (c) where assessment of damages would really be a matter of conjecture.

I was much moved by that submission and thought about it very seriously.
However, I think it is unwise to try and categorise the situations in which
Equity will consider that damages are not an adequate remedy in this class of case. I think there is some merit in Mr Bellanto QC's summary, but I also believe it would be misleading to adopt that summary because I believe that the words of Dr Spry in the 4th Edition of his book at p 65 on Equitable
Remedies (Law Book Company 1990) are correct. The learned author, when referring to the sort of matters I have just been speaking about, said: "Considerations of this latter kind should not be regarded as decisive, but are merely evidentiary matters going to whether the plaintiff will be put in as favourable a position in all material respects through the award of damages as he would be through specific performance." 
In particular the submission that Equity will not consider damages to be an adequate remedy when the assessment of damages is a matter of conjecture is too imprecise a proposition. As can be seen from an examination of the cases referred to in Jones and Goodhart on Specific Performance, Butterworths
London 1986, p 114: "English Courts have never accepted that specific performance should be decreed simply because the plaintiff's loss in consequence of the breach is very difficult to estimate. That is the natural hazard of litigation. Only if it would be impossible to prove loss will specific performance be granted." 
With great respect, I do not think that is quite the situation in Australia.
The matter is again I think better summed up by Dr Spry, where he says, at pp and following, that: "Whether damages are an appropriate remedy is a question of fact in each particular case, and it is unsafe to rely on decisions reached on other contracts and in other circumstances." 
Furthermore, it does seem to me that in Australia one does not have to go so far to say that the damages must be impossible to prove, not merely difficult, before one grants specific performance in the case of a contract to sell a chattel or some shares or stock. That difficulty of a precise assessment of damages is one of the factors that one takes into account when considering all the factors as to whether damages are an adequate remedy. Indeed, in some cases, especially those involving contracts to be performed over a considerable period of time, the rule seems to be that if it is extremely difficult to estimate with reasonable certainty the damages then Equity is justified in treating the matter as one for specific performance; see Buxton v Lister (supra); Fells versus Read (supra); and Adderley versus Dixon <case>; [(1824) 1 Sim & St 607] 
Jones and Goodhart endeavour to explain away some of these early cases by merely saying that they have been superseded by later thought and refer to
Hart versus Herwig [(1873) 8 Ch App 860], 866.
However, Adderley versus Dixon was recently referred to with approval by Jacobs
J, when a judge in this Court, in Aristoc Industry Pty Ltd versus R A Wenham
Pty Ltd [[1965] NSWR 581.] 
That the English distinction is extremely hard to administer is shown by the examples given by Jones and Goodhart. Cases, such as Societe des Industries
Metallurgiques SA versus The Bronx Engineering Co Ltd [1975] 1 Lloyds Law
Reports 465, would I am sure be decided differently in Australia. The shipping cases, such as Behnke versus Bede Shipping Co [[1927] 1 KB 649], 661 and
The Stena Nautica (No 2) [1982] 2 Lloyds Law Reports 336 and 349 show that one has to adopt a rule such as is set out in Spry before one can deal justly with the sort of situations that arise in cases of the sale of a ship.
However, as Spry says at p 66, the law is still searching for an adequate general answer in the case of the sale of a ship. I think to a lesser degree it is searching for an answer in the present type of case.

The observation should be made that prior to the Judicature Act in England and prior to the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) in New South
Wales the question which we have been examining went to the very jurisdiction of the Court of Equity. However, nowadays, when principles of equity and principles of law are administered concurrently in the one court, the dividing line between what is a special chattel and what is not and between when damages are an adequate remedy and when they are not merely goes to remedy.
Accordingly one can tolerate a more fuzzy dividing line where the question goes not to jurisdiction but to discretion.

The only modern reported case where the sale of an animal has been considered is The Millstream Pty Ltd versus Schultz [[1980] 1 NSWLR 547.] That was a case where the plaintiff sought specific performance of a contract for the sale of deer. The plaintiff failed to get specific performance because the defendant showed he had no deer at the time of the hearing so it would be impossible for him to comply with any decree for specific performance.
Accordingly, the claim for specific performance was abandoned at the hearing, though it had to be considered by McLelland J because of him having to decide whether damages should be given for breach of contract at Common Law or under [s 68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s68.html) of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) (Lord Cairns
Act).

It is clear from what was said and not said in the judgment that the present
Chief Judge would have had no difficulty about granting specific performance of the deer had they still been in existence.

Mr Cini in his evidence, when being asked about the uniqueness of racehorses, said that buying a horse is just like making an entry in Lotto. He gave instances and, indeed, some of these instances are even mentioned in the catalogue, of horses which had been bought at sales like this for $2,000 or so and had made hundreds of thousands in prize money.

We spent some time in working out what percentage of horses sold at these sales would be winners ("winner" being a horse that has won a race somewhere some time in its life), but none of this was really particularly edifying. Mr
Bellanto QC said that one should not take Mr Cini's comment too literally, it was more a quip than something that should be taken to be a fair equivalent. I think there is some sense in that submission.

Mr Gruzman got evidence out of the witnesses he was cross-examining and indeed from his own witnesses, that the average price of horses at these sales was about $2,800 to $3,000, though some have gone as high as $38,000. Certainly if one wanted to buy a horse of reputable bloodline one would have a choice of many at about the $2,000 price mark.

Mr Bellanto QC put that this horse has uniqueness. It was interesting to see this word "uniqueness" used in the submissions. Normally the text books use the word "unique". I took "uniqueness" to mean something that was not a one- off, something that was not one of its kind, but something which had a sufficient number of special and unusual features as to warrant a person insisting on that animal rather than a substitute animal.

On the other hand, Mr Gruzman put that this horse was just one of many horses, was even below the average price for a horse and there was no trouble in giving damages so that an equivalent horse could be bought.

As I mentioned in my earlier judgment, there is the old case of Pearne v
Lisle [(1749) Amb 76], 77; <case>; [26
ER 47], 48, involving a contractor who provided slaves and the Court then thought that one slave was much the same as another. However, I think that where one does have an item like a horse, where there is in the eyes of experts so much store placed on its bloodlines and its dam's and sire's racing records, that one does get into the area where if a person has purchased a specific animal for a reason connected with its bloodline it is not giving that person what that person would have expected under the contract to say to him, "Well go and buy another one which is just as good".

In this case Mr Cini did give evidence that he had seen the dam run and he was looking to buy in due course a foal from that dam. He was a horseman of some skill and experience and in his mind this was a special factor of this animal.
Indeed, even Mr Howlett, the defendant, said that this animal was special to him in that it had a big wide chest, et cetera, but, of course, the animal that was inspected by Mr Cini did not have those characteristics.

Some of the cases suggest that it is the subjective view of what is unique that should dominate. In Fells versus Read, Loughborough LC said in respect of a silver tobacco box enclosed in two large silver cases adorned with engraving, "The value I cannot measure". His Lordship then referred to other cases that I have already cited and said: "The Pusey horn, the Patera of the Duke of Somerset, were things of that sort of value, that a jury might not give two-pence beyond the weight. It was not to be cast to the estimation of people, who have not those feelings. In all cases, where the object of the suit is not liable to a compensation by damages, it would be strange, if the law of this country did not afford any remedy. It would be great injustice, if an individual cannot have his property without being liable to the estimate of people, who have not his feelings upon it." 
Those words strongly suggest that if a chattel has some unique value to the purchaser then it is appropriate to grant specific performance on the ground that damages are not an adequate remedy for that particular person. One can imagine many cases in that sort of situation where, for instance, a person buys a chattel to complete a set, which has a special value to that person, because of the completion of the set, that it might not otherwise have to others. Dr Spry tends to suggest that it is an objective test, but, with respect, I am not convinced by what he has written.

However, whether it is an objective test or a subjective test, in my view, there is sufficient about this particular chattel, as well as sufficient difficulty in the estimation of damages as to what its value would be and what its possible winnings might be, for this to be a case where the Court would grant specific performance.

Just developing that last point for a short period, if specific performance were refused one would have to work out the chances of a horse that has never raced earning prize money. The evidence shows that there have been some horses bought for $2,000 or less that have won half a million dollars in prize money, but that only 30 percent of horses are winners under the definition I have already given, so it would seem to me that one would have to apply very heavy discount figures to the possible winnings for the vicissitudes of the horse's life in the racing industry, and one is really getting very close to the area where assessing the damages would be a matter of conjecture.

Accordingly, adding together the aspects of uniqueness and the conjecture as to damages, and looking at all the other matters, this is a situation where the Court should give specific performance.

Mr Gruzman also relied on the defence of laches and the defence of mistake in Equity. I have dealt with the latter under heading 4.

I cannot see how this is a case of laches. There was no fault, to my mind, on anybody in not picking the error until February 1995. When the error was discovered the plaintiff acted within a month. No further detriment is shown to the defendant by the action being taken when it was and, as I have said, clause 7 of the conditions is inapplicable. Accordingly, there is no equitable defence which leads to a refusal of specific performance.

Accordingly, (1) the Court declares that the plaintiff purchased the horse registered number S3920300, whose sire is Southern Gentleman and whose dam is
National Chimes from the defendant on 6 March 1994.

The Court orders that the said contract be specifically performed.

The Court gives liberty to the plaintiff to move for directions of implementation of the decree of specific performance.

The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of the suit but there is to be offset against those costs the costs which the plaintiff has to pay pursuant to my reasons for judgment on 24 April 1996.

The exhibits may be retained for 28 days or until the Court of Appeal has considered any appeal, whichever is later, and the Court reserves further consideration generally.
 * * * 
