

Gio General Limited versus Beckers t/as Professional Towing and Anor Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 735 (19 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
GIO GENERAL LIMITED versus BEVERLEY ANNE BECKERS t/as PROFESSIONAL TOWING & ANOR /98 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This matter came before me in this morning's list for hearing from the applications list at short notice. On the matter coming before me, I was informed that a letter had been given by the plaintiff to the defendants last Friday stating that today there would be an application for summary judgment. 
Upon the matter being called, Mr. and Mrs. Beckers, the first and second defendants, appeared in person seeking an adjournment, as their solicitor was overseas and they wished to continue to retain the services of that solicitor.
It was pointed out to counsel for the plaintiff that the defendants had had little time and the court would be most reluctant to press on with an application which might result in the entire disposition of the action without affording them the opportunity of legal advice and assistance, if necessary.

In those circumstances, the matter was allowed to stand in the list and at my invitation counsel for the plaintiff spoke to Mr. and Mrs. Beckers to see if a timetable could be agreed for the future prosecution of the matter. Such timetable has now been agreed and reduced to writing in the form of short minutes.

The defendants are proprietors of a tow truck business who claim the storage fees in relation to a wrecked motor vehicle, the property in which the plaintiff asserts, lies in it. The defendants have undertaken on their own behalf that during the period of the adjournment no further storage charges shall accrue until judgment is delivered.

The matters raised in the short minutes include that the plaintiff have leave to file an amended summons joining another party as third defendant. This may set back the hearing of the matter to some degree. It may be that it will enable the early resolution of all issues that might otherwise be outstanding.

In the circumstances, I make orders in accordance with the short minutes initialled by me and placed with the papers. I note the undertaking as expressed in number five in the short minutes, which is not an order.

The matter is stood over to 22 June 1998.
 * * * 
