

Regina versus Bozatsis; Regina versus Spanakakis Matter Nos 60130/97 [1997] NSWSC (29 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 6 March 1998 
Regina versus Bozatsis 
Regina versus Spanakakis /97 /97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Meagher JA, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
Catchwords: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PRACTICE - EVIDENCE - ILLEGALITY OF POLICE CONDUCT - STAY OF PROCEEDINGS - accused charged with manufacturing prohibited drug - police informer and undercover police officers participate in plan - police arrange supply of a necessary ingredient - trial judge excluded the whole of the prosecution evidence - granted stay of proceedings - HELD - the trial judge failed in his reasons to address the issues raised by Evidence Act 1912 s138 - orders should be set aside and notice of motion for stay of proceedings remitted to District Court for further hearing. 
Ridgeway versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 19] considered.

APPEAL - Criminal Appeal Act s5F - HELD - a decision that the whole of the prosecution evidence should be excluded on discretionary grounds and that the prosecution should be permanently stayed was an interlocutory judgment or order within s5F. 
R versus Steffan [(1993) 67 A Crim R 506] distinguished.

R versus Edelsten [(1989) 18 NSWLR 213], R v
Saunders [(1994) 72 A Crim R 347],
Chow versus DPP [(1992) 28 NSWLR 593], R v
Lethlean [(1995) 83 A Crim R 197],
Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee versus A Practitioner [(1987) 46 SASR ],
Commonwealth versus Mullane <case>; [(1961) 106 CLR 166] considered.

Orders Appeal allowed.
 Decision and orders of Bellear DCJ of 7 February 1997 set aside.
 Matters remitted to District Court to be dealt with according to law.

REGINA versus Peter BOZATSIS 
REGINA versus John SPANAKAKIS 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The Crown appeals, pursuant to [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) , against what are said to be interlocutory judgments or orders of Bellear DCJ which effectively brought to an end the prosecution of each respondent on a charge of having knowingly taken part in the manufacture of a prohibited drug, methylamphetamine. 
Bellear DCJ made orders substantially in terms of paragraphs 2 and 3 of a
Notice of Motion filed on behalf of each respondent.

The Notice of Motion sought the following orders: "1. That all prosecution evidence obtained in relation to the charges be excluded under s138 of the Evidence Act on the basis that it resulted from the illegal or improper conduct of police which induced the accused to commit the offences.
Further, and in the alternative that such illegal police conduct did either itself constitute the principal offence or alternatively such conduct constituted an essential ingredient of the charged offence and should therefore be excluded under s138 of the Evidence Act.
That all further proceedings be stayed on the basis that upon the evidence already having been excluded as a result of the orders in paragraphs and 2, any further proceedings against the accused would inevitably fail." 
In substance, the learned judge, relying on [s138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) , read in the light of the decision of the High Court in Ridgeway versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 19], made a discretionary decision that he would exclude all of the evidence upon which the Crown might seek to rely to prove its case against the respondents and, in consequence, stayed the proceedings on the basis that they must inevitably fail for want of evidence.

The respondents have raised a jurisdictional issue as to whether the matter falls within [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). Before addressing that issue, however, it is convenient to describe some of the background to the proceedings before Bellear DCJ, and also to explain the nature of the Crown case against the respondents, and the basis upon which they sought the rulings referred to above.

Procedural Background 
The respondents, and two other men named Fadel and Tsolakis, were all charged with knowingly taking part in the manufacture of a prohibited drug. Another man named Andrade was charged with concealing a serious offence. Following the laying of those charges the respondent Spanakakis, after sentence indication proceedings, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to a term of 300 hours community service. Tsolakis, also after sentence indication proceedings, pleaded guilty and sentence was deferred upon his entering into a recognizance to be of good behaviour for two years. Fadel was committed for sentence following a plea of guilty, and was sentenced to imprisonment for three years to be served by way of periodic detention. Andrade, after sentence indication proceedings, pleaded guilty and sentence was deferred upon his entering into a recognizance to be of good behaviour for two years. The respondent Bozatsis declined to accept a sentence indication of three years periodic detention and his matter was listed for trial.

The Crown then appealed against the inadequacy of the sentences imposed upon
Spanakakis, Fadel and Tsolakis. In relation to Spanakakis, the Court of
Criminal Appeal determined that, if he did not withdraw his plea of guilty, he would be sentenced to imprisonment involving a minimum term of twelve months, and an additional term of twelve months.

Spanakakis and Tsolakis subsequently withdrew their pleas of guilty, and they and Bozatsis filed Notices of Motion seeking the orders set out above. The applications of Spanakakis and Bozatsis came for hearing before Bellear DCJ.
The application of Tsolakis remains to be heard. The hearing was treated as a voir dire. Oral evidence was given, and argument was presented, over six days. The parties then filed written submissions. On 7 February 1997, Bellear
DCJ made the decision outlined above. It is against that decision that the
Crown appeals, claiming to do so by right.

The Crown Case 
The charge against each appellant was that between 10 March 1993 and 27 May , at Marrickville, he did knowingly take part in the manufacture of a prohibited drug, methylamphetamine, which was not less than the commercial quantity applicable to that prohibited drug.

According to the Crown case, and according to the evidence of police witnesses in the proceedings before Bellear DCJ, (which was neither contradicted nor rejected), in late February 1993, police from the Drug Enforcement Agency were approached by a man named Collaro, who gave them information to the effect that Bozatsis and others were planning to manufacture a substantial quantity of methylamphetamine, and were purchasing chemicals and glassware for that purpose.

Collaro was a registered police informer, and had a criminal record. The evidence showed that he was ultimately paid a substantial reward for the information he gave to the police.

The police, following Collaro's approach to them, commenced surveillance. That surveillance continued up until an occasion in late May 1993, when they raided premises at Marrickville and found methylamphetamine in the process of being manufactured.

There was undisputed evidence that on 28 April 1993, Spanakakis, using a false name, leased premises at Warren Street, Marrickville, which were the premises ultimately used to manufacture the drug.

There was evidence of the involvement of Bozatsis in obtaining a recipe, and purchasing raw materials for use in the manufacture.

Neither Spanakakis nor Bozatsis had any prior criminal history. On the other hand, in evidence they gave before Bellear DCJ in support of their respective applications, they frankly admitted their involvement in a plan to manufacture methylamphetamine, in the hope of making a substantial sum of money. They asserted, however, that it was Collaro who had instigated the plan, and persuaded them to join him. The police, as was noted above, said that Collaro had told them that Bozatsis and his associates instigated the plan.

Up until 17 May 1993, the role of the police in the matter was one of surveillance. On or about that day, however, Collaro told the police that, although Bozatsis had been able to obtain the other necessary raw materials, he was having difficulty obtaining hydriodic acid, a chemical used in the manufacture of amphetamine. It appears that, perhaps because of a desire on the part of the chemical suppliers to avoid even indirect involvement in illegal activities, supplies of hydriodic acid are not readily obtainable from reputable suppliers unless the customers are known to the suppliers. Bozatsis had obtained the other necessary raw materials from a company known as Crown
Scientific Pty. Ltd. However, although the evidence on the point was not entirely clear, he apparently had some difficulty persuading that company to supply him with hydriodic acid. At that stage, unknown to Bozatsis, the police intervened and themselves placed an order with Crown Scientific for two litres of the chemical. They then arranged for the chemical to be made available to
Bozatsis, and, as a result, they had records of the transaction by which he obtained hydriodic acid. After Bozatsis collected the chemical from Crown
Scientific, he and Spanakakis were followed by police, and by this means the police became aware of the Warren Street premises at Marrickville.

Police surveillance showed that, on 24 May 1993, Bozatsis entered the
Marrickville premises, carrying what appeared to be equipment, and on 25 May , Bozatsis and Spanakakis entered and left the premises at various times.
On 26 May 1993, Bozatsis and Spanakakis again entered and left the premises at various times. At 10.00pm on that day the police carried out a raid on the premises pursuant to a search warrant. Bozatsis and Spanakakis were found standing near a sink, apparently participating in the manufacture of chemicals. A search of the house occupied by Bozatsis revealed literature relating to the manufacture of amphetamine. The lease of the Marrickville premises was found in the boot of a car belonging to Spanakakis. Chemical found at the Marrickville premises was tested and proved to be methylamphetamine. Bozatsis allegedly made certain admissions to the police.

The evidence before Bellear DCJ 
The oral evidence before Bellear DCJ was that of the respondents, Bozatsis and
Spanakakis, and certain police officers, including the officer in charge of the surveillance operation. Collaro was not called as a witness. The depositions of police witnesses from the committal proceedings were also tendered.

In their evidence, both of the respondents acknowledged that they were involved, knowingly, and for the purpose of making money, in the manufacture of methylamphetamine. They had been virtually caught red-handed. Both claimed that the ring leader of the manufacturing operation was Collaro. The two respondents had met Collaro socially. They said he told them that he needed quick cash for a business project, and he ultimately convinced them that a good way to raise the cash was to manufacture a quantity of amphetamine. They agreed to participate in the expectation of profit for themselves.

Bozatsis gave the following evidence: "What I recall was that after the manufacture as Harry (Collaro) put it, and the product was finished he would disburse and get rid of the product, and at no risk to anybody involved, to any of us." 
Later, Bozatsis gave the following evidence: "Q. Why did you become involved in the purchasing of apparatus and the manufacturing of an illegal drug? 
A. Because Harry involved me. ...

Q. Well, you must have believed you were going to get some money for it? 
A. Well obviously, that's what he stated, "it would be worth your while"." 
Spanakakis gave the following evidence: "Q. And so that there is no misunderstanding about where you are coming from, so far as that product is concerned, did you believe it to be part of the overall manufacturing process for the amphetamine? 
A. Yes, sir.

Q. And you were quite conscious of the fact that that was being done in premises leased by you under a false name? 
A. Yes." 
It may be mentioned that the proceedings at first instance, and in this court, were conducted upon the common assumption that the evidence given by the respondents in support of the Notice of Motion was not available to be relied upon by the Crown at a subsequent trial, should the Notice of Motion be unsuccessful. (Wong Kam-Ming versus The Queen [[1980] AC 247], Reg versus Brophy [[1982] AC 476], Macpherson versus The Queen <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 512).] 
The competing contentions and the decision of Bellear DCJ 
It appears from the written submissions put before Bellear DCJ, and from the argument in this court, that the case for the respondents at first instance was put on two bases, one broad and one relatively narrow.

The broader basis was that Collaro, in his dealings with the respondents, from beginning to end, was an agent provacateur engaged by the police to find gullible people such as the respondents, and persuade them to manufacture amphetamine so that the police could subsequently arrest and charge them. This was contrary to the evidence of the police, and was not supported by any positive evidence. Bellear DCJ made no express findings of primary fact on the point. Nowhere in his reasons for judgment did he refer to or reject the evidence of the police officers. Their evidence was that Collaro came to them and told them that he had infiltrated a conspiracy of which the instigator was
Bozatsis. There is a difference between someone who is a police informer, and someone who is a police agent. Many police informers are criminals, but it does not follow that they are acting as agents of the police every time they commit a crime.

It is possible that Collaro was deceiving everybody, including the police and the respondents. It may be that he never intended to manufacture and sell amphetamine for personal gain, but that his objective at all times was simply to obtain a reward for giving the police information leading to the conviction of the respondents.

In any event, Bellear DCJ made no findings as to Collaro's intentions, nor did he reject the police evidence.

The narrower basis upon which the argument for the respondents was put turned upon the role of the police in obtaining from Crown Scientific Pty. Ltd., for the respondents, the hydriodic acid which was necessary for the manufacture of amphetamine.

There was no examination by Bellear DCJ of the detail of the evidence relating to the intervention of the police in obtaining the hydriodic acid, or of the relationship between that conduct and the ultimate manufacture of amphetamine.
The evidence showed that the police, in effect, procured on behalf of the respondents a necessary ingredient for the manufacture of amphetamine, but there was no examination of what alternative steps the respondents might have been able to take if the police had not done that. It suited the police to do it, because they then had records which they could use against the respondents. Buying and selling hydriodic acid is not a criminal offence, but
Bellear DCJ found that, in the circumstances of the present case, the police were aiding and abetting the manufacture of amphetamine by the respondents.

The Crown argued, at first instance, that none of the Crown evidence against the respondents should be excluded. However, an alternative argument was put to the effect that, even if the judge found that there was illegal conduct on the part of the police, so that the evidence of the purchase of hyrdriodic acid should be excluded, it would not warrant excluding evidence of the other activities of the respondents, either before or after 17 May 1993. Because he viewed the case as falling within the second category of case referred to in
Ridgeway versus The Queen (184 CLR at 39) Bellear DCJ concluded that the proper course was to exclude all of the Crown evidence against the respondents.

The second category of case was referred to in the joint judgment in
Ridgeway in the following terms: "The other category of case is where illegal police conduct is itself the principal offence to which the charged offence is ancillary or creates or itself constitutes an essential ingredient of the charged offence. An example of that category is a case where a person is charged with receipt or possession of stolen property in circumstances where not only the supply, but the actual theft, of the stolen property had been organised by the police for the purpose of obtaining the conviction of the person to whom it is supplied.
In that category of case, the police illegality and the threat to the rule of law which it involves assume a particularly malignant aspect." 
In his judgment, Bellear DCJ recited the Crown arguments against the contention that the case fell within that category, but simply indicated that he did not agree with them. His Honour then said: "After giving much consideration to all submissions on the voir dire I dismiss the first order sought in the Notice of Motion. As to order 2 sought in the Notice of Motion, I am satisfied that the paragraph has been made out and I therefore make that order which is to include that all prosecution evidence obtained in relation to the charges should be excluded under [s138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) on the basis that it resulted from such illegal police conduct that did either itself constitute the principal offence or alternatively such conduct constituted an essential ingredient of the charged offence and should therefore be excluded." 
He then went on to make an order staying the proceedings as requested.

The jurisdictional issue 
It is argued on behalf of the respondents that, consistently with the decision in R versus Steffan [(1993) 67 A Crim R 506], we should hold that this is a case of a ruling on the admissibility of evidence only, and that a ruling on the admissibility of evidence is not a judgment or order within the meaning of s5F.

The respondents acknowledged that Bellear DCJ made an order permanently staying the proceedings, which has generally been regarded as a prime example of the kind of judgment or order which falls within s5F. However, it is said, such an order was accepted on all sides at first instance as the necessary consequence of the order sought in paragraph 2 of the Notice of Motion, and the real issue which was decided by Bellear DCJ was that raised by paragraph
The Crown submits that R versus Steffan does not require the conclusion that the present is not a case involving an interlocutory judgment or order. Here the decision in relation to paragraph 2 of the Notice of Motion was not merely a decision about the admissibility of particular evidence, the exclusion of which might have weakened the Crown case. This was a decision excluding all evidence which the Crown might seek to lead in support of the charge against each respondent, and the decision necessarily determined the result of the case. Even if there had been no formal order permanently staying proceedings, the Crown argues, the case would have fallen within s5F. It is so much the clearer because there was such an order.

Section 5F provides for appeals, to the Court of Criminal Appeal, against interlocutory judgments or orders given or made in certain criminal proceedings, including proceedings of the kind presently in question. When the accused is the appellant, leave is required. When the Crown appeals, the appeal lies as of right.

There is no dispute that if the decision of Bellear DCJ were a judgment or order, it was interlocutory. Nor is it in dispute that an order granting a permanent stay of proceedings is an interlocutory order within the meaning of s5F. The history of the legislation, referred to in R versus Edelsten [(1989) 18
NSWLR 213] and R versus Saunders [(1994) 72 A Crim R 347], shows that applications for stays of proceedings were the primary, although not the only, kinds of application which prompted the legislation. As was pointed out in Saunders, that does not mean that s5F should be read down as confined to appeals against decisions in relation to such applications.

The requirement of leave in the case of appeals by an accused raises discretionary considerations of the kind referred to in R versus Matovski [(1989) NSWLR 720] and R versus Rogerson [(1990) 45 A Crim R 253.]
The right of an accused, after conviction, to complain, in an appeal under [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), about an interlocutory decision may be a reason for refusing leave to appeal under [s5F.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html)
That consideration, however, has no relevance to the present case. The decision of Bellear DCJ made conviction impossible and, in any event, the
Crown does not require leave if the case otherwise falls within [s5F.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) 
The order made under paragraph 3 of the Notice of Motion is clearly one against which the Crown has a right of appeal. So, although less clearly, was the order made under paragraph 2.

Quite apart from discretionary considerations relating to a grant of leave, where leave to appeal is required, there are numerous judicial statements to the effect that, generally speaking, a ruling on the admissibility of evidence, before or during a trial, is not a judgment or order within the meaning of [s5F.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html)
The case of Steffan is an example. (There are dicta to the opposite effect (eg Chow versus DPP [(1992) 28 NSWLR 593] at -611)). However, in Steffan (at 513) the Court of Criminal Appeal said that there may well be a "rare case" where a ruling on evidence, because it formed the basis of a stay of proceedings, could be the principal legal issue to be determined of a [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) appeal.

In R versus Lethlean [(1995) 83 A Crim R 197]
Sheller JA observed that the authorities have established no bright line test for discriminating between judgments or orders, on the one hand, and rulings which do not constitute judgments or orders, on the other. King CJ, in Legal
Practitioners Complaint Committee versus A Practitioner [(1987) 46 SASR 126] drew a distinction between judgments or orders and what he called "incidental rulings". A judgment or order, he said, is a "judicial act which decides the question or one of the questions which is raised for decision in the particular proceedings". However, rulings also decide questions. It is the character of the question, and the effect of the decision, that makes the difference.

One of the reasons given for denying to a ruling on evidence, in the ordinary case, the quality of a judgment or order is that it can be changed during the course of the proceedings. It lacks finality. It does not require a decision of an appellate court to reverse it; at least in theory the judge can be persuaded to alter it.

In The Commonwealth of Australia versus Mullane <case>; [(1961) 106 CLR 166] the High Court had to consider whether a decision under review, which involved a ruling on a point of law, amounted to a judgment, decree, order or sentence. In a passage at 169, cited by Sheller JA in
Lethlean, the Court said: "What his Honour did was simply to give a ruling on a point of law which was raised. It did not conclude the rights of the parties before the hearing of the case was completed. The County Court judge might have altered his mind, he might have ruled otherwise, he might have qualified his ruling, there was no determination." 
Bellear DCJ, in a passage quoted above, dealt with paragraph 2 of the Notice of Motion by saying that he was making an order excluding "all prosecution evidence" against the respondents. What is important is not his Honour's use of the word "order", but the character and effect of the decision he was making. He was not merely deciding that some particular piece of evidence was admissible or inadmissible. He was making a discretionary decision not to receive any evidence tending to prove the guilt of the respondents of the offences charged. He was, in substance, refusing to permit the Crown to seek to make a case against the appellants. Such a decision is properly characterised as a judgment or order.

The jurisdictional issue should be resolved in favour of the Crown.

The merits of the appeal 
There are two principal difficulties in evaluating the reasoning of Bellear
DCJ. The first is the absence of findings of primary fact. The second is the absence of specific reference to and reasoning about, the discretionary considerations which [s138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) requires to be taken into account.

The second problem is less serious because, if it had stood alone, it may well have been possible to draw certain inferences as to his Honour's approach to particular relevant discretionary considerations.

His Honour's reasons for judgment consisted almost entirely of repetition of the competing submissions made by counsel for the respective parties, followed by an indication of his preference for the submissions of the respondents.
However, as was noted above, the case for the respondents was put on two different bases, and the submissions, as repeated and accepted by Bellear DCJ, were frequently expressed in a manner which failed to differentiate between the two.

The point can be illustrated by repeating some of the submissions which were recorded and accepted by Bellear DCJ.

His Honour said: "The accused Bozatsis submits that he was persuaded, cajoled, incited and encouraged to commit the offence by the person Harry Collaro, an agent for the
Drug Enforcement Agency. The person Collaro provided the accused with the recipe of ingredients and was the guiding hand who instructed the accused on how to obtain the precursor chemicals from Crown Scientific." 
He also said: "It is submitted that Spanakakis was taken down the path of serious crime by the words and actions of Collaro, not merely a police informant but a person used by Detective Sergeant Dawson (as he was then) to incite Spanakakis to commit the crime which is pending before this Court." 
Further he said: "Here the police, through their agent, asked that the illegal drug be produced, solved the accused practical problems with an assurance that they could provide the essential ingredient that was difficult to obtain, (and furnished) the precursor chemicals as had been promised." 
Later he said: "It is submitted that the police agent, Harry Collaro, a man with an extensive criminal history enjoyed a relationship with police through his participation in the shadowy world of profiteering from association with both crime and law enforcement authorities. Either at the behest of those authorities or for his motives of reward, (he) implanted, promoted, nurtured and fostered the germ of `criminal design' in the mind of the accused." 
In the course of argument in this appeal senior counsel for the respondent
Bozatsis strongly urged this court to adopt the view that Bellear DCJ decided the case on the narrower, rather than the broader, basis propounded at first instance. The reason why counsel would wish to make such a submission is understandable. As was mentioned earlier, an acceptance of the broader basis would have required a consideration of the evidence, and a making of findings of fact contrary to a substantial body of police evidence concerning the relationship between the police and Collaro in connection with this matter.

In truth, however, it is impossible to tell what his Honour was intending to accept as the basis for his decision. As the passages quoted above demonstrate, he appeared to adopt submissions advanced on behalf of the respondents which were, in a number of respects, not limited to the narrower basis, and which characterised Collaro, contrary to the police evidence, as acting at all material times as an agent for the police.

Furthermore, a proper consideration of the discretionary matters illustrated in [s138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) would necessitate a clear and accurate appreciation of the nature and extent of any illegal conduct on the part of the police.

If the only element of police illegality lay in the circumstance that, by facilitating the obtaining of the hydriodic acid from Crown Scientific, they were aiding and abetting the commission of an offence which the respondents had previously determined to commit, then it is difficult to see that the case should be regarded as falling within the second category in Ridgeway, or that a proper application of the discretionary considerations set out in [s138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) would require or justify exclusion of the whole of the Crown evidence in the case. To refer to the language of Ridgeway, quoted above, the police conduct was not a principal offence to which the charged offence was ancillary, nor did it create or constitute an essential ingredient of the charge offence. (In this context "ingredient" is used in a legal, not a physical, sense). If, on the other hand, it were accepted that the entire enterprise was instigated by
Collaro in his capacity as a police agent then the case would take on a different complexion. Notwithstanding the disclaimer made by senior counsel for the respondent Bozatsis, the reasons for judgment of Bellear DCJ suggest that his Honour did not advert to the significant difference between the two bases upon which the case for the respondents rested. Without making the necessary findings of fact, his Honour adopted submissions that were in certain potentially important respects contrary to the evidence. He did not say that, or explain why, he was rejecting that evidence, which was substantially uncontradicted, and was not inherently incredible.

The Crown has made good its challenge to the manner in which the Notice of
Motion was dealt with by Bellear DCJ. On the other hand, it has not been demonstrated that, on a proper approach to the facts of the case and the relevant discretionary considerations, a judge would necessary reach a conclusion contrary to that of Bellear DCJ. The proper course, in the circumstances, is for this court to allow the appeal, to set aside the orders made by Bellear DCJ, and to remit the matter to the District Court. It will be a matter for the respondents to decide whether they wish to make a fresh application along the lines of the previous application.

Orders: 
The court should make the following orders: The appeal is allowed.
 The decision and orders of Bellear DCJ of 7 February 1997 are set aside.
 The matter is remitted to the District Court to be dealt with according to law.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with Gleeson CJ. 
BRUCE J: I agree. * * * 
