

Santino Agrillo and Ors versus Katia Codisposto and Ors [1996] NSWSC 121 (10
May 1996) 
SANTINO AGRILLO AND ORS versus KATIA CODISPOSTO AND ORS /93 
Friday 10 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 26 March last I delivered reasons for judgment in this case. I directed the purchasers to bring in short minutes giving effect to those reasons.

The matter was listed again on 1 April when various questions were argued. I delivered oral reasons for judgment on that day resolving a number of disputed questions and directed the parties to bring in short minutes giving effect to those reasons. A transcript of that oral judgment was prepared and made available on 10 April. The parties then disagreed about a further question, the vendors contending that a further sum of $10,000 was payable.

The case was listed for hearing yet again on 22 April when that question was debated. I reserved judgment overnight and delivered reasons for judgment on April, holding that it was not payable. In the course of all that some short minutes of order prepared by the purchasers and dated 1 April were proffered. During the course of the debate on 22 April I dated and initialled those terms with two amendments, namely to paragraphs 2 and 9. Paragraph 3 was amended earlier this morning.

On 23 April I gave another oral judgment and made orders in terms of the short minutes proffered by the plaintiffs, with the amendments I have mentioned. At that stage, the document bore two dates: a typewritten date of 1 April and a manuscript date on the top of the front page of 22 April.

It seems to me that in the absence of some special order, the orders took effect from 23 April. See Erasmus versus Jackson, a decision of Wootten J, of 15
April 1975, unreported but noted in Ritchie's Supreme Court Practice, paragraph 57.1.1.

The purchasers appealed and I understand that last Monday, 6 May, they asked the Court of Appeal for expedition of the appeal and for a stay pending the hearing of the appeal. They contended that in all the circumstances they ought not to have to pay interest, which was one of the conditions I imposed as a term of the order for specific performance of the contract.

I understand that on Monday in the Court of Appeal the vendors said in substance that they might wish to cross-appeal. The last day upon which they might do so in accordance with the Rules is 24 May. Understandably they do not wish to incur the costs of filing a cross-appeal unless and until they have to.

The purchasers had the matter listed again today. They have been seeking from the vendors, in substance, an extension of time. The vendors have been contending that the 42 days in which the purchasers were to complete the contract ran from 1 April. They have argued that today. I have held against them.

The purchasers today sought an order adjourning the proceedings until a date after 4 June, being a date 42 days after 23 April. They foreshadowed an application for an extension of time.

It does not seem to me that I should adjourn the matter on that basis. As I said earlier in the course of discussion, it is more appropriate to simply make no order. The parties ought not be put to the expense of coming back to
Court again if it can possibly be avoided. If the purchasers cannot complete and they wish to make an application for an extension of time, it can be made.
If I am absent at the time it can be made to the duty judge.

My view then is it is not appropriate to make any order today. I have held that the 42-day period runs from 23 April. If on 22 or 23 April I had been asked to substitute a different period, then subject to what might later be said, my present feeling is that I probably would have made that order.

Originally I said "42 days" to allow for the intervention of the Easter break.
However, on 22 and 23 April nobody thought to debate that question. It seems now, so far as I can tell, that the parties were then already at cross purposes.

In any event, both parties now ask for an order for costs of today. I do not think either party is entitled to an order. The vendors have, in substance, lost the argument as to the effect of the order of 23 April. The purchasers have effectively lost the argument that the matter should be adjourned to some other date.

I make no order today and I make no order as to the costs of today. The only order I do make is that if some future dispute arises in my absence, the matter should be brought before the duty judge.
 * * * 
