

Regina versus Garrick Norman Joseph; Regina versus Julie Ann Lorraine Wright [1997]
NSWSC 13 (2 February 1997) 
REGINA versus GARRICK NORMAN JOSEPH REGINA versus JULIE ANN LORRAINE WRIGHT /96, 60124/96 
MONDAY 16 DECEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
JAMES J, BELL AJ 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: These are two applications for leave to appeal against sentence brought by two co-offenders, Garrick Norman Joseph and Julie Anne Lorraine Wright. The sentences of imprisonment which were imposed on each applicant by his Honour Judge Urquhart on 1 March 1996 consisted, after allowing for a short period of discrete pre-sentence custody, of a minimum term of 18 months to date from 9 November 1995 and an additional term of six months. The precise sentence imposed on Joseph consisted of a minimum term of 17 months 23 days and an additional term of six months and the precise sentence imposed on Wright consisted of a minimum term of 17 months seven days and an additional term of six months.

Each of the co-offenders had pleaded guilty to supplying a prohibited drug, being cannabis leaf, contrary to s25(1) of the Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act. Each asked Judge Urquhart to take into account, and Judge Urquhart took into account in sentencing each applicant, an offence of supplying a prohibited drug being amphetamine.

A short statement of the facts of the offence charged and of the offence to be taken into account, as alleged by the Crown, was admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence. However, some of these facts were disputed by the applicants and the sentencing judge conducted protracted proceedings on sentence lasting several days, in which a number of police officers and both applicants gave evidence, so that the sentencing judge could determine disputed issues of fact.

A number of facts were not disputed. For some time before the applicants were arrested they had been living together at premises at Davistown. Between 19
November and 30 November 1992 a listening device was installed by the police in the premises pursuant to a warrant granted under the Listening Devices Act and a number of conversations between the applicants and another person, (the former well known criminal Edward "Jockey" Smith) and several other persons were listened to and recorded. On 30 November 1992 the police executed search warrants at the premises and the two applicants were arrested.

It was not disputed that each of the applicants had had some involvement in an enterprise supplying cannabis leaf and also supplying amphetamine. However there were disputed issues about the amount of cannabis leaf the applicants were supplying, the amount of amphetamine the applicants were supplying, the role played by each of the applicants in the enterprise of supplying prohibited drugs and whether an amount of 16.8 grams of amphetamine, of which the applicants denied any knowledge, had been found, as the police alleged, in the backyard of the premises.

In his careful remarks on sentence Judge Urquhart made a number of important findings of fact. His Honour was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the amphetamine had been found in the backyard of the premises, as the police alleged. Nevertheless, as his Honour noted, each of the applicants had asked that an offence of supplying amphetamine be taken into account. His Honour found that the conversations which had been listened to and recorded by means of the listening device related to a course of dealing in cannabis and, to a lesser extent, amphetamines. He found that each of the applicants was privy to, and shared knowledge of, the various dealings in prohibited drugs referred to in the conversations. His Honour found that the objective criminality of the applicants was the same. His Honour concluded that it was not possible to reach any conclusion about the specific amount of cannabis leaf or the specific amount of amphetamine in which the applicants were dealing. His
Honour went on to say, "I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that so far as cannabis leaf be concerned pounds is an appropriate measure of the weight of that prohibited drug in which the two prisoners dealt but I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that it was very much in excess of but a few pounds. Indeed the indictable quantity in respect of cannabis leaf is 1kg." 
His Honour also made findings about the amount of amphetamines in which the applicants had been dealing.

In his remarks on sentence Judge Urquhart referred to the subjective circumstances of the two applicants: as to Wright his Honour noted that she had been born in 1956 and that she has a long criminal history including many sentences of imprisonment. There was evidence before the sentencing judge that
Wright had been approached by investigators from the Police Royal Commission.
A letter from the Royal Commission stated that Wright had been frank and co- operative with investigators but she did not have the information which was being sought by them. She had supplied certain information but none of the information supplied had led to any further inquiry by the Royal Commission.

As to Joseph the sentencing judge noted that he had been born in 1957. He had a minor criminal record in the 1970's but no criminal conviction since 1976, when he was 19 years old. He had established himself as an earthmoving contractor on the Central Coast.

The challenge made by counsel for Joseph to the sentence passed on him is very limited in scope. It was conceded that the sentence passed on Joseph, standing by itself, could not be challenged. However, it was submitted that Joseph was entitled to feel a legitimate sense of grievance, because there was no disparity between the sentence passed on him and the sentence passed on the co-offender Wright, where, although the sentencing judge had found that their objective criminality was the same, Joseph's antecedents and particularly his previous criminal history, were better than Wright's. As the challenge to the sentence passed on Joseph was limited in this way, it is convenient to turn first to Wright's appeal.

Counsel for Wright sought to challenge findings of fact made by the sentencing judge. However, as has been repeatedly stated by this Court, this Court will not interfere with a finding of fact made in the court below, unless it has been demonstrated that there was no evidence to support the finding or if the evidence is all one way or if the judge misdirected himself or herself in relation to that finding, thereby giving rise to a miscarriage of justice.
Applying these principles to the present case, Judge Urquhart's findings of fact, which were clearly supported by at least some of the evidence, cannot be successfully challenged.

I have already referred to the approach made by investigators of the Police
Royal Commission to Wright. In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge said that he did not accept that the letter from the Royal Commission should be taken into account by him under s442B of the Crimes Act. It is perhaps unclear from his Honour's remarks on sentence whether his Honour reached that conclusion upon the basis that Wright had not actually provided any assistance or undertaken to provide any assistance or whether his Honour reached that conclusion on the basis that none of the paragraphs of ss(3) of s442B were applicable.

It was submitted on behalf of Wright that Wright was entitled to some discount on the grounds of assistance, even though what had happened might not fall within s442B or at least not fall within any of the paragraphs in ss(3) of s442B.

However, even if this submission is correct, as to which I express no opinion, any discount which could be allowed for conduct in the nature of assistance, which did not involve the actual provision of any assistance or an undertaking to provide assistance in the future, could only be slight. In the present case the sentencing judge said in his remarks on sentence that he took into account the applicant Wright's willingness to assist the authorities as evidence of her contrition.

It was submitted that the sentencing judge erred in not giving sufficient weight to the applicant's plea of guilty. His Honour took the applicant's plea of guilty into account in his remarks on sentence. His Honour noted that each applicant had pleaded guilty and said that the plea of guilty had significant utilitarian value, in that it had averted a trial which could have lasted up to twelve weeks. It was unnecessary and indeed undesirable for his Honour to attempt to quantify the discount he made for the plea of guilty.

In my opinion, none of the challenges to the total sentence imposed on the applicant Wright has been made good and I would consider that the total sentence was well within the range of a sound exercise of his Honour's sentencing discretion.

It was submitted that his Honour should have found special circumstances within [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). His Honour turned his mind to whether there were special circumstances and expressly found in his remarks on sentence that there were not. In my opinion it is not possible to say that his Honour erred in the exercise of his discretion in finding that there were no special circumstances. His Honour was not obliged to give any reasons for the finding that there were no special circumstances.

I would propose in the case of the application by Wright, that, while leave to appeal be granted, the appeal against sentence be dismissed.

I return now to the application by Joseph. Counsel for Joseph argued that
Joseph should have received a lighter sentence than Wright, because of his clearly much less serious criminal history. It was submitted on behalf of the
Crown that the applicant Joseph's less serious criminal history could be counterbalanced by the assistance that Wright had furnished and by the greater degree of contrition exhibited by Wright. I have however, earlier in this judgment, concluded that any weight which could be given to Wright's alleged assistance was very slight.

So far as contrition is concerned, in his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge referred at some length to the question of whether Wright had evinced contrition, ultimately concluding that she had. His Honour did not deal with the subject of contrition by Joseph at the same length. However, in one part of his remarks on sentence his Honour noted certain letters which had been received by the Court relating to Joseph and certain evidence which Joseph had given in the proceedings on sentence. His Honour said that it had been submitted on behalf of Joseph that those letters and that evidence had reflected an intention on the part of Joseph to put his criminal behaviour behind him. There is no further reference in the remarks on sentence to the subject of contrition by Joseph. I would infer from the absence of any further reference, in what were extensive and careful remarks on sentence, that his
Honour was prepared to accept the submission made on behalf of Joseph on the subject of contrition.

I accordingly have reached the conclusion that the much less serious criminal history of the applicant Joseph, involving only a very few offences, all of them committed about twenty years ago and none of them involving a prison sentence, was not counterbalanced by any factors operating in favour of the co-offender, such as assistance provided by her or a greater degree of contrition. In those circumstances I conclude that the applicant Joseph is entitled to feel a legitimate sense of grievance at the lack of disparity between the sentences passed on him and his co-offender.

A further submission is made on behalf of Joseph, that the Court should find that there were special circumstances. However, the total sentence which I will propose imposing on the applicant Joseph, is comparatively short and I am not persuaded that there are special circumstances such that the Court should impose a proportionally longer than usual additional term.

The actual order which should be pronounced is complicated by the short period of discrete pre-sentence custody to which I have already referred. I would propose that in the case of the applicant Joseph, that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal be upheld, that the sentence imposed by his Honour
Judge Urquhart on 1 March 1996 be quashed and that in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced to a sentence of imprisonment of 19 months 23 days consisting of a minimum term of fourteen months twenty three days commencing on 9 November 1995 and expiring on 1 February 1997 and an additional term of five months. The applicant should be released on probation on 2 February 1997.

BELL AJ: It should include provision for supervision and further supervision which do not actually flow from the form of sentencing regulation.

JAMES J: Those are the orders that I would propose.

BELL AJ: I agree with the orders and the reasons. Just one thing, perhaps I should mention: there is a ground of appeal on the facts. The presiding judge mentioned that there was evidence to support all the factual findings. I think there may have been a slip of the tongue, or of the pen when reference was made in the sentencing judge's reasons to 8 ounces of amphetamines. I think he probably meant 8 grams.

JAMES J: That was fairly apparent, because if in fact the judge had meant 8 ounces, it would be surprising for him to have devoted much of his judgment to deciding whether 16 grams was found in the backyard.
 * * * 
