

Beach Petroleum Nl versus Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy Matter No 50030/96 [1997]
NSWSC 528 (31 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 
Beach Petroleum NL versus Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy /96 October 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division /1996 - BEACH PETROLEUM NL versus ABBOTT TOUT RUSSELL KENNEDY 
JUDGMENT - ADMISSIBILITY OF PORTIONS OF THE WITNESS STATEMENT OF MR BRIAN HENRY DAVIDSON MADE ON 31 JULY 1997 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
In these proceedings the plaintiff, Beach Petroleum NL, ("Beach), for which Mr
J.C. Kelly of Senior Counsel and Mr I.D. Faulkner of Counsel appear, has sued those who were the partners, at all material times, of Messrs Abbott Tout
Russell Kennedy, for whom Mr T.E.F. Hughes of Queen's Counsel, Mr M.A.
Pembroke of Senior Counsel and Mr J.W.J. Stevenson of Counsel appear, alleging, put very generally but sufficiently for present purposes, that the partners in and solicitors employed by the defendants, who were involved in various transactions the subject of the proceedings, breached various duties they are alleged to have owed to the plaintiff. Mr Kelly has tendered a witness statement of Mr Brian Henry Davidson, who was admitted as a solicitor of this Court on 26 July 1957 and is a highly experienced solicitor with a wide range of expertise in matters arguably relevant to the present proceedings, in support of the plaintiff's case. Mr Davidson's experience and expertise are not in issue. Objection has been taken to paragraphs 229 to 267 of his report on three basic grounds, namely:-
A substantial number of those paragraphs are bad in form;
Most, if not all of the paragraphs, are not legitimate expressions of opinion and therefore the evidence is not relevant; and
They should, in any event, be excluded pursuant to [s.135](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

Mr Davidson's Witness Statement 
In paragraphs 1 to 4 of his witness statement, Mr Davidson set out his experience as a solicitor which, as I have said, is not in issue.

In paragraphs 5 to 169, he set out the assumptions of fact he has made. In relation to these it has been submitted that they do not accord with the facts about which evidence has been given, or with the factual findings for which the defendants will be contending. It has also been submitted that the complexity of the factual and legal matters is such that they cannot be the subject of expert evidence. I do not consider these matters provide reasons for rejecting the evidence, if it is otherwise admissible. I appreciate, of course, that if the assumptions are not made good this may have an effect on any conclusions Mr Davidson has reached, and that the nature of the transactions may be such that at the end of the evidentiary day it is difficult to say that there is a recognised practice relevant to them.
Paragraphs 170 to 192 deal with assumptions of law made by Mr Davidson.
Although no separate objection was taken to them, it was submitted that they lack the particularity of the assumptions of fact and do not, necessarily, set out the correct legal formulation of the issues. I propose to treat these assumptions in the same way as I shall the assumptions of fact.

In paragraphs 193 to 198 Mr Davidson sets forth various matters under the heading of "Instructions". In paragraph 193 he said:- "I have been asked to state what steps, if any, a prudent solicitor would take when acting for Beach in relation to each of the above matters, were that solicitor to act in conformity with the standard of skill, care and diligence practised by solicitors in New South Wales at that time." 
He continued, in paragraph 194, that for the purpose of doing that he had been asked to state what standard practice, if any, existed at the time, which would bear on the conduct of those who had the carriage of the matter for
Beach and what steps, if any, that practice would require those to take, or to refrain from taking, if acting in conformity with that practice. In paragraph he stated:- "In relation to each matter, I am to answer those questions, firstly, upon the assumption that the solicitor acts or potentially acts in the context of multiple retainers as set forth in the assumptions of law set out above and, secondly, upon the basis that the solicitor was an independent solicitor who had been retained to act for Beach in relation to the matter." 
It was submitted that this paragraph contained an inherent contradiction.

In paragraph 196 he said that he had not been asked to express an opinion in relation to the quality of professional practice exhibited by the defendants, or as to what he would have done in the circumstances, but to identify any practice:- ".. that may be said to be a standard practice, if such a practice may be said to exist, and to state what steps a solicitor who was conducting himself in accordance with standard practice would or would not have taken as the case may be." 
He continued:- "197. When I refer to `standard practice' I am not purporting to describe what most solicitors do or do not do. I intend to refer, by that term, to the norms, which are recognised by solicitors governing the mode of practice or approach that they should take to particular problems. . When I use words such as `a solicitor would have ..', `the solicitor would not have' or the solicitor `should' or `should not' have taken a particular step, I intend to refer to the steps that a hypothetical prudent solicitor would or would not have taken when conducting himself in conformity with that standard practice, as distinct from deviating from the norm. I do not intend to and should not be taken as passing judgment upon the conduct of the solicitors who are involved in the present case." 
In paragraphs 199 to 226 Mr Davidson dealt with what he asserts to be the standard practice in relation to conflict. He refers to various statements of principle, which regulate the manner in which he understands solicitors should act when confronted with potential or actual conflict, in a manner which is uncontroversial. In paragraph 224 he considered the position of acting for a "group" of companies with common directors and, in paragraph 225, he said:- "In such a case, the solicitor would be concerned to ensure that he has a thorough understanding of the proposed transaction before taking any steps to act in relation to the matter so that he may discern any actual or potential conflict which may preclude him from acting, including any actual or potential conflict which may arise by reason of the fact that the director or directors through whom the solicitor received instructions may themselves be in a position of conflict of interest or conflict of duty and cannot give independent instructions. In such a case, the standard practice is the same. The circumstances in which the standard practice is to be applied, however, are more complex. In every case the solicitor will ask whatever questions may be necessary so that he may fully acquaint himself with the proposed transaction and ensure that he has received satisfactory answers before he accepts instructions and proceeds to act so that he does not accept instructions and proceed to act when he is not in a position to do so." 
Mr Pembroke, who presented the submissions on behalf of the defendants on this point, said that that statement, to which no objection is taken, deals comprehensively with the general practice as to conflict and anything further, by way of evidence, should not be permitted. Objection is taken to the further evidence in which Mr Davidson identified various transactions, which lie at the heart of the proceedings, relied on the assumptions he has made and certain further assumptions and asserted that, in those circumstances, there is a practice, which he specified.

The Principles Of Law 
The principles determining the extent to which expert evidence can be given as to the way in which a solicitor should act in performing his or her professional functions were considered by Deane J in Hawkins versus Clayton &
Ors (1988) 164 CLR 539 at 573; by Hodgson J in Robelais Pty Limited v
Cameron (8 February 1993 - unreported); by Young J in Permanent Trustee
Australia Limited versus Boulton [(1994) 33 NSWLR 735] at 738, and by me in St George Commercial Credit Corporation Limited versus Collins
Wallis Properties Pty Limited & Ors (23 November 1993 - unreported) and in Ostavest Pty Limited versus Brown (2 May 1995 - unreported). In a number of those cases the decision in Midland Bank Trust Co Limited versus Hett Stubbs & Kemp [[1979] Ch 384] was cited. This is not intended as an exhaustive list of the cases, many of which are conveniently drawn together in O'Brien versus Gillespie & Ors [(1996) 41 NSWLR 549.] 
The basic principle, as stated by Deane J, is that evidence may be given of "any general practice defining the professional obligations of a solicitor in the postulated circumstances": p.573.

Hodgson J, in Robelais Pty Limited versus Cameron, said:- "Certainly, such evidence may go to professional standards laid down by a professional institute or regularly practised." 
Young J said, in Permanent Trustee Australia Limited, that he would admit "evidence of any `industry-wide' good practice" or "subject to relevance, evidence of what is common practice amongst solicitors of good repute".

Thus admissibility at common law is determined by establishing a general, regular or common practice and, subject to one matter, it is this principle, which I have applied previously, that I propose to consider in ruling on the present objections. The proviso is that I also must take into account [ss.79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) and [80](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s80.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). In doing so I shall apply [s.80](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s80.html), as Lindgren J did in Allstate Life Insurance Co versus Australia & New
Zealand Banking Group Limited (No 33) [(1996) 137 ALR 138], and I shall hold that statements, which purport to express a final conclusion about a matter in issue or the ultimate issue, are not statements "about" those issues. In so far as I say that evidence is not evidence of practice, or words to that effect, or that the requirements of [s.80(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s80.html) have not been met, I am making those rulings in the context of what I have just written. It will be appreciated that I am giving these rulings in the course of a lengthy hearing, such that some economy of language is necessary.

Of course, my rulings on evidence do not in any way preclude an appropriate challenge in cross-examination to the evidence given or an ultimate challenge in submissions, either to the appropriateness of the evidence having regard to the assumptions, which are proved, or the weight to be attributed to the evidence. Nor does the admission of the evidence prevent an attack on the basis that the matters in issue in the present case are of such complexity or uniqueness as to make it difficult, if not impossible, to give evidence of regular or common practice. I am concerned solely with the question of admissibility.

Rulings On Disputed Paragraphs 
In paragraph 229 Mr Davidson said that in considering the question of actual or potential conflict the Hypothetical Solicitor, which is the term by which he identified the solicitor to whom he referred, would have been mindful of a number of factors, which he set out. It seems to me that he may or may not have been mindful of those matters, but the issue is the response of the
Hypothetical Solicitor to the matter presented to him, and, in my opinion, it does not assist by asserting the matters which one solicitor would have in mind. Such evidence goes beyond establishing a practice to the point of setting forth an unarticulated reasoning process, which, in my opinion, is not admissible. I reject paragraph 229.

In paragraph 230 Mr Davidson asserted that on 27 April 1989 the Hypothetical
Solicitor would have made an assumption, asked a number of questions, been aware of certain requirements of the Australian Stock Exchange, made certain enquiries, and given a warning and certain advice. Whilst it may be said that these matters are covered, speaking generally, in paragraph 225, I consider that this evidence is admissible, it being stated as being a matter of practice. I do not see why, in the postulated circumstances, what is said to be a common practice cannot be stated with greater specificity. Essentially for the same reason, I consider that paragraph 231 is admissible.

The first sentence of paragraph 232 makes a factual assumption and the second and third sentences suggest the response of the Hypothetical Solicitor to it.
Whilst there may be assumptions additional to those made earlier in the statement, I do not consider they are inadmissible by reason of that fact. I shall allow further assumptions. In my opinion, the first, second and third sentences of paragraph 232 are admissible. The fourth and fifth sentences assert what, having made the assumption and drawn the conclusions, the
Hypothetical Solicitor would "also have assumed". In my opinion this further assumption, in the context, does not rise above speculation or "assumption on assumption", and I reject that sentence. The final sentence of paragraph 232 asserts that a solicitor would have been comforted by certain facts. In my view this does not establish a practice and I reject that sentence.

Paragraph 233, on its face, sets forth what the Hypothetical Solicitor would have done as a matter of practice and I admit it.

Paragraph 234 commences with two sentences, which contain factual assumptions and the third sentence of paragraph 234 sets out concerns the Hypothetical
Solicitor would have had having regard to the assumed instructions. The paragraph concludes:- "These specific concerns would have led him to have an overall concern as to whether Firstway was at arm's length from Beach and Claremont and whether the transaction was bona fide." 
In my opinion, and for the purposes of paragraph 235, the assumptions in the first and second sentences of paragraph 234 are admissible as assumptions of fact. The third sentence, in which I include sub-paragraphs 234.1 to 234.9 and the final sentence, which I have quoted, refer to concerns and, in my opinion, do not go to the matter of practice. The issue is what, as a matter of practice, is the response to the concerns. I reject the third and fourth sentences of paragraph 234.

Paragraph 235 picks up the concerns following the instructions referred to in paragraph 234, and then states what the Hypothetical Solicitor would have done. In my view paragraph 235 goes to the matter of practice and I admit it.

The first four sentences of paragraph 236 make assumptions of fact which I admit as such. The balance of the paragraph asserts that from a perusal of the documents referred to in the first and fourth sentences certain things "would have been apparent to the Hypothetical Solicitor". I do not regard that as going to a question of practice, but rather as setting forth Mr Davidson's construction of the documents, and that which he considers the Hypothetical
Solicitor would have had in mind. That, in my opinion, is not admissible as evidence of practice.

Paragraph 237 is a statement as to what the Hypothetical Solicitor would have done, in consequence of the assumptions I have admitted in paragraph 236, and
I admit it.

Paragraph 238 also sets forth what the Hypothetical Solicitor would have done, as a matter of practice, and I admit it.

I admit paragraphs 239 and 240 as evidence of what the Hypothetical Solicitor would have done. I reject paragraph 241, which asserts that of which the
Hypothetical Solicitor would have been mindful, for the reasons I have given on this point, and I admit paragraph 242 as to what he would have done in the circumstances therein stated.

I admit paragraph 243 as evidence of what the Hypothetical Solicitor would have done, and I reject paragraph 244, which is concerned with conclusions the
Hypothetical Solicitor would have reached rather than his response to them.

I reject the first sentence of paragraph 245 which, in my opinion, does not go to any matter of practice. I admit the words in the second sentence of paragraph 245:- "The Hypothetical Solicitor, on being give pre-signed blank letterhead of both Spargos and Beach with instructions to type up letters of instruction thereon" ...... "would have declined ..." to the end of the sentence as going to matters of practice.

I reject "would have" to "accordingly" being related to reasons which do not go to matters of practice, and I reject the final sentence of paragraph 245 as not going to a matter of practice. I also reject paragraph 246 as not going to a matter of practice.

I am not certain to what matters reference is being made in paragraph 247 and, accordingly, I reject it but grant leave to the plaintiff to adduce oral evidence in admissible form.

I admit paragraphs 248 and 249, and I reject paragraph 250 consistently with my earlier rulings.

I admit paragraphs 251 and 252 as setting forth matters of practice. I admit paragraph 253 as setting forth assumptions of fact, and I reject paragraph 254 as not setting forth any matters of practice.

I admit the first three sentences of paragraph 255 as assumptions of fact. I reject the balance of paragraph 255 on the basis that it sets forth argumentative material and not material as to practice or setting forth any assumptions. I also reject paragraph 256 as not setting forth any matter of practice. I reject paragraph 257 as being argumentative and not setting forth matters of practice or assumptions, which are subsequently relied upon in the statement. I reject paragraph 258 as not going to a matter of practice and as seeking to refer to a matter for my decision.

I admit paragraphs 259 and 260 and I reject paragraph 261 consistently with earlier rulings. I admit paragraph 262, save for sub-paragraph 4, as to what the Hypothetical Solicitor would have done. I reject sub-paragraph 4 which is based upon a somewhat speculative suggestion.

Paragraph 263 sets forth what Mr Davidson perceives to be the consequence of the failure to advise that Beach should be represented in relation to a certain transaction. I do not regard this as going to a matter of practice, but rather as putting forward matters of submission, and I regard the suggestions as to what an independent solicitor would have done as in the same category. I do not regard the paragraph as saved by reliance upon [s.80(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s80.html)
I accordingly reject paragraph 263.

Paragraph 264 sets forth the terms of a certain agreement, and asserts that from that the Hypothetical Solicitor would have appreciated certain things, which appreciation would have reinforced the need for Beach to be separately advised in relation to the transaction. In my opinion this is not a matter susceptible of expert evidence as flowing from any practice, but rather an interpretation of the facts, based on other evidence, which is a matter for me. Accordingly, I reject paragraph 264, which I do not consider is saved by [s.80(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s80.html) 
The first four sentences of paragraph 265 set forth matters which I am prepared to admit as assumptions of fact and, based upon those assumptions, I admit the last two sentences of paragraph 265 as being matters of practice.

The matters set forth in paragraph 266 are not, as I understand it, in issue.
It seems to me however that they should not be contained in the portion of the report dealing with Mr Davidson's opinion and, in those circumstances, I reject the paragraph. If the matters are in issue they cannot be proved by Mr
Davidson's assertions.

Paragraph 267 states:- "It is well accepted that it is an undesirable practice for a solicitor to back-date a document, and if by doing so it is intended to mislead third parties, then it would be unethical conduct for a solicitor to do so." 
In my opinion this is an ultimate question for me, if the facts are ever established, and, accordingly, I reject the paragraph.
 * * * 
