

Dalysmith Corporation (Australia) P/L and 1 Or versus Cray Personnel P/L and 5
Ors [1998] NSWSC 998 (29 January 1998) `DALYSMITH CORPORATION (AUSTRALIA) P/L & 1 OR versus CRAY PERSONNEL P/L & 5 ORS ` `2789/96` `MONDAY 24 FEBRUARY 1997` `THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION` `YOUNG J` `` `JUDGMENT ` `` `HIS HONOUR: The question before the court is whether the plaintiff should be entitled to read an affidavit of Mr Jansson who was the third defendant in these proceedings sworn on 20 February 1997 notwithstanding its recent swearing. The affidavit was served either the same day or the next day so that it was served one or two working days before the hearing. Ordinarily this would not be a reasonable time within Part 38 rule 7 of the Supreme Court
Rules so that the affidavit could only be used with leave. The transcript of the directions that the Chief Judge made at the pre-trial on 22 November 1996, when counsel appear to have assured the Chief Judge that the case was ready make it even more difficult to escape the conclusion that it is unreasonable to allow the affidavit to be read. However, when considering this type of application, as the High Court reminded in Queensland versus JL Holdings Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 294], one must never allow rules and case management procedures to outflank the principles of justice. It is important that the court when seeking the truth of this matter have before it all the relevant evidence.` ` Mr Newlinds for the defendants mainly affected by the evidence says that there has clearly been a tactical decision made to come to terms with the third and sixth defendants late in the piece then to deploy their affidavits against the other defendants leaving insufficient time to get proper instructions to reply to the affidavits. There is some suspicion of this, but not enough material to enable me to make the finding even on the voir dire.
The factual material in the affidavits can be answered. It is just that there is insufficient time to investigate fully material that might be put to the witness to undermine the witness's credit. To a degree this can be dealt with by considering when weighing the evidence the lateness of its filing.` ` Ideally the matter could be met by an adjournment. The adjournment, if it were put in my list, would be for 6 May 1997 and I doubt whether any other judge's list is less congested. Mr Newlinds indicated that the prejudice his client would suffer by such an adjournment would be such if the affidavit was to be read on terms of an adjournment, he would be instructed not to accept the terms.` ` Unsatisfactory as it is, the best I can do is to admit the evidence and to discount its weight as appropriate. ` ` Thus, I give leave for the affidavit of Mr Karl Jansson sworn 20 February to be read in the proceedings.` `` `DALY SMITH CORPORATION (AUST) P/L & ANOR v` `CRAY PERSONNEL P/L & ORS` `2789/96 ` `THURSDAY, 3 APRIL 1997` `THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION` `YOUNG J` `` `JUDGMENT` `` `HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced by summons filed 18 July
They subsequently continued by way of pleadings.` ` Essentially the facts are that both the plaintiffs on the one hand and the first defendant on the other hand are in the field of selecting and placing labour. The plaintiffs are in the blue collar labour field; the first defendant is in that and other fields. The second and fourth defendants were employed by the plaintiffs up until early 1996. They both signed covenants restricting their activities in the relevant field after termination of their employment. The plaintiffs seek to enforce those covenants by injunction and otherwise.` ` The first and second defendants filed cross-claims against the plaintiffs for damages under <case> of the Trade Practices Act for allegedly false and misleading statements made by the plaintiffs about them.` ` An interlocutory hearing was held before Cohen J last July. On 30 July 1996 his Honour ordered:` `` ``"Upon the plaintiffs by their counsel giving to the Court the usual undertakings as to damages. Order that the defendants by their servants and agents be restrained until 30 September 1996 or the final hearing, whichever is the sooner, from canvassing or endeavouring to take away from the plaintiffs any customer or client known by the defendant concerned to have been a customer or client for whom the plaintiffs or either of them had engaged or supplied labour during the period from 1 September 1995 to 1 March .

This order does not restrain the defendants from engaging to supply labour to persons to whom the first defendant has supplied labour since 1 March 1996.

I note the undertaking given to the Court by the first and second defendants that they will keep an account of all earnings and profits made in the business of the first defendant until the final hearing.

Recommend that the hearing of the proceedings be expedited.

Stand over to Expedition Judge on 9 August 1996.

Costs reserved to the hearing." 
On 27 September 1996 in the course of a directions hearing the parties again had recorded that they consented to orders extending the orders of Cohen, J until further order of the Court or until final hearing.

On 22 November 1996 the Chief Judge ordered that the proceedings, though not the cross-claim, be expedited.

I heard the proceedings on 24 to 26 February and 3 March 1997. Mr Masterman QC and Mr RW Cameron appeared for the plaintiffs; Mr CRC Newlinds appeared for the first, second and fourth defendants. The proceedings were settled as against other defendants. The plaintiffs made it clear at the hearing that they did not seek any orders against the fourth defendant who had become a bankrupt. I reserved my decision without making any explicit order continuing the interim injunction.

Mr Newlinds suggested that the reasons for judgment should be structured by considering a series of questions. With a slight modification I have adopted his suggestion. I have prepared a draft of 38 pages fully considering those questions and the case generally. Unfortunately, with the resources available to me plus the fact that I am currently the Duty Judge it is unlikely that the final engrossed set of reasons in a form which the Court of Appeal says that parties are entitled to have will be ready for about three weeks. As there either is or might appear to be a current injunction, it seems to be in the interests of justice that I should take the unusual course of relisting the matter, recording my answers, and dealing with the interim injunction. The regrettable delay in providing the full reasons will then have less impact on the parties.

The questions are:
Are the covenants in cls 2,3, and 4 of the employment agreement valid and enforceable under the general law?
If the answer to 1 is "No", are those covenants or any of them enforceable as read down under the [Restraints of Trade Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/)?
Has the information the subject of the proceedings such "quality of confidence" that it can be regarded as confidential?
Have the defendants breached the covenants as modified?
Did the defendants steal documents belonging to the plaintiffs?
Did the second defendant breach his obligation to the plaintiffs by encouraging others to leave the plaintiffs' employ; and if so, was he successful in those endeavours?
Have the plaintiffs shown any entitlement to damages/account of profits/equitable compensation?
What is the result of the case? 
I have reached a final view as to the answers, which are as follows:
No.
Yes.
No, but this answer does not cover the field as the covenants can be supported as protecting the plaintiffs' connection with their customers.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
Not applicable.
Yes.
The covenants should be read down in various respects. Clause 2 should be read down so as to insert "confidential" before "information" and by deleting the phrase "or any of its customers... his or her employment." Clause 3 should be read as if it contained an additional sentence which read "In this clause 'customers or clients of the DSC Group' include only such persons who, between September 1995 and 1 March 1996 had a contract with DSC for the supply of blue collar labour and the business referred to shall mean only the business of DSC of supplying blue collar labour to such customers or clients." Clause 4 should be read down only to apply to blue collar labour. The area covered by the restriction should not extend beyond the Hawkesbury River, but otherwise the area covered by the restraint is reasonable. The time for which the covenant is to last should be for one year or the time for which the employee was actually employed, whichever is the shorter. Accordingly, the covenant expired on 1 December 1996.

It follows that the plaintiffs were entitled to an injunction up to 1 December but not beyond that date. Any existing injunction is hereby dissolved.
The first, second and fourth defendants may be entitled to a reference to the
Master pursuant to the undertaking as to damages.

The plaintiffs have demonstrated circumstances indicative of the probability of damage. Thus they are entitled to damages or an account of profits in respect of the breaches referred to in the answers to questions 4 and 5. As to this, in the first instance the plaintiffs must elect which remedy they wish to pursue. It may be that they are entitled to some further discovery before they make this election (Led Builders Pty Ltd versus Eagle Homes Pty Ltd (No 3) [(1996) 36 IPR 293).] However, as account of profits in this type of case is purely discretionary, the ultimate choice of remedy will be in the hands of the Court (Ancher, Mortlock, Murray & Woolley Pty Ltd versus Hooker Homes Pty Ltd [1971] [2 NSWLR 278], 291). Because of this election having to be made and in my discretion I will not assess loss at this stage. I will consider submissions as to whether a Master should carry out that exercise or whether I should do it myself in due course.

The question of the cross-claim will have to be considered in due course, though I would imagine that, in light of my findings, these cross-claims may now be academic.

My reasons will be available within twenty-one days. They will be posted to counsel when available. They should be considered and when the matter is next mentioned before me counsel should be in a position to say how much time needs to be set aside to deal with the aftermath of my decision. 28 April next would be a suitable date but counsel may, in a moment, suggest some other day.

Of course, time for appeal will only run from when the final orders are pronounced. To avoid confusion this means the final orders other than the result of any inquiry as to damages or taking an account of profits.

I dissolve any existing injunction. Note that full reasons will be delivered to counsel when available.

Stood over to 28 April 1997 for further submissions.

DALYSMITH CORPORATION (AUST) P/L & ANOR V CRAY PERSONNEL P/L &
ORS /96 
Monday 14 April 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs on the one hand and the first defendant on the other hand are in the field of selecting and placing labour. The plaintiffs are in the blue collar labour field; the first defendant is in that and other fields. The second and fourth defendants were employed by the plaintiffs up until early 1996. They both signed covenants restricting their activities in the relevant field after termination of their employment. The plaintiffs seek to enforce those covenants by injunction and otherwise.

The first and second defendants filed cross claims against the plaintiffs for damages under <case> of the Trade Practices Act for allegedly false and misleading statements made by the plaintiffs about them.

An interlocutory hearing was held before Cohen, J last July. On 30 July, 1996
His Honour made an interim order, to extend up until 30 September 1996, restraining the defendants from canvassing or endeavouring to take away from the plaintiffs any customer or client known by the defendant concerned to have been a customer or client for whom the plaintiffs or either of them had engaged or supplied labour during the period from 1 September, 1995 to 1
March, 1996. There were certain exceptions to this restraint. His Honour also ordered the first and second defendants to keep an account of all their profits.

On 27 September, 1996, the parties consented to orders extending those orders until further order of the court or until final hearing.

On 22 November, 1996, the Chief Judge ordered that the proceedings, though not the cross claims, be expedited.

I heard the proceedings on 24-26 February and 3 March, 1997. Mr Masterman, QC and Mr R W Cameron appeared for the plaintiffs; Mr C R C Newlinds appeared for the first, second and fourth defendants. The proceedings were settled as against other defendants. The plaintiffs made it clear at the hearing that they did not seek any orders against the fourth defendant who had become a bankrupt. I reserved my decision, without making any explicit order continuing the interim injunction.

By 2 April 1997, after considering the submissions made and rereading the affidavits and the relevant part of the transcript, I had made up my mind what the result of the case must be. As it seemed that it might be some time before formal reasons in proper form could be handed down, I relisted the matter on 3
April and gave a short judgment as to that result, dissolved any existing injunction and indicated that my full reasons would be delivered in due course. These reasons now fulfil that obligation.

As I have said, the plaintiffs are a group of companies involved in the business of selecting and placing blue collar labour. The second defendant,
William Crowe, was employed by the plaintiffs from 27 March 1995 until 29
January 1996 as a sales consultant. His employment was regulated by a contract bearing date 12 April 1995. The fourth defendant, Mary Davis, was similarly employed from 10 November 1995 until 1 March 1996 as a staff co-ordinator at the plaintiffs' Rydalmere branch. Her contract in almost identical form is dated 24 August 1995. What I have called "the plaintiffs' Rydalmere business" was for some part of the time actually operated through a corporation TTP
Corporation Pty Ltd trading as DSC Personnel. Mr Smith, the managing director of each of the plaintiffs, says that that company was part of the Dalysmith
Corporation Group and no argument was presented as to the difference in identity of the employer within the Group.

The first defendant has two directors and shareholders, the second defendant and one Robert Day. The first defendant was incorporated on 22 January 1996 and Mr Day says it commenced business on 4 March 1996. The plaintiffs would have me find that it operated from an earlier date. There is no doubt at all that the first defendant employed Miss Davis from 5 March 1996 and she is still employed by the first defendant. The second defendant was employed by the first defendant from 23 March 1996 and is still employed by it.

Clauses 2 to 4 of the employment agreement signed by the second and fourth defendants with the plaintiffs are as follows:- "2. The Employee shall not at any time during his or her employment hereunder (except so far as is necessary and proper in the course of his or her employment) or afterwards disclose to any person any information as to the practice, business dealings or affairs of the DSC Group or any of its customers or clients or as to any other matters which may come to his or her knowledge by reason of his or her employment.
The Employee shall not after termination of this agreement for any cause whatever canvass, or endeavour to take away from the DSC Group the business of any customers or clients of the DSC Group.
The Employee shall not while in the employment of the DSC Group whether in the capacity in which he is now employed or in any other capacity or during the period of two years next after he shall by reason of dismissal, retirement or otherwise have ceased to be so employed directly or indirectly and whether as principal, agent, director of a company, traveller, servant or otherwise carry on or be engaged or concerned or take part in the business of the supply of contract skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled labour services within a 50 kilometre radius of Northcott Street, St Leonards in the State of New South Wales, except on behalf of or with the consent in writing of the DSC Group." 
The plaintiffs do not seek any orders against the fourth defendant. However, as against the first and second defendants they claim first, an injunction restraining the second defendant until 29 January 1998 from carrying on or being engaged, concerned or taking part in the business of the supply of contract labour services within 50 km of St Leonards; secondly, an injunction preventing the second defendant canvassing customers; thirdly, an order that the first and second defendants destroy any of the plaintiffs' documents still in their possession; and fourthly, damages/account of profits/equitable compensation for the defendants' breaches of fiduciary duty.

I have found it very difficult to devise a structure which will enable me to discuss and rule on the various points of contention in the case in a logical fashion. Mr Newlinds suggested that the reasons for judgment should be structured by considering a series of questions. With slight modification, I have adopted his suggestion. Accordingly, I pose for myself the following issues:-
Are the covenants in clauses 2, 3 and 4 of the employment agreement valid and enforceable under the general law?
If the answer to 1 is "no", are those covenants or any of them enforceable as read down under the [Restraints of Trade Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/)?
Has the information, the subject of the proceedings, such "quality of confidence" that it can be regarded as confidential?
Have the defendants breached the covenants as modified?
Did the defendants steal documents belonging to the plaintiffs?
Did the second defendant breach his obligations to the plaintiffs by encouraging others to leave the plaintiffs' employ, and (b) if so, was he successful in those endeavours?
Have the plaintiffs shown any entitlement to damages/account of profits/equitable compensation?
What is the result of the case? 
I will deal with each of these issues in turn.
The law limits the type of covenants and the breadth of covenants which can be taken from an employee by an employer which might have the effect of limiting competition. The following general propositions are not in dispute:- 
An employer cannot take a covenant to protect himself against mere competition: Stenhouse Australia Ltd versus Phillips <case>; [[1974] AC 391], 400; Wright versus Gasweld Pty Ltd [(1991) 22 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%2022%20NSWLR%20317 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 329.

Contractual provisions in restraint of trade are prima facie void:
Nordenfelt versus Maxim Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Co [[1894] AC ], 565.

A contractual provision which on its face operates so as to restrict a person's liberty in the future to carry on his or her trade is a contractual provision in restraint of trade: Esso Petroleum Co Ltd versus Harper's Garage
Ltd <case>; [[1968] AC ], 307.

The onus of proving that a restriction is reasonable is on the person seeking to enforce the covenant: Herbert Morris Ltd versus Saxelby [[1916] 1
AC 688], .

The validity of the covenant is to be judged as at the date of the agreement imposing it: Lindner versus Murdock's Garage <case>; [(1950) 83 CLR 628], 653; Amoco Australia Pty Ltd versus Rocca Bros Motor
Engineering Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1973) 133 CLR 288], 318.

When enforcing (e), one must remember that the court takes into account future possibilities which could then have been foreseen; see the Murdock's
Garage case at 653 and ICT Pty Ltd versus Sea Containers Ltd [(1995) 39
NSWLR 640], 671.

When the court is considering whether an injunction should be granted it looks also to the facts as they exist at the date of hearing: Kone Elevators
Pty Ltd versus McNay (Young, J, 10 March 1997, unreported, reversed, though not on this point 19 March 1997).

It is more difficult to establish that a contract in restraint of trade is valid in the employment context than it is in the sale of business context:
Geraghty versus Minter [(1979) 142 CLR 177], 185.

I must now examine the covenants imposed by the plaintiffs on the second and fourth defendants using these principles and consider whether they are, in all the circumstances, reasonable restraints.

Clause 2 of the employment agreement is obviously far too wide. "Any information as to the practice, business dealings or affairs of the DSC Group or any of its customers or clients" (the underlining is mine) goes further than respecting confidential information.

Clause 3 focuses not only upon the customers or clients with whom the employee dealt during his or her employment but to all customers. This type of covenant is considered as being too wide and bad: Baines versus Geary [(1887) 35 Ch D ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281887%29%2035%20Ch%20D%20154 "View LawCiteRecord" ); Stephens versus Kuhnelle  <case>; [(1926) 26 SR 327.] 
It is well accepted that because of the difficulty of framing restrictive covenants to cover precisely the interests of the employer that need to be protected, the court will look favourably on a covenant which restrains the employee from trading for a certain period of time: Littlewoods Organisation
Ltd versus Harris [[1977] 1 WLR 1472], 1485. The vital words of clause 4 are that the employee is not to be engaged in the business of the supply of contract skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled labour services within a 50 km radius. It is alleged that this is too wide because the employment of the second and fourth defendants with the plaintiffs was in the unskilled market; (b) the 50 km radius of St Leonards is too wide; and the period of two years is too long.

Although the plaintiffs do not seek any relief against the fourth defendant, it is necessary to look at her situation, because, as I understand it, orders are sought against the first defendant which involve her employment.

Mary Davis went to work at the Rydalmere branch of the plaintiffs' enterprise on 10 November 1995. Her job involved placing advertisements for prospective employees, interviewing the same, liaising with clients and arranging for the placement of employees with clients, ensuring that the employees turned up for work, and telephone canvassing for potential new clients. She left the employment on 4 March 1996. She never seems to have worked outside the
Rydalmere branch, though she did have an interview for employment at the
Rosebery branch. Miss Davis' title was "Staff Co-ordinator Rydalmere". She was one of the two persons employed in such a position, the other being Darren
Judd who gave evidence in the proceedings.

The second defendant was employed as a sales consultant. He swore that for the first two weeks of his employment he worked out of the plaintiffs' Rosebery office; thereafter he was transferred to the Liverpool branch and subsequently to the Rydalmere branch. In both of those offices his job was principally the supervision of other staff. From July 1995 to January 1996 he worked out of the Rosebery office. He says that he had developed a large range of contacts in the food industry and the waste disposal industry and although his job at
Rosebery was to seek out prospective customers, he would estimate that at least 90% of all prospective customers he contacted were companies and organisations known to him before he commenced employment with the plaintiffs.
Furthermore, he says that all prospective and existing customers were listed in the Sydney or regional white and yellow pages telephone books.

It is clear that the plaintiffs' business was principally concerned with the supply of blue collar labour. As to this, Mr Smith was cross examined at T22 as follows: "Q. And when you say blue collar worker, you mean people who work outside, not in the office? 
A. Skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled, if that describes it for you - blue collar workers.

Q. An unskilled person who works for an office would not be classed as blue collar; is that right? 
A. No, that is correct.

Q. And indeed the type of people we are talking about are described in [part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/index.html#p3) of the statement of claim - fitters, welders, boilermakers, carpenters, etc? 
A. In the main, that is correct.

Q. And really the plaintiffs' business has never been considered with what has been described as white collar placement? 
A. It is rare and preferably not.

Q. And you are not really interested in that? 
A. We do not market that service." 
It can immediately be seen that clause 4 extends beyond the category popularly known as "blue collar workers". Unsurprisingly, there is no decided case that
I have found which defines a "blue collar worker". The Macquarie Dictionary definition of "blue-collar" is "belonging or appertaining to workers other than white-collar, as factory, production line workers, etc." The definition of "white-collar worker" is "non-manual workers, as those in professional and clerical work, who traditionally wore a suit, white shirt and tie." I do not consider that the term "blue collar worker" is confined exclusively to factory workers or production line workers. The term extends also to manual workers in the gardens and grounds of schools and public reserves etc and to certain transport workers like deckhands on a ferry.

It may sometimes be difficult to tell exactly which side of the blue/white collar line a person is and indeed, occupations may develop across the line.
Thirty years ago an engine driver on a railway train would be considered to be a blue collar worker as he drove a steam engine in his blue overalls in the grease and grime, but the smart-looking lady who sits at the controls of a monorail in her white blouse and red bow tie, pressing a button, might not now be considered to be a blue collar worker even though she, like her predecessor, is employed to drive a train along a track. However, no matter what the difficulty of placing the dividing line, there is no doubt at all that the distinction is generally a valid one.

Unless one can read down the words used in clause 4 to blue collar labour, the covenant is too extensive. Mr Masterman QC put that courts strive to uphold bargains made between parties not under disadvantage and that in the circumstances I should hold that the covenant is valid. Unfortunately, I cannot see how one can read the words "labour services" down to "blue collar labour services" as a matter of construction.

Accordingly, under the general law I consider clause 4 also to be expressed too widely as to subject-matter.

So far as the 50 km radius is concerned, one needs to look at the way in which the business operated to see whether such a wide range is reasonable. Fifty kilometres from St Leonards was not actually demonstrated to me, but it would roughly cover the area from Gosford in the north, to Penrith in the west and to Bulli in the south. The plaintiffs worked through regional offices, one at
Rydalmere, another at Liverpool, a third at Alexandria and a fourth at
Rosebery, and whilst these offices covered a considerable part of the Sydney metropolitan area, the whole of the 50 km radius was by no means covered.
Furthermore, the evidence shows that the fourth defendant was mainly connected with the Rydalmere branch, though the second defendant's activities extended wider. The prospecting lists annexed to Ms McCowen's affidavit, whilst not a completely accurate guide to the spread of the plaintiffs' business, shows that the prospects tended to congregate in the well-known industrial areas of
Sydney such as Bankstown and suburbs, Alexandria, Mascot, Botany, Seven Hills-
Blacktown and Silverwater, with pockets in the industrial areas of suburbs like Lane Cove. I only noticed one prospect north of Hornsby, none south of
Sutherland, nor west of Kingswood. Read in conjunction with the whole personnel market rather than the blue collar personnel market, in my view a 50 km restriction is too wide. It may be that if one reads down the scope of the covenant to blue collar workers, it would be much easier to defend a 50 km radius. I will deal with this under [section .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s2.html) 
So far as two years are concerned, the evidence in the case strongly suggests that a lot of the material which passes through the hands of employees of the plaintiffs is only of temporary significance. Casual labour in the blue collar market tends to be very fluid and details as to employees need to be updated regularly. However, there is far more permanency about who are the industries needing casual blue collar labour and who should be contacted to obtain contracts for the hire of casual labour in those industries. Even so, a person could, by merely canvassing, obtain these details readily enough and certainly could do so with three to six months' effort.

One must look at reasonableness of a restraint as a package including its subject-matter, its area of operation and the time for which it operates.
However, if one were considering the aspect of the time of the restraint separately, one would judge reasonableness by considering what needs to be imposed to protect the legitimate proprietary interest of the employer; see
Stenhouse Australia Ltd versus Phillips <case>; [[1974] AC 391], 402; Fleming Bros (Monaro Agencies) Pty Ltd versus Smith [(1983) 5 ATPR 40-389] at p 44,571. Where that interest is the employer's customer connection, a restraint that enures after the time taken for a reasonably competent new employee to master the job and be able to demonstrate to customers that he or she is effective and efficient, will be too long. This appears from the American cases considered by Professor Harlan M Blake in his article, "Employee Agreements Not to Compete" in [(1960) 73 Harvard Law Review ], 677.

I appreciate that the second defendant was appointed to a fairly senior position. However, much of his time was spent in supervision of other employees or in canvassing for new customers rather than in dealing with existing customers of the plaintiffs. Although there was no period fixed in his contract, it would seem that both parties thought that the employment would last for some time, though both assumed that it could be terminated by one month's notice on either side.

It is difficult to see how any restriction to last for more than six months to a year could be justified for such an employee. One year was the normal notice period at common law. The evidence in this case showed that a person who had no previous contact with the employee recruitment field was able to establish himself as competent in a fairly short space of time. When Mr Crowe left the plaintiffs, he had only been employed for just over ten months. Any competent replacement should be able to get himself or herself into a similar position in the same time.

Accordingly, in my view, two years was too long to be classed as a reasonable protective period.

Thus, under the general law, the covenant would, in my view fail.
I now pass to the operation of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the [Restraints of Trade Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/). This sub-section, so far as is relevant, provides that, "A restraint of trade is valid to the extent to which it is not against public policy, whether it is in severable terms or not." 
The Court of Appeal recently considered the operation of this sub-section in
Kone Elevators Pty Ltd versus McNay (supra). Sheller, JA, with whom Meagher and
Cole, JJA agreed said, "If the Court can read down a covenant in restraint of trade, otherwise void as against public policy, to an extent that makes its enforcement not against public policy, the Court may restrain a breach of the covenant so read down. Compare A Buckle & Son Pty Ltd versus McAllister [(1986) 4 NSWLR 426], at 434. By this means a party may be able to restrain a particular breach of a covenant even though the covenant is expressed in terms so wide as to be void against public policy at common law. [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the Act has confirmed and enlarged the capacity of the Court to enforce just and reasonable covenants which may on their face be too widely expressed." His Honour then cited the judgment of Lindley, MR in Haynes v
Doman [[1899] 2 Ch 13], 26 that, "the Court ought not to hold a just and honest agreement void, even when to enforce it would be just, simply because the agreement is ... unskilfully worded...".

The general way the court approaches this sort of problem is set out by the present Chief Judge in Equity in Orton versus Melman [[1981] 1 NSWLR .]
The passages from this judgment are so familiar, and are repeated in virtually every other judgment on the topic, that there is no need to set them out yet again.

The court's power under [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) is not unlimited. As Sheller, JA said in the Kone Elevators case, "the subsection does not allow the Court to remake the contract or a covenant in it." However, the present case does not provide any real barriers to reading down the covenant so as to make it a reasonable restraint.

So far as subject matter is concerned, clause 2 suffers the vice that the phrase "information as to the practice, business dealings or affairs" is too wide as is the reference to any customers or clients generally and to "any other matters" which the employee may come to know by reason of the employment. Mr Newlinds concedes that the court could read this down to confidential information only. I will accordingly read it down as if the word "confidential" was inserted before "information" and disregard the words "or any of its customers ... his or her employment".

So far as clause 3 is concerned, the vices are that the "customers or clients" referred to are not limited to the active customers and clients who were associated with the employees and that the business of such customers is not limited to their requirements for blue collar workers. The clause could be read down by virtually adding an additional sentence which read "In this clause 'customers or clients of the DSC Group' include only those persons who between 1 September, 1995 and 1 March, 1996 had a contract with DSC for the supply of blue collar labour and the business referred to shall mean only the business of DSC of supplying blue collar labour to such customers or clients." 
However, Mr Newlinds submits that even such a reading down would not be of any value because the covenant would still be simply a covenant to restrain competition. He says that the information as to these employers was not confidential within the meaning of the term as defined by the authorities, particularly Wright versus Gasweld Pty Ltd [(1991) 22 NSWLR 317] and
Faccenda Chicken Limited versus Fowler [[1987] Ch 117.] 
Ordinarily, any knowledge of the names and addresses of an employer's customers do not constitute confidential information, so that any memorised list of them is not protected, though of course if an employee steals a printed list from his employer, different considerations will apply: Coral
Index Ltd versus Regent Index Ltd [[1970] RPC 147], 149. In
Wright versus Gasweld, the majority thought that information as to the identity of reliable suppliers of Taiwanese suppliers of tools and hardware was confidential information which could be protected by covenant, though the
Chief Justice strongly dissented.

In Westminster Chemical NZ Ltd versus McKinley and Tasman Machinery &
Services Ltd [[1973] 1 NZLR 659], 665,
Speight, J reviewed the cases and distinguished between knowledge which might be acquired in the trade generally and particular knowledge acquired during employment. In Millwell Holdings Ltd versus Johnson <case>; [(1988) IPR 378], 391, Gault, J said that "The distinction which must be drawn [is] between the personal knowledge and skill of an individual and the proprietary information which he can be prevented from using ... ". The
Gasweld case makes it clear that the proprietary information will not be limited to trade secrets, but will also cover confidential information which satisfies the elements of Coco versus AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd [(1968) 1A IPR ], .

Despite the seeming analogy with the Gasweld case, to my mind the information as to the persons who were accustomed to hire casual blue collar labour and the contact person in their organisation, does not fall within the category of confidential information. It is information which can readily be obtained even from cold canvassing from the telephone book though it may take a few weeks to compile.

There is, however, another way in which clause 3 can be supported. It has usually been considered by the courts that an employer has a legitimate interest in preserving its customer connection and one way of doing this is to take a covenant from an employee that the employee will not, for a certain time, solicit customers of the employer, at least those customers with whom the employee had dealings; see Woodmason's Melrose Dairy Pty Ltd versus Kimpton <case>; [[1924] VLR 475]; Marquette versus Walsh <case>; [(1929) 29 SR 298];
GW Plowman & Son Ltd versus Ash [[1964] 1 WLR 568] and Smith v Ryngiel [[1988] 1 Qd R 179.] 
It is, of course, dangerous to just note that in other cases in other industries courts have enforced covenants against dealing with customers by an ex-employee without looking closely at the facts and circumstances. The first two cases that I have noted above dealt with milk carters or bread carters and it seems to have been thought at that time that the dairies and bakeries had a significant interest to protect in that industry. Another case in the same line is Coote versus Sproule <case>; [(1929) 29 SR 578](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=%281929%29%2029%20SR%20%28NSW%29%20578 "View LawCiteRecord" )`. `In the` `Plowman case the employee was a salesman for a firm of agricultural merchants who had a defined list of customers on whom he was to call. In Smith's case the employee was an assistant accountant. It can thus be seen that the spread of cases does not appear to be limited to any particular type of industry.

However, Mr Newlinds says that in the market for casual blue collar labour, the evidence shows that the customers are in quite a different situation.

The evidence showed that the method by which businesses such as the plaintiffs operated was to have on their books a number of persons who sought casual work of a blue collar nature. They would endeavour to place these people by employing them directly to do work for a customer. The customer would then pay the plaintiffs a fee including a profit margin and the plaintiffs would then pay the employee for his or her work. Employees tended to send their resume to more than one agency. Customers (by which I mean the people who wished to utilize the blue collar labour) would make their demand for labour known in one of three ways. First, they would call for tenders for the provision of such services and award a contract for a fixed period of time to one or more of the successful tenderers. Secondly, they would direct their business to whichever agency appeared at the time to be able to supply their wants for a reasonable fee; or thirdly, they would contact a regular supplier even though there was no formal contract between the agency and the customer. Furthermore, there was a very quick and large turnover of employees. Employees either found a permanent position or moved out of the workforce or moved out of Sydney.
Accordingly, it was recognized that any resume of a person who had not been placed in the last three to six months was really of little value.

Mr Newlinds puts that in these circumstances one does not have a customer who deals exclusively with an employer such as the cases involving the milk and bakery industries or the other cases referred to earlier. Furthermore, the evidence of Miss Claire Babidge, the financial administrator of one of the customers, was that she had spent about 25 hours of her time providing the successful tenderer for her company's work (in this case the plaintiffs) with her company's requirements and having accepted the plaintiffs' tender she did not wish to waste that effort. Indeed, she said that as the employees were employees of the agency and not employees of her company, it was detrimental to change agencies because the good employees would then have to go through all the upheaval of resigning their employment from one agency and taking up employment with a new agency and that as the good employees were valuable to her company, she did not wish to involve them in such disruption. Mr Newlinds says that this evidence shows that this is not an industry where there is to be expected a close personal relationship between the employee and the customer, but the nature of the job means that the identity of the employee is a relatively minor matter; what motivates the customer is the sort of things
Miss Babidge spoke about and also the cost to the customer of the service.

The customer connection interest depends on the notion that "the employee, by contact with the customer, gets the customer so strongly attached to him that when the employee quits and joins a rival he automatically carries the customer with him in his pocket": Arthur Murray Dance Studios of Cleveland
Inc versus Witter [105 NE (2d) 685], 705 (Ohio
Common Pleas) (1952) per Hoover, J. As JD Heydon says when commenting on this decision in his book The Restraint of Trade Doctrine (Butterworths
London 1971) p 108, "It is not enough for the employee simply to have contact with the customers. There must be some element in the employee- customer relationship which causes customers to rely on the servant and to regard him as the business to the exclusion of the employer. Hoover, J has pointed out that lift attendants, receptionists, apartment caretakers have very frequent and regular contact with their employer's customers, often resulting in the most friendly relations; yet they do not follow these employees when they leave and it would be wrong to validate covenants restraining these employees from working for competitors on the ground of customer contact alone." Thus, Mr Heydon says at 110, "The clearest examples of frequent customer contact come from 'route' or 'rounds' cases: milk roundsmen ... bread carters ... and so forth." 
Some of the cases where this form of covenant has been upheld are cases in the employment agency field though they are from the United States of America. The first is Haysler versus Butterfield [218 SW (2d) 129 (Missouri] Court of
Appeals) (1949), the second Deck & Decker Personnel Consultants Ltd v
Pigg [555 SW (2d) 705 (Missouri] Court of
Appeals) (1977). In the latter case at p 707 the court said, "An employee's contact with prospective employers to whom job applicants of an employment agency were referred ... constitute(s) a legitimate protectable interest of the employment agency for the purpose of enforcing a covenant not to compete by way of injunction." See also Lloyds
Employment Corp versus Kraft [95 NYS (2d) 313] (1950) and the annotations to Plunkett Chemical Co versus Reeve 43 Am LR (2d) 91 (Penns
SC) (1953) at pp 164-175.

There are certain situations where customer contact is detrimental. Thus, if a person is an efficient debt collector, his or her contact with the public may not be such that there will be any return business from such contact; see
Sternberg versus O'Brien 22 A 348 (New Jersey Chancery) (1891) at p 351. This is just an illustration of what Hoover, J said in the Arthur
Murray case at p 705 that the customer contact theory is "a much-abused, much-misunderstood and much-misapplied theory." 
The law in America and the law in Australia on this particular topic appear to be very similar. I believe I should follow the cases in Missouri that this particular industry is one where there is likely to be a danger to employers if an ex-employee is able to canvass customers of his or her employer.

Accordingly, in my view, clause 3 properly read down could be enforced.

As to clause 4, so long as one reads it down to apply only to blue collar workers, the only vices are the distance and the time of the restraint.

As to distance, the relation to Northcott Street St Leonards is completely artificial. This just happens to be the head office of the plaintiffs, which I understand is an accountant's office, and bears no relation to the place where the second and fourth defendants were employed.

The evidence of Terese McCowen, the plaintiffs' financial controller, was that the Rydalmere branch employees were given a definite geographic area. She didn't tell me which geographic area that was, but the evidence clearly suggested that each branch did have a catchment area. Miss McCowen said there were about 220 employees registered with the Rydalmere branch for the financial year 1995 to 1996. Other evidence suggests that the number of employers who were regularly serviced by the Rydalmere branch was about two dozen.

The evidence was that, generally, the plaintiffs serviced the metropolitan area of Sydney and its Liverpool branch extended that service to what was vaguely referred to as the "south coast." 
In the case of Mary Davis, there would not seem to be any real reason for confining her earning her income outside the
Parramatta/Bankstown/Silverwater/Ryde and perhaps Windsor industrial areas.
Anything wider than that would seem to me to be unreasonably wide.

With the second defendant, the question of area is not so easily solved. He was working at Rosebery as well as Rydalmere and Liverpool and he was in a relatively senior position. A reasonable employer might well have thought that it was at risk from his activities in the Sydney metropolitan area generally.
Accordingly, the covenant need only be read down to exclude the area north of, say, the Hawkesbury River from the 50 km radius, though this, it would seem, would be of no significance to any party.

So far as time is concerned, the present case is complicated by the fact that, whilst the blue collar labour force constantly changes, there is fair stability in the plaintiffs' customers who consume that labour. The factors going to reasonableness of time considered when discussing question 1 are relevant here too, but I believe the court can also consider the actual matters that occurred between the parties including matters that occurred after entering into the contract. The most significant of these matters is the length of time the employment in fact lasted and the type of customer contact that in fact took place with the relevant employee. In Mr Crowe's case, he had just over ten month's service. Part of that time was served in a managerial capacity and another part was spent attracting new customers who, because of their previous relationship with Mr Crowe, would not be likely to remain with the plaintiffs in any event.

As I said earlier, a reasonable time of restraint for an employee in touch with customers is usually to be reckoned with respect to the time taken for a reasonably competent replacement to ensure the continuance of the customer connection.

I have found it extremely difficult to make a final assessment of what was a reasonable time for the read down restraint to operate. Mr Newlinds strongly submitted that six months is all that is required to eliminate any prejudice to legitimate interests of the employer. This is because the job cards of employees would become outdated in that period. However, I consider that the court needs to take more factors into account than just that one fact.

Mr Masterman, QC says that the plaintiffs have a trade secret in the methodology by which they produce their quotations. I very much doubt that this methodology comes within the category of a trade secret. The method used by the plaintiffs is to commence with the award rates and margins for a particular class of worker and then to add a profit percentage apparently according to what they think the market would bear. Even if the methodology of assessing quotations was confidential information, that methodology, including the profit margins, may very well change within a period of six months because of altered awards or increased or decreased competition in the industry.
Furthermore, if a trade secret was involved, the second defendant was not privy to it. The evidence shows that he did not give quotations, he referred that aspect of the matter in hand to some other officer of the plaintiffs.
Thus, I do not see how this matter takes the case any further.

When reading down a covenant, the court basically looks at what was reasonable at the date of entering into the covenant, though, as I have said, in the reading down exercise one can have regard to what actually happened as the exercise is to see how a just order can be made in all the circumstances as now occur. The court must be careful to see that its consideration of the issues is evenly balanced. The court must ensure that it is not overwhelmed either by the factors that weigh heavily on the mind of the employer nor those which weight heavily with the employee.

In the present case, it is significant that Mr Crowe was a senior employee who was expected to stay in the plaintiffs' employ for a considerable period, and whose influence over customers could well be extensive. On the other hand, in fact, the employment lasted only ten months and a large part of the time was spent in internal management and canvassing. Again, Mr Crowe was employed when he had no experience in the industry. Miss Davis was in a more junior role, but her customer contact was greater. However, she was only employed for about four months 
The matters to which I have referred, both in the discussion of question 1 and this question, lead me to the conclusion that a greater period than six months would have been a reasonable period, but not more than one year.

I consider that a reasonable period of restraint for the parties to have chosen should have been one year or a period equal to the length of actual employment whichever was the less. As to the significance of the actual period served see Heydon, op cit at p 169.

For almost all intents and purposes it is Mr Crowe's involvement that should dictate the length of any covenant that is to be protected by injunction. Ten months and two days from 29 January, 1996 mean that the covenant should have expired on 1 December, 1996.

Accordingly, pursuant to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the [Restraints of Trade
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/), I should read down the covenants in the way I have indicated. This would mean that the covenants would cease to be effective on 1 December, 1996.
The information which the plaintiffs say is confidential is set out in [part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/index.html#p2) of the schedule to the statement of claim as follows:- "1. Client job sheets.
Client contact cards.
Debtors listings.
Company price quotations.
Costing methodology.
Prospecting lists.
Employee applications." 
It would not seem to me that any of these matters fall naturally under the heading of confidential information within the definition in Coco's case. 
If one looks at Kirby, P's guidelines in Wright versus Gasweld Pty Ltd at p , the information contained in the schedule to the statement of claim does not pass muster when one applies those guidelines. In particular the information does not appear to have been jealously guarded by the employer, it was readily made available to employees and could, relatively easily, be acquired by others (see guideline 2). The information that comes closest to confidential information is the client contact cards and the costing methodology. The quotations given for jobs would not seem to me to be confidential, as, as soon as a quote is given, any confidentiality within the plaintiffs is lost. Prospecting lists are not confidential information as defined. They are merely a record of a telephone call made to a prospect and a note as to whether the prospect was uninterested or may be interested.

The client contact cards are really in the category of customer lists which it is possible for an employee to remember up to a point as part of his or her know-how, though the employee is not permitted to take the lists away or copy them.

So far as costing methodology is concerned, again it seems to me that this is within the category of know-how. As Mr Newlinds put it, it "is nothing more than a skill developed by the defendants during the course of their employment. As such it cannot be regarded as confidential. It is not complex nor is it secret." In any event, the case seemed to proceed on the basis that
Mr Crowe did not know the methodology nor how to prepare quotations.

Accordingly, it does not seem to me that it has been shown that information in [part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/index.html#p2) of the schedule is confidential information.
It follows from what I have said that in being involved in the business conducted by the first defendant, the parties for whom Mr Newlinds appears have breached or been privy to a breach of clause 4.

Two persons who had up until shortly before the commencement of the hearing been defendants turned "Queen's Evidence" and gave evidence for the plaintiffs. In particular, Mr Jansson swore that he could remember Mr Day saying at the meeting at the Tilbury Hotel, "The success of the venture depends on you guys contacting the DSC clients and taking them with us." Both
Messrs Jansson and Judd swore that after the first defendant commenced business they were instructed by Mr Day that they should go to the DSC lists and chase up those clients, as endeavours to obtain new clients was a waste of time.

Garry Hall, who was also a defendant at one stage, gave evidence on behalf of the defendants. He said in cross examination that at one stage it was said to him that "We're not doing well enough. Let's get after the DSC clients".

Mr Day denied that any instructions were given to Messrs Jansson, Judd and
Hall to canvass DSC clients. Mary Davis also denied that Mr Judd had ever said to her that he had been instructed to follow up DSC clients.

In evaluating the evidence on this matter, I should first note that I agree with Mr Newlinds' submission that witnesses who have turned "Queen's Evidence" and who have been released from any claim the plaintiffs may have on them, including any obligations under their covenants on termination of employment in consideration of them supplying evidence against the first and second defendants, should be treated with caution.

Further, in cross examination, Mr Judd appeared very uncomfortable indeed. His evidence in no way inspired confidence. On the other hand, Mr Jansson gave his evidence confidently and clearly and was not affected by a very skilful cross examination and I would have difficulty in rejecting what he said, even bearing in mind the "Queen's Evidence" submission.

Again, Mr Hall's demeanour was one of a competent and credible person. He was called by the defendants as a witness of truth and there is no reason why I should not accept his evidence which was given fluently and appeared credible.

Thus, I consider that I should accept Mr Jannson's evidence on the solicitation of DSC clients by the first defendant and not accept Mr Day's and
Miss Davis' denials. It is just unthinkable that what was happening within the first defendant and what was being said by Mr Day was not without the full knowledge of Mr Crowe. Thus I also find that there was a breach of covenant 3.
The next question is a question of fact as to whether I am satisfied that the defendants stole documents belonging to the plaintiffs.

The evidence on this issue was that there was an unexplained break-in to the
Liverpool branch of the plaintiffs' enterprise and that a photostat machine which was fully primed with blank paper when the manager of the Liverpool branch left on Friday night for the weekend was found to be almost empty of blank photostat paper when she arrived at work the following Monday. This evidence was reinforced by the evidence of Messrs Jansson and Judd.

Mr Jansson said when he started working for the first defendant he saw a large bundle of photocopy documents on a table in the main office area. Mr Crowe said to him, "They are there if you need them". Mr Jansson noticed that there were a series of quotations on DSC letterhead, one in particular he remembers was addressed to Inghams Chickens, a hospitality survey report and a cement industry survey report both addressed to DSC, worker employee cards and about pages of client prospecting lists.

Mr Judd said that when he started working for the first defendant on 1 July he saw a bundle of documents on a desk in the main room. He saw that they were photocopies of DSC documents including quotations on DSC letterheads including a quotation for Inghams Chickens, handwritten notes on DSC letterhead in his writing and that of Miss Davis and Messrs Jansson and Crowe containing information about potential and actual clients, and 12 or so weekly job sheets containing pay and charge rates, site addresses and contact names for individual sites. These sheets had the DSC logo and included sheets for
Griffiths Landscape and Richard Crookes. He said that he saw these documents from time to time, sometimes they were on Mary Davis' desk. They were in files and kept in a storeroom on a shelf. He remembers that shortly after the summons was served on the defendants the second defendant said, "This is a joke. It won't hold up in court you know" and soon afterwards either Mr Crowe or Mr Day said, "We had better get rid of those documents." 
I have already noted my problem with Mr Judd's evidence and that I agree with
Mr Newlinds' submission that care must be taken in evaluating the evidence of
Messrs Jansson and Judd because it is clear that they gave evidence for the plaintiffs only after they had been released from any obligation to the plaintiffs and their costs of these proceedings had been underwritten by the plaintiffs.

Mr Crowe, when he gave evidence denying what Messrs Jansson and Judd had said, again gave evidence confidently and was not troubled in cross examination. Mr
Day also denied that there were any DSC documents ever on the premises of Cray
Personnel.

Mr Hall said that there were some DSC letterheads in the first defendant's office, but otherwise the only documents he saw were some brochures which "I think when we all left we probably all had a couple of those left in our briefcase." 
Accordingly, one must look to the details of what the various witnesses said.

Mr Judd said that the documents referred to in his affidavit were sitting on a pile near Mary Davis' desk. He agreed that Mary Davis' desk was a large desk which could seat four or five people. He remembered that the documents were near a column on the lefthand side of the desk. The desk was in the main room of the first defendant's office. The documents were in one pile, probably about 20 millimetres high. It was not a neat bundle of documents. Although the documents were sitting in a pile, it was an untidy pile and there were other bits and pieces of paper mixed in with it. He saw no job cards from DSC. The quotations he saw were draft quotations which were unsuccessful. He agreed in cross examination that they were old quotes. He said that he was encouraged to chase after the DSC clients and he felt uneasy because the information contained on the documents he thought belonged to DSC but he did what he was told.

Mr Jansson said that the documents were in a neatly stacked pile, but it moved around a bit. It was basically in the office on a desk used by Mary Davis which was a big "U-shaped" desk. The documents were usually on the lefthand side of the desk. He never went through the pile, but did move it aside to get to other things. Although the documents were in one pile, sometimes they spilled over and one could see the uppermost document exposed. There were about a dozen prospecting sheets all of which appeared to be photocopies. He also remembers DSC letterheads which he got sick of looking at so "I guess I bundled them up and stuck them up in the corner of the shelves myself." He could not explain why those letterheads were destroyed.

Mr Crowe denies that there were any bundles of documents on the desk. He also denies that there were any letterheads of DSC in the office.

Mr Crowe's evidence was not completely satisfactory. He was very uncomfortable when he was cross examined about alteration of the cheque butts in the first few weeks after the first defendant was established. However, I was not at all sure whether he wished to hide something which was done under a genuine mistake, or which needed to be changed to put the company's affairs in the best light for taxation purposes, or had to be changed to minimise the plaintiffs' chances of success in this litigation.

Mr Day denied there were any DSC documents on the first defendant's premises.
Mary Davis in her affidavit said that she had never taken away from the plaintiffs' office any copies of the plaintiffs' documents. Further, she had never provided any such copies to anyone in the first defendant's organisation. She agreed that, when employed by the first defendant, she had contacted former employees of DSC, but that contact was from memory. She never mentions anywhere in her affidavit any pile of documents that was ever on her desk, nor was any question directed to her in cross examination on this matter.

I have no particular adverse comment to make about Mr Day's evidence or that of Miss Davis. However, on the balance of the evidence which I have accepted,
I cannot see how I can accept their denials as being truthful. In particular, there was no reason for Mr Hall to say what he did.

Mr Newlinds properly submits that the allegation is really one of theft, thus although the civil standard of proof applies, as such a serious matter is involved, the court must be comfortably satisfied that the allegation is made out: Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336.] 
The background to the setting up of the business by the first defendant in conjunction with the second defendant was that the second defendant became disenchanted with the plaintiffs' organisation. In particular the second defendant became disenchanted with Mr Teahen, the NSW General Manager. He complained to Mr Smith, the Managing Director about Mr Teahen, but was told that Mr Teahen was one of DSC's most trusted and loyal executives and nothing that Mr Crowe could have to say would make any difference to Mr Teahen or Mr
Teahen's policies. Indeed, Mr Smith thought that Mr Crowe was trying to undermine Mr Teahen's authority.

Mr Crowe tries to paint the picture that the morale was low at the Rydalmere branch and in the plaintiffs generally. This is denied by Messrs Smith and
Teahen, but I cannot really see how there could have been such a mass defection unless there was more than a glimmer of truth in the allegation.

The evidence generally suggests that the idea of setting up the first defendant was not a spur of the moment decision. It is not completely clear how long the preparation for the new business had been in place.

Mr Jansson says that he can remember that in December, 1995, Mr Crowe expressed dissatisfaction with what he termed, "Gerald Teahen's petty antics" and mooted the possibility of starting a new agency. That germ of an idea was given growth as a result of the aftermath of a Christmas get-together that
Darren Judd had organised at Rydges Hotel at Rose Hill. Mr Teahen was not invited and he was upset that there had been what he perceived as a treasonable meeting without his involvement.

In early January 1996, Mr Crowe was speaking much more seriously about setting up a new business because he thought Mr Teahen was beyond a joke. The first defendant company was incorporated on 22 January 1996.

Mr Day says that he had discussions with Mr Crowe about his unhappiness at DSC and in early January 1996 Mr Crowe had told him, "I do not know how much longer I will be able to continue at DSC. The place is a shambles and there is no morale at all. There was a huge blow-up because a number of the staff, myself included, had drinks before Christmas and did not invite Gerard Teahen.
Tom Smith was furious about it and I think he became almost irrational. It is all quite bizarre." It was later in that conversation that the possibility of obtaining a shelf company and commencing business was seriously considered.
Later in January, there was a further conversation in which Mr Crowe told Mr
Day that things had got worse at DSC and that Mr Smith had made it clear that if he had to pick sides, he would come down on Mr Teahen's side, and accordingly, Mr Crowe thought he might as well quit. He did quit on 25 January .

There was a meeting at the Tilbury Hotel in Forbes Street, Woolloomooloo late in January at which Mr Crowe, his friend, Suzette, Bob Day, Mary Davis and
Karl Jansson were present. It was made clear to those assembled that the new business was starting up. The business did commence on 5 March 1996. Although there were submissions from counsel for the plaintiffs that I should find an earlier date for the business' commencement, the evidence suggests that, whilst there were acts preparatory to the commencement of business by the first defendant before 5 March, business only commenced on that day.

With a lead time of about six weeks, and with some of the people who were to defect from the plaintiffs' employ remaining in such employment until early
March, it is incredible that human nature was so fixed with moral principles that no-one thought of taking some of the DSC papers. That matter was never put to Mr Crowe or to Miss Davis, so perhaps I should discount the thought.
Certainly, however, one of the background factors is that the operation to start a new business was planned at least over some weeks, if not eight weeks.

There is then the concrete fact that the employees of the first defendant did in fact canvass many of the customers of DSC. Further, it is significant that even Mr Hall is prepared to admit that there were some DSC letterheads on the premises of the first defendant, though this is denied by Messrs Day and
Crowe. Mr Jansson's evidence as to the documents being on Mary Davis' desk was credible. It got some support from Mr Judd whose evidence was unsatisfactory.
If Mr Hall's evidence is correct, as I believe it is, he having been called by the defendants and having no reason to lie about the matter, it is strange that all the letterhead disappeared before discovery. This is consistent with someone having ordered destruction of the DSC documents.

The plaintiffs also rely on the Liverpool break-in. However, I believe Mr
Newlinds is correct in his submission that there is no suggestion of any connection of the defendants with the break-in, nor is there any suggestion of contact by the defendants with any Liverpool branch customers. Thus, I think, this particular episode need not concern me further.

As against the matters that I have related, there is the fact that Mary Davis was not questioned at all about the documents that were supposed to be on her desk. Her affidavit is rather narrowly worded that she herself did not take any documents from DSC, nor make use of any documents. She never makes an outright denial that there were no documents, but nor was she asked any questions about this pile of documents on her desk. Furthermore, there was contradictory evidence given by Messrs Jansson and Judd as to just what this pile looked like, even though, surprisingly, both Messrs Jansson and Judd deposed to a fairly similar list of documents that they had seen. This, however, is explained if the documents did collapse like an ill-stacked pack of cards from time to time and the Inghams quote was on the top of the pile.

Although I could not be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that DSC documents were removed into the possession of the first defendant, the matters that I have just discussed make me comfortably satisfied that at least some DSC documents were either taken from the offices of DSC, or photocopied and the copies taken to the first defendant's premises.

The evidence shows that any original or copy documents that were taken by the defendants were destroyed before discovery took place in these proceedings.
However, the plaintiffs are entitled to damages or an account of profits as a result of the documents being taken and used.
The next matter to consider is whether the second defendant, whilst he was employed by the plaintiffs, breached his fiduciary obligations to the plaintiffs by encouraging others to leave the plaintiffs' employ and whether he was successful in these manoeuvres.

The second defendant quitted his position with the plaintiffs on 25 January
I have already indicated that it was only shortly before that time that the firm scheme to set up a new business was finally cemented into place.
There was thus not much opportunity during the time of employment to solicit away the other defendants. In any event, it is clear from the evidence that
Miss Davis was not originally intending to work in the industry after she had retired from the plaintiffs' employ but, as a result of what happened to her (I don't know what it was) at the Family Court on 4 March 1996, she was financially compelled to continue paid employment. I am satisfied that there was no solicitation of Miss Davis. Mr Hall worked for some other company for three months after he left DSC, became dissatisfied with that company and then joined the first defendant. Again, it does not seem to me that this can be laid down at the feet of Mr Crowe or the first defendant.

Mr Jansson says that he was recruited at the meeting in the Tilbury Hotel late in January. He says that after Mr Crowe told him that he and Mr Day were starting up a new employment agency, Mr Day asked him to consider going with them and Mr Jansson said he would.

Mr Judd's affidavit tends to put Mr Crowe in the position of soliciting him,
Mary Davis and Karl Jansson in late December 1995 and January 1996. I am not sufficiently impressed with Mr Judd as a witness to accept him on this.

I do not accept that Mr Crowe enticed away any of the employees of the plaintiffs. It may well be that he said something to them during January, but there is insufficient evidence that anything Mr Crowe may have said induced any of them to leave. Accordingly, I do not find that Mr Crowe breached any fiduciary duty in this respect.
The question now comes to what money sum should be awarded to the plaintiffs as a result of the conduct of the first and second defendants. The plaintiffs seem to have approached this case on the basis that they would have the question of quantum referred to a Master. However, nothing was ever said at any directions hearing as to this, and the defendants dealt with the matter as if all issues were to be dealt with by the Judge. Ordinarily, unless the question of a separate trial as to damages or a reference of damages is agreed to or ordered at the pre-trial, the parties and the Judge should assume that all issues will be dealt with at the trial.

It must also be remembered that even if there is to be a reference as to the quantum of the damages before a Master, the Judge still must be satisfied before he or she makes that order that some damages have in fact and in law been suffered. As Rath, J said in Enkelmann versus Glissan (1982) 2 BPR 9640, , "Before an order is made for an inquiry as to damages, the court requires to be satisfied that it is proper to direct such an inquiry, and ordinarily the court will not be so satisfied unless there is before the court evidence of damage, or there are circumstances indicative of a probability of damage." 
I consider that, in the instant case, the evidence shows that there are at least circumstances indicative of the probability of damages. Accordingly, I would either have to determine the question of damages myself or refer it to a
Master.

There is, in this case, the possibility of there being damages at common law for breach of contract, damages under Lord Cairns' Act or an account of profits. When damages are available at common law there is usually no call for any award of damages under Lord Cairns' Act: ASA Constructions Pty Ltd v
Iwanov [[1975] 1 NSWLR 512.] The choice is, accordingly, between common law damages and an account of profits.
However, there may be some call for equitable damages where there has not been a common law breach of contract.

The distinction between an account of profits and damages was stated by
Windeyer, J in Colbeam Palmer Ltd versus Stock Affiliates Pty Ltd  <case>; [(1968) 122 CLR 25], 32 as "by the former the infringer is required to give up his ill-gotten gains to the party whose rights he has infringed: by the latter he is required to compensate the party wronged for the loss he has suffered."
As Windeyer, J went on to say, "The two computations can obviously yield different results, for a plaintiff's loss is not to be measured by the defendant's gain, nor a defendant's gain by the plaintiff's loss. Either may be greater, or less, than the other." 
Whilst the plaintiff can apply for damages and an account of profits in the alternative, it usually can obtain judgment for only one or the other and the election must be made before any enquiry into the quantum of monetary relief is embarked upon: Led Builders Pty Ltd versus Eagle Homes Pty Ltd (No 3) [(1996) 36 IPR 293], 300 and see Neilson versus Betts [(1871) LR 5 HL 1] which was affirmed by a subsequent sitting of the House of Lords as De Vitre versus Betts [(1873) LR 6 HL 319.] It must be noted, however, that there is the odd case where both remedies may be awarded, see eg Timber Engineering Co Pty Ltd v
Anderson [[1980] 2 NSWLR 488.] 
The reason for requiring an election is that by taking an account of profits flowing from an act, the plaintiffs virtually adopt that act. After such an election, there can be no further claim for damages flowing from a wrongful act, Watson versus Holliday [(1882) 20 Ch D 780], 783.

In Weingarten Bros versus Charles Bayer & Co [(1905) 22 RPC 341], 351, a case involving fraudulent use of another's trade name, Lord Macnaghten, with whom Lord Lindley agreed, said, "Ever since the case of Edelsten versus Edelsten in <case>; 1863 (1 De GJ & S 185; [46 ER 72)], it has been the established rule that a plaintiff succeeding in a case of this sort may at his option take an inquiry as to damages or an inquiry as to profits." However when one looks at Edelsten's case , the real question decided was not the option to choose the form of relief, but the extent of the account to be taken.

In Gentry Homes Pty Ltd versus Diamond Homes Pty Ltd ([993] AIPC 91-008,
Beazley, J, when a Judge of the Federal Court, rejected a submission in a case under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1968133/s115.html) of the [Copyright Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1968133/) that it was for the court to determine whether the appropriate order was by way of damages or an account of profits. No reasons were given for this decision.
Unless it is confined to situations where there is a statutory right to an account of profits rather than a right in equity, it is inconsistent with the practice of this court.

In Ancher, Mortlock, Murray & Woolley Pty Ltd versus Hooker Homes Pty Ltd [[1971] 2 NSWLR 278], 291, LW Street, J said, "Although the choice is ultimately one for the Court, a successful plaintiff who seeks an account of profits can ordinarily expect to recover this form of consequential relief." See also
United States Surgical Corp versus Hospital Products International Pty Ltd [[1982] 2 NSWLR 766], 814-6.

Generally speaking, there is no right to an account of profits. Such an order will be made if a court of equity considers the remedy appropriate. It may be that the court will not consider it appropriate to award such a remedy if the degree of fiduciary fault on the part of the defendant is small (cf
Seager versus Copydex Ltd [[1967] 1 WLR 923] and note by
Gareth Jones in [(1970) 86 LQR 463], 487). Again, the difficulties in assessing the profits may make a court order damages instead of an account, see Dean, The Law of Trade
Secrets, (LBC Sydney, 1990) p 330.

Where an account of profits is sought then the word "account" itself suggests that the matter must be referred to a Master or a referee to look at the accounts. It is not a matter that the Judge can deal with at the trial.

The situation at present is that the plaintiffs maintain both rights. The plaintiffs must make some sort of election before the matter goes any further.
It should be noted that, in an appropriate case, the plaintiffs are able to obtain further discovery before making their election, see the Led Builders case.

Accordingly, whether it be for me or for a Master to make some sort of order as to monetary compensation, it is not appropriate to do so at this stage.

There is a further reason why it is not appropriate to do that exercise at this stage, and that is because as I have found the facts, there was no warrant for continuing the interlocutory injunction that had been granted past December 1996. The interim injunction granted by Cohen, J in July 1996 extended beyond this date. The defendants may be entitled to an enquiry as to any damages that they have suffered by the continuing of the injunction past 1
December 1996. Commercially it may well be that the parties consider that the amounts of money involved are so small on either side that there is no need to have an enquiry. Again, it may be that the plaintiffs, having been vindicated to a certain extent, would feel that they have been successful in the litigation and that a money payment is a secondary consideration. On the other hand, it may be that feelings run so high between the parties that the court has to complete the exercise. If so, then that, of course, will occur.

Mr Newlinds, of course, wishes me to say at this stage that there has been no sufficient proof of any substantial damages so that any damages should be nominal. I can understand him saying this, but I have a discretion and I decline at this stage to enter into the matter of quantum for the reasons I have given. That is not to say that I might be persuaded at a later stage that
I should determine that question without further evidence, but I believe that at the very least there should be time to consider these reasons and for the plaintiffs to indicate what election they make.
Accordingly, on 3 April 1997, I discharged any interim injunction that might still be in force. I deliberately did not enter into any discussion as to whether that injunction still continued up to that time or whether, by default of an order continuing it, it lapsed on the first day of hearing, 24
February, 1997.

I have adjourned these proceedings for mention before me on 28 April, 1997 at am subject to counsel arranging an alternative date with my Associate by 22
April.

On the adjourned date, I will need to be provided with a reliable estimate as to how much time must be set aside to deal with the remaining issues in the case. These include what remedy should be awarded to the plaintiffs, the quantification of any loss the plaintiffs have suffered or an account of profits. I will also consider submissions as to whether a Master should carry out the exercise of determining the quantification of what is payable to the plaintiffs or whether I should do that exercise myself in due course. I need to make orders as to costs. There is also the matter as to whether the first and second defendants are to have an enquiry as to loss pursuant to the undertaking as to damages.

The question of the cross claims will have to be considered in due course, though I would imagine that, in the light of my findings, these cross claims may now be academic.

Of course, time for appeal will only run from when the final orders are pronounced other than, of course, the result of any enquiry as to damages or taking an account of profits.
 * * * 
