

Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Commonwealth Funds Management Limited and
Anor Nos. Ca 40755/94; Ald 30050/92 Stamp Duties [1995] NSWSC 175 (28 December )
 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), POWELL JA(2) AND BROWNIE AJA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 17 October #DATE 14:11:1995 #ADD 28:12:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    A H Slater QC and B R Pape 
Solicitor for the Appellant:
I V Knight (State Crown Solicitor) 
Counsel for the Respondent:   D H Bloom QC and J L Allsop SC 
Solicitors for the
Respondent:  Freehill Hollingdale and Page
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P This appeal, which was attractively argued on both sides, raised only one critical point. It was whether, when Parliament in [s 78D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s78d.html) of the [Stamp
Duties Act 1920](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/) (the Act) used the expression "rent reserved", it did so intending a particular meaning. The appeal has turned upon the meaning of the words "rent" and "rent reserved".
The respondents argued for a technical meaning. They convinced Windeyer J.
The decision of Windeyer J is now reported [(1994) 95 ATR 4],004. For them, the phrase meant the rent had to be reserved on the occasion of a demise. It was a grant out of the subject matter conveyed. They upheld Windeyer J's reasons.
See Junghenn versus Wood [(1958) 58 SR 327 (FC], 546. See also V G Wellings,
Woodfall's Law of Landlord and Tenant etc, 28 ed, vol 1, Sweet and Maxwell,
London 1978, 277f. Upon this view, rent was not reserved by the agreement for lease entered in this case. Accordingly, [s 78D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s78d.html) of the Act, as it stood at the relevant time, did not apply to the agreement for lease executed in 1983. The words "rent reserved" were not "a quaint relic of" medieval law. They denoted a particular concept of land law well known in 1962 when [s 78D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s78d.html) was inserted in the Act by the Stamp Duties (Amendment) Act 1962, <case>(a). So went the arguments of the respondents.
 
Arguments in favour of a technical meaning for "rent reserved"
I have to concede that a number of arguments favour the opinion of
Windeyer
J and the submissions of the respondents. As in most cases of this kind, the decision in the appeal is by no means open and shut.
Amongst the arguments in support of the respondents' constructions are:- 
Parliament could have used the expression "rent payable".
But it chose to use the phrase "rent reserved", a term of art well known to the law. Where such a term of art is used, it should ordinarily be presumed that Parliament meant what it said; 
It is not as if the phrase was a slip or a mistake. Elsewhere, in the amendments to the Act, Parliament chose to use the words "rent payable".
See e.g. <case>(a) and (b). Accordingly, by contrast, where the phrase "rent reserved" was used the technical meaning was intended; 
Essentially, the Commissioner was now seeking to read the word "reserved" out of the Act and also to give the word "rent" a non-technical meaning. He had a unique capacity to influence the language of the legislation enacted by
Parliament. He was not at arms length to the legislators. On the contrary, they were presumably seeking to conform to his advice in order to enhance the revenue. It could be inferred that he vetted, and approved, the terms of the legislation and had full access to technical legal advice in that regard. He permitted the legislation to continue in terms that referred to "rent reserved", notwithstanding his unique capacity to promote amendments if there were any doubt which diminished the revenue; 
In fact, the Act was amended by the Stamp Duties (Amendment) Act 1990 s (2) Sch 1 to omit <case> as it stood at the relevant time and to substitute an entirely new section with a distinct and different approach to the imposition of duty payable in respect of rent or variations. The opening words of s
D(1) of the Act, as it now appears, persist with the use of the word "rent".
But they completely delete reference to "reserved". ("This section applies to a lease under which the rent may be varied during its term so that the total rent payable for the term cannot be calculated at the commencement of the lease ... ").
This amendment, belatedly and ineffectively for the present proceedings, recognises the fundamental defect in the language of the
Act as formerly provided. It amounts to a parliamentary acknowledgment of the meaning which sustains the opinion expressed by Windeyer
J;
Although the former approach of construing revenue legislation strictly and contrary to the revenue has now been abandoned, the duty of the Court remains to give meaning to the Act according to its terms. See Cooper Brookes
Pty Ltd versus The Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of
Australia <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 297], 305, 319. It would have been easy for Parliament to have approached the raising of revenue in a different way, and, if persisting with the use of the word "rent", to have used an expression such as "payable" rather than a past participle verb "reserved". The
Court is bound to give effect to the purpose of Parliament as expressed in its language. If, by that language, the possible objective of the Commissioner misfired, that was simply the consequence of the choice of a technical expression. Revenue legislation is full of technical expressions. It is not for the Court to cure problems presented by the language chosen. It must be faithful to the purpose of Parliament as expressed in the language actually used. See Re Bolton and
Anor, Ex parte Beane <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 514], 520. The possible subjective intentions of the Minister, or the Commissioner, by words put into the
Minister's mouth in the Second
Reading speech were irrelevant. The purpose of
Parliament had to be found in the language of the legislation, as enacted. And that language chose a technical expression with a well established legal meaning to which the Court should give effect as Windeyer J had done.
 "Rent reserved" means no more than rental payable by agreement
I accept the persuasiveness of these arguments. But in the end, I have concluded with the other members of the Court that the better view is that the phrase "rent reserved", where used in <case> of the Act as it then stood, meant no more than to refer to an agreement providing for a payment as part of the consideration for the right to use the property. Accordingly, the fact that there was no present estate in law or equity afforded by the subject agreement was not fatal to the Commissioner's arguments. Windeyer J should therefore have rejected the pre-emptive application of the respondents for a declaration excusing them, in effect, from the provision of information sought by the Commissioner on the assumption that <case> applied to the agreement. My reasons are as follows:- 
For at least forty years in this country, the word "rent", when used in a lease, has been given a wide meaning, beyond that strictly applied at common law. The medieval notion of rent as a thing issuing from the land has been gradually replaced by a wider notion that rent is simply part of the consideration for the right to use the property. Brownie AJA, by reference to the decision of the Victorian Supreme Court in Commissioner of State Revenue v
Price Bent Services Pty Ltd (1994) 94 ATC 4672, 4675 has assembled the authorities which demonstrate how this change of meaning came about. It began in England no later than Property Holding Co Ltd versus Clark  <case>; [(1982) CLR 600], 538 (McHugh
JA). In my opinion, it was the understanding of "rent" when, in 1962, <case> in its original form was inserted in the
Act. In any case, it was the understanding in 1983 when the section fell to be applied to the subject agreement; 
Likewise, the phrase "rent reserved" had, by the same time, come to mean no more than rent agreed to be paid. Brownie AJA has cited the passage in
Samuel versus Salmon and Gluckstein Ltd [(1946) 1 Ch 8.] To the extent that the word "reserved" formerly bore a technical meaning, it had increasingly lost that significance, at least where the phrase "rent reserved" appeared in legislation;
The apparent mischief to which <case> of the Act was addressed was that revealed in the line of cases such as Ex parte Henry and Ors; Re Commissioner of Stamp Duties [(1963) 63 SR 298 (FC).]
Whilst those cases appear after the amending legislation, their facts, as revealed in the reports, refer to agreements entered before the Act was amended in 1962. It is clear that the Commissioner was prepared to battle his way through the courts but to secure amendment of the legislation just in case the outcome in the courts was unfavourable. This being the history that lay behind the amendment, it can be seen that the mischief to which <case> of the
Act was addressed was not limited to cases where "rent" was "reserved" in a
strict or technical sense. Rather, the Act was addressed to the modern meaning which "rent" had come to carry and "reserved" in the sense of "payable" under the relevant agreement; 
Nothing in the Second Reading speech which accompanied the passage of the amending Act gives any support to the adoption of a narrow construction of the phrase "rent reserved". On the contrary, where the Minister (Mr R R
Downing, Attorney General) sought to explain the amending Bill to the
Legislative Council, into which he introduced it he said:- "In such cases the duty is to be chargeable on the instrument evidencing such increase but will be assessed on the difference between the total rental payable under the original lease and that payable under the terms of the new agreement. This is necessary because, as the Act now stands, duty would be charged on the total rental shown in the new document as the instrument evidencing the increase would be considered, under the present
Act, as a new lease." 
New South Wales Parliamentary Debates (Legislative Council) 15 November 1962, , 1683. 
Although a Second Reading speech may not disturb the meaning of language enacted in the actual terms of the statute, where there is ambiguity, it is permissible for a court to have regard to its terms. Where this is done in the instant case, it bears out each of the primary contentions of the
Commissioner.
For any technical residue in "rent" read the non-technical "rental". For any technical residue in "reserved" read "payable";
So far as the amendment in 1990 is concerned, it is true that the word "reserved" is dropped. But this is part of an entirely new scheme designed to approach the calculation of duty in quite a different way. In these circumstances, the principle of statutory construction explained in Grain
Elevators Board (Vic) versus President, Councillors and Ratepayers of the Shire of
Dunmunkle <case>; [(1946) 73 CLR 70], 84 has no application. At least it cannot govern the outcome of this case; and 
In the event of ambiguity in the meaning to be assigned to the words "rent reserved", the governing duty of this Court is to give effect to the purpose of Parliament expressed in its language. It is not to approach the construction of the Act in a different, narrow or strict way because it is an
Act for the raising of revenue. That approach, apt for a time when taxes were imposed upon unrepresented, or inadequately represented, citizens is no longer apt to legislation enacted by a Parliament elected by, and accountable to, all citizens. Revenue legislation is no longer treated as special. There is neither a presumption in favour of, nor against, the construction urged by the
Commissioner. The Court's duty is simply to try to work out what Parliament was getting at when it enacted the provisions in dispute. When that question is asked, there can be little doubt what the Parliament meant in the 'instant case. It was not reviving medieval or narrow technical notions by the use of the words "rent reserved". It was simply addressing a new phenomenon of delayed rental calculations and providing a formula for the calculation of duty thereon. This Court must give effect to Parliament's purpose.
 
Conclusion and orders
For completeness, I would simply note that the first respondent,
Commonwealth Funds Management Limited, made it clear that it raised no constitutional point to assert that it was entitled to any Commonwealth immunity from duty under the Act. I am content to proceed upon that basis.
For the remainder of the issues in the appeal and in the cross-appeal, I agree with what Brownie AJA has written.
I therefore agree in the orders which he has proposed.
JUDGE2
POWELL JA I agree with Brownie AJA.
JUDGE3
BROWNIE AJA By a deed dated 27 June 1983 the respondents agreed with Sydney
Cove Redevelopment Authority (THE AUTHORITY) that they would take from the
Authority a lease of some land. The Authority did not then own all of the land, but it covenanted that it would promptly obtain title to it, and then bring it under the provisions of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). In the meantime, the
Authority was to give possession of the land to the respondents, and they were to carry out certain "CONSTRUCTION
WORKS", demolishing existing buildings and erecting a new building. These construction works were to be carried out during a "CONSTRUCTION
PERIOD" of four years running from the date of the deed, but there was provision for the construction period to be extended for a further period of two years in certain events.
There was a form of lease annexed to the deed. The term of the lease was to be 99 years, and that term was to commence not later than the date of the issue of a particular certificate, broadly speaking upon completion of the construction works. During the construction period, the respondents were to pay the Authority an "occupation fee" of $75,000 for the first year, $100,000 for the second year, $125,000 for the third year, $150,000 for the fourth year, and (if appropriate) $18,000 a month during the balance of the construction period. The lease provided for the payment of rent of $250,000 for the first year of the term, $500,000 for the second year, and $1 million for the third and succeeding years; but it also contained elaborate provisions for the payment of additional sums by way of rent - in general terms, a proportion of the net income derived by the respondents from the building they were to construct.
The deed was presented for stamping, and stamped as a "lease", under [Section 76](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s76.html) of the [Stamp Duties Act 1920](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/) (THE ACT). Duty was assessed on the basis that the total rent payable was the aggregate of the sums of $75,000, $100,000, $125,000 and $150,000 payable during the construction period, together with the aggregate of the sums of $250,000 and $500,000 payable during the first two years of the term of the lease, and a further $97 million, being 97 years at $1 million per year. Later, the appellant asserted that additional duty was payable under Section 78D of the Act. The appellant now appeals from the decision of Windeyer J, who found that Section 78D did not apply.
As the Act stood at the time, Sections 76 and 78D provided: "76(1) For the purposes of this Act the expression 'lease' includes any... agreement for a lease ...

A lease made subsequently to and in conformity with any such... agreement duly stamped is to be charged with the duty of fifty cents.

D(1) Where the rent reserved by a lease... is subject to re-appraisement in any way whatsoever during the term of the lease so that the total rent payable during such term is not ascertainable at the commencement of the lease, duty shall in the first instance be payable upon the total rent appropriate to the full term of the lease calculated as if the rent payable during the remainder of the term following re-appraisement, or where provision is made for more than one re-appraisement following the first of such re-appraisements, were - where the rent payable prior to re-appraisement or the first re-appraisement, as the case may be, was at a fixed rate - at such rate; or where the rent payable prior to re-appraisement or the first re-appraisement, as the case may be, was at varying rates - at the higher or highest of such rates.

Whenever any such rent is re-appraised or a re-appraised rent is further re-appraised and by any such re-appraisement the rent is increased to a rate in excess of the rate in respect of which duty was paid pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the lessee ... (shall supply certain information) and shall pay... additional duty in respect of the additional rent thereby payable - where there is no provision for a further re-appraisement - for the remainder of the term of the lease; or where there is provision for a further re-appraisement - for that part of the remainder of the term of the lease expiring upon such further re-appraisement.

The foregoing provisions of this section shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to and in respect of any premium, fine, foregift or consideration other than rent reserved by a lease in like manner as they apply to and in respect of rent reserved by a lease.
 ...

In this section 're-appraisement' includes appraisement, calculation, determination, re-calculation and re-determination and 're-appraised' has a corresponding interpretation."
The form of lease annexed to the deed contained complex provisions for the adjustment of rent from time to time during the 99 year term, to reflect the possibility (or probability) of the net income from the building, to be constructed by the respondents, increasing with inflation. The appellant called for the production by the respondents of documents, to enable a calculation to be made of the additional duty said to be payable, under
Section 78D; and the respondents sought and obtained a declaration that the deed was not a lease to which Section 78D applies, and that the lease itself was dutiable under Section 76(2), and a repetitive provision in the Second
Schedule to the Act.
 
The meaning of "rent"
The learned trial judge accepted the submission that the expression in
Section 78D "rent reserved by a lease" was a term of art, or a technical legal expression, which should be given that precise technical meaning in a taxing statute. However, in Commissioner of State Revenue v Price Brent
Services Pty Ltd (1994) 94 ATC 4672 at 4675 Brooking J said: "In recent years there has been a reluctance to attribute to the expression 'rent', when used in a lease or a statute, the strict meaning of that term at common law, a meaning reflecting the medieval notion of rent as a thing issuing from the land. Until comparatively recently it was still often said that 'true' rent issues out of the land demised and that the primary liability to pay it arises from privity of estate and not from covenant.
(Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Brasch <case>; [57 CLR 69] at 82;
Loder versus Tokoly 52 SR 283 at 285; Junghenn versus Wood 58 SR 327 at ). Rent was treated by the early common law as a thing - a tenement - just like the land (Holdsworth, History of English
Law, Vol 3, 151; Holdworth, Historical Introduction to the Land
Law, 97). Rents were regarded as so far a part of the realty as to be capable of possession and disseisin, and they could be recovered like land by a real action (Holmes, The Common Law, and 388-390). The land was bound to pay the rent, which "issued out of" it. By ancient remedies of the common law, the landlord could seize the land itself for rent in arrear and hold it until payment was made. These ancient processes were replaced by distress, whereby, instead of seizing the land, the landlord seized all moveables on the land and held them until he received payment: see the annotation in  <case>; [(1914) 17 CLR 535] at 546). Distress for rent was abolished (in Victoria in 1948, and in New South Wales by the Landlord and Tenant Amendment (Distress Abolition) Act 1930).

In the view of the early law, the landlord who demanded rent that was in arrear was not seeking to enforce a contract, he was seeking to recover a thing. The rent which was 'reserved' when the tenancy was created was thought of as something which remained to the lessor after he had made the lease (Pollock and
Maitland, History of English Law, 2nd ed, Vol 2, 127 and 129).
As already mentioned, in recent years the courts have shown reluctance to apply the medieval notion of rent as a thing issuing from the land to the expression 'rent' when used in a lease or statute, preferring the more modem conception that rent is a contractual obligation to pay for the use of the land.
 
The new approach can be traced in England from the judgment of
Evershed LJ in Property Holding Co Ltd versus Clark [(1948) 1 KB 630] at 648-649, through Sidney Trading Co Ltd versus Finsbury
Corporation [(1952) 1 TLR 512] at , per Lord Denning MR, and through what was said in the
House of Lords in United Scientific Holdings Ltd versus Burnley
Borough Council [(1978) AC 904] at 935 per Lord Diplock, at 940 per Viscount Dithome, at 947 per Lord Simon of Glaisdale, at per Lord Salmon and at 963-964 per Lord Fraser of
Tullybelton. Finally in England reference should be made to
T and E Homes Ltd versus Robinson [(1979) 1 WLR 452] at 456-457 per
Orr LJ and at 458-459 per Templeman LJ.

In Australia reference should be made to the judgment of Brennan
J in Booker Industries Pty Ltd versus Wilson Parking Qld) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 600] at 610 612, Yanchep Sun City Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of State Taxation (WA) 84 ATC 4761 at 4766; [(1984) ATR 1165]; 86 ATC 4740 at
NSWLR 531-532; ATC 4742, per Mahoney JA, and at NSWLR -539; ATC 4747 per McHugh JA (with whose judgment
Samuels JA agreed).

As a result of these decisions the expression'contractual rent', used by way of contrast to 'true' rent (that is, rent according to the traditional common law view), has gained currency."
I respectfully accept this as a correct statement of the law, adding that in United Scientific Holdings Ltd at 93 5 Lord Diplock said that "... the mediaeval concept of rent as a service rendered by the tenant to the landlord has ... left as its only surviving relic the ancient remedy of distress..."; and if this is the only surviving relic in English law, then nothing survives in New South Wales, or Victoria, for that remedy has been abolished by statute.
See too the decision of the English Court of Appeal in Escalus Properties
Ltd versus Robinson [(1995) 3 WLR 524.]
This is not the only aspect of the law concerning leases where the law has outgrown its feudal origins; and there need be no reluctance to recognise both the origins of the law and the fact that the law, like society, has changed.
Compare The Progressive
Mailing House Pty Ltd versus Tabali Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR ] at 29 and 52.
 
The meaning of "rent reserved"
However, the expression in section 78D is not just "rent", but "the rent reserved by a lease"; and Windeyer J accepted the respondent's submission that this phrase connoted a precise and technical expression, with a meaning that could not be treated as having changed, as the meaning of "rent" has changed.
In Co. Litt. 47a, the law was described thus: "It appeareth by Littleton, that reservando is an apt word of reserving a rent, and so is reddendo, solvendo, faciendo, inveniendo, dummodo and the like. And note a diversity between an exception (which is ever a part of the thing granted and of a thing in esse) for which exceptis, salvo, praeter and the like are apt words; and a reservation which is always of a thing not in esse, but newly created or reserved out of the land or tenement demised."
Littleton wrote in the 15th century. In this passage written by Coke in the 16th century, he did not treat "reserved", or its Latin equivalent of "reservando", as a word that had to be used in order to validly create "rent".
What was important then was the distinction between rent being something that issued "out of" the thing let, as distinct from being part of the thing let - that is, the distinction between a reservation (of money, or services, to be provided by the tenant to the lessor out of what issued from the thing let, usually land), and an exception (from the thing permitted to be used, for example part of a tithe).
See too Browning versus Beston (1691) Plowden 131 at 132, [75 ER 202] at 204.
In Samuel versus Salmon and Gluckstein Ltd [(1946) 1 Ch 8], Uthwatt J had to consider the meaning of the expression "rent reserved" in the War Damage Act (Imp). At 10, he said: "The only question argued was whether the expression 'rent reserved' in the section was for the purpose in hand (pounds) or ,200 ... 'Rent service' has been defined as 'an annual return made by the tenant in labour, money or provisions in retribution for the land that passes' (see Gilbert on Rents (1758), p [9, Co Litt 142a).] No technical words are needed to create a rent service, but in regard to that it is a return of something that was not in the grantor before the words 'reddendo', 'reservando', 'solvendo' and 'inveniendo' were treated as proper words (see Gilbert, p 30). Of these words 'reservando' seems to have captured the ear, with the result that it has become usual to refer to the rent agreed to be paid by a lease as the 'rent reserved by a lease'. But, in my view, 'rent' and 'rent reserved' do not differ in meaning.

Is this so-called premium 'rent' or not? That, I think, is merely a question of the effect of the lease properly construed ... It appears to me that the proper inference is that in all respects the sums were intended to be, as they in fact were, payments for the use of the land. In my view the label 'premium', applied to the promised payments does not alter the situation. Parties may freely make their agreement as to the terms on which the use of land is ceded by one to the other of them. Land may be leased for a consideration which is not a rent in law or for a consideration which consists of or includes a rent. The parties may write an agreement in such terms as they please and, if so minded, may attach any label they wish to the payments agreed to be made by the lease. But, when all that is done, it is for the law to decide on the effect of the document what payments are reserved and what not. No label can create a fact: a label may accurately describe a fact or it may mis-describe it, or may help to the solution of a doubtful question of interpretation. What the parties have done - not their description of it - is the determining consideration. In my view the payments expressed to be premiums were in law part of the rent, and are for the purposes of <case> of The War Damage
Act 1943, part of the 'rent reserved'."
There does not appear to be any authority to the contrary, although there are many cases that recognise that, ordinarily, the use of the word "reserved" in conjunction with the word "rent" points towards the conclusion that the drafter of the document intended that the word "rent" bear its technical meaning: Apperly versus The Federal Commissioner or Land Tax <case>; [(1914) 17 CLR 535] at 132; and similarly, in Price Brent Services, at 4680, Ormiston J observed that the word "reserved" had perhaps lost part of its original significance by the time of Coke, and had certainly done so by 1835 when Doe d Douglas versus Lock 2 Ad and
E 705; <case>; [111 ER 271] was decided. See the discussion at 744-745; 287-288.
No doubt, conveyancers and solicitors would be ill advised to lightly or thoughtlessly depart from precedents that have stood the test of time, and the expression "rent reserved" is now hallowed by very long use, but it seems clear that when it first "captured the ear" it had no special meaning, except that it was one of the terms used to help to make it clear that what was involved in a particular transaction was to create an obligation to pay "rent", properly so called in the medieaval sense. But other words would have done just as well, and nothing that has happened in the development of the law over a period of at least 500 years has changed this situation. As long as what is created is a lease, with an obligation to pay rent, the use of the word "reserved" is not essential, and it adds nothing significant, except an air of Familiarity. In that sense it may be compared with such expressions as "null and void", where lawyers habitually express the same notion twice, perhaps for emphasis, perhaps only out of habit.
Windeyer J considered that the use of the expression "the term of the lease" in Section )(1) was a pointer towards the construction he favoured.
If all else were equal, I would agree, but what I have set out above seems to me to lead to a different construction.
I conclude that the expression in section 78D of the Act "the rent reserved by a lease" applied to the sum payable by the respondents to the
Authority under the deed, notwithstanding that as at the date of the deed the respondents had only an agreement for lease, that was subject to conditions not then fulfilled, so that at that date the respondents had no legal or equitable interest in the land; and it follows that the declarations made should be set aside.
 
The "uncertainty" argument
Windeyer J rejected a submission advanced by the respondent, and renewed on appeal, to the effect that since the construction period was not known with precision, it could not be said that section 78D applied. The critical words of the section are: "Where the rent reserved by a lease ... is subject to re-appraisement ... so that the total rent payable during the term is not ascertainable at the commencement of the lease...... The respondents submit that in this case the total amount of the rent was not ascertainable as at the date of the deed, for two reasons: the possibility of re-appraisement of the rent, and the fact that the length of the construction period was not known; but, they submit, the section only applies when the possibility of re-appraisement of the rent is the sole cause of the total rent being unascertainable.
I agree with Windeyer J on this question.
I do not think that the words "so that" necessarily convey the meaning of a unitary or sole causal relationship; and in the context found here, I do not think that this meaning can properly be given to those words.
 
Conclusions
On these findings there is no need to consider the other grounds that the appellant sought to advance in an Amended Notice of Appeal, nor the cross-appeal, which was filed defensively, in relation to those further grounds. I propose that the appeal be allowed, the orders made by Windeyer
J set aside, and the action dismissed. The respondents should pay the appellant's costs below and on appeal, but should have a certificate under the
Suitor's Fund Act, if qualified.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/175.html  
