

Regina versus Gregory Ram Biggs [1997] NSWSC 71 (5 March 1997) 
REGINA versus GREGORY RAM BIGGS /96 
Wednesday 5 March 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Sheller JA, Grove J, Simpson J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SENTENCE - EXCESSIVE - NO SPECIAL POINT OF PRINCIPLE - APPEAL DISMISSED 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence imposed by Flannery DCJ. The appellant appeared for sentence on counts of malicious wounding; malicious wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and possessing a firearm. To each of these counts the appellant pleaded guilty and the sentencing judge was asked to take into account two offences of possession of prohibited drugs consisting of 24 grams of cannabis and gram of cocaine. 
In respect of the first and third counts fixed terms were specified but the overall enveloping sentence on the second count was a total of ten years penal servitude divided into a minimum term of six years and an additional term of four years. It is convenient to regard that overall term as the sentence for the purpose of this appeal.

Submissions on behalf of the appellant expressly state that there is no criticism of the fact finding by Flannery DCJ and it is conceded that in the face of the need for strong deterrent sentences his Honour was concerned to afford the appellant every consideration legitimately available to him.
Counsel for the appellant opened argument by stating that it was not contended that the sentence was "outside the range" by which I take him to have meant the range of sound exercise of discretion. However, it was said that examination of a collection of cases would in some fashion reveal that the sentence should be categorized as excessive and thereby attract intervention by this Court.  
The objective circumstances of the offences are correctly categorized by the
Crown as appalling. There is no need to recapitulate all the detail leading up to them which is set out in his Honour's remarks on sentence. It suffices to observe that on 10 March 1995 the appellant intervened in an argument taking place among people in a street shortly before midday by producing a pistol and shooting one of the participants in the upper thigh. The victim had previously been treated for schizophrenia and a medical report suggested that he could appear menacing when untreated. At the time the appellant was, to an extent, under the influence of his prior ingestion of the drug Ecstasy. On 7 May 1995 at about 1.30am the appellant was present with a friend at a "rave" party occurring at a location described as the "graffiti wall of fame" at
Alexandria. An argument broke out and there was a particular dispute about the alleged taking of a gold neck pendant. The appellant produced a pistol and from a range of about one metre fired a shot into the chest of a 22 year old victim.

The appellant fled the scene and persuaded a companion to exchange jackets.
Police were in pursuit and the companion was arrested. The appellant was later confronted by police whom he threatened with his pistol and in response a female police officer fired her service revolver wounding him in the buttock.
Despite this the appellant continued to attempt to flee by climbing a cyclone wire fence but he was ultimately apprehended.

Submissions on behalf of the appellant do not point to any error of principle in the approach of the learned sentencing judge. What is attempted is an accumulation of other cases for comparative purposes and a consequent suggestion that the sentence imposed by his Honour was excessive along the lines of the submission already noted. I do not find the cases referred to helpful nor is any point served by tedious repetition of the attempts at comparison and distinction which have been offered in the opposing written submissions on behalf of the appellant and the Crown. My comment is not intended to be critical of those efforts, indeed I am appreciative of them, but it suffices to state my conclusion that none of them provides a demonstration of error in the present assessment by the sentencing judge.

The gravity of offences by a person willing to use a concealable weapon such as a pistol is a matter of substantial community concern and it is difficult to understate the importance of both general and personal deterrence in such a case.

The principal thrust of other submissions on behalf of the appellant drew attention to his comparative youth but in the light of the objective criminality here demonstrated the remarks of this Court in R versus Nicholls, (unreported 12 November 1991) are apt. In that case the Court said: "Making all the allowances that one can for youth and its enthusiastic stupidity and recklessness the fact is that when young people have already been before the courts and have shown no inclination to reform, they cannot expect their youth to continue to be a barrier against the imposition of sentences appropriate to the gravity of the crime without too much regard for their youth." 
As the finding of special circumstances by the sentencing judge demonstrates, this appellant has the opportunity to gain some benefit by his eligibility for parole earlier than division of the total sentence on the second count in accordance with [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) would permit.

It is true that Flannery DCJ exposed in his remarks on sentence the considerable agony that he felt in determining what was appropriate and indeed he expressed comfort in the existence of the review process of which the appellant presently seeks to avail himself.

In my view nothing has been shown to provoke the intervention of this Court.
The sentence imposed was untainted by error and as I have said lies well within the range of the sound exercise of judicial discretion.

I propose that the application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted but the appeal be dismissed and the sentences confirmed.
 
SHELLER JA: I agree.

SIMPSON J: I also agree.

SHELLER JA: The orders of the Court are as proposed by Grove J.
 * * * 
