

Khalifeh versus District Court Judge Job and Anor Nos Ca 40170/94; Dc /12/1351 Judicial Review - Legal Practitioners [1996] NSWSC 222 (24 June )
 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
MEAGHER(1), HANDLEY(2) AND SHELLER(3) JJA Summons for Judicial Review of decision of District Court in its Criminal Jurisdiction.
HRNG
SYDNEY, 25 October 1994, 3 February 1995 #DATE 27:2:1996 #ADD 24:6:1996 
The Claimant appeared in person 
Solicitors for the First Opponent   I V Knight, Crown Solicitor 
Counsel for the Second
Opponent    William Fitzsimmons 
Solicitors for the Second Opponent   Warren.F Ball
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
MEAGHER
JA I agree with Sheller JA.
JUDGE2
HANDLEY JA I agree with Sheller JA.
JUDGE3
SHELLER JA On 29 July 1991 Christian Khalifeh was convicted in the Local
Court on twenty-three charges laid by the Royal Society for the Prevention to
Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) - under the provisions of the [Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/poctaa1979360/) (the Act). On 2 July 1993 Mr Khalifeh was convicted in the
Local Court on a further thirty-four charges and his wife, Narelle Khalifeh, on thirty-two charges under the provisions of the Act. Pursuant to [s122](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s122.html) of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) Mr and Mrs Khalifeh appealed to the District Court against these convictions. By consent all the appeals were heard together by Acting
Judge Job who, on 28 March 1994, delivered judgment allowing the appeals in respect of all but one of the convictions of 29 July and all the convictions of 2 July 1993.
The charges on which Khalifeh was convicted on 29 July 1991 were one of aggravated cruelty to a weanling, eleven of being a person in charge of an animal and failing to provide the animal food which was proper and sufficient and eleven of failing to exercise reasonable care of the animal to prevent the commission of an act of cruelty. The only one of these upon which Judge Job convicted Mr Khalifeh was the charge of aggravated cruelty. All these charges related to events alleged to have occurred on Mr Khalifeh's premises at
Oakdale in October 1990. The charges on which Mr and Mrs Khalifeh were convicted on 2 July 1993 were of failing to provide proper and sufficient food. These related to events alleged to have occurred in July 1992 at Beulah.
The hearing of the appeals to the District Court began on 10 January 1994 and ran over a total of some thirty-two days. The Khalifehs, or Mr Khalifeh, had been refused Legal Aid. Mr Khalifeh appeared for himself and his wife. A number of witnesses were called including at least seven veterinary surgeons.
The Khalifehs were not provided with a transcript because, they said, they could not pay for it but from a date after the proceedings began were given access to a transcript of a nature which I shall return to describe. Mr and
Mrs Khalifeh had legal representation during the hearing in the Local Court.
In his reasons for judgement,
Judge Job dealt first with the charge of aggravated cruelty. Before setting out part of his Honour's reasons I should say something about the section under which the charge was laid. [Section 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s6.html) (1) of the Act provides that a person shall not commit an act of aggravated cruelty upon an animal. Upon a summary conviction the penalty is $4,000 or imprisonment for one year, or both. To understand what is meant by "an act of aggravated cruelty upon an animal" it is necessary to refer back to the definition section, s4, particularly subss (2) and (3), and s5 which provides, so far as relevant, as follows: "(1) A person shall not commit an act of cruelty upon an animal.

A person in charge of an animal shall not fail at any time: to exercise reasonable care, control or supervision of an animal to prevent the commission of an act of cruelty upon the animal; where pain is being inflicted upon the animal, to take such reasonable steps as are necessary to alleviate the pain; or where it is necessary for the animal to be provided with veterinary treatment, whether or not over a period of time, to provide it with that treatment."
Section 4 (2) provides that for the purposes of the Act a reference to an act of cruelty committed upon an animal includes a reference to any act or omission as a consequence of which the animal is unreasonably, unnecessarily or unjustifiably: "(d) inflicted with pain."
Section 4 (3) provides that for the purposes of the Act a person commits an act of aggravated cruelty upon an animal if he commits an act of cruelty upon the animal or (being the person in charge of the animal) contravenes s5 in a way which results in: "(b) the animal being so severely injured, so diseased or in such a physical condition, that it is cruel to keep it alive."
The information charged that between 13 and 27 October 1990 at Oakdale Mr
Khalifeh "(d)id commit an act of aggravated cruelty upon an animal to wit, a
Chestnut
Thoroughbred Colt." No further particulars were provided nor apparently asked for even though Mr Khalifeh was legally represented in the
Local Court. A cursory glance at ss4 (2) and 5 (3) of the Act demonstrate the inadequacies of the charge unparticularised and the difficulties faced by a lawyer, let alone a lay defendant, of meeting it. However this is not the point of this case.
 .
Judge Job referred to evidence of an RSPCA inspector visiting Mr
Kbalifeh's premises at Oakdale on 25 October 1990, where he saw a young foal with an obvious leg injury. The next day other RSPCA inspectors visited the property and also saw the foal. On 27 October Dr Butcher, the then executive director of the RSPCA, in company with a number of inspectors, went to the property where he examined the injured animal. The reasons for judgment continued as follows: "He gave evidence that it was obviously extremely lame on its near hind leg. It showed quite gross swelling on the leg from the coronet to the hock, and had a discharging sinus on the anterior part of the fetlock joint. He said the animal was plainly distressed and would grunt when it moved, which was the type of noise a horse in pain would express. He said the animal was sweating profusely, had an elevated heart rate, was in extreme pain and was also febrile.

His diagnosis was septic arthritis associated with a penetrating wound to the fetlock joint. He was of the opinion that the condition had been present for at least ten days.

Dr Butcher said that
Mr Khalifeh had given conflicting versions of his treatment of the wound, at least as to how and how often penicillin was injected. Dr Butcher said he said to Mr Khalifeh, 'This horse has septic arthritis. It has a penetrating wound to the joint.
It is long standing. The joint is irrevocably destroyed and the animal should be immediately put down'. Mr Khalifeh wanted a second opinion and a vet, Bernice Blom, attended. At her request the horse was taken to Camden.

At Camden the horse was examined by Dr McClintock and he also diagnosed the horse as suffering from septic arthritis.

He said that these wounds and septic arthritis, or infection of the joint, is normally one of the most painful conditions seen on a horse, other than perhaps a major fracture. He said that within two days of the injury occurring it would have looked much like it looked to him when he examined it, that is with severe swelling, discharge and non-weight bearing lameness.

He said the horse should have received veterinary treatment at that stage, that is after the two days. He said that he did not administer pain killers to the horse as it was his very clear recollection, on first examining the horse, that it would probably be destroyed in a matter of hours. He did say even at that stage the horse could have been treated but the prognosis was very poor.
 
Dr
Alison Havadjia carried out an autopsy on the leg of the foal after it had been put down. Her reports reads: 'Severe septic arthritis and osteomyelitis with a fracture of the lateral condyle of Metatarsus 111 and severe degenerative joint disease.'
The report commented that the fracture bone lysis and a proportion of the cartilage degeneration and soft tissue inflammation would have been present for some weeks, perhaps two. The pus accumulation and remaining degenerative cartilage and inflamed soft tissue component may have been more recent, perhaps one week.

Dr Havadjia also said that the horse would have been acutely lame and said that no amount of butazolodin would cause the joint not to be painful.

The appellant, Mr Khalifeh, gave evidence that the colt had been injured two Sunday's before the RSPCA came on 27 October. He said he rang Sydney University and was told to give it tetanus shots, penicillin, and butazolodin. He said he bandaged the leg and could not see if the condition had deteriorated or not. Afterwards he saw pus coming through the bandage and took it off. He said he rang the university about a week after the injury and arrangements were made for a vet to arrive at the earliest date, which was the following Monday or Tuesday. That is the Monday after the RSPCA actually arrived.

He said at no time did he believe the horse was in extreme pain or suspected that it was in enough pain to be put down. The appellant was cross examined about the foal and its treatment and that evidence appears at pages 1582 to 1605 of the transcript.
I formed the view that his answers were evasive and unconvincing on this matter. If the horse was injured on Sunday, 14 October , then by Tuesday, October it would have been in extreme pain and that pain would have continued until it was destroyed on 27 October.
 
The animal was seen on a daily basis by the appellant and I am unable to accept his evidence that he did not believe that it was in extreme pain. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that it was unreasonable to keep that horse alive from 16 to 27 October , and accordingly I find the offence of aggravated cruelty proved."
No appeal lies from this conviction.
[Section 146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s146.html) of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) provides that no conviction or order of a justice or justices, or adjudication upon appeal of the District Court, shall be removed by any order into the
Supreme Court. However it is well settled that there is a distinction between a wrongful or erroneous exercise of jurisdiction, which is covered by [s 146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s146.html) and an "excess of jurisdiction" which would not amount to an 'adjudication upon appeal" as [s122](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s122.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) envisages and so be susceptible to an order from this Court notwithstanding [s 146:](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s146.html) Anderson versus Judges of the District
Court [(1992) 27 NSWLR 701] at 718. The policy behind [s146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s146.html) is to prevent the review of decisions made within the jurisdiction of the District Court; Parker v The Director of Public Prosecutions [(1992) 28 NSWLR 282] at 291. Denial of procedural fairness will ordinarily be treated as jurisdictional error; Kopuz v District Court of New South Wales [(1992) 28 NSWLR 232] at 245.
Bearing in mind these constraints on appealing or obtaining other relief in this Court, Mr Khalifeh filed a summons seeking relief, inter alia, under [s69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s69.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) in the nature of certiorari. The opponents were "District Court Judge Justice Job" and the RSPCA. Judge Job was wrongly described and joined but filed a submitting appearance except as to costs. As the Court has repeatedly pointed out this is not appropriate.
The proper party in this case is the District Court. An order should be made striking out Judge
Job and substituting the District
Court as the first opponent. The matters upon which Mr Khalifeh relied were numerous. He appeared for himself and understandably, bearing in mind the technical nature of the proceedings, the argument ranged into the forbidden area of the merits of Mr Khalifeh's conviction. This did however reveal that the case was not without complexity.
Some of it of a technical nature which can be explained by a summary of
Mr Kalifeh's defence. Mr Khalifeh said that when he saw the animal in question was injured he telephoned a veterinary surgeon to seek advice. The veterinary surgeon was not available to attend but gave him advice to administer various medications to the animal which he followed and which he believed was an appropriate form of veterinary treatment. Either the animal's condition did not improve or, if it improved, there was a relapse and Mr Khalifeh again contacted a veterinary surgeon but before he could attend the RSPCA arrived at the premises. There was technical evidence about the condition of the animal and whether that would cause pain, about whether a veterinary surgeon, if contacted in the way Mr Khalifeh described, would not automatically follow up the telephone advice by attendance or further contact and whether the medications that Mr Khalifeh said he administered could have been administered. There were also questions as to whether those medications would have relieved the pain and if so to what extent.
Central to Mr Khalifeh's complaint was the assertion that he was facing in the District Court eighty-nine criminal charges against himself and his wife, thirty-two days of hearing from 10 January 1994 to 24 February 1994 broken only by weekends, the Australia Day holiday, and one day when the Court did not sit, for the most part starting at 10 am and finishing at 4 pm with an hour's break for lunch. He then had a period of about eight days within which to prepare submissions. While the judge and the prosecutor had the benefit of a transcript prepared on a daily basis, Mr Khalifeh had limited access to a transcript made available by the Court Reporting Branch. The evidence from the prosecutor about the transcript was that on 10 January 1994 the supervisor of the Shorthand Writers and Liaison Officer at the Downing Centre, Mr Chris
Blight, was approached by Mr Khalifeh and handed a letter requesting a free copy of the transcript. Mr Blight said to Mr Khalifeh that he could not give him a free transcript but would write to head office which he did on 11
January 1994. On or about 13 January Mr Blight said to Mr Khalifeh, in the court room: "We cannot supply the transcript but you can view it upstairs in the Court Reporting office outside court sitting hours. You can have the Local
Court transcript for free. Come and see me later to arrange access to the transcript." Later on that day Mr Khalifeh attended the
Court Reporting Branch and arrangements were made for him to have access to the transcript. He was provided with a desk at which to work together with pens, paper and any other stationery he might require. He first attended to study the transcript on 21
January
At first the arrangement was that Mr Khalifeh could only attend when Mr Blight was present, but no later than two weeks after he was first offered access to the transcript, he was able and in fact attended at any time when the Court Reporting Branch was open.
Mr Blight started work as early as 8 am some days and would normally depart no earlier than 5 pm. The office would not close before pm at night and the claimant had the opportunity to view the transcript until that time. According to Mr Blight there were numerous times when Mr Khalifeh did not attend to study the transcript.
This evidence was produced to the Court on the adjourned hearing of the application on 3 February 1995. Mr Khalifeh wished to cross examine Mr Blight, whose affidavit had only come to his attention the night before, but Mr Blight was sick and unavailable to attend for cross examination. It cannot be said that Mr Khalifeh would accept any part of Mr Blight's account. However to my mind, even taken at face value, it presents a sorry state of affairs. Had Mr
Khalifeh been legally represented, his legal representative could hardly have regarded such limited access to the transcript in a case where the evidence occupied some thirty-two days as adequate. The transcript was needed for proper cross referencing and marking and to be used in Court with the benefit of such cross referencing and marking to examine and cross examine witnesses.
Ordinarily legal representatives would expect to be doing this sort of preparation late at night and over the weekends. Furthermore Mr Khalifeh lived some distance from the Court and had to pursue his normal business and domestic activities as best he could in the time available.
The situation would be quite different if the case involved one or two charges heard in a day or two.
However Mr Khalifeh on more than one occasion acknowledged to Judge Job that he had had a fair hearing and Judge Job congratulated Mr Khalifeh on his presentation of the case. In large measure, as the result indicates, Mr
Khalifeh succeeded both on his own behalf and on behalf of his wife. I should point out that the prosecutor was prepared to make available to him a copy of the transcript but this sensible option was prevented by the Court Reporting
Branch's insistence upon its copyright. The prosecutor pointed out that the amount of evidence directed to the charge upon which Mr Khalifeh failed in the
District Court was but a part of the whole of the evidence.
On the other hand
Mr Khalifeh has pointed out that in the course of running the case he had to deal with all the charges. He claimed that the various witnesses who gave evidence against him on the charge of aggravated cruelty were not necessarily cross examined to best advantage because of the want of transcript.
I do not find this part of the case easy to resolve. Mr Khalifeh appeared before us in person and in large part his argument consisted of assertions about the difficulties he faced. Mr Fitzsimmons, who appeared for the prosecutor, provided us with a useful analysis of those parts of the evidence concerned with the charge upon which he was convicted, some 189 pages of transcript spread through a total of over 2,000 pages. The charge gave rise to quite different considerations from the other charges but, as I have said, Mr
Khalifeh was not in a position where he could direct all his attention to the charge upon which he ultimately failed. He had to meet all eighty-nine charges. I am satisfied that Mr Khalifeh was denied procedural fairness by being denied for his own use a transcript.
In National Companies and Securities Commission versus News Corporation
Limited <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 296] at 312 Gibbs CJ said: "The authorities show that natural justice does not require the inflexible application of a fixed body of rules; it requires fairness in all the circumstances, which include the nature of the jurisdiction or power exercised and the statutory provisions governing its exercise." One of the problems in this case is that Mr Khalifeh had no right to legal aid nor right to a free transcript. One of the bases of Mr
Khalifeh's challenge to his conviction relied on the High Court's decision in
Dietrich v
The Queen <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 292.] at -7 that an accused's right to a fair trial is more accurately expressed in negative terms as a right not to be tried unfairly or as an immunity against conviction otherwise than after a fair trial; see 299. The principle which emerges from that case has been taken to be "that a court has jurisdiction to grant an adjournment or order a permanent stay of proceedings at a trial until such time as an indigent person charged with a serious criminal offence is provided with legal representation necessary for a fair trial or resources for such representation. As the majority judgments made clear, that principle is based on, and derives from, the accused's right to a fair trial." New South
Wales versus Canellis <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 309] at 328. Their Honours went on to say in
Canellis that the majority judgments in Dietrich did not suggest "that such a jurisdiction could be exercised in favour of an indigent person charged with a criminal offence which is other than serious." In the present case it seems to me that although the offence charged carries a maximum penalty, upon summary conviction, of $4,000 and imprisonment for one year, it should not be regarded in the Dietrich sense as serious. In that case the applicant was charged, inter alia, on a count of importing into Australia not less than a traffickable quantity of heroin. I would reject Mr Khalifeh's claim in so far as it is based upon his not having legal representation. I do not think the want of legal representation standing alone resulted in an unfair trial. On the other hand I am satisfied that a combination of the number of counts that he and his wife faced, the length, day following day, of the trial and the want of transcript in those circumstances did deny to him the fair trial to which he was entitled.
 .
The prosecution countered this by submitting that even if the transcript had been available to him the result would have been no different. For this purpose we were taken to various parts of the evidence and in particular to his Honour's view expressed more than once that on particular matters Mr
Khalifeh's answers were evasive and unconvincing. However there were factual issues about whether Mr Khalifeh received and acted upon veterinary advice and whether if he did the charge could be made out in the sense that it could be said in the language of [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s5.html) (3) that he failed to exercise reasonable care of the animal to prevent the commission of an act of cruelty or where it was necessary for the animal to be provided with veterinary treatment failed to provide it or was guilty of an omission as a consequence of which the animal was unreasonably, unnecessarily or unjustifiably inflicted with pain and if so he committed the act of cruelty or contravened [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s5.html) (3) in a way which resulted in the animal being in such a physical condition that it was cruel to keep it alive. I am by no means satisfied that Mr Khalifeh was able to mount his defence to these various possibilities absent a transcript or that if he had been able so to do he would have been convicted. I think the case is an appropriate one for relief in the nature of certiorari and propose the following orders: 
Order that the summons be amended by striking out the name of the first opponent and substituting the
District Court; 
Bring up the record of the District Court relating to the appeal of
Christian Khalifeh to that Court, being
District Court (Criminal Jurisdiction) proceedings 91/12/1351; 
Quash the order made by his Honour Acting Judge Job by which he convicted the said Christian Khalifeh, imposed a fine of $2,000 and ordered him to pay court costs of $40 in the Local Court;
Order that the proceedings be remitted to the District Court to hear and determine the matter of the appeal to that Court by the said Christian
Khalifeh according to law; and 
Order that the second opponent pay the claimant's costs of the summons, but have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/222.html  
