

Regina versus Meares Matter No Cca 60468/97 [1997] NSWSC 458 (3 October 1997) 
Regina versus Colin Meares /97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Sully J, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Colin MEARES 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against the sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Shillington in the District Court at Bega. 
Following the trial before Shillington DCJ and a jury, the appellant was convicted of an offence against section 86A of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) of the
Commonwealth. The charge was in the following terms: "That between 1 May 1993 and 31 August 1993 he conspired with Peter William Chesterton to defraud the
Commonwealth contrary to section 86A of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) in that they agreed that for the financial years ending 30 June 1992, 1993 and 1994 the amounts of $40,000, $45,000 and $50,000 respectively were to be claimed in his relevant income tax returns as management fees for the Lakeside Walk and the Promenade retail shopping complexes". When the jury returned their verdict of guilty, they added to it a rider requesting that the judge show clemency.

Shillington DCJ sentenced the appellant to a term of imprisonment of two years to date from 29 August 1997. He further directed the release of the appellant pursuant to [s20(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s20.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) after a period of six months upon the condition that the prisoner enter a recognisance in the amount of $1,000 without surety for a period of one year and three months.

The co-offender Chesterton had earlier pleaded guilty and had been sentenced by the Chief Judge of the District Court, Justice Blanch, in October 1996.
Chesterton received a non-custodial sentence, being ordered to perform 200 hours of community service. The two main factors that were taken into account in his favour by Blanch J were his plea of guilty and his offer to give assistance to the authorities in the prosecution of the present appellant.
Chesterton was called as a witness by the Crown in the prosecution of the appellant.

The facts of the case, which are set out in the written submissions filed by the Crown, and which are not disputed by Senior Counsel for the appellant, are as follows.

At all material times the appellant owned two retail shopping complexes in
Merimbula. They are referred to in the charge set out above. Chesterton was the appellant's accountant. In May 1993 there was a meeting between the appellant and Chesterton at which there was some discussion about the burden of the appellant's income tax obligations and the possibility of lightening that burden. Chesterton proposed to the appellant a scheme, the nature of which will appear from the facts about to be mentioned.

The essence of the scheme may be summarised as follows. The appellant through
Chesterton was to pay substantial sums of money to two persons, Mr and Mrs Le
Brun, whose past business failures had produced the result that they had substantial carried forward tax losses. For that reason they would be able to claim allowable deductions against assessable income and the payments I am about to mention would not result in any taxable income in their hands. They were to retain a small percentage of the amounts in question and the balance was to be repaid by them through Chesterton into the appellant's bank account.
The payments were to be represented as management fees for past and future years and the appellant was to claim in his own income tax returns allowable deductions in respect of such management fees.

It was the Crown case that the management arrangement was a sham and that it was never intended that any significant management services would be provided to the appellant by Mr and Mrs Le Brun. A management agreement was prepared by
Chesterton for execution by the appellant and Mr and Mrs Le Brun. It was prepared in July 1993. It was backdated to 1 July 1991. It provided for the payment of management fees by the appellant to Mr and Mrs Le Brun as follows: -1992: $40,000, 1992-1993: $45,000, 1993-1994: $50,000.

In July 1993 the appellant directed his secretary to draw three cheques on his account with the Westpac Bank at Merimbula, each in favour of Mr and Mrs Le
Brun, for the amounts of $40,000, $45,000 and $25,000. The last amount represented half of the 1993/1994 payment of $50,000 for which provision had been made in the agreement. Those cheques were subsequently given to
Chesterton. In late July 1993 Chesterton met with Mr and Mrs Le Brun who both signed the management agreement. Chesterton then handed them the three cheques totalling $110,000 drawn by the appellant in their favour, in return for which he received a cheque drawn by Mr Le Brun in favour of the appellant in the sum of $99,000. That cheque was later deposited by Chesterton in the appellant's bank account. The management agreement was signed by the appellant some days after the meeting of 28 July 1993 between Chesterton and Mrs Le Brun.

In March 1994 the appellant directed his secretary to draw a further cheque in favour of Mr and Mrs Le Brun in the sum of $25,000, being the balance of the $50,000 for which provision had been made in the agreement in respect of the /1994 year. On 29 March 1994 Chesterton again met with Mr and Mrs Le Brun and handed them this cheque, in return for which he was handed a cheque in favour of the appellant in the sum of $22,500. This cheque was later deposited into the appellant's bank account.

Police investigations into the transaction commenced in 1994.

The appellant's defence at his trial was that it was his understanding that this was a scheme of tax avoidance, not tax evasion, and that Chesterton, his accountant, had proposed to him what he believed was a legitimate method of minimising his tax liabilities. That line was taken by the appellant in a statutory declaration which he prepared and produced to the authorities, as I understand it in support of a proposal that there should be no prosecution against him. Chesterton's response to that was to confess his guilt to the authorities, offer to plea guilty to a charge of conspiracy with the appellant and to give evidence against the appellant if and when the appellant were prosecuted. As has already been mentioned, that is what occurred at the appellant's trial.

The practical effect of the sentence imposed on the appellant is that he will spend 6 months in prison. As Senior Counsel for the appellant has observed, the appellant is a middle aged man with no previous criminal history. The term he will spend in prison may be relatively brief compared to the terms spent by many of the people with whom this court makes an acquaintance, but, for a man of his character and background, any term of imprisonment is an extremely serious penalty. I accept that.

There are three grounds of appeal argued on behalf of the appellant. The first is that the sentence is too severe. The second is that the jury's recommendation for clemency should have been given such weight that a sentence of imprisonment should not have been imposed. The third is that the appellant is entitled to feel a legitimate sense of grievance that he was sentenced to imprisonment when his co-offender, a professional accountant, was not sentenced to imprisonment but was ordered to serve a term of community service.

It is important to bear in mind that although the appellant sought to defend the case against him upon the basis that he honestly believed that all that was involved in this transaction was a technically legitimate, if factually somewhat devious, scheme of tax avoidance, the charge against him was a charge of conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth. Although on occasion, it suits people, for argumentative purposes, to blur the difference, or pretend that there is no difference, between tax avoidance and tax evasion, the difference between the two is simple and clear. Tax avoidance involves using, or attempting to use, lawful means to reduce tax obligations. Tax evasion involves using unlawful means to escape payment of tax. Tax avoidance is lawful and tax evasion is unlawful. Although some people may feel entitled to disregard that difference, no lawyer can treat it as unimportant or irrelevant. It is sometimes said that the difference may be difficult to recognise in practice. I would suggest that in most cases there is a simple practical test that can be applied. If the parties to a scheme believe that its possibility of success is entirely dependent upon the revenue authorities never finding out the true facts, it is likely to be a scheme of tax evasion, not tax avoidance.

The jury evidently concluded in the present case that Chesterton and the appellant could only have honestly considered that this scheme might have any prospects of success if the facts never became known to the taxation authorities. The three aspects of the scheme which the jury must have held branded it as a scheme of tax evasion rather than tax avoidance were as follows. First, there was the movement of the cheques, which produced the consequence that almost the whole of the moneys paid out by the appellant, and in respect of which he claimed tax deductions, came back to him almost immediately. Second, the management agreement that he entered into with Mr and
Mrs Le Brun was never intended by the parties to the agreement to have any practical significance and, in particular, to oblige Mr and Mrs Le Brun to perform any realistic management services. Third, the management agreement was backdated to a date two years before its execution in order to secure tax benefits for the appellant over that period.

It is difficult to imagine that any properly instructed jury could have failed to recognise this as a scheme of tax evasion.

So far as the first ground of appeal is concerned, it is not suggested that the sentencing judge made any error of fact or principle. Having regard to sentences that have been imposed in comparable cases, it cannot be said that the sentence imposed upon the appellant was outside the bounds of a proper sentencing discretion. As is often said in matters of this kind, considerations of general deterrence are of particular importance. The taxation system operates on a basis of self-assessment and, in consequence, considerable reliance is placed by the authorities on full and true disclosure by taxpayers. A sentence involving a custodial element of six months in the present case is well in line with the ordinary run of sentences imposed in circumstances of the present kind. Indeed, Blanch J indicated when he was sentencing Chesterton that if it had not been for Chesterton's plea of guilty and his offer of assistance to the authorities in relation to the prosecution of the appellant, he would have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment involving a total term of eighteen months and what might be described as a non-release period of six months.

As to the jury's recommendation for clemency, this is a matter that was referred to in his remarks on sentence by Shillington DCJ and he said that he took it into account. However, it is argued that he should have given it such weight as to result in a non-custodial sentence. Senior Counsel for the appellant pointed out that the jury were well aware that the co-offender,
Chesterton, had not been sent to prison. I accept that it is highly likely that that was in the forefront of the minds of the members of the jury when they decided to make a recommendation for clemency. On the other hand, it is rather unlikely that the jury would have understood the legal principles that operated to produce the result they obviously found so surprising.

Those principles are relevant to the third ground of appeal also and it is convenient to mention them at this stage. It is well-established that in the ordinary case where a person charged with an offence pleads guilty, that person will receive a significantly lesser sentence than would have been received if the person had pleaded not guilty. There are two reasons for that.
The first is that the plea of guilty will usually be taken to indicate contrition on the part of the offender, something which goes in mitigation of penalty. The second reason is pragmatic. The system gives credit to a person for the saving in time and money that is involved in conduct which renders a trial unnecessary. The weight to be given to those considerations may vary from case to case, but a sentencing judge is obliged to have regard to them.
When Blanch J sentenced Chesterton, he was obliged by law to take those considerations into account in Chesterton's favour.

Again, a sentencing judge may be obliged to give a discount, sometimes a substantial discount, to an offender whose cooperation with the authorities assists the successful prosecution of a co-offender. Once again the law's approach in this respect is pragmatic. The law sets out to encourage offenders to implicate one another. I do not intend to suggest that the present is such a case, but it will be understood that in some circumstances for an offender to implicate a co-offender carries with it a high risk of retribution. For that reason, when Blanch J came to sentence Chesterton, the principles by which he was bound in the sentencing process required him to take into account in favour of Chesterton his co-operation with the authorities.

The jury's recommendation for clemency should be understood in the light of their knowledge that Chesterton was not given a custodial sentence, but, for my part, I would not be prepared to infer that it was made in the light of any detailed understanding by them of the principles to which I have just referred. I see no error in the approach that Shillington DCJ took in the present case to the matter of the jury's recommendation for clemency.

As to the third ground of appeal, the explanation for the difference in the sentence that was imposed upon the appellant and the sentence that was imposed upon Chesterton is that which I have just given. Blanch J indicated that, if
Chesterton had not pleaded guilty, and had not offered to assist the authorities, he would have been sent to prison, as the appellant was ultimately sent to prison, for a term involving a non-release period of six months.

It was also submitted on behalf of the appellant that the present is a case in which there was such a substantial difference between the culpability of
Chesterton and the appellant that, notwithstanding the explanation that can be advanced of the differences in the way in which they were treated, those explanations do not justify the extent of the difference. In my view in the culpability of Chesterton and the appellant was approximately the same. For reasons already given, the present case does not strike me as a case in which what was involved could reasonably have been regarded, either by Chesterton or by the appellant, who is himself a well-educated man of business, as a scheme of tax avoidance. This was regarded as a fairly rough scheme of tax evasion.

In my view the appellant should have leave to appeal against the sentence, but the appeal should be dismissed.
 
SULLY J: I entirely agree.
 
BRUCE J: I agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the court will be as I propose.

REGINA versus Colin MEARES 
SENTENCING - CONSPIRACY TO CHEAT AND DEFRAUD - Tax evasion - parity in sentencing - appellant and his accountant charged with conspiracy - appellant pleads not guilty, is convicted, and sentenced to two years imprisonment, to be released on recognizance after six months - accountant pleads guilty, gives evidence against appellant, and receives non-custodial sentence - HELD - no disparity - discussion of difference between tax avoidance and tax evasion. 
O R D E R S Leave to appeal granted.  Appeal dismissed.
 * * * 
