

Jeffrey James Wyllie -v- National Mutual Life Association of Australasia
Ltd and Ors [1997] NSWSC 146 (18 April 1997) 
JEFFREY JAMES WYLLIE -v- NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALASIA LTD & ORS /96 
Friday, 18 April 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff claims in these proceedings: "1. A DECLARATION that the First Defendant is liable to pay to the
Plaintiff, or to the Second Defendants in respect of the Plaintiff as a member of The Asea Brown Boveri Superannuation Fund, the amount of "Group Life
Assurance" to which he was entitled as at 28 February 1992 as a result of his becoming "Totally and Permanently Disabled" following a stroke which he suffered on 12 March 1992.
An ORDER that the First Defendant pay to the Plaintiff, or to the Second
Defendants in respect of the Plaintiff, the amount of "Group Life Assurance" to which the Plaintiff was entitled as at 28 February 1992 as a member of The
Asea Brown Boveri Superannuation Fund." (Pars 1 and 2 of the Amended Summons) 
The second defendants are the trustee (the trustee) under a trust deed dated October 1990 (the deed) in respect of a fund known as The Asea Brown Boveri
Superannuation Fund (the fund) which was constituted for the benefit of employees of Asea Brown Boveri Pty Ltd and of associated companies (ABB). On May 1992 the deed was varied by trust deed of that date "by deleting the whole of the Clauses and Rules of the (deed) and replacing them with the" provisions of the deed of variation. The plaintiff was a member of the fund which comprised, in part, contributions made by members. The deed empowered the trustee to effect policies of insurance or assurance to insure any risks and liabilities of the fund and to provide for all or any part of the benefits which may become payable from the fund. The trustee effected such a group life assurance (the policy) with the first defendant (the insurer).

The policy provided that if an assurable member left the service of the employer before age sixty five and did not receive a total and permanent disablement benefit prior to that, the member was entitled within sixty days of leaving that service to lodge a proposal for an individual policy of assurance and the insurer was obliged to provide an individual policy without requiring any evidence of the member's health. It was further provided that if such a member became totally and permanently disabled within sixty days after so leaving that service the insurer was obliged to "pay to or in respect of him the amount of Group Life Assurance in respect of him at the date on which he left the Service". As appears later in these reasons that provision, known as the conversion option, was amended by amendment consented to by the insurer on 5 November 1990.

As at February 1992 the plaintiff had been an employee of ABB for several years during which he had received various promotions, the last of which was as Controller, ABB Power Generation Pty Ltd. On 3 February 1992 he received notice of termination of his employment in the following terms: "When ABB Power Generation Pty. Ltd. was formed at the beginning of 1991, it was hoped that the business would develop strongly during the year and that the economic recession would soon be over.

In fact, the recession has been deep and lasted longer than anyone predicted and infrastructure projects have been deferred or cancelled.

We have decided that the Controller's role will be supplied by EPT who are themselves downsizing which means that your position will become redundant at the end of February.

This decision is an economic one and not a reflection of your performance or ability." (p 82, Exhibit A) 
The termination became effective on 26 February 1992 and two weeks later the plaintiff "sustained a left pontine stroke". The insurer was notified by ABB of this and a total disablement claim was submitted. That consisted of a "Statement of Claim by Member" together with an "Employer's Statement". The plaintiff suffered his stroke approximately one month prior to his thirty seventh birthday. The employer's statement described the duties of the plaintiff whilst in the employ of ABB as being: "In charge of the preparation of accounts for the company, budgeting, maintenance of property and equipment, purchasing and contract control" (p 91, Exhibit A) 
It described his qualifications as including a Bachelor Degree of Commerce . It described other "similar types of work" for which the plaintiff's skills could qualify him as being: "Financial Management 
Contract Account 
Accountant" (p 93, Exhibit A) 
In general comments the statement noted that the plaintiff had been fit, was a skier and had received "AN ANNUAL AND THOROUGH MEDICAL CHECKUP". The plaintiff's member statement particularised his qualifications as follows: "Section B - PERSONAL HISTORY (if space insufficient, attach a separate sheet, which is to be signed and dated) (a) At what age did you leave school? 17 years (Knox Grammar) Higher School
Certificate (b) What is your level of education - Primary, Secondary, Tertiary? 
Tertiary (c) What qualifications do you have? B.A. (Accounting) Macquarie
University 1978 
Master of Commerce (Marketing) University of N.S.W. 1983  (p 89, exhibit A) 
His occupation was described as financial controller and the duties involved in the position were described in the same terms as appeared in the employer's statement.

It was noted that, in that position, he had three people under his supervision. His other qualifications were stated to be "Certified Practising
Account (Aust. Soc of C.P.A.'s)". His interests were described as "Sailing,
Tennis, Surfing, Skiing, Travel, Home Improvements". The statement was typed by the secretary of the plaintiff's father and contained some obvious errors.
In response to the question whether he had sought treatment in relation to the effect of the stroke from a physiotherapist he answered "No". That was incorrect, as was his answer to the question whether he had, as a direct result of the effect of the stroke, been incapable of following his normal duties or usual occupation. He answered "No". It would have been obvious to the insurer that this was in error from the nature of the application and from his response to the question whether he had been able to "work in ANY job whether full or part time, whether paid or unpaid since (he was) disabled".
His response to that question was also "No". Details of his employment were provided going back to February 1977 which disclosed that he had been engaged throughout that period as an accountant.

Those matters requiring correction of the member's statement were brought to the attention of ABB by the plaintiff in his facsimile of 3 June 1992 which was forwarded by ABB to the insurer on 5 June 1992. On 9 June 1992 the insurer advised ABB that the claim would be assessed on 26 August 1992 after the expiration of six months of absence from work.

In the mistaken belief that the plaintiff was eligible to claim for total temporary disablement, the insurer informed ABB by letter of 10 July 1992 as follows: "Asea Brown Boveri Superannuation Plan - EFG 1139 
Disablement Claim 
We refer to the claim for disablement benefits in respect of Mr Jeffrey James
Wyllie and would like to keep you informed of our progress. We will now assess this claim for 2 Year Disability Income benefits.

In order to further consider the claim, we require a medical report from the member's treating doctor, Dr K McCarthy at the Mt Wilga Private Hospital.
Unfortunately, we are unable to request the reports from Dr McCarthy as we require Medical Authority forms.

Would you therefore arrange for Mr Wyllie to sign the attached forms and return them in the reply paid envelope provided.

Upon receipt of these forms we shall request the report and continue with the assessment of the claim. If you have any queries please contact me on the above number." (p 164, Exhibit A) 
ABB so informed the plaintiff by letter of 17 July 1992 as follows: "I refer to your claim for disability benefits and advise that National Mutual will now assess your claim for eligibility for Total Temporary Disablement benefits.

In order for National Mutual to further consider your claim, they require a medical report from your treating doctor, Dr. K. McCarthy at the Mt. Wilga
Private Hospital.

Could you please sign the attached forms so that National Mutual can request the report and continue with the assessment of your claim." (p 165, Exhibit A) 
It was in those circumstances that the insurer wrote to Dr Kathleen McCarthy on 27 July 1992 in the following terms: "We have received a claim for the above member for a Total but Temporary
Disablement benefit.

To assist us in the assessment of the claim would you please supply National
Mutual with a detailed medical report. Please include in your report specific reference to the diagnosis, the current level of disability, prognosis and the type of work the claimant might currently be capable of or may be capable of in the future.

We emphasize that your report is a confidential report prepared solely for the use of National Mutual." (p 167, Exhibit A) 
McCarthy was a medical practitioner who specialised in rehabilitation medicine and who, in 1992, was a consultant at Mt Wilga private hospital in which capacity she assisted in the rehabilitation of the plaintiff following his stroke. It will be observed that the terms of the letter of the insurer to
McCarthy did not direct her attention to the question whether the plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled: it rather assumed that, if the plaintiff suffered from total disablement, it was likely to be temporary. Prior to reporting to the insurer as requested, McCarthy obtained a neuro-psychological assessment of the plaintiff from a clinical neuro-psychologist at Royal North
Shore Hospital , Geoff Marshall (Marshall), and on 27 August 1992, McCarthy reported to the insurer (the August 1992 report). I think it is clear from that report that McCarthy's opinions addressed the question of total temporary disablement which had been referred to her. I think it is useful to set out the whole of that report which follows: "Thank you for requesting a detailed medical report on Mr. Wyllie. He was admitted under my care to Mt. Wilga Rehabilitation Hospital on 25.3.92 and was discharged on 15.5.92. I have seen him on several occasions since that time during an Outpatient Rehabilitation Program.

Mr. Wyllie was admitted to the Royal North Shore Hospital,, Sydney, under the care of Dr. R. Johnston on 12.3.92. He had sustained a left pontine stroke due to left vertebral artery and basilar artery thrombosis. I understand the thrombosis were confirmed by an aortagram with bilateral subclaving angiograms. Although the right vertebral artery was small in calibre there were no other abnormalities. Of note in his history was borderline hypertension which was initially diagnosed in 1991 but had required no treatment. I understand from Mr. Wyllie that he had his blood pressure assessed by his local doctor approximately a week prior to his stroke and had been told that it required no treatment. There appeared no other aetiological factors to his stroke and his stay at the Royal North Shore Hospital was uneventful.

Mr. Wyllie sustained dysarthria, ataxia and incoordination, left hemiparesis with some sensory impairment, an intention tremor of the right hand and high level cognitive deficits. During his stay he was managed by an individualised rehabilitation program. His dysarthria significantly improved although he continues to have some difficulty with nasality and tone alteration. He is, however, intelligible in virtually all situations.

During his stay his ataxia and incoordination improved and he became independent with his mobility. Although he still has a left hemiparesis and mild tremor of the right hand, it does not markedly impair his capacity to walk. He is able to walk at a slightly reduced pace, manage stairs and uneven terrain without difficulty. He can manage escalators and public transport. He is unable to run, jump or hop but can toe walk, heel walk and squat. He continues to have mild incoordination of the right hand but he is independent in self care and able to manage most household tasks.

Mr. Wyllie has high level cognitive deficits confirmed on neuropsychological assessment. He has some impairment of his adaptive and executive function. His self monitoring is below the expected level for a man of his intelligence. He has difficulty in perceiving the social significance or implication to his action and therefore has difficulties with "rule breaking". As a consequence of these cognitive deficits he failed a driving assessment and is currently unable to drive for this reason.

In summary, his diagnosis is that of a left pontine stroke due to left vertebral artery and basilar artery thromboses, resulting in significant physical and cognitive impairment. Although currently he is able to manage his self care and to perform the normal household duties, I do not consider that he is fit to return to his former work or any work at this stage. I consider his condition is not yet stable and he is improving. His prognosis is for good functional recovery, although I would anticipate that his cognitive deficits may cause considerable difficulty should he attempt to return to complex and new work duties.

I consider he has been unfit for work in any capacity since the date of his stroke, 12 March 1992. I would consider that he will remain unfit for any work until at least the end of December 1992. He would need to be reviewed at this stage to ascertain his fitness for a return to work. In view of his cognitive deficits I would not recommend that he attempt to return to a complex and new work situation without substantial support. I would anticipate that he should be able to continue with accountancy, however he would need to have supervision and to be provided with routine and structured work duties at least to begin.

I will review Mr. Wyllie in approximately one month and at that time will recommend that he commence a work assessment, looking at vocational options.
It may be feasible that he would be able to commence a work conditioning program by the end of the year with selected duties and reduced hours. I recommend that a further report be sought towards the end of this year as to his work fitness.

Should you have any queries about my report, please don't hesitate to contact me." (Emphasis added) (pp 172-3, Exhibit A) 
I think it is clear from that report that McCarthy was in no position at the time of the report to express anything other than a guarded view of the plaintiff's ability to return to work.

It was not until September 1992, after the insurer had decided to admit the plaintiff to a disability income establishment, that it was realised by the insurer that the plaintiff was not eligible for that benefit under the rules of the fund. The insurer confirmed this in writing to ABB by letter of 21
September 1992 in which the insurer stated that the total and permanent disability claim assessment would be deferred until 21 March 1993. This information was passed on to the plaintiff by ABB. Accordingly on 7 April 1993 the insurer wrote to McCarthy in the following terms: "We are reviewing a claim for the above member for a Total and Permanent
Disablement benefit.

To assist us in the assessment of the claim would you please supply National
Mutual with an up to date detailed medical report. Please include in your report specific reference to the diagnosis, the current level of disability, prognosis and the type of work the claimant might currently be capable of or may be capable of in the future.

We emphasize that your report is a confidential report prepared solely for the use of National Mutual." (p 180, Exhibit A) 
McCarthy's attention was drawn to the question of total and permanent disablement but not to the specific definition of that term in the policy.

McCarthy saw the plaintiff for reassessment on 3 May 1993 and then reported to the insurer by letter of 26 May 1993 (the May 1993 report) which is set out in full below: "Thank you for requesting a report on Mr. Wyllie who is a patient of mine at
Mt. Wilga Rehabilitation Hospital. As I had not seen Mr. Wyllie for several months I thought it advisable to re-assess him for the purpose of this report.
I saw him on Monday, 3 May 1993.

In brief, Mr. Wyllie was admitted to the Royal North Shore Hospital in Sydney under the care of Dr. R. Johnston on 12.3.92. He had sustained a left pontine stroke due to the left vertebral artery and basilar artery thromboses. These were confirmed by aortagram with bilateral subclavian angiograms.

Of note in his history, Mr. Wyllie has had borderline hypertension initially diagnosed in 1991 but had not required treatment.

Mr. Wyllie sustained dysarthria, ataxia and incoordination, left hemiparesis with some sensory impairment on the left, an intention tremor of the right hand and high level cognitive deficits. He was managed initially at Royal
North Shore Hospital for his acute care and then transferred to Mt. Wilga
Rehabilitation Hospital for an inpatient and then outpatient rehabilitation program. He significantly improved during this time.

When I reviewed Mr. Wyllie he stated that he continued to have some high level cognitive deficits. In particular, he found that his short term memory was not as reliable as it had been, particularly when he was under pressure and with regard to time. He found his creative flair had substantially diminished and that although he was able to think through and appropriately deal with complex problems, he was unable to always see the difficulty initially.

He stated that his writing had improved although he was still a little slower.
He is right handed. He is now able to attend to all his pre-morbid household tasks and has resumed his usual level of fitness and, in fact, went skiing without difficulty. He has found, however, that his capacity to manage on his boat is a little less and has relinquished his boat. He has returned to his house in Clareville which has (a) considerable number of steps and he has not noticed any difficulties.

Mr. Wyllie previously had obtained a Masters in Commerce at New South Wales
University with marketing as a major. He was a Certified Public Accountant and had done a Bachelor of Arts in Accountancy. Mr Wyllie resigned in February from the CPA status and he is (no) longer practising as an accountant. He has, however, set up in business with a partner recently.

On examination on 3.5.93, Mr. Wyllie was oriented in time, place and person.
On my bedside testing there was no cognitive impairment. He remains slightly dysarthric with slight impairment of his bulbar musculature. He has mild right tremor and is slightly uncoordinated, particularly on the right. His left hemiparesis remains with minimal reduction in weakness.

I consider that Mr. Wyllie has most likely made most of the expected recovery from his stroke. He has sustained both physical and cognitive impairment. His physical difficulties are of note in that they have reduced his capacity to cope with uneven terrain, to hop, jump or run. His cognitive deficits are of more relevance. Although his high level impairment is subtle, it is significant in particular with regard to his creative thinking, as he has some increased rigidity of mindset and difficulty in self-monitoring. He has difficulty in developing successful strategies for organising more complex and unstructured learning situations. I would consider that he should be able to carry out most, if not all, the routine work responsibilities that he needed to do prior to his stroke. He should be able to analyse and carry out logical and mathematical calculations without difficulty. He would be able to carry out accountancy as usually considered.

However his previous position as a financial controller meant that he was also responsible for the supervision of several others, required budgeting and strategic planning, designing and implementing general ledger systems, setting up and using computer systems. I would consider that Mr. Wyllie would have difficulty in managing tasks that required subjective evaluations or the organisation and problem solving of complex or unfamiliar tasks where required. Although I think he is fit to return to work and to work in the open marketplace, I would suggest that he would be somewhat restricted in his ability to perform, unsupervised, all his previous duties.

I would refer you to my previous report dated 27.8.92 which has somewhat more detail about his initial rehabilitation.

I will review Mr. Wyllie in approximately six months' time but at this stage he no longer requires rehabilitation.

He does not require ongoing follow-up apart from a medical review, as I mentioned.

Should you have any queries or concerns about my report, please don't hesitate to contact me." (Emphasis added) (pp 185-7, exhibit A) 
For reasons which are particularised later in these reasons, I consider that the McCarthy report contained many unsatisfactory elements. I have emphasised some of the salient points in this and the August 1992 report.

Following his review by McCarthy, the plaintiff contacted ABB to inform it of the pending report by McCarthy to the insurer. ABB's telephone attendance note of that conversation bears a further note evidencing the fact that ABB made enquiry of the insurer as to the then state of the plaintiff's claim. That note records that the following information was provided by the insurer: "Is with assessors at this stage. They are assessing to see if information received is adequate or whether they need more info ..." 
In fact at that time, the insurer had not received the May 1993 report. ABB was formally advised by letter of the insurer of 18 May 1993 that McCarthy's report was still outstanding and suggested that the plaintiff might contact
McCarthy to expedite the report.

Upon receipt of the May 1993 report, the insurer assessed the plaintiff's claim on the material then before it (the claim material). This assessment was carried out by John Hickey (Hickey), the claims officer in the insurer's Head
Office Claims Department responsible for the assessment. Hickey carried out that task with the assistance of John McKeand (McKeand), the Chief Medical
Officer of the Insurer. In circumstances which Hickey could not recall, another assessor, Stanley Fong, was engaged initially in the assessment. On 17
June 1993 Fong noted the following on the "Disablement Claims Assessment
Sheet" of the insurer: "Based on medical evidence TPD claim is declined and he is no longer qualified for DI" 
I think the evidence disclosed that this opinion did not play any part in the final assessment of the plaintiff's claim. It appears from the insurer's "T.P.D. CLAIMS ASSESSMENT SHEET" (the TPD assessment sheet) as completed by
Hickey that he formed a tentative view on 22 June 1993 as to the plaintiff's disability as recorded in his note "refer CMO 22/6/93 - dclne TPD?".

In relation to that note, Hickey gave the following evidence: "Q. I am just asking you whether you had some doubt as to whether he was entitled to the benefit? 
A. On the continuation option aspect that still had to be clarified, yes.

Q. You see, you have got "decline TPD"? 
A. Are you asking in relation to the question mark? 
Q. Yes? 
A. Yes, I am asking the chief medical officer for his opinion about the claim.

Q. Because you were in some doubt as to whether it should be declined or not after your assessment? 
A. No, it is a question to the chief medical officer would he decline the claim.

Q. Is that a decision which you do not make yourself? 
A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Is it, in effect, a recommendation by you to him that the claim should be declined? 
A. No, it is more, how can I say, an aide-memoire, if that is the right term.
Dr McKeand visits our area a couple of times a week. At that time there would have been quite a number of files to be discussed with him. It was more to prompt me when I picked up this file again in discussion with Dr McKeand as to what the issue was. So it is really a question directed to John, would he be declining this TPD claim.

Q. Does it reflect the fact that at the time you had finished your assessment on 22 June you had decided that it should be declined? 
A. I was probably tending to that view.

Q. Did you put it any higher than that? 
A. Until I had some advice back from the chief medical officer I wasn't making a final decision on the claim.

Q. Did you have any conversation with Dr McKeand or did you send the file off to him and get it back? 
A. I can't remember what happened. Sometimes we discuss files. Sometimes he separately takes them away and returns them with his notation.

Q. You do not recall what happened on this occasion? 
A. I can't recall, it's too long ago.

Q. Do you recall what sort of medical advice you might have been looking to Dr
McKeand for in relation to this claim? 
A. Not specifically. I may have been seeking some further medical view of the reasonableness of the conclusions as I understood them from Dr McCarthy.

Q. Did you have some difficulty in understanding some of the medical jargon, if you like, that Dr McCarthy had in her report? 
A. There would be some words in there I don't know the meaning of.

Q. At all? 
A. That is correct.

Q. And you do not know the medical consequences of the conditions which she was describing? 
A. I think I have an understanding of the consequences, it is just some of the terminology I don't understand." (T92.33 - T93.42) 
I think it is relevant in that context to observe that Hickey had noted on the
TPD assessment sheet what he considered to be the substance of the August 1992 report as to the work capacity of the plaintiff, namely, that he was unfit for any work until at least December 1992 and, in respect of the May 1993 report, that the plaintiff was: "Fit to return to work but not all duties - set up as partner in a bsnes - No lngr rqrs rhbltn" (Presumably meaning "no longer requires rehabilitation").

I have little doubt that the extraction of those remarks, as representing the effect of the May 1993 report, reflect clearly the thinking of Hickey at that time. In particular, I think it reflects a basic approach to the analysis of the May 1993 report and reflects little of the more subtle considerations called for in the application of the policy's disability provision which is examined later in these reasons.

On the TPD assessment sheet there is noted the following: "CMO Opinion: clearly is not T & P D 24/6/93" 
Again, this note of McKeand is devoid of any express consideration of the particular requirements of disability as defined by the policy.

Consequent upon that advice, Hickey recorded his decision on 24 June 1993 to decline the plaintiff's claim. On the same date Hickey made a file note which reflected something of the practical implications of declining the plaintiff's claim, he having ceased to be employed by ABB. The file note was as follows: "TPD claim J Wyllie (Asea Brown Boveri) 
Spoke with Richard Pinn (HD. CSS Legal Support) 24/6/93.

This is an `old version' GL contract (refer RP's 7/4/93 memo to me).

With claim, disability occurred 12/3/92 which was after 28/2/92 when employment terminated.

Accordingly, the claim is valid under the Continuation Option extended cover provision (in this case relevant period is 60 days - date joined plan is /7/88).

While strictly speaking, in such circumstances, the insurance claim is consequently only between NM and the life insurer it would be courtesy to keep the trustee involved as if it was a normal insurance claim.

Furthermore, it is not clear that in the claim circumstance it is not also a claim by the trustee against the insurance. This issue revolved around whether or not any supn (sic) benefit has been paid to the member, why and when. From the file no such benefit was paid as at 16/4/92 and a view may be taken that he was still a member as at 12/3/(92). To properly resolve this aspect would take further investigation.

Perhaps the solution is to treat this as a normal claim and avoid getting into any discussion with the trustee as to the strict legal standing of this case - particularly if the claim is declined on medical grounds." (p 189, Exhibit A) 
On 30 June 1993 Hickey completed the disablement claims assessment sheet with the following comments: "TPD claim is declined. Please type the enclosed summary and forward it with the declinature letter to the trustee. Please liaise further with Jane Abbott.
Alan Lewis is being transferred from H.O. Claims and wants no further involvement in this claim matter. It would be in order for Jane to tell the trustee verbally, that the claim is declined because (the plaintiff) has largely recovered and has since established a business partnership. There should be no need for a claim assessor to attend a trustee meeting on this matter." (Emphasis added) (p 192, Exhibit A) 
It will be necessary to return to the implications of that decision not to set up a trustee meeting.

The "summary" referred to in that note was in the following terms, omitting formal parts: "This claim was considered by a claims assessor and the chief medical officer.

The evidence considered was: * the `Employer's Statement' claim form dated 13.4.92.
 * the `Member's Statement' claim form dated 30.3.92, with amendments dated 3.6.92, 2 reports dated 27.8.92 and 26.5.93 from Dr K McCarthy. (treating rehabilitation medicine consultant.

The diagnosis for the claimed disablement was a stroke suffered on 12.3.92.
Technically, this is a claim between NM and the life insured as it is covered by the extended cover provisions of the Conversion Option.

The occupational history (from most recent to earliest) is: * controller and manager finance and administration (8 years 8 months) * accountant (6 years 3 months) 
Other details in relation to the life insured's education, training and experience are: * Batchelor of Arts (Accounting) * Master of Commerce (Marketing) * Certified Practising Accountant, (resigned this status February 1993).

The medical evidence Has been provided to NM on a confidential basis by Dr
McCarthy, and NM is not at liberty to release that evidence. However, to assist yourselves as the policy owner, we are prepared to disclose the key points arising from that evidence on the assumption that you will treat it as strictly confidential and will not release it to Mr Wyllie.
 
The key points arising from Dr McCarthy's 26.5.93 report: * treating doctor since 25.3.92.
 * Mr Wyllie has significantly improved during this time.
 * he no longer practices as an accountant, but he has set up in business with a partner.
 * Dr McCarthy considers that Mr Wyllie has most likely made most of the expected recovery from his stroke. He would be able to carry out accountancy as usually considered. However, he would have difficulty in managing tasks that required subjective evaluations or the organisation and problem solving of complex or unfamiliar tasks.
 * Mr Wyllie no longer requires rehabilitation.

The TPD definition is not an "own occupation" definition nor a definition which covers the inability of the claimant to perform the "normal duties" of his former occupation.

For NM to admit a claim, we must be satisfied that the claimant's condition totally and permanently prevents him from being unlikely ever to engage in not only his own occupation, but any occupation or work for which he is reasonably qualified by education, training or experience.

It is NM's opinion that Mr Wyllie is not "Totally and Permanently Disabled" within the terms of the insurance contract." (Emphasis added) (pp 197-8, Exhibit A) 
I have occasion later in these reasons to refer to this decision of the insurer in the emphasised passage as reflecting a double standard in its dealings with the trustee and the plaintiff respectively. That summary was forwarded to ABB with a covering letter from the insurer in the following terms: "We refer to the claim for Total and Permanent Disablement benefit in respect of Mr J J Wyllie.

After taking into consideration the medical evidence obtained, we do not consider the member to be Totally and Permanently Disabled in accordance with the Policy definition.

The claim has therefore been declined.

Attached is the summary of the declined claim." (p 196, Exhibit A) 
In contrast with the information supplied to ABB, the insurer informed the plaintiff of its decision to decline his claim in the following terms: "We refer to your claim for Total and Permanent Disablement benefit under the above superannuation plan and at the request of the trustee advise you of the result of the assessment of the insurance claim.

The insurance claim was assessed by National Mutual as the insurer, taking into consideration details contained in the "Member's Statement" submitted by yourself, "Employer's Statement" submitted by the Company and 2 medical reports dated 27.08.92 and 26.05.93 from Dr K McCarthy.

For National Mutual as insurer to admit a claim, we must be satisfied that your condition totally and permanently prevents you from being unlikely ever to engage in not only your own occupation but any occupation or work for which you are reasonably qualified by education, training or experience.

After taking into consideration the evidence received, National Mutual does not consider you to be Totally and Permanently disabled in accordance with the
Policy and definition.

The insurance claim has therefore been declined." (p 200, Exhibit A) 
In December 1993, the plaintiff's solicitor sought information from ABB as to the material submitted to the insurer in support of the plaintiff's claim. A similar letter was forwarded to the insurer. On 30 December 1993 the insurer replied in the following terms: "We refer to your letter dated 13 December 1993 in regards to your client's disablement claim.

We are unable to support you with any copies of medical reports of Dr K
McCarthy as these reports were provided solely and confidentially for the use of National Mutual.

With regard to the "Members Statement" referred to in your letter, we are aware that the company will be providing you with a copy of the same and we trust this is to your satisfaction.

If you have any queries, please contact me on 287 4769." (p 229, Exhibit A) 
That remained the position of the insurer at the time of the institution of these proceedings.

The policy as issued on 10 September 1971, with a commencement date of 1
November 1969, provided for a definition of "totally and permanently disabled" which underwent amendment, the precise extent of which was not, in my opinion, established by the evidence. Included in exhibit A was an amendment dated 23
April 1990, consented to by the insurer on 8 June 1990, which contained the following definition of "Totally and Permanently Disabled": "...(I)n relation to a Member means having been absent from employment with the Company through injury or illness for six consecutive months and in the opinion of National Mutual after consideration of medical evidence that is satisfactory to National Mutual having become incapacitated to such an extent as to render the Member unlikely ever to engage in or work for reward in any occupation or work for which he is reasonably qualified by education training or experience PROVIDED THAT a Member shall be deemed to have become Totally and Permanently Disabled if he has suffered the loss of two limbs or the sight of both eyes or the loss of one limb and the sight of one eye where `limb' means the whole hand or the whole foot." (p 9, Exhibit A) 
In manuscript the word "six" has been altered to read "three". Also included in exhibit A was a document entitled "Amendment", unexecuted, said "to be made with effect from 1 August 1988". That amendment, if it was ever effected, amended the above definition by substituting "three" for the word "six". I note that the insurer administered the plaintiff's claim on the basis of the unamended definition as at June 1990 and that this was the definition relied upon by the insurer in these proceedings. The plaintiff has treated the definition as having been amended effectively from 1 August 1988. Nothing turns on this uncertainty and I propose to treat the definition as quoted above, unamended by the manuscript alteration.

In the written submissions of counsel on behalf of the plaintiff it was contended as follows: "7. In considering and determining whether it should form such an opinion NML -
 had to consider and determine the correct question; was under an obligation or duty of good faith and fair dealing to Wyllie which required it to have due regard to his interests; was under an obligation to act reasonably in considering and determining the question:
Furthermore, there was implied into the policy a provision requiring each party to act towards the other with the utmost good faith: ...

The policy was a "continuous disability insurance contract" (s. 11(5)) and therefore a "contract of life insurance" for the purposes of the Act: s.11(3)(b). it was also a "blanket superannuation contract" for the purposes of the Act: s. 11(4),(c). The Act does not apply to contracts of insurance entered into before the date of its commencement (s. 4(1)). In the case of a contract of life insurance the reference to "the entering into of a contract of insurance" includes a reference to "the making of an agreement by the parties to the contract to extend or vary the contract": <case>(a). The policy was varied by amendments made in 1988 and 1990 and in that amended form was subject to the provisions of the Act including ss. 13 and 14.
NML did not consider and determine the correct question. In particular - it did not consider what occupation or work Wyllie was or would be reasonably qualified for by education, training or experience; it considered the expression "reasonably qualified by education, training or experience" as capable of referring to an occupation or work for which
Wyllie was over qualified; it did not consider the actual likelihood of Wyllie gaining employment in any occupation or work of the kind answering the description in (a).
NML did not have due regard to Wyllie's interests. In particular - it failed to fully advise Dr McCarthy of the question which it had to address and the purpose for which her medical report of 26.5.93 was required; it failed to make inquiries of Dr McCarthy as to matters in that report.
In particular - the partnership business referred to on page 2; what she meant by the expression "would be able to carry out accountancy as usually considered" on page 2; the nature and purpose of the review referred to on page 3; it failed to make any inquiries of Wyllie or his wife as to how he was performing in the partnership business in which they were involved as at May ;
 it failed to advise Wyllie - of the contents of Dr McCarthy's report of 26.5.93; of its proposed decision based on that report and its reasons for that decision and failed before declining his claim to give him any opportunity to put submissions, medical reports or other materials before it in support of his claim; it failed, having received a report from Dr McCarthy which on its face was "pre-final", to defer consideration of the question whether Wyllie was totally and permanently disabled until such time as there was evidence available to it as to how he had or would function in real work situations: ....
 it failed to give Wyllie copies of either of the medical reports of Dr
McCarthy upon which its decision was apparently based notwithstanding that he requested that he (be) provided with them.
In the circumstances NML did not act reasonably in considering and determining the question whether Wyllie was totally and permanently disabled." (Pars 7-11) 
By his amended summons the plaintiff contended that the opinion expressed by the insurer in its letter to him of 15 July 1993, namely, that it was not satisfied that his condition totally and permanently disabled him within the meaning of the policy, was so unreasonable that no reasonable person considering the evidence placed before it, could have arrived or would arrive at that opinion.

The plaintiff further relied upon an implied term of the policy that the insurer "would act fairly and reasonably in considering and determining the question whether the plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled" and, in the alternative, he contended that the insurer "had a duty to so act when considering and determining that question". Breach of that term or duty was particularised as follows: "(a) it failed in April and May 1993 to fully advise Dr McCarthy of the purpose for which her medical report of 26 May 1993 was required; having received Dr McCarthy's report, it failed to make any inquiries as to the partnership business referred to on page 2 of that report and as to what she meant by the expression "would be able to carry out accountancy as usually considered".
 it failed to make any inquiries of the Plaintiff or his wife as to how the Plaintiff was performing in the business in which they were involved in
May 1993.
 it failed to advise the Plaintiff of the assessment which it was undertaking in April and May 1993 and of the question which it was addressing and further failed to invite him to put any submissions or evidence before it in support of his claim.
 it failed to defer consideration of the question whether the Plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled until such time as there was evidence available to it as to how the Plaintiff functioned in real life as distinct from test situations." (Par 12B of the Amended Summons) 
By their defence to the amended summons, the defendants did not admit the implied term nor the existence of the duty alleged by the plaintiff. As a matter of strict pleading, no point was raised that the plaintiff had no standing to claim the relief sought by the amended summons. However, what was referred to in submissions as "the party point" arose, essentially, as ancillary to the determination of the nature of the contractual or other duty, if any, owed to the plaintiff by the insurer. In respect of that matter, in the written outline of argument on behalf of the insurer, it was submitted that: "(The insurer's) only obligation was to act fairly and in good faith. In the discharge of that obligation, (the insurer) was not subject to the rules of procedural fairness that might apply in a court." (Par 26) 
It was further submitted that the Court was not permitted to "embark upon its own determination of the disability question" if the insurer was "in breach of its obligations in relation to the formation of its disability opinion". The
Court could only do so if "that breach ... prevented the formation of the relevant opinion ... (the insurer's) principal submission (was) that there been no breach". It was further submitted that "there (was) no proper basis for the Court to embark upon its own determination of the disability issue (and that the) appropriate order, if breach (was) established, (was) simply a declaration and an order that the matter be reconsidered by (the insurer)". Nevertheless, as I understood the oral submissions of senior counsel for the insurer, those submissions drifted away from an acceptance of the obligation "to act fairly and in good faith" to the plaintiff.

While, in my opinion, it is not open to the insurer to put in issue the standing of the plaintiff to seek relief against it, I think it is necessary to determine the status of the plaintiff under, or in respect of, the policy in order to determine the nature of any contractual or other duty that may have been owed by the insurer to the plaintiff in the assessment of the plaintiff's claim. No relief is sought by the plaintiff against the trustee and, as I understand the case as presented on behalf of the plaintiff, no suggestion is made that the trustee had any continuing obligation to the plaintiff in respect of his claim for total and permanent disablement entitlements. Those rights of the plaintiff are to be found in the conversion option under which the insurer accepted the obligation to pay benefits to former employees of ABB who became totally and permanently disabled within the meaning of the policy within a period of thirty or sixty days (depending upon the date upon which the employee became a member in respect of the fund) of leaving ABB's employment. I understand the joinder of the trustee as recognising the possible applicability of the remarks of McLelland J, as he then was, in Edwards versus The Hunter Valley Co-op Dairy Co. Ltd & Anor [(1992) 7 ANZ Insurance Cases 61-113] p 77,531 at 77,535 and a possible construction of the policy which might require payment of the plaintiff's entitlement to the trustee in the first instance.

The joinder of the trustee along with the insurer also accommodates the divergence in approach to third party entitlements reflected in the majority judgment and that of Deane J in Trident General Insurance Co Ltd versus McNeice
Bros Pty Ltd <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 107.] If the plaintiff falls within the class of person entitled to sue within the meaning of the majority judgment in Trident then, as I see the plaintiff's position, there is no need to join the trustee in these proceedings. The position is otherwise if the entitlement is more aptly described as that of a beneficiary of the insurer's promise to pay him total and permanent disablement benefits in accordance with the amended conversion option under the policy. Should the better view be that the plaintiff's entitlement to sue lies in his position as beneficiary of the benefit of a promise, the insurer gains no comfort from the fact that the trustee was not requested to institute the proceedings as promisee-trustee. Referring to a similar situation in Trident, Deane J observed that: "... the fact that Blue Circle was apparently not requested by McNeice to institute proceedings as promisee-trustee should be seen, as between McNeice and Trident, as a matter of mere procedure which should not, of itself, be allowed to preclude the proper resolution of the real dispute." (At 153) 
Whether the plaintiff's status is that of a party entitled to enforce the terms of the policy against the insurer, or is that of a beneficiary of the benefit of the insurer's promise, is not material to the decision which I have reached in this matter.

It is common ground that the policy is a contract of life insurance within the meaning of [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s11.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), as a consequence of which the policy is not a contract of general insurance for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s48.html) of the Act: although it was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that the provisions of the section may have some analogous value in determining the insurer's obligations to the plaintiff.

Counsel for the insurer has referred me, in the course of oral submissions, to various provisions of the policy and of the trust deed which were directed to the nature of the duties owed by the insurer under the policy. In relation to the policy, particular attention was directed to the third schedule to the amendment entitled "BENEFITS", which was in the following terms: "Subject to the terms and conditions of the Policy and this Proposal when a benefit becomes payable to or in respect of a Member pursuant to the provisions of the Trust Deed National Mutual shall pay to the Proposers an amount equal to such benefit." (Emphasis added) (p 11, Exhibit A) 
In relation to the deed, I was referred, in particular, to cl 3.05 which provided for resolution of disputes by the trustee in respect of the interpretation of the trust deed or the rights of members and to cl 22 which provided for the payment of benefits to members.

As stated earlier in these reasons, the policy was amended by amendment dated October 1990 which was consented to by the insurer on 5 November 1990. The fourth schedule to the policy was amended as follows: "BY DELETING from the Fourth Schedule the clause (if any) headed or annotated `Continuation Option' or `Conversion Option' AND SUBSTITUTING
THEREFOR the clause set forth in Annexure B hereto." (p 64, Exhibit A) 
So far as is relevant, Annexure B contained the following amendment to the conversion option: "(b) If within 30 days of his ceasing to be an Assurable Member but before the commencement of an individual policy as aforesaid such person dies or (2) becomes disabled in circumstances where an amount of Group Life
Assurance (other than an income benefit) in respect of him would have been credited to the Accumulation Account had he then been an Assurable Member then National Mutual shall pay to him or if he has died National Mutual shall at its option pay to any person whom National Mutual in its absolute discretion determines to have been dependent on him and if more than one in such shares as National Mutual in its like discretion determines or pay to the deceased's estate or legal personal representatives the amount of Group Life
Assurance in respect of him on the date on which he ceased to be an Assurable
Member.

If such a person became an Assurable Member before 1 January 1991 then in lieu of the period of 30 days referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this clause a period of 60 days shall be deemed to be substituted therefor." (p 66, Exhibit A) 
Quite clearly, in my opinion, the third schedule provision of the policy for payment of benefits has no application to the payment of benefits undertaken by the insurer pursuant to the conversion option as amended, nor do the provisions of the trust deed relating to payment of benefits have any such application to the plaintiff's entitlement under the amended conversion option. That provision of the policy calls for payment to the member by the insurer as distinct from any provision of the policy providing for payment of the benefit by the insurer to the trustee for payment, in turn, to the member.

As to the obligation of the insurer to the plaintiff I have reached the conclusion that:
It was under a duty to the plaintiff to act with utmost good faith in the assessment of his claim,
It was under an implied obligation to the plaintiff, in forming an opinion as to the plaintiff's disability, to act fairly, in good faith, and reasonably in considering and determining that matter, having due regard for the interests of the plaintiff.

The duty to act in good faith, in my opinion, is owed to the plaintiff whether his status is that of a party entitled to sue the insurer directly or derivatively as the beneficiary of the benefit of the promise under the conversion option offered by the policy (see Trident and Edwards supra).
In this context I have been assisted by the observations of Mahoney JA in C E
Heath Casualty & General Insurance Ltd versus Grey & Ors [(1993) 7 ANZ
Insurance Cases 61-199] as follows: "The view that the operation of the principle of good faith is not limited to those who, at law, are parties to the contract of insurance flows, I believe, from the nature of the principle itself. It is a broad principle applicable to the making of insurance contracts and the performance of them. The nature of it was discussed in detail in Manuel Khoury and Samira Khoury versus Government
Insurance Office of New South Wales <case>; ANZ Insurance Cases |P60-581; [(1984) 165 CLR 622.] It was there established that it is not based upon a doctrine of implication of terms: at 635 et seq; although, in a particular case it may no doubt assist in determining what implications are to be made: cf the cases referred to at 635.
It is "an incident of the relationship" of insurance: at 637. From the principle, various rights and obligations have been held to flow. Thus, in the
Khoury case, the right of the insurer to terminate the contract for non- disclosure was held to flow, not from an express or implied term to that effect, but directly from the principle itself.
 .....................

It is relevant also that the duty of good faith operates not merely in relation to the making of a contract of insurance but also to aspects of the performance of it. Thus, it has been said to regulate the conduct of the parties in respect of some aspects at least of the disclosure of facts during the course of the policy and, eg, in relation to claims made under it. In The
Distillers Company Bio-Chemicals (Australia) Pty Limited versus Ajax Insurance
Company Limited <case>; [(1974) 130 CLR 1] at 26 et seq, Stephen J referred to a "duty of good faith" in relation to the exercise by an insurer of a right under the contract, namely, the right of controlling the settlement of claims by the insured. This, in my respectful opinion, derives, not merely from the implication of a term obliging a party to act in good faith, but from the general relationship between parties which a contract of insurance requires: see the authorities collected by Badgery-Parker J in Gibson versus Parkes District Hospital [(1991) NSWLR 9."] (At pp 77,277 and 78,278) 
Where [s13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s13.html) of the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) imports a duty into a contract of insurance upon parties to the contract to act with the utmost good faith towards each other "in respect of any matter arising under or in relation" to the contract, it is extremely difficult to see how such a duty of the insurer is not extended as an "incident of the relationship" in respect of a third party in the position of the plaintiff under the conversion option of the policy: in this instance, in respect of the performance of the contract by the insurer.

The practical consequences of this conclusion may be slight having regard to the further conclusion which I have reached as a matter of implication. The insurer was under an obligation to assess the plaintiff's claim in good faith.
The obligation of an insurer in circumstances not materially different from those of the insurer in these proceedings was considered by McLelland J, as he then was, in Edwards as follows: "It is next necessary to examine the nature and content of Zurich's relevant obligations under the policy. Those obligations were contractual and not fiduciary. Zurich was an insurer, not a trustee. Since the commercial purpose of the policy was, relevantly, to provide insurance against the risk of total and permanent disablement, and since the policy was expressed in terms requiring the formation by Zurich of a particular opinion as a condition of
Zurich's own liability, there was clearly an implied obligation on Zurich to consider and determine whether it should form that opinion. That involved a consideration and determination of the correct question (see James Noel Eric
Butcher versus Martin Port (1985) 3 ANZ Insurance Cases |P60-638; [(1985) 1 NZLR ]
at 496, 504, and cf. Wilson versus Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer [18 NSWLR 730] at 734). Furthermore, in the exercise of powers affecting the interests both of itself and the claimant, Zurich was under a duty of good faith and fair dealing which required it to have due regard for the interests of the claimant (see The
Distillers Company Biochemicals (Australia) Pty Limited versus Ajax Insurance
Company Limited <case>; [130
CLR 1] at 29-31).
This duty is in my opinion analogous to the duty to which a mortgagee is subject in exercising a power of sale of mortgaged property, and to the duty to which a controlling shareholder of a company is subject in exercising a right to procure the passage of a resolution affecting the interests of shareholders at a general meeting of the company (cf. Peters' American
Delicacy Company Limited versus Heath & Ors <case>; [61
CLR 457] at 502-4).
(It is to be noted that the policy was issued prior to the commencement of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/)).

Where under a contract, rights or liabilities depend upon the subjective state of mind of a party, e.g. the party's approval, opinion or satisfaction, of or about something, it can be a difficult question whether the party is subject to an implied obligation in reaching that state of mind, or failing to reach it, as the case may be, to be bound by objective standards of reasonableness (see the discussion by Mason J in Meehan versus Jones & Ors <case>; [149 CLR 571] at -1, and see also V L Credits Pty Ltd versus Switzerland General Insurance Co
Ltd (No 2) <case>; [(1991) 2 VR 311] at 315-6). However in the field of insurance, it is well established that where under a contract of insurance an element of the insurer's liability is expressed in terms of the satisfaction or opinion of the insurer, the insurer is obliged to act reasonably in considering and determining that matter (see Moore versus Woolsey (1854) 4 El & B1 243 <case>; , [119 ER 93],
Braunstein versus Accidental Death Insurance Co <case>; [(1861) 1 B & S 782],
London Guarantie Co versus Fearnley [(1880) 5 App Cas 911] at 916, 921,
Doyle versus City of Glasgow Life Insurance Co [(1884) 53 LJ Ch 527],
Harvey versus Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corporation [(1905) 2 IR 1], James Noel
Eric Butcher versus Martin Port (1985) 3 ANZ Insurance Cases |P60-638; [(1985) 1
NZLR 491], cf. Teur versus London Life Insurance Co [(1936) 1 DLR ).] 
To say that insurer must act reasonably in forming or declining to form an opinion is not to say that a Court can substitute its own view for that of the insurer. As North J pointed out in Doyle at 529, "reasonable persons may reasonably take different views". Unless the view taken by the insurer can be shown to have been unreasonable on the material then before the insurer, the decision of the insurer cannot be successfully attacked on this ground." (At p 77,536) 
See also Chammas versus Harwood Nominees Pty Ltd [(1993) 7 ANZ Insurance Cases -175] p 77,995 at 77,999.

If the question to be decided in these proceedings was whether the plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled - as "having become incapacitated to such an extent as to render (him) unlikely ever to engage in or work for reward in any occupation or work for which he is reasonably qualified by education, training or experience" - I would have little difficulty in determining that he was so disabled upon the evidence presented by the plaintiff in this case.
However, the principal question before me is whether the absence of the condition precedent of the insurer's opinion that the plaintiff was so incapacitated operates to defeat the plaintiff's claim.

The conclusion I have reached in this case is that the insurer failed to act reasonably, fairly or in good faith in the assessment of the plaintiff's claim, largely as a result of its misconception of what was required of it in assessing the plaintiff's claim under the policy. In particular, the insurer seems to have proceeded under the misapprehension that all that was required of it was to obtain medical reports on the plaintiff's medical condition and, on that evidence, together with the employer's statements and the member's statement, determine whether he was totally and permanently disabled within the meaning of the policy.

In some cases such an approach could be justified, particularly where the assessment only concerns the physical limitations of the claimant. Here, however, the plaintiff's injury was brain stem damage resulting in dysarthria, dysphasia, ataxia, incoordination, left hemiparesis and a significantly high level of cognitive deficiencies. While neurological assessments and rehabilitation assessments may be made of the effect of such an injury, the task confronting the insurer in such a case involved carrying out a pragmatic exercise aimed at ascertaining what the plaintiff was actually capable of doing, in addition to obtaining medical opinion evidence, satisfactory to it.

Moreover, the terms of the total and permanent disability provision required the insurer to do more than obtain an opinion as to the "type of work the claimant might currently be capable of or may be capable of in the future": taking the terms of the insurer's instructions to McCarthy. While the insurer may not be obliged to obtain medical evidence expressly directed to the policy definition of total and permanent disability, if the insurer chooses to be less specific in its quest for medical opinion, it heightens the difficulty of the task confronting the insurer in making its own assessment.

In this case, for example, the insurer did not require McCarthy to have regard to the qualification that the capacity for work under consideration was that for which the plaintiff was "reasonably qualified by education, training or experience". The importance of this omission as evidenced by McCarthy is referred to later in these reasons.

What I have described as the pragmatic side of the exercise was no small task required of the insurer. The extent to which the insurer fulfilled that task may be contrasted with the information on which it chose to act: information that, in my opinion, was both scant and elliptic. That it chose to act on that material, I think, exposed the insurer to a charge of breach of its policy obligations to which I have referred.

I think the conduct of the insurer was manifestly unfair to the plaintiff in failing to provide the plaintiff with an opportunity of addressing the matters upon which McKeand had formed the opinion that the plaintiff was "Clearly ...
not T. & P. D.". Having regard to the nature and seriousness of the plaintiff's injury and to the unsatisfactory aspects of the claim material referred to later in these reasons, I think the insurer was obliged to inform the plaintiff of the particulars of the basis upon which that opinion had been reached and so to afford him the opportunity of presenting evidence of his actual capacity. Its failure to do so may be contrasted with the way in which the insurer considered that it was appropriate, when assessing claims which involved payments to the trustee, to consult with the trustee in committee when a decision adverse to the claim had been reached and, in that context, to provide the trustee with the basis for that decision. Indeed, in this case, although it was not a claim by the trustee, or involving any payment to the trustee, the insurer, as a matter of courtesy provided such information to the trustee while steadfastly declining to treat the plaintiff similarly. I find that quite unacceptable in the context of the insurer's obligations under this policy.

Set out below are extracts from the cross-examination of Hickey on the subject of this double standard: "Q. In your memorandum to Francis of 23 December you said that no medical evidence could be released as Dr McCarthy's reports were provided confidentially to National Mutual and National Mutual was not prepared to release them. Did you make that decision yourself or did you first speak to someone else? 
A. It is the general policy of our area.

Q. Not to provide claimants with copies of medical reports? 
A. Not those that have been provided to National Mutual on a confidential basis. Sometimes the claimants provide copies of evidence they have obtained themselves from whatever doctors and we would be quite happy to release them back to the claimant.

Q. What about medical reports from the claimant's treating doctor? 
A. It depends on the basis it was provided to National Mutual. If it was on a confidential basis to National Mutual it would not be released.

Q. Did you ever give any consideration at this time to how Mr Wyllie might find out the basis upon which National Mutual had declined his claim? 
A. In terms of specific reasoning? 
Q. Any reasons? 
A. The presumption would be the treating doctor has discussed the matter that has been disclosed to National Mutual by Dr McCarthy with Mr Wyllie.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Would you repeat that? 
A. Dr McCarthy is Wyllie's treating doctor. We asked Dr McCarthy some specific questions and they were generally dealing with his capacities and the extent of his disabilities. As she was a rehabilitation specialist it would be a reasonable presumption that virtually all of the material which she disclosed to National Mutual would have been discussed with Mr Wyllie or disclosed to Mr
Wyllie in relation to his rehabilitation and what he would or would not be able to do.

Q. Aren't you aware of the terms in which she was asked to report? 
A. I am referring more to the facts.

Q. Are you not familiar with the terms in which she was asked to report? 
A. Perhaps I misunderstand what the correct question is.

Q. I am not clear in my recollection but I have an impression that it was made very clear to her that the report was to be confidential and not to be disclosed? 
A. That is correct yes.

Q. So I have some difficulty in understanding why you would think in those circumstances she would discuss the contents of her report with Mr Wyllie? 
A. The point I am making is that the statements that she disclosed to National
Mutual I would have expected many of them if not all of them would have been separately disclosed or discussed with Mr Wyllie, not in an attempt to just by
Dr McCarthy to disclose the contents of the report to National Mutual to Mr
Wyllie but in terms of her treatment and rehabilitation to Mr Wyllie.

MEAGHER: Q. Before you wrote your note to Francis of 23 December did you speak to Dr McCarthy to see whether she had communicated anything to Mr Wyllie about what she had reported to National Mutual? 
A. No.

Q. If you could go to page 229, that was the letter which was sent by National
Mutual to Mr Conolly saying that you were not prepared to disclose the reports? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you think that Mr Conolly would have bothered to ask for the reports or the substance of the reports if he already knew what was in them or did you not think about that at all? 
A. I don't really know what his thinking may have been.
 ........................

Q. At all, did you? As at December 1993 you had a request from solicitors that you provide the information and you refused it and you knew that in refusing it you were denying Mr Wyllie the opportunity to know the basis upon which his claim had been declined, isn't that so? 
A. That is correct.

Q. Did you at all turn your mind to whether or not Mr Wyllie might have wanted to challenge National Mutual's decision? 
A. As to why he would want to challenge? 
Q. As to whether he would want to challenge it? 
A. It would not be unexpected.

Q. As at December 1993 you had had no communication with Mr Wyllie at all, had you? You had never met the man? 
A. That is correct.

Q. You had never invited him to submit any material to you in relation to the claim, had you? 
A. No but it was open to him to provide something further or ask us to have a look at it.
 ........................

Q. You say it is typical is it not common for National Mutual to treat its claimants in this way, that is, refuse to provide them with information about reasons why claims have been denied? 
A. At that time that was the general position yes.

Q. Is that still the position? 
A. No it's not.

Q. What has changed? 
A. If we decline a claim now subject to a confidentiality agreement being signed by the owner of the insurance policy which is generally the trustees of the superannuation plan, we will disclose reasons for the declining a claim and also provide them with copies of the evidence that we had in assessing the claim.

Q. When did that practice start? 
A. I can't remember the exact date but it has been evolving over the last few years.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Can you state a reason for it? 
A. I suppose it is increased scrutiny by external bodies, the courts, the
Superannuation Complaints Tribunal, the existence of that body, the existence of a Life Insurance Complaints Service.
 ........................

Q. Could you go please to the letter to the trustee which is at page 196? This is the letter which was sent to the trustee on 7 July? 
A. Yes.

Q. And it enclosed the summary which is at pages 197 and 198 which you had prepared? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you were aware that the letter of 7 July was going to the trustee? 
A. That's right.

Q. If I can just take you back. When you were assessing this claim in June you formed the view that this is really a claim between National Mutual and Mr
Wyllie and had nothing to do with the trustee, didn't you? 
A. Technically, yes.

Q. That is how you regarded it as a claim, in effect, by Mr Wyllie direct on
National Mutual? 
A. But we decided we would continue to keep the trustee informed as to what was going on with the claim.

Q. Why? 
A. As a matter of courtesy.

Q. To the trustee? 
A. To the trustee, yes.

Q. What did you expect the trustee was going to do with the information you were providing to it? 
A. At best it is probably information only.
 ........................

Q. If you go to the document at page 197 about .6 on the page there is a paragraph commencing "The medical evidence" and you go on to say, "However, to assist yourselves as the policy owner we are prepared to disclose the key points arising from that evidence on the assumption that you are treating it as strictly confidential and will not release it to Mr Wyllie". What was the purpose of providing that information to the trustees in the way of assistance? 
A. My recollection is that the consultant to the superannuation plan specifically asked us to provide some more details in relation to this claim.
 ........................

Q. But at the same time you were telling them they could not tell Mr Wyllie? 
A. That is correct. They could not disclose the details provided by Dr
McCarthy.
 ........................

Q. Could you go back to page 192 which is the note you wrote on 30 June? You say there in the last sentence "Life insured has largely recovered and has since established a business partnership. There should be no need for a claims assessor to attend a trustee meeting on this matter." What is that a reference to? 
A. Presumably Jane must have asked about the possibility of one of the claims assessors or Alan Lewis attending a meeting with the trustee.

Q. Was that something that happened from time to time in relation to claims at that time? 
A. That's right.

Q. What went on at those meetings? 
A. I have never been to one.

Q. You have no understanding as to what went on at those meetings? 
A. There would have been some discussion about the claims.

Q. The merits of the claims? 
A. That is correct.

Q. And whether National Mutual's assessment was to be accepted or to be reconsidered or contested? 
A. Presumably to give the trustees some understanding of what process we went through and whether they considered we were being reasonable or not.

Q. Because the trustees were the persons who were interested in effect, in the outcome of National Mutual's decision whether to accept or reject the claim? 
A. Generally speaking, yes, if more in the situation of Mr Wyllie's claim.

Q. Just putting aside Mr Wyllie, you understand that when the claim was made on behalf of a continuing member of the fund that the trustees would, in effect, go in to bat for the member? 
A. That can be expected, yes.

Q. You understand that was their obligation, didn't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. Who was going to do that for Mr Wyllie in circumstances where no one was providing him with any information? 
A. I don't know." (T84.35 - 85.58, T86.16 - .38, T87.8 - .55, T88.1 - .33, T89.21 - .31, T89.53 - .56 and 
T90.21 - 91.10) 
I note that Hickey justified the absence of any need "for a claim assessor to attend a trustee meeting" on the basis that the plaintiff had "largely recovered and (had) since established a business partnership". I think that observation reveals a serious misconception of the plaintiff's then condition and the manner in which the insurer relied upon the obviously incomplete and inadequate claim material.

As to Hickey's suggestion that the plaintiff may have been expected to be privy to the contents of McCarthy's reports to the insurer, McCarthy gave the following evidence: "Q. Dr McCarthy, at any time after July 1993 were you asked by Mr Wyllie or on his behalf to provide copies of your medical reports to him or your solicitors? 
A. I was.

W. Did you do that? 
A. No, I didn't.

Q. Why didn't you do that? 
A. I was asked to prepare a report, a confidential report for National Mutual.

Q. Did you take the view that you were not permitted, therefore, to disclose it? 
A. I did.

Q. Did you ask National Mutual whether they would consent to you doing so? 
A. I suggested that Mr Wyllie and his solicitor contact National Mutual. I said I had also provided a report separately." (T41.32 - .52) 
When one comes to examine the nature of that breach I think it can be demonstrated that, had the insurer acted in accordance with its obligations and had due regard to the interests of the plaintiff, at the very least, it could not reasonably have formed a positive opinion that the plaintiff was not totally and permanently disabled. In the light of the evidence which has been adduced in this case, I think the probabilities are very high that, in due course the insurer would have reached an opinion favourable to the plaintiff, assuming that it paid due observance to its obligations under the policy.

In his statement of evidence in chief dated 12 August 1996 (the August statement), Hickey gave evidence of the manner in which he assessed the plaintiff's claim. That process was described as follows: "16. I considered Mr Wyllie's medical condition as disclosed by the reports of
Dr McCarthy and Dr McCarthy's opinion as to his prognosis, together with his occupational and educational history as disclosed by the claim form and
Company Report.
In relation to his medical condition I had particular regard to Dr
McCarthy's report of 26 May 1993 which was then the most current report on Mr
Wyllie. I had regard to the following matters set out in that report:- 
Dr McCarthy's position as Mr Wyllie's treating physician since 25 March ;
 the comments of Dr McCarthy indicating significant improvement of Mr
Wyllie (in particular, the last sentence of the fourth paragraph on page 1; the third sentence of the first paragraph on page 2; the first sentence in the fourth paragraph of page 2; the second last sentence of the fifth paragraph on page 2; and the second sentence on page 3.

The comment in the last sentence of the second paragraph of page 2 that:- "[Mr Wyllie] has, however, set up in business with a partner recently".
 the opinion of Dr McCarthy as expressed in the following parts of her report: in the fourth paragraph of page 2:- "I would consider that he should be able to carry out most, if not all, the routine work responsibilities that he needed to do prior to his stroke. He should be able to analyse and carry out logical and mathematical calculations without difficulty. He would be able to carry out accountancy as usually considered." in the last paragraph of page 2:- "I would consider that Mr Wyllie would have difficulty in managing tasks that required subjective evaluations or the organisation and problem solving of complex or unfamiliar tasks were required" and in the second sentence on page 3:- "I will review Mr Wyllie in approximately six months' time but at this stage he no longer requires rehabilitation".
In relation to his employment and educational history, I note Mr Wyllie was employed as a Financial Controller while at ABB Power Generation and was a qualified accountant. His employment was terminated on 28 February 1992 and the stroke occurred on 12 March 1992.
I considered the definition of Total and Permanent Disablement in the
Policy which provides:- "Having been continuously absent from employment with the Employer through injury or illness through the TPD Waiting Period and in the opinion of
National Mutual, after consideration of medical evidence that is satisfactory to National Mutual, having become incapacitated to such an extent as to render the Insured Member unlikely ever to engage in or work for reward in any occupation or work for which the Insured Member is reasonably qualified by education, training or experience .....".
I formed the opinion, having viewed the reports of Dr McCarthy, the claim form and the Company Report that:- 
Mr Wyllie had been continuously absent from employment; and this absence was due to injury or illness but that Mr Wyllie had not become incapacitated to such an extent to render him unlikely ever to engage in or work for reward in any occupation for which he is reasonably qualified by his education, training or experience. In particular, I formed the opinion that Mr Wyllie was not unable to engage in his usual occupation as an accountant (he in fact appeared to be doing so), although he may have been unable to return to his former position as a
Financial Controller." (Pars 16-20, Exhibit 2) 
That evidence was modified in his further statement of evidence in chief of 7
November 1996 (the November statement) as follows: "5. Paragraph 20 of my former affidavit is incorrect in that I did not form the opinion that Mr Wyllie appeared to be working as an accountant. As I stated in paragraph 17(c) of my former affidavit, and as noted by me at the time on the TPD Claims Assessment Sheet that is Annexure "J" to my earlier statement, Mr Wyllie had set up in business with a partner.
Accordingly, paragraph 20 should be amended so that the words from "in particular" down to "appeared to be doing so" should be deleted and replaced with the following: " I formed the opinion that Mr Wyllie did not satisfy that part of the definition that read `having become incapacitated to such an extent to render the Member unlikely ever to engage in or work for reward in any occupation or work for which he is reasonably qualified by education, training or experience ...'." " (Pars 5 and 6, Exhibit 3) 
Read with or without the amendment of the November statement, Hickey's August statement, in my opinion, makes it quite clear that Hickey's opinion of the actual work capacity of the plaintiff as at June 1993 was that of a person who was capable of conducting a business on his own account. I think par 20 in its original form was clearly referring to that fact as set out in par 17(c) of the August statement. I think that is confirmed by the terms of the November statement amendment and by his cross-examination of this matter as follows: "MEAGHER: Q. (Exhibit A shown) I just want to clear up one matter in relation to your supplementary statement. Could you go to paragraph 20 of your first statement which is Exhibit 2 and also paragraph 6 of your second statement which is Exhibit 3. Is the position now that looking at paragraph 20 you would like it to stop at the end of the sentence finishing "qualified by his education, training or experience" and you want to delete the rest of that paragraph, is that right? 
A. I think it is just removing the words in brackets "in fact appeared to be working as an accountant" is the statement that I wanted to have withdrawn.

Q. Do you want to withdraw the words "In particular I formed the opinion that
Mr Wyllie was not unable to engage in his usual occupation as an accountant"? 
A. No, I don't really want that withdrawn.

Q. Think about it and then tell me whether you do or do not withdraw that part of paragraph 20? 
A. I think the correct intention is just to withdraw the words in brackets." (T75.43 - 76.6) 
Clearly the statement, extracted from the May 1993 report, that the plaintiff was engaged in the conduct of a business on his own account, was a matter of considerable importance to Hickey in the evaluation of the plaintiff's capacity as at June of 1993. Quite apart from the evidence in chief of Hickey, his notes on the TPD assessment sheet concerning the May 1993 report noted only 3 matters:
That the plaintiff was fit to return to work but not all duties,
That he had set up as a partner in a business, and
That he no longer required rehabilitation.

Moreover, his judgment that there was no need for a trustee committee meeting with the insurer was based on his observation that the plaintiff had "largely recovered and (had) since established a business partnership".

The insurer made no attempt to ascertain from the plaintiff what the business was, or what he was actually capable of doing in that business, or what he was in fact doing at the time that Hickey formed the opinion that he was able to work as an accountant and to carry on a business to an extent that the plaintiff was not totally disabled within the meaning of the policy. Had the insurer done so, or had it informed the plaintiff of the subject matter in the claim material upon which it had relied in forming an opinion that he was "not unable to engage in his usual occupation as an accountant", disclosure to the insurer of the facts as they existed at that time, in my opinion, at the least, would have deterred the insurer from declining the claim.

I think it is clear from the evidence of McCarthy that she did not address her mind to the question of disability which the insurer was required to address under the policy. As I have stated earlier in these reasons, that is not to say that the insurer addressed the wrong question. The importance of the terms of McCarthy's instructions upon the content of the May 1993 report was reflected in her statement of evidence in chief as follows: "8. I am asked to assume that when I was asked for the medical report which I prepared in May 1993 I was advised that the report was to be provided to enable National Mutual to form an opinion as to whether Jeffrey Wyllie had become incapacitated to such an extent as to render him unlikely ever to engage in or work for reward in any occupation or work for which he was reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. If I had been asked to express an opinion as to whether Jeffrey Wyllie had become so incapacitated
I would have said that it was still too early to express any firm opinion about that at that time. Although the prognosis for improvements following a stroke such as Jeffrey Wyllie's is usually said to be six to twelve months, I have found through my experience that for those who are young and determined further improvement may be expected. As at May 1993 Jeffrey Wyllie had not undertaken any work as an accountant and I would have wanted further time to allow him to undertake some work so as to provide information as to work capacity.
In the test situation such a Neuropsychological Assessment, some people perform better due to the structured environment. In the case of Jeffrey
Wyllie, if I was asked to express an opinion in relation to the question referred to above, I would have waited until I had a more detailed work history following his injury so as to permit a functional assessment as well.
From a medical viewpoint I considered that Jeffrey Wyllie was reasonably qualified in that he had qualifications that would permit him to undertake accounting work without training. However, I considered that he would not be suitable for a position such as he held prior to his neurological impairment.
From that viewpoint he would probably be over qualified for simple accountancy or bookkeeping or for any simple basic duties. If asked I would have said that
Jeffrey Wyllie was unable to perform in a similar capacity at work as he had prior to his stroke.
If, following some further period of time, a functional assessment (based on actual work experience) had shown Jeffrey Wyllie to be unable to carry out the tasks that I have specified that I believe an accountant should be able to carry out, this obviously would have influenced my decision as to his work capacity. I consider that the most important indicator of a person's work capacity and ability to perform a particular task is that person's ability to function in a real life situation." (Emphasis added) (Pars 8-10, exhibit G) 
McCarthy elaborated on that statement in her oral evidence in chief as follows: "* Q. What did you understand was the test as to whether someone was totally and permanently disabled when you were preparing your report? .................

A. I understood that to mean whether one was able to work at all, meaning capacity.

Q. Could you look at paragraph 8 of your report. In paragraph 8 you were asked to assume what might be said to be a different test as to what constituted total and permanent disablement, do you see that? 
A. Yes.

Q. If you had been aware, if you had been told that your opinion was required for the purpose of someone deciding whether or not he was fit to work within a range of possible occupations described in the way they are described in paragraph 8, would you have approached your task any differently? 
A. Yes, I would have.

Q. How would you have approached it differently? 
A. If I'm asked to look at a particular range of occupations I would have required both more information and more time to provide that information, to provide that assessment.

Q. Why? 
A. Because its asking for whether someone can do a particular range of duties rather than can they work at all." (T40.54 - 41.30) 
The passages emphasised, I think, refer to the importance of what I have termed the pragmatic exercise involved in assessing the capacity to work of a person suffering from brain damage.

McCarthy's evidence also underlines the importance of the misplaced reliance of the insurer upon the knowledge that the plaintiff was engaged in business at the time of that report. Quite clearly, McCarthy had not gone into the nature of the plaintiff's involvement in that business, nor had she addressed what the business enterprise was. I regard that omission as quite unsatisfactory. I would have regarded it as basic to have ascertained those details. Equally, I would have considered it basic for the insurer to have informed itself of those details, given that obvious deficiency in the May report. Moreover, I think this deficiency in the May 1993 report was just one of a number of manifestations of the failure of the insurer to direct
McCarthy's mind to the precise question of disability raised under the policy.

Hickey was asked in cross-examination to address the reason why information concerning the plaintiff's business activities was not requested by the insurer. He gave the following evidence: "Q. If you go to page 192 which is the disability claims assessment sheet, have you recorded there anywhere what occupation or work you thought Mr Wyllie was not prevented from doing having regard to his qualifications and training and experience? 
A. No.

Q. But you have recorded some things about his ability to work, haven't you? 
A. I think there is a reference to having established a business partnership.

Q. Would you tell us what you knew about that business partnership at the time? 
A. I have got no further detail.

Q. Did you know what the business was? 
A. No.

Q. Did you know whether Mr Wyllie was an active partner or a silent partner? 
A. No, I saw no need to.

Q. Why did you see no need to? 
A. Because the occupation or occupation and work issue, the TPD definition was accountancy and Dr McCarthy makes the point that he would be able to do that sort of work.

Q. Why did you bother to refer to what you have recorded there about the fact he is largely recovered and has since established a business partnership if it was irrelevant? 
A. I can't specifically recall what the conversations were with Jane at the time. It may have been something to do with the fact that Mr Wyllie was no longer employed by Asea Brown and just indicating to her something that had come through from the medical evidence." (T96.7 - .42) 
I have some difficulty in accepting the accuracy of that explanation, given the emphasis which, quite clearly, was placed by the insurer in its contemporaneous records upon the establishment by the plaintiff of a business partnership.

The importance of the deficiency in the claim material of details of the plaintiff's actual "work capacity" or "ability to function in a real life situation" was not challenged by McKeand. Indeed, I am of the view that it was not open to challenge. I have described the need to ascertain those details as being a basic element in the required assessment of the plaintiff's claim.

Counsel for the plaintiff has pressed submissions that by reason of the general nature of the inquiry made by the insurer of McCarthy and of the terms of the request to identify "the type of work the claimant might currently be capable of or may be capable of in the future" that the insurer addressed the wrong question in assessing the plaintiff's claim. Essentially, it was contended that a description by the insurer of the question to be addressed as being the question what work the plaintiff "might" be capable of performing, ignored the question whether such capacity was for work "for which he (was) reasonably qualified by education, training or experience" and not something for which he was over qualified.

However, I have some difficulty in accepting the proposition that the insurer addressed the incorrect question required of it under the terms of the disability provision of the policy. I think that the problem confronting the insurer in this case is not the fact that it addressed the wrong question, but the fact that it proceeded to a decision to decline the claim on what, I think, was clearly inadequate claim material and deliberately chose a path of withholding from the plaintiff the basis upon which that decision could be made so as to enable him to address those matters. I think the evidence is clear that both McKeand and Hickey treated the contents of the May 1993 report as evidencing the fact that the plaintiff was capable of performing the "normal duties of an accountant". Hickey thought that the plaintiff had "largely recovered". Once that opinion is reached, the question does not arise whether the plaintiff would be over qualified for the work which he was regarded capable of performing. Inherent in that opinion was the absence of the need to define the limitations on the range of activities as an accountant which the plaintiff was regarded capable of performing.

In the case of McKeand, I think his evidence disclosed that, even if he had reached the conclusion that the plaintiff was limited to simple book-keeping tasks, he would still have regarded the plaintiff as being precluded from recovery under the policy. Set out below is an extract from the transcript which reflects some of the difficulties which I think are inherent in the May report and in the approach to disability adopted by McKeand: "HIS HONOUR: Q. Doctor, I've got some problems with Dr McCarthy's report of
May '93 in that I think it is clear from her clinical assessment she regarded
Mr Wyllie as having some incapacity. Do you agree with that? 
A. Yes.

Q. At the same time she has used an expression which I find a little ambiguous in referring to his capacity to do accountancy work "as usually considered", particularly since it follows a statement in which she has referred to his capacity to do most, if not all, routine work responsibilities and refers to his capacity to analyse and carry out logical and mathematical calculations, which suggests to me a somewhat limited concept in the accountancy skills she is referring to there, and then when I come to the last paragraph on that page
I find that she is expressing the view about Mr Wyllie's capacity which is qualified by the reference to the possible need of supervision without again quantifying the degree of supervision, it seems to me, that is involved, and it is not clear to me what your understanding of totally and permanently disabled is from the answers you have given in cross-examination today. Could
I ask you this. If consistently with the clinical findings that were made by
Dr McCarthy it was found that Mr Wyllie's capacity in accountancy was limited in this way, namely, to the performance of basic bookkeeping which was performed by Mr Wyllie slowly with mistakes and which required supervision and which at the end of a full day's work have resulted in excessive tiredness, if you make those assumptions, would that affect your view as to his capacity expressed in terms of permanent or total disablement? 
A. Normally I would want clarification that they are objective assessments of the situation.

Q. You are being asked to make that assumption.

A. If I am making that assumption, I think if this man can return to bookkeeping, which is one of the activities within the accountancy field, then
I think he probably is not totally and permanently disabled under our definition.

Q. Have you included in that answer the other aspects in my question, namely, the assumption that that work at bookkeeping is done slowly with mistakes and under supervision and with resultant excessive tiredness at the end of the day? 
A. That would be very much a matter of the question of degree. If it is mild, but he is still able to do a reasonable day's work and satisfy his employer with his output, then I don't think he would qualify under our definition." (T70.23 - 71.14) 
I think the above passage picks up the particular problems of ambiguity which
I see in the May 1993 report. I have no doubt that if an unenquiring approach was adopted to the task of considering the claim material, in particular the
May 1993 report, one may extract from it material to found a conclusion that the plaintiff was not totally and permanently disabled within the meaning of the policy. If one extracts from the May report, as McKeand and Hickey have done, statements that "the plaintiff should be able to carry out most, if not all, the routine work responsibilities that he needed to do prior to his stroke": that he "should be able to analyse and carry out logical and mathematical calculations without difficulty": that he was "fit to return to work and to work in the open market place" and that he "would be able to carry out accountancy as usually considered", then I think one could reasonably come to the conclusion that there was a wide range of activities in the field of accountancy that could be performed by the plaintiff for reward and for which he was not over qualified. I think this conclusion could be reached notwithstanding the opinion of McCarthy that the plaintiff had significant "high level impairment" and notwithstanding her qualification on his ability to work as being "somewhat restricted in his ability to perform, unsupervised, all his previous duties".

However, as I have stated earlier in these reasons, I have reached the conclusion that the insurer misconceived the extent of the task required of it in limiting itself to the inadequate claim material and in failing to give the plaintiff the opportunity of addressing its obvious deficiencies before proceeding to a decision to decline his claim. I think the unsatisfactory aspects of the May 1993 report only served to highlight those failures. This is not a case where the failures of the insurer to fulfil its obligations were of small moment. I think the evidence clearly established the following: 
Had McCarthy understood the precise question which the insurer was required to address, that would have resulted in: deferral of her final opinion; and a final opinion, in due course, favourable to the plaintiff's claim.

In June 1993 the plaintiff remained seriously incapacitated.

The subsequent post-injury work history of the plaintiff demonstrated a disability which would have satisfied the insurer that his disability was total and permanent within the meaning of the policy.

The educational background of the plaintiff was that he was educated at Knox
College where he obtained his higher school certificate in 1972. He obtained a level which entitled him to a Commonwealth university scholarship. He studied medicine successfully for three years before deciding on another career. In he commenced the study of accounting and economics for a Bachelor Degree in Economics at the Australian National University, transferring from that university to Macquarie University in 1977 where he obtained his degree.

In his graduation year he commenced employment as a clerk with a major commercial organisation. In that employment he was promoted to various positions including senior clerk, internal auditor and then, in 1980, to accountant of the head office. He described his duties as the evaluation of "staff, accounting procedures (which) required subjective evaluation and ...
on a daily basis involved ... organisational issues and problem solving both of complex matters and unfamiliar matters and tasks". In this work the plaintiff was unsupervised and had a staff of four. It was part of his function to organise the department to meet deadlines and to report on the profitability of various departments within the organisation and to identify departures from budget. He became his employer's expert on its general ledger system. In 1981 he was promoted to the position of divisional accountant for a new division which had been acquired by his employer. It was his responsibility to establish an accounting system for that division to fit in with the overall accounting structure of the organisation which had branches in all states and in Papua New Guinea.

In 1982 the plaintiff returned to Sydney to complete a Masters Degree in
Commerce (Marketing). In 1983 he commenced employment with Brown-Boveri as management accountant for its industrial division, a position which he held for approximately twelve months and from which he was promoted to a position of project manager. The project lasted three years and had a value of approximately $12,500,000. In the performance of this role he had one assistant and an on site workforce of approximately twenty people. He was required to co-ordinate several concurrent activities and supplies from a number of different overseas suppliers.

In 1987 he was promoted to business development manager, a position he held during a company merger which resulted in the formation of ABB. After a short break from employment with ABB he took up the role of the financial controller of its service division. This required him to produce a unified reporting structure within the merged organisation. He had a staff of five or six in
Sydney and one in each state capital. He was responsible for the formal accounting function of the division and for the introduction of reporting requirements for the group. In 1990 he was promoted to the position which he occupied at the time of the termination of his employment.

The stroke that the plaintiff suffered was described by McCarthy as a major stroke. The outline of his medical history immediately following the stroke was set out in the August 1992 report. His neuropsychological condition upon which that report was based was set out in summary form by Marshall in his report to McCarthy of 5 August 1992 as follows: "CONCLUSION 
In the aftermath of his brain stem stroke Mr. Wyllie is reported to have higher order cognitive impairment and this is supported by his neuropsychological assessment. These deficits involve the evaluation and assessment of the significance of material presented and subtle but significant rule breaking, rigidity and self-monitoring errors. He also appears to have difficulty in developing successful strategies for organizing more complex and unstructured learning situations. These deficits are at the higher levels of operations and his basic cognitive functions, including perceptual abilities, appear intact and calculation and mental processing is quick and effective.

The features evident in Mr Wyllie's assessment are those usually characterized as involving "frontal system" functioning, which includes subcortical pathways linked to the frontal lobes, and his profile seems to suggest some disruption to this frontal system.

In relation to his work prospects Mr. Wyllie appeared well able to analyse and carry out logical and mathematical calculations and as such would probably manage these aspects of his career. However he is likely to have difficulty with tasks requiring subjective evaluations or organising of complex or unfamiliar situations.

I think therefore he may need to re-enter his career in a supervised capacity, at least in the initial stage, rather than at the managerial level to which he is accustomed. He may not however appreciate the need for this due to his relative lack of insight and concern." (p 170, Exhibit A) 
Notwithstanding the nature of the plaintiff's injury it appears that no further neuro-psychological assessment was sought from Marshall by McCarthy prior to the May 1993 report.

The partnership business referred to by McCarthy in her May 1993 report, and so particularly relied upon by the insurer, concerned a retail children's clothing shop at Avalon which was purchased by a `shelf' company, acquired by the plaintiff and his wife Julie-Anne Redmond (Redmond). The plaintiff described his contribution to that business as follows: "My activities in the children's wear shop at Avalon were bookkeeping, cleaning, banking. My wife ran the business. We did not make any money and we were forced to close the business after one year in March 1994. If I had not had a stroke we would not have bought it in the first place. My wife has no business qualifications. I found myself very unsatisfactory as her helper. I had very little input into it. The bookkeeping I found hard and it took longer than I think it should have. I kept making mistakes. I had to do most things two or three times. When I was paying suppliers my handwriting was very slow.
I was not confident enough with my speech to work in the shop. This did not matter much as men do not do that job in children's shops. I worked up to three hours per day, mornings only, for four to five days a week. I worked for full days once every few months." (Par 36, Exhibit B) 
Redmond gave evidence along similar lines as follows: "I found Jeff to be pretty useless in assisting me to run the business. He often did not give useful information. He seemed to lack perspective. When he got an idea in his head he was not flexible and open to suggestions about other ways to do something. When he did the bookkeeping he often made simple mistakes. This occurred continually. For example: he often did the banking and forgot to count the money before he deposited it into the bank or after he made a withdrawal from the bank for the purposes of the business; when advising amounts/limits for stock purchases he often quoted incorrect amounts therefore leading to over and under purchasing of stock; he often made mistakes monitoring the cash position of the business and our bank account was overdrawn on numerous occasions; and he often paid incorrect amounts to creditors or forgot to take into account credit notes when paying creditors leading to a number of cases where we were in credit situations with creditors.

We could no longer afford to continue the business and closed it down in March ." (Par 3, Exhibit E) 
There was no suggestion by the insurer that any of that description of the plaintiff's incapacity was inaccurate.

The reference in the May 1993 report that the plaintiff had resumed his usual level of fitness and resumed skiing is quite inexplicable, except for the tendency of the plaintiff to understate his capacity. His one attempt at skiing following his injury had been a failure and he had not returned to the ski slopes.

In 1993 the plaintiff also performed work of an accountancy nature with the company known as MPA Group Pty Ltd. The plaintiff described that work in his evidence in chief as follows: "In the MPA job the person I worked for was Frank Garvin. I was basically their part-time bookkeeper. I did basic bookkeeping which involved maintaining bank accounts, preparing a few reports based on cash expenditure, preparing payroll involving two people per week and preparing monthly payroll of twelve people. I got tired very easily. I was taking more time than required to complete my tasks. I had problems completing bank reconciliations as I often missed things such as mismarking cheques off which had been presented. I had problems doing calculations as I often keyed in the incorrect numbers. I often transposed numbers such as 6 instead of 8, and 62 instead of 26. I often missed the last digits in numbers such as reading $0.48 as $0.40. I kept the job for 6 months. I had to stop because of travelling and shop commitments and the job itself was tiring me out even though it was an accounting job it was merely bookkeeping. It worried me a lot because I kept making mistakes in what was ordinary bookkeeping. I would pick up mistakes but I wasted so much time checking and checking and checking again. I also felt he was not happy with my work and he commented I was taking a lot of time to do things." (Par 37, Exhibit B) 
I think it is fairly obvious that the plaintiff obtained that work through the charitable disposition of his employer. It was a "small organisation", the principal of which was a "personal friend" of the plaintiff and his wife. The work could be done by a junior accountant who required no qualifications. The closest description "would be book-keeper. Like a book-keeper does the hack work". The plaintiff described the circumstances in which he was offered the work as follows: "A. My wife, Julie, was already working there on a part-time basis doing administration, and the proprietor of MPA, Frank Garvin, was a personal friend of ours. He asked Julie if I would be interested in some work because he knew
I had had a stroke and he had some bookkeeping work that he wanted done and he knew I needed a job. So he basically offered me a job. I think it might have been more out of charity, I'm not sure." (T2.20 - . 27) 
The plaintiff gave the following description of the circumstances in which he ceased doing that work: "A. Okay. From my point of view I found I was getting increasingly tired. I was aware that I was taking a long time to do things, and from my previous experience I knew how long things should have taken. Say, for a bank reconciliation, that used to take two or three days that should have been done in a morning. Then Frank commented to me about - he paid me all this money for the report, this money by way of salary for the reports, and then he told me what his chartered accountants had done for about $2,000, which was a lot less than he had paid me over six months, so from his point of view he wasn't getting very effective service and I basically decided to leave before I got fired or it became embarrassing for Frank." (T2.35 - .47) 
After leaving MPA the plaintiff's evidence was that he "did very little although the shop was running until March 1994. (He) still could not speak properly and (he) had virtually given up looking for a job although (he) did apply for the occasional job".

In fact, in the second half of 1993, the plaintiff sought assistance from the
Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service (CRS) to whom the plaintiff had been referred by McCarthy on 16 August 1993. A neuro-psychological assessment of the plaintiff was performed by a clinical neuro-psychologist, Peter Rawling, the results of which were set out in his report of 12 October 1993. It is apparent from that report that the testing performed was very limited, the explanation for which is offered in the report as being as a result of "uncertainty over the content of (a previous) assessment".

On 13 October 1993 the plaintiff was the subject of an assessment by a speech pathologist who prepared two reports dated respectively 13 October 1993 and 21
October 1993. In the first of those assessments, which was a language test, the pathologist summarised her findings as follows: "SUMMARY 
Jeff presented with a mild ataxic dysarthria for which he compensated well.
Issues of fatigue and confidence were identified as affecting his communication effectiveness. Slowness in writing and information processing were also significant. Problem solving was found to be impaired.

It was recommended that Jeff attend some follow-up sessions to address areas of deficit to maximise performance in a work setting." (p 213, Exhibit A) 
In the second of the reports, which was an assessment "To assess current communication skills and their possible impact upon work options", the pathologist identified "MAJOR PROBLEMS" as follows: "MAJOR PROBLEMS IDENTIFIED 
Jeff presented as a quiet man with a mild ataxic dysarthria for which he compensated well. Intelligibility in conversation was adequate as were his language skills. Issues of fatigue and confidence were identified as affecting his communication effectiveness. Slowness in the mechanics of writing is a significant difficulty in relation to work, as is difficulty with mental arithmetic, decreased speed of information processing and its relationship to accuracy. A need for increased structure and organisation was also noted to be necessary to increase accuracy. Some difficulty with problem solving would also be significant in a high level job." (p 215, Exhibit A) 
The CRS advised McCarthy on 4 November 1993 of the progress of the plaintiff in the following terms: "Jeff continues to be involved in a rehabilitation program at the Commonwealth
Rehabilitation Service, St Leonards. He has attended a number of assessments including neuropsychological, physiotherapy and speech pathology reviews. He has been given a home program to address his physical needs and is attending a number of sessions at St Leonards to facilitate communication skills specific to work.

We are currently investigating relevant work training opportunities in the area of accounting. However, the type of placement we are seeking is at (a) lower level than Jeff was previously working due to slower writing skills, decreased confidence in speaking situations, decreased efficiency in high level organisational skills and difficulty maintaining accuracy with acceptable speed." (p 219, Exhibit A) 
In what appears to have been the conclusion of the plaintiff's rehabilitation program with the CRS, he underwent a "Work Training Placement" with Australian
Geographic Pty Ltd from 14 February to 11 March 1994. His hours of work were described as "Commencing 3 x 1/2 days and gradually building up to full time hours". His proposed duties were described as "Assist in the accounting procedures of the company". The outcome of that program was described in a report by CRS to the personnel manager of the Moran Health Care Group (Moran
Health) dated 12 April 1994. That report was as follows: "Following our phone discussion yesterday I will outline briefly the information gained in Jeff Wyllie's rehabilitation program to date. One of the major aims of the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service is to facilitate injured or disabled persons locate suitable employment.

As a result of his stroke, Jeff initially had some difficulty with problem solving, organisation and attention to detail. This improved significantly after some intervention with the Occupational Therapist. He evidenced only very mild difficulties with concentration and memory, however, when fatigued or placed in a demanding situation, these difficulties are more evident. Jeff has some difficulties with balance and co-ordination and has been given some ideas to improve these at home. After the stroke, he had some difficulty with slurred speech, which is now very functional and decreased confidence in speaking situations. His handwriting and keyboard use is noticeably slow.

Jeff completed a one month work training at Australian Geographic in the
Accounting section. He was involved in manual accounting procedures and started on part time hours working towards full time hours. Observations during this work training included: - difficulty with fatigue after 3-4 consecutive full days resulting in poor concentration.
 - slow handwriting.
 - difficulty accepting current systems of operation in the work place where he perceives his system would be better.

Jeff was able to perform basic manual accounting procedures accurately once shown. He has set up an accounting system for a small retail business and is very interested in working at the interface between accounting and computing.

As Jeff has obtained part time employment with your company and neither you nor Jeff are reporting any need for our input, the Commonwealth Rehabilitation
Service will recontact in two weeks. If no further assistance in vocational rehabilitation is identified his case will be closed.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if I can be of any assistance." (pp 236-7, Exhibit A) 
In March 1994, the plaintiff obtained employment with Moran Health, commencing on a part time basis for two or three days a week which continued for approximately three months, after which his hours then became full time. The evidence disclosed that this work was provided and sustained by Moran Health out of sympathy for the plight of the plaintiff. The position was obtained through his friendly relationship with the financial director of Moran Health.
Those circumstances and the performance of the plaintiff in the employment of
Moran Health were described in the following evidence of the management accountant of Moran Health, John Nixon (Nixon): "Q. (By leave) Mr Nixon, you say that Mr Wyllie commenced employment with the
Moran Group in mid March 1994? 
A. That's correct.

Q. At that time were you given any instructions in relation to Mr Wyllie and, if so, by whom and what were they? 
A. Mr Wyllie came to us through the financial director as a family friend.

Q. What is was the financial director's name? 
A. Robert Alder.

Q. Yes? 
A. And he instructed me that Jeff Wyllie had had a stroke and that we would, he discussed it with the family, the Moran family, and that we would employ
Jeff Wyllie on a part time basis in the accounts department to do menial tasks, filing and the like.

Q. You either directly or via others were his supervisor or superior? 
A. That's correct.

Q. During the whole period he was employed? 
A. Yes.

Q. And during part of the period he was employed full time? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Could you describe initially by title and then by duties what he was doing in the period that he was employed full time? 
A. Initially he came on board and we, he was sort of - we didn't know what his abilities were, we just knew that he had a stroke so we tried him on a number of things. Firstly, I think we asked him to assist in the pay roll area in doing some superannuation reconciliation work, which was a fairly basic reconciliation. You know, the pay roll manager there came to me and said that that work was not done very satisfactorily but, perhaps - and then we thought maybe that's a bit too complicated. At the same time we were giving him filing work and we also gave him some other general ledger, general bookkeeping work, very basic general entries, debits and credits and, even that proved to be a problem sometimes.

Q. Are you responsible within the Moran Health Care Group from time to time for hiring and firing? 
A. Yes.

Q. If you had been asked in June 1994 that is, say, three months after Mr
Wyllie had joined, whether you would employ him knowing what you knew about him from his work experience at that time, would you have employed him and, if so, in what capacity, assuming it was an arm's length transaction? 
A. Had I knew his previous experience? 
Q. Yes? 
A. No.

Q. Why not? 
A. It was a case of needing constant supervision. There was - sometimes he would be able to do the work satisfactorily but, more often than not, he would do it incorrectly and would need constant supervision from an accountant who was his supervisor, direct supervisor and, you know, we just couldn't afford a full time accountant to be basically doing the same job, doing that job as well as his own, which was basically what it came down to.

Q. Are you able to describe the activities which Mr Wyllie was undertaking in that early period at Moran? 
A. What? 
Q. In the description, bookkeeper, accountant, junior, senior? 
A. It was at the most he, I guess, would be classified as an accounts clerk which, I guess, would be bookkeeper but, you know, certainly no more than that and the duties under that head were a difficulty for him." (T28.13 - 29.34) 
In cross-examination, Nixon explained that the position of "assistant accountant" was used to classify all the account clerks; that there was no person below that level and that their duties entailed "filing and the like".
Cross-examined on the circumstances of the employment of the plaintiff, Nixon stated that the plaintiff "was just given (the position) as a floater in the accounts department" and that he "really wasn't required". I think the following passage from his further cross-examination evidence sums up the way in which the plaintiff's employment was maintained: "A. His circumstances allowed us to make allowances for him. He was recovering from a stroke and I think we all were trying to assist him in that recovery.
He had also just given birth to a baby which would have been, you know, given him some financial hardships. Again, you know, we took the compassionate view that we would allow for his work short falls and would continue to supervise him." (T31.32) 
He agreed that the work that the plaintiff was performing could be described as "low level accounting work".

On leaving the employment of Moran Health the plaintiff tendered his resignation in the following terms: "I hereby tender my resignation from the Moran Health Care Group effective
February 24, 1995. I have been becoming increasingly frustrated working at such a junior level after so many years at a more senior level. I have therefore obtained a more senior position in keeping with my background, but on a part-time basis (I do not think I am ready yet for a full-time senior position). This will allow me to spend more time with my family while utilising more fully my background and qualifications.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr & Mrs Moran and Robert
Alder for helping me return to work after such a prolonged absence." (p 245, Exhibit A) 
I think the terms of that resignation are significant having regard to the evidence of Redmond as to the over estimation by the plaintiff of his ability (T39.28) and of the evidence of his performance in the employment which he left Moran Health to take up. For the purpose of that employment with
Robertson Australia Pty Ltd (Robsearch) the plaintiff used the vehicle of the shelf company, which had acquired the Avalon retail business, to provide his services as a "consultant". The agreement between that company and Robsearch set out his responsibilities as a consultant as follows: " Attachment "A" - Responsibilities of Consultant
Record payments and receipts;
Prepare weekly cash report;
Process receipts to Accounts Receivable;
Process payments to Accounts Payable;
Process payments and receipts to General Ledger;
Reconcile General Ledger accounts;
Debt collection;
Record payroll in Excel spreadsheet;
Answer telephones when necessary;
Prepare mail when necessary;
Prepare draft accounts for finalization by public accountant;
Sundry administration;
Monthly report preparation;
Process petty cash journal; " (p 244, exhibit A) 
The reality was far removed from that description.

The plaintiff described his work with Robsearch as follows: "41. The job I currently have at Robsearch Australia Pty Limited I obtained in
February 1995. Robsearch is a geophysical consulting company. The job consists of preparing the books of account. It is a bookkeeping job. I am slow at it and I make mistakes all the time and I have developed an elaborate system of checking myself.
I have been in great fear of losing this job and I do not want to lose it as I find it a cordial place to work. The fear of losing the job may be indicated by the fact that I have never told them I have had a stroke or about my case against National Mutual because I thought I would be dismissed. At Mr
Conolly, my solicitor's request, I told them about the case in July 1996 and it is only in recent times I feel I can do that without risk of losing my job.
I guessed for some time they must have known something was wrong with me because of my speech and generally because of my slowness and also given my background I believed they must have suspected something strange about me.
I work 20 hours per week and the office is at North Sydney. I get paid $25.00 per hour which is a bookkeeper's rate. I work with Kaylene Harris, the
Computer Assets Manager. The other two days I spend looking after my two year old daughter. I find the work less stressful than looking after my two year old.
In my present condition I receive an annual salary of up to $23,000.00 gross, often less due to reduced hours. Before the stroke I received $60,500.00 p.a. plus a fully maintained company car (see annexed copy letter of employment dated 20 December 1990). I believe this equates with a package of about $75,000.00 in 1990 - about $90,000.00 in 1996 with 4% inflation.
I am reasonably happy in my current job and for what I do it is not bad pay. I do not plan to leave and do not believe I can do any better work, although I cannot describe it as the work of an accountant. The ASC reporting for Robsearch and the tax reporting is done by a chartered accountant. It is not accurate to describe my job as financial controller nor is it accurate to describe it as company accountant. It would be accurate to describe it as bookkeeper." (Pars 41-45, Exhibit B) 
Cross-examined in relation to his consultancy agreement with Robsearch, he agreed that the job description referred to above was a correct statement although they were "all pretty small jobs". An indication of this can be taken from the fact that the task of recording payments and receipts involved something like "maybe 20 receipts and maybe 50 cheques" a month. He identified the task of recording the payroll as applying to two people. In describing his task of preparing reports for divisions he noted that there were the following divisions: "Q. What are the various business divisions of this company? 
A. Okay. It is all based on the type of consulting they do. One is called environment consulting, one is called mineral consulting. Minerals makes up probably about 80 or 90 per cent of the week. There's another one called project management which is largely inactive. There's petroleum, which again it's fairly small. There's what's called publications, which consists of the grand total of one or two newsletters they produce for only a couple of customers, and that's about it. Then there's the overheads as well.
 (T20.14) 
He further described the size of those divisions as, in the case of environmental consisting of one consultant, in the case of minerals two, and that in some cases "they can go for three or four months without any revenue".
In re-examination the plaintiff described the Robsearch staff as consisting of two full-time employees and up to half a dozen part-time consultants.

However, I think the most significant evidence concerning this phase of the plaintiff's post injury employment was given by Kaylene Beth Harris (Harris) who was employed by Robsearch as a computer manager/accounts. Her working hours were twenty hours per week over three days. She held a Bachelor of
Science Degree in Computers and Mathematics. She identified the work of the plaintiff as that of a book-keeper. Her evidence in chief as contained in her statement of 26 August 1996 included the following: "7. Jeffrey takes a long time to do some of these things and is slow to pick things up sometimes. He also cannot be relied upon to be accurate all the time. He keeps his job because he is methodical although with help and we've also got to like him.
Most of the things that Jeffrey does he does with me. We work fairly closely together. I would not say I supervise him but because of his accuracy problem and his slowness and because he gets tired, there is a supervisor's element by me of his work. He does not supervise me and, in my opinion, could not.
I would not describe Jeffrey's work as that of an accountant. We send our work out to David Calver at Thornleigh who is a chartered accountant. His work is the final tax return and all the work that would require the input of a professional accountant. We are in fortnightly or monthly contact with his firm and meet with representatives of it every two months or so.
Jeffrey only told me of his stroke about two weeks ago, i.e. in mid-July.
He explained that he had not told me before then because it was hard for him to talk about it. Before then I knew something was wrong with him. I guess he must have had an accident and sustained permanent damage. He tends to be clumsy, bumps into things and knocks things over. I knew he had been an accountant once and that he had held fairly senior positions and I could see that he could no longer be employed in a senior position that required levels of concentration, accuracy or stress so I did not inquire or embarrass him.
I do not believe Jeffrey's job with Robsearch is in jeopardy although with a different employer it could be. He has now been with us eighteen months and we know what we have and we like him and the problems of the need for some supervision even in bookkeeping functions seems to be something we have grown to accept." (Pars 7-11, Exhibit D) 
In further evidence in chief, she described the plaintiff's work as a book- keeper because "Basically we are just writing up cheques, we just do basic accounting work, ...". In cross-examination she agreed that she did not supervise the plaintiff's work rather that she "would oversee what he does".
She agreed that the matters that the plaintiff was concerned with included the ledgers, monthly reports and draft annual accounts. In his re-examination, the plaintiff explained that those accounts are produced by the plaintiff keying "the required number into the computer and it comes out".

The plaintiff was cross-examined upon his curriculum vitae which he produced for the purpose of employment and which was expressed in terms somewhat inconsistent with the description of his work capacity as outlined above. He explained that inconsistency in the following evidence: "Q. Then if you would look back to page 249, there in your CV you have described your prior employment with the MPA Group Pty Ltd as position part- time accountant. Was that how you were described by them? 
A. No.

Q. Ho were you described by them? 
A. I wasn't. That CV was prepared basically to assist me to get a job, so it is a little bit inflated. Most CVs are.

Q. It is a bit exaggerated, is it? 
A. Yes. Since the stroke it is, but before the stroke it is quite factual. I had to make myself look as good as possible." (T10.18 - .31) 
The statement of Brian Trevenen of 23 August 1996 was admitted into evidence in the plaintiff's case. He described himself as "an international executive search professional" and his evidence, for which he was not required for cross-examination, was as follows: "2. I have known Jeffrey Wyllie for over twelve years both in a professional and social capacity. Since his stroke I have observed, only in a social situation, a dramatic change in his physical appearance and an obvious decrease in his intellectual capacity.
I have been shown statements of Julie-Anne Redmond, John Nixon, Kaylene
Harris and Jeffrey Wyllie. I have been asked to assume that the matters stated in those statements are true.
From those statements I understand that Jeffrey Wyllie has difficulty managing organisational problem solving, has difficulty in managing objective evaluations, has difficulty managing problem solving that is either complex or unfamiliar, has poor numerical accuracy and has difficulty in an unsupervised environment.
If Jeffrey Wyllie applied to me for a role at the level of accountant or beyond, say through to financial controller, I believe I would be professionally negligent in my duties to my clients if, as an executive search professional, I presented his application for consideration.
In the circumstances which I have assumed, I would not be able to recommend him for any professional qualified accounting role. I would also be very reluctant to recommend him even for a basic bookkeeping role." (Pars 2-6, Exhibit F) 
I consider that the evidence which I have outlined above and which there is no reason, in my opinion, not to accept fully, disclosed that the true state of the plaintiff's incapacity was such that he is limited to basic book-keeping work which he does slowly, part-time and which is attendant with mistakes. I think it disclosed that the plaintiff is not capable of performing that work full time and what work he does perform requires the sympathetic understanding of those who employ him. I entertain little doubt that if the evidence that has been adduced in this case was presented in support of a claim for total and permanent disability under the policy the insurer, properly instructed, would necessarily form the opinion that the plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled within the meaning of the policy. (Compare the factual analysis and conclusions of Hodgson J in Chammas at 78,000). In so reaching that conclusion I think I have indirectly addressed the principal arguments advanced on behalf of the insurer. Certain of those submissions, however, I think should be addressed specifically.

Under the issue of "unreasonable rejection" on behalf of the insurer it was submitted, inter alia, that: "15. Where eligibility for benefits under such a policy depends upon the insurer's opinion in this way, the insurer:- .1 must consider the relevant policy issue; .2 must act reasonably in considering the application of the policy to the plaintiff; .3 must act reasonably in the opinion that it forms: ...
In the present case it is not alleged that NM failed to consider the relevant policy issue.
An insurer who forms an opinion unfavourable to an insured will not breach its obligations unless its opinion is not reasonably open in the circumstances: ...
In determining the question of breach the relevant question is only as to the reasonableness of the insurer's opinion in the circumstances of the information that was actually known to it: ...
Accordingly, neither information that only (be)came available after the insurer's decision, nor information that was not known to the insurer, is admissible on the question of the insurer's breach: ..." (Pars 15-19, Defendant's Outline of Argument) 
As to par 16 I think it is clear that it is part of the plaintiff's case that the insurer failed to consider the correct question and that is an issue that
I have considered earlier in these reasons.

In my opinion, each of those submissions fails to address the deficiency in the insurer's consideration of the plaintiff's claim, which I have referred to throughout these reasons, as wrongly limiting itself, in a case of cognitive impairment resulting from brain damage, to consideration of inadequate claim material and its failure to inform the plaintiff of the matters which could lead to a decision to decline the claim so as to enable the plaintiff to address those matters. In those respects, I think it is clear that the insurer acted in breach of its obligations to act in good faith, fairly and reasonably, having due regard to the interests of the plaintiff. Once that is accepted, it is, I think, idle to speak of the reasonableness of the opinion formed by the insurer "in the circumstances of the information that was actually known to it".

Similarly, it seems to me that the submission that "neither information that only became available after the insurer's decision nor information that was not known to the insurer, (was) admissible on the question of the insurer's breach", can serve to advance a case of an insurer who has deprived itself, by its conduct, of the opportunity of receiving and considering that information.

It was submitted that the insurer's decision was reasonable based upon the medical reports of McCarthy, the review of McCarthy's opinions by the insurer's chief medical officer and the consequent recommendation of its claims officer. For the reasons that I have particularised that submission must be rejected.

Under the heading "failure to make appropriate enquiries" it was submitted that the insurer was "entitled to exercise its own judgment as to the information that it required" and "that the question of the sufficiency and appropriateness of that material was a matter for (the insurer's) discretion".
Provided that it is understood that that judgment and that discretion was required to be exercised in accordance with the obligations by which the insurer was bound, no exception could be taken to that contention. The problem with the submission, in my opinion, is that it fails to have regard to those requirements.

It was further submitted that the insurer sufficiently informed McCarthy of the general purpose for which her report was required; committed no breach of any obligation of good faith or fairness by not providing additional information; was entitled to and did make its own assessment of the significance of her report and committed no breach of any obligation of good faith or fairness by regarding that report as containing information upon which it could rely in forming its opinion. In my opinion those submissions simply do not go far enough. As I have stated in these reasons, I do not think it was obligatory on the insurer to request the opinion of McCarthy on the specific question raised by the disability provision of the policy, so long as the insurer addressed its mind to the correct question when it received that opinion. I have to say, however, that in a case such as this, I think it is highly desirable for the insurer to provide the expert with the precise terms of the question to be addressed under the policy. The importance of such an approach, in this case, I think, is borne out by the evidence of McCarthy to which I have referred. As I have stated in these reasons, the breach of the obligations cast upon the insurer is not constituted by its failure to provide additional information to McCarthy, rather, than by the way in which it limited its consideration of the question in the particular respects which I have criticised in these reasons. Similarly, the breach of those obligations does not lie, in isolation, in the reliance by the insurer upon the May 1993 report in the formation of its opinion.

Under the heading "failure to make appropriate enquiries of (the plaintiff) following ... McCarthy's report" it was submitted that the insurer was not subject to the rules of procedural fairness that might apply in a Court; that the breach of the obligation of good faith and fair dealing by the absence of enquiries was not established by pointing to the possibility, or even the prudence, of enquiries that could have been made and that the question was whether the insurer acted unreasonably. This is not a case in which the breach could be attributed to some general requirement on the part of an insurer to observe some undefined standard of procedural fairness. There is no doubt in my mind that the insurer failed to act fairly towards the plaintiff in assessing his claim in the particular circumstances of this case and, in that respect, I think the insurer revealed a completely unacceptable inequality of standards in its perceived obligation to act with due regard to the interests of the trustee when payment was denied to the trustee under the policy, as against the standard of denying any information to the plaintiff in a case such as this. There may be many cases where it is appropriate for the insurer to withhold particular information from a claimant. No purpose would be served by examining the numerous circumstances where that would be so. In my opinion, none of those circumstances which come to my mind justify the approach adopted by the insurer in this case and its conduct, as I have stated, constituted an absence of due regard to the interests of the plaintiff.

It was submitted under the heading of "lack of notice to (the plaintiff)" that there was no general obligation upon the insurer to invite submissions from a claimant before refusing a disability claim. In the course of those submissions, reference was made to the member and employer statements supplied to the insurer by the plaintiff and ABB and to the fact that it was known to the plaintiff that the insurer would be relying upon the evidence of his treating doctor. In general terms, those submissions, I think, ignore the basic need to ascertain the actual work performance of a claimant in the circumstances of the injury suffered by the plaintiff and the submissions do not address that aspect of the obligation to act in good faith fairly and reasonably which, in my opinion, required the insurer to give the plaintiff the opportunity of providing necessary information to it.

Under the heading "failure to defer consideration of the claim", it was submitted that the plaintiff implicitly acknowledged that the information available as at July 1993 did not justify a conclusion that the plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled and that, accordingly, the insurer cannot be regarded as unreasonable in not approving the benefit in 1993: further, that it could not be regarded as unreasonable for the insurer to have come to the view that further deferral of the assessment of the plaintiff's claim was not required. It is not, in my opinion, implicit in the plaintiff's case that the information available as at July 1993 did not justify a conclusion that the plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled. Rather, it is the plaintiff's case that the information available did not justify a conclusion that he was not so disabled, assuming that the insurer conducted itself in accordance with its obligations under the policy: further, that in due course when so properly informed, the insurer would have formed the opinion that the plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled within the meaning of the policy.

It was further submitted that, if this Court was entitled on a finding of breach to determine the question of disability, it should find that the plaintiff was not totally and permanently disabled within the meaning of the policy. In that context it is accepted by the insurer that the plaintiff is unable to return to pre-injury employment level. However, it was submitted that the plaintiff has been in continuous regular employment since March of : that he was in full-time employment between July that year and February and that the activities that he was capable of performing included book- keeping or accounting. It was submitted that, on the proper construction of the disability definition under the policy, while "irregular occasional employment" would not satisfy the test, it was not necessary that the capacity of the claimant should be to engage in full time employment; notwithstanding the contrary view expressed in Chammas at 77,999. I do not think that the disability provision of the policy necessarily requires the insurer in every case to consider the claimant's capability for full-time employment. There may be circumstances which dictate consideration of employment less than full-time employment. That is not the case here and, in any event, I am satisfied that the plaintiff's incapacity falls squarely within the total and permanent disablement provision of the policy. I have no doubt that what full-time work the plaintiff has performed has been done with significant imperfections and was wholly dependent upon the good will or charity of his employer. In the case of his present part-time employment, I think the evidence discloses that his work is done slowly, imperfectly and, I think, with dependence upon the good will and understanding of his employer.

In what I think should be regarded as last resort submissions, it was put on behalf of the insurer that the plaintiff failed to call several witnesses to support his case of incapacity and that: "In any event, it would not be appropriate to conclude that Mr Wyllie will be permanently incapable of full time employment. He is partly responsible for the care of his children on the days when he is not working. The demands placed upon him in that role may be no less than those that would be imposed in full time employment - and, indeed, in some respects they might well be less." (Par 54, Defendant's Outline of Argument) 
If that is the current thinking of the insurer, then it is a stance that goes close to evincing an unwillingness to reasonably consider the entitlement of the plaintiff to a disability lump sum payment: which brings me to the final point for consideration in these proceedings.

It was submitted on behalf of the insurer that, in the event that this Court determined that the insurer was in breach of its obligations in its assessment of the plaintiff's claim, then it was not open to the Court to proceed to its own determination of the plaintiff's disability: that the opinion of the insurer as to the plaintiff's disability was a condition precedent to his entitlement and that it followed from that construction of the policy provision that the plaintiff's present entitlement was to have his claim reconsidered by the insurer. I do not agree. I think both Edwards and
Chammas are authorities to the contrary. In any event, I consider that the insurer has precluded itself by its breach from relying upon the condition precedent of its opinion as to the plaintiff's disability. With that condition precedent removed, it is simply a question of determining the disability or assessing damages for breach, a possible difference in approach which has no practical distinction in this case, in my opinion.

It is admitted by the insurer in its defence to the amended summons "that the amount of the benefit (the plaintiff) would have been entitled if he had been
Totally and Permanently Disabled within the meaning of the Policy was $257,125". There should be judgment for the plaintiff in that sum against the first defendant. No relief is sought against the second defendant. In relation to the claim for interest, I think interest should run from 1 January 1994.
The plaintiff is directed to bring in short minutes of order in accordance with these reasons.
 * * * 
