

State Bank of New South Wales versus Douglas Peard [1996] NSWSC 342 (8 August )

STATE BANK OF NSW v. Bruce Douglas PEARD /94 August 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Introduction 
Douglas Burleton Peard (the father) was a dominating but plausible man given to using the farm of his son, Bruce Douglas Peard to borrow money for improvident ventures. Repayment was not a virtue which he practised although he promised much. He first became bankrupt in 1953. It seems that he was discharged about 24 February 1964. He was again made bankrupt in 1971 and not discharged until February 1986. Remarkably, State Bank advanced moneys to him in 1982 and 1983 without making a bankruptcy search. In August 1983 the bank did not heed the reports of the bank's valuer advising against any further advance.

The son had led a very isolated and sheltered life and his main contact was with his parents with whom he lived. To obtain his own way his father was good at putting on acts and scenes and creating an impossible domestic situation for the son and his mother. The son might resist and argue but in the end he was putty in the hands of his unscrupulous father. The son was never emancipated from his father. The father's performances in giving evidence were illuminating. In securing what he wanted the father manipulated both the bank managers and his son.

The son was of frugal habits and avoided borrowing money. The father was expansive and borrowed considerably. He was able to persuade banks and finance companies to lend him money or finance goods on hire purchase or leases.

The son ultimately signed as mortgagor, mortgage bearing date 18 January 1983 over his farm for the moneys advanced by the Bank to the father. Default in repayment occurred. The bank wants the farm and the son wants relief under the
Contracts Review Act and in respect of undue influence.

Under the mortgage the customer was shown as "Peard Trust - Douglas Peard of 'Orana', Linden Roth Drive, RMB 321, Mannus via Tumbarumba, Farmer and
Grazier." The mortgage recites "that at the mortgagor's request certain advances and/or other banking facilities have been or are to be made available to the mortgagor and/or the ... customer". The moneys advanced by the bank went to the "Peard Trust", which was solely operated by the father, and not to the son. The mortgage had been organised by the father.

Early History of The Land and the Tate Dispute 
The bank relied on some of this material and it helps to explain how the father assumed the role which he did. It appears that the grandfather, Burley
Herbert Peard and the father were in partnership and became bankrupt about
By at least 1963 the Official Receiver was pressing for the sale of the family property which comprised 302 acres and portions 205, 207 and 249 of the
Parish of Mannus. That property stood in the name of Burley Peard. However, there were problems in selling the lands because they were under the [Closer
Settlement Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/csa1904210/) and the consent of the Minister for Lands was required. On 5 December 1963 Kenneth
Tate contracted to purchase the lands from the Official Receiver for 7000 pounds. On 21 February 1964 the Minister consented on the basis of Kenneth
Tate declaring that he was a trustee for Bruce Peard and would transfer the lands to him on his obtaining the age of 21 years. The requisite declaration of trust was signed by Mr Tate on 13 July 1964.

Bruce Peard attained the age of 21 on 28 March 1967. On 16 December 1968
Kenneth Tate executed a transfer in favour of Bruce Peard. At the same time
Bruce Peard entered an old system deed of mortgage for $28,000 which took the usual form of a conveyance of the fee simple of the lands and executed a transfer by mortgage under the Closer Settlement Acts. The mortgage was to be repaid over 23 years.

The son recalled an occasion in December 1968 when his father said that he had to go to town to sign some papers. His father took him to town but was not present when the son signed the papers. The son said that he signed the papers in Mr Stevenson's shop and that Mr Stevenson also signed them. Mr Tate, who was also present, told the son where to sign.

The son said that he did not read the documents and that neither Mr Tate nor
Mr Stevenson read them to him or explained them. He did not understand what he was signing. He signed them because his father told him to do so.

The mortgage had endorsed upon it a Moratorium Certificate signed by Mr Coyte,
Solicitor, Tumbarumba, stating that Bruce Douglas Peard knew of and approved of the insertion in the mortgage of the covenants to pay the principal and interest moneys secured.

The son had no recollection of seeing Mr Coyte and believed that his father may have done so. Mr Peard, after being shown the certificate, did not think that he might have spoken with Mr Coyte. The son denied that he had received or knew anything about $28,000, the moneys purportedly advanced.

I interpolate that Mr Tate in some earlier proceedings gave a contrary version. The bank placed considerable reliance upon the defendant executing the mortgage in 1968. The bank's reliance was misplaced.

Between at least 1968 and 1974 disputes arose between Tate and members of the
Peard family. These appear to have been in the hands of the father.

In 1973 the grandfather died. The son said that his father began making investigations and that it was about 1974 when he first became aware of the trust arrangements which had been made in 1964. Acting on his father's advice and direction the son sought legal advice. The son claimed that he had never authorised the steps taken by Mr Tate or the moneys which he had expended. In proceedings were instituted in the Equity Division of this Court by the son against Mr Tate.

Consent orders were made by Mr Justice Holland on 27 August 1976. The terms of these are not before the court. It seems that there was a declaration as to the existence of a trust and an order requiring Mr Tate to give an account of his stewardship as a trustee. There was a lively dispute as to many items. The son denied knowledge of much of what had been done and denied authorising the acts and payments of Mr Tate which were wide ranging. Amongst other things the son sought an account of the moneys and credit obtained by Mr Tate on the security of the title to the land held in trust by Mr Tate.

So far as I can tell Mr Tate had to give an account of his stewardship as trustee. This involved considering certain mortgages.

The process of taking accounts extended over some years. Mr Tate said that he had proceeded on the basis that Douglas Peard (the father) acted for everybody. It is not surprising that the matter settled.

On 16 April 1980 Mr Bruce Peard (the son) and Mr Tate entered into Terms of
Settlement. The son agreed to pay $6000 to Mr Tate who, on payment, was bound to deliver the certificate of title, sign and deliver all documents and do all things necessary to enable the property to be transferred to the son as registered proprietor. Upon completion of these matters there were mutual releases in respect of the administration of the trust and all other matters ancillary thereto.

I am far from persuaded that the old system mortgage executed in December 1968 and what was happening was ever explained to the son. I am satisfied that no adequate explanation was ever given. I have considerable reservations as to whether the son spoke with Mr Coyte. Perhaps there was some passing discussion. The explanation required as to an old system mortgage which conveys the fee simple and relates to land under the Closer Settlement Acts differs in some respects from that required as to a mortgage of land under the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). The son has little appreciation of business affairs. In late 1968 he was a 22 year old man who, apart from some limited military service, had led an isolated life confined to the simplest of matters on a small rural property in a relatively remote rural area. What was happening was well beyond his understanding.

I do not agree with the bank's submission that the very essence of the Tate dispute concerned the defendant's knowledge and understanding of what he had done in giving a mortgage and that this leads to the irresistible inference that by 1980 (at the latest) the defendant fully understood the commercial significance of a mortgage and its legal effect.

The dispute with Tate concerned his stewardship as a trustee. He was called upon to give an account. The mortgage was but one aspect. There were many other matters in issue. I do not accept that by 1980 (at the latest) that the son fully understood the commercial significance of a mortgage and its legal effect. An old system mortgage from a beneficiary to his trustee of the trust property is unusual. It was a curious incident of a transfer of trust property. In 1968 the son had little idea of what was happening.

Family Background 
The son was born in 1946. He has always lived on the property with his parents. He left school at the age of 15, during his third year of high school, and worked as a part-time labourer for neighbours. He also earned small amounts of money selling rabbit skins. At the age of 17 he purchased 5 cows and began a very modest dairy business. He milked the cows for cream production and sold their calves each year. The cream was collected from the farm twice a week. His mother opened a savings account for him with the
Commonwealth Bank and banked the cheques which were left in exchange for the cream.

In 1966 the son was called up for national service and over a period of five years he spent approximately 33 days a year in the army. His time was primarily spent working in the stores section at Holsworthy issuing equipment and clothing. He ultimately obtained the rank of Lance Corporal.

The son began to buy and sell cattle on a very small scale when he was 20 and in 1971 he abandoned his dairy business. By the late 1970's he had approximately 60 cows and in 1980 he began to run sheep on the property. In he had approximately 100 sheep and 40 cows. By 1994 this had increased to approximately 230 sheep and 70 cows.

The father was born in 1910. He took over running the farm from his own father. He began receiving a pension from 1972. His health deteriorated due to arthritis and old age and by 1981 he was reliant upon two walking sticks. As at 18 January 1983, the date of the mortgage, he was an undischarged bankrupt and possessed only a few assets, in the form of some cattle and machinery.

The son was aware that his father had experienced financial difficulties. He knew that his father had been declared bankrupt on two occasions and, without fully appreciating the effect of bankruptcy, understood that part of the farm had to be sold off when he was about 10 to service his father's debts.

Since the mid to late 1970's the son has run one part of the property (67 ha) while his father has run the other (54 ha) under an arrangement known as the "Peard Trust". The "Peard Trust" was a device used by the father to carry on the business of farming while bankrupt for his own benefit. He was the "Peard
Trust". His protestations and disclaimers were of no substance. The "Peard
Trust" was never in truth run for the son. There are two houses on the property. The son has always lived in one with his parents while the other has been rented out for a nominal amount to another family, some members of which are retarded.

From the early 1980's onwards the father was incapable of performing physical work of any consequence and the son performed most of the manual tasks for the whole property. Throughout the 1980's hay contractors and shearers also worked on the property.

The son's life has fallen within a very narrow ambit with little, if any, social contact outside the property. He has never married or had a partner and has no children. He has never held a drivers licence and manages the farm using a horse. He has never been a member of any club, social organisation or church. He ventured off the property to neighbouring towns infrequently and on those occasions when he did he was usually accompanied by his father. His main hobbies involved working in his vegetable garden and watching television. He also read newspapers. On the relatively few occasions on which he has been on holidays he went mostly with a member of the family who lived in the other house on the property.

In the course of operating his farm he has had little direct contact with others. The farm business has been conducted simply. When he wants to sell some stock he arranges for them to be collected and taken to the sale yards.
In due course he receives a cheque from the agent. He avoids borrowing money, being content with a modest income and a modest build up in his business. His sister, who worked for an accountant, prepared all his tax returns. He has had no legal or business training and has gained little commercial knowledge or experience. He pursues a rudimentary life style. The bank submitted that with his army experience and his conducting a small rural business he must have acquired some commercial knowledge and become aware of how business operates and what was involved in mortgages and borrowing money. I do not agree. My assessment of the son was that he had little knowledge or understanding of business matters or mortgages. The position of the son is obvious quickly. No one speaking with him could miss it.

The "Peard Trust" 
As stated, this was a device devised by the father to enable him to carry on his farming business on about one half of the property. If he were taxed that he was the real operator of half the farm he disclaimed that suggestion and asserted that it was the "Peard Trust". He was just the manager. As a legal entity the "Peard Trust" could not stand analysis.

It is necessary to say a little more about the trust because of the position taken by the bank and the name appearing as the customer on the mortgage.

Under a deed bearing date 1 March 1974 ("the management agreement") the son purported to appoint the father to manage, carry on and conduct the son's property, affairs and business. The father was given the widest powers including a power to borrow upon the property's security, open bank accounts and purchase equipment on the son's behalf. The agreement was for three years and then from time to time as agreed.

I doubt if the agreement ever operated according to its terms. It may have done so for one or two years but I doubt it. For many years there were two separate rural businesses conducted on the property, one by the son and one by the father under the guise of the "Peard Trust". They probably shared plant and equipment and the son probably did the bulk of the hard work on the father's portion of the property.

Despite suggestions from the father to the contrary (T91-93) and the handwritten documents of 1 March 1977 apparently signed by the son and the father purporting to terminate the management arrangements (Ex E) the "Peard
Trust" continued. It matters little whether the management agreement was formally renewed (Exs F & G). The father continued to carry on business with the son's knowledge, under the name of "Peard Trust" on portion of the land.

The son maintained that at all times he understood that the "Peard Trust" was simply his father's trading name. He denied that he was aware that the effect of the management agreement was to appoint his father as trustee and manager of the farm and his business affairs. He maintained that his father ran a section of the farm under the name "Peard Trust" and that the management agreement only related to his father's section, not the defendant's section which he ran himself. The son's contentions do not accord with the contents of a letter dated 3 March 1979, signed and handwritten by the son, addressed to the Official Receiver's Office (Ex. J). This letter refers to an earlier rather strong letter sent to the Official Receiver by Mr Tate in which it was alleged that the father had been running the farm on his own account during his bankruptcy (Ex. V) and doing as he pleased. I do not doubt that the father was running part of the farm generally doing what he pleased and ignoring the provisions of the Bankruptcy Act. Part of the son's letter reads: "I signed the 'Peard Trust' document in 1974 - no other paper - appointing my father as Trustee & Manager & he has the running of the concern as he had dealt with the Peard/Tate affairs prior to my knowledge of it in about .

Farming is my job, first & last & in legal matters I am out of my depth. That is the reason the 'Peard Trust' was formed solely to enable my father, who has the knowledge & experience, to act on my behalf in all these matters." 
The son stated that he had little recollection of this letter and that it was "obviously me father's doings" (T.30f). He later suggested that it had been drafted by his mother (T.42). He also said that the contents of the letter were not correct and continually maintained that he conducted one half of the farm on his own accord while his father ran the other half under the "Peard
Trust". He denied that his father ever managed his affairs for him (T.37-38).
He stated that his father had no assets of his own to run his section of the property, but that he managed to acquire some on hire purchase. The son denied that he had financed the trust and maintained that it was run solely by his father (T.38). He also denied that income from the trust was included in his tax returns. His evidence on this point is substantiated by his taxation records and those for the "Peard Trust" (Exs. U, AT & AU).

In 1979 the litigation between the son and Mr Tate was bubbling along. It was
Mr Tate's case that he had dealt with the father who represented the family and ran their affairs. The father actively pursued the litigation and guided his son who also probably acted on the advice of the lawyers whom his father had selected.

The father probably arranged for the letter to the Official Receiver. He was acutely conscious of the need for the "Peard Trust" to appear to be running the farm and for him to be seen as doing no more then acting on the trust's behalf. The letter may well have been drafted by the mother. Despite the contents of the letter and its signature I think that the correct position in
March 1979 was that the son was managing his portion of the property and that the father was managing the other portion under the facade of the "Peard
Trust".
 -1982 
In December 1981 the father attended at the State Bank, Batlow Branch and opened an account in the name of the "Peard Trust". He handed to Mr W H
Hancock, the Branch Manager, a copy of the management agreement bearing date either 1 July 1981 or 1 March 1981. He described it as a trust deed and noted the clauses he regarded as relevant for banking purposes. On the same day he took an application from the father for the approval of a temporary advance for $3000 as "carry on" finance, repayable on 11 June 1982. Mr
Hancock was told that the funds were required to meet final payments on three
AGC hire purchase agreements due in June 1982 and to pay carting costs. My impression from the notes made by Mr Hancock is that the father spun him a good story.

On 27 February 1982 the application was approved. A bill of sale was given over farm implements by the "Peard Trust" and signed by the father. It was witnessed by Mr Hancock.

About July 1982 Mr Hancock caused a mortgage to be prepared. Mr D B Peard borrowed $20,000. The earlier loan of $3000 was repaid out of this sum. A copy of the mortgage bearing date 16 July 1982 was in evidence. An important part has been cut off in the photocopying, that is, the name of the customer. Mr
Hancock said that he understood that this mortgage was a third party mortgage - see (T-149 and Exhibit A3) 
Mr Hancock depended upon his notes, the bank records and his usual practice.
Mr Hancock had no recollection of Mr Bruce Peard or of him signing the mortgage. Further, Mr Hancock had no recollection of Mr Douglas Peard.

Mr Hancock said that in 1982 it was his usual practice to have both the borrower and the third party mortgagor in his office at the same time. He told the borrower that if he did not repay the loan the bank would ask the third party mortgagor (indicating him) to repay the money and that if he did not repay it the bank would take the property. He said that he mentioned the basic points but did not dissect the mortgage. He handed over the mortgage documents and said "If you want anything discussed or if you have any queries, I'm not an expert on these sort of things but I will get an answer for you." Mr
Hancock then asked them to sign. Mr Hancock said that he told the borrower and mortgagor what was required by way of repayment, for example, instalments or a lump sum. He did not worry about the incorporated conditions. He was not sure that they even had a copy of them at the Batlow branch. He mentioned what he regarded as the essential parts of the mortgage. Mr Hancock did not explain that it was an all moneys mortgage (cl.2).

The son said that he now knows that he gave a mortgage to secure repayment of the moneys which the father used for his own personal purposes. His father had requested him to attend at the bank in connection with a farm equipment loan.
The son had little recollection of signing documents at the bank in July 1982.

The father stated that he did not recall anything about the execution of the mortgage of 16 July 1982. He then accepted that the person at the bank, whom he thought was Mr Greer not Mr Hancock, informed him that the document was a mortgage which the bank was taking over the property. At T118 this passage appears: "Q: He also said that the mortgage means that if the loan is not repaid, the bank can take the property? 
A: Well -- 
Q: Or words to that effect? 
A: Nothing was discussed. The only thing is that I know the bank teller asked
Bruce to sign it and Bruce didn't want to come to the signing of it and I took him there and I influenced him to go, but if I had known it was a third party mortgage I wouldn't have even allowed him to sign it.

Q: You know it is very important for Bruce's case to suggest you influenced him to sign, don't you? 
A: No, I don't know. I know now it was something, I didn't know before and that's - I come down here for nothing and the sister comes down here for nothing and we can't get any wages out of it and that's not right either." (This is probably a reference to the earlier hearing which had to be adjourned because of last minute amendments by the son.) 
The father recalled going to the bank twice with his son Bruce and that on both occasions the bank officer spoke to them and mentioned the word "mortgage". On each Bruce signed a mortgage.

The father denied that the bank officer used words to the effect that the property could be taken if the loan was not repaid. When it was put that Mr
Hancock "certainly did some talking" the father replied, "Well, not exactly, it was more signing the papers up than anything." 
The bank relied upon the 1982 mortgage. It contended that the son must have understood that he was signing a mortgage and that he could lose the property if he failed to make the required payments. It was submitted that Mr Hancock would have adhered to his usual practice and explained the essence of a mortgage and that the 1983 mortgage should be approached on the basis that in the son had signed a mortgage and had acquired a good working knowledge about mortgages. I am very wary about the father's evidence. He was evasive and unreliable. I have not overlooked his age or ill health.

I think that what probably happened was that Mr Hancock handed the documents to the father and asked the father and son to sign them so the loan could go through and that any explanation was cursory. There was no adequate explanation. The father probably dominated proceedings and the son was probably pushed into the background. I do not think that at that stage the son realised that he could lose the property nor how dependent he was upon what the father did. He would have had no idea that it was an all moneys mortgage and what that meant.

Early 1983 
According to the son in early 1983 the father wanted the son to sign some papers so the father could obtain a loan. The son refused. He did not believe his father could pay for the loan. Over the ensuring days the situation at home became unbearable for the son and the mother with the father sulking, grizzling or raving at both of them. In the end for the sake of peace at home the son gave in but against his desire and better judgment.

The son, on being pressed, was able to remember some of the circumstances surrounding the signing of the mortgage (Ex A) on 18 January 1983. He attended with his father at the Batlow Branch of the State Bank because his father wanted the loan. He claimed that all he knew was that it was necessary for him to sign the document in order for his father to get the loan and that he did not know at that time what a mortgage was. He said that he did not realise at the time what the document was which he was signing. He agreed that
Mr Greer may have told him what a mortgage was. He thought that the document which he was signing was a loan document. Later, he agreed that in January when he signed the mortgage he knew that moneys were being advanced by the bank on the security of Orana. He did not realise at that time that he was putting his property on the line and that the bank wanted to obtain some security. The son stated that he went to the bank under protest to sign and did not realise the effect of signing the mortgage. He did not think that Mr
Greer, the bank manager in 1983, told him that if the money being borrowed was not repaid the bank could take the property. He did not recall anything of what Mr Greer had said to him. The probable reason for this is because the son did not understand what Mr Greer was talking about.

The son doubted whether his father would be able to repay the loan but the father insisted that he would be able to do so. The son knew that it would be necessary in time for him to repay any amount of borrowings that his father could not pay.

The son claimed that it was not until about 1986 when bank officers visited his property that he understood what a mortgage was and that he had put his property at risk.

At T72-72 this passage appears in the son's cross examination: "Q: The day that you went to the bank in January 1983 you knew that on your father's case your father was seeking to borrow some money? 
A: Yes, for himself, yes.

Q: You were appreciative or aware of the fact that if he didn't pay you would have to pay his debt? 
A: Yes.

Q: You agreed to that? 
A: I had to.

Q: You could have gone to see a lawyer and obtain advice for your yourself had you wanted to, couldn't you at that time? 
A: Yes, but I didn't know anything about how to go about it.

Q: But you had already seen lawyers over the case you had with Mr Tate, hadn't you? 
A: Of yes, you're right there, yes.

Q: You also had ongoing communication with the Legal Aid authorities? 
A: Yes.

Q: There was nothing to stop you, had you wanted to resort to those people, to go and get advice, isn't that right? 
A: Yes.

Q: Whatever advice you had received - let's assume that you had sought advice - you intended to go ahead, didn't you? It wouldn't have matters what advice you got, you would have gone ahead? 
A: It wasn't me, as I say, it was my father, he wanted the money.

Q: Your father wanted the money and you were prepared to comply with his request or wish? 
A: After a few arguments, yes.

Q: You had some arguments and you had some meetings but then you made your own decision to go ahead, isn't that right? 
A: Yes.
 
Mr R N Greer was seen by the father purporting to act on behalf of the "Peard Trust" on 4 January 1983. The father sought $8000 by way of carry on finance. The farm was included as an asset of the trust. Mr Greer has noted: "Drought has effected customer. Hay cut was down to NIL for sale as what held used for cattle food for self. Peard Trust conducts farming on portions 205, & 249 of the security property while son runs balance of property. Son to call & execute mortgage for this advance." 
Mr Greer confirmed that he understood in January 1983 that the father via the "Peard Trust" worked about 54 hectares and that the son worked the rest of the property. The bank via Mr Greer granted the father's application "subject to unreg'd 2nd, 3rd party mortgage from D B Peard." This loan differed from and was in addition to the existing Farm Equipment Loan of $24,443.

Mr Greer believed that the son attended at the bank's Batlow Branch about 18
January 1983. He did not have an actual recollection of meeting Bruce Peard and witnessing his signature. He stated that he would take the mortgagor into his office, engage in a bit of friendly chat, hand him the mortgage and tell him that it was a mortgage for the moneys to be advanced. Usually Mr Greer would say, "This is the mortgage over the property, if you don't pay the bank gets the place." In the case of a third party mortgage he usually said, "This is the mortgage. The effect of it is that if the third party doesn't pay then you pay and if you don't pay then the bank takes the place." 
Mr Greer then showed the mortgagor where to sign. The person signed the document and handed the mortgage back to Mr Greer who witnessed it and put it into the packet. There would be a bit more general chat and the mortgagor would leave. Mr Greer kept everything as friendly as possible.

At the time the mortgage was signed Mr Greer knew that Mr Bruce Peard lived with his mother and father on the same farm and assumed that they all lived in the same house. It was Mr Greer's normal practice with third party mortgages to have both the third party and the mortgagor in his office at the same time.
He thought that this probably happened. He said that it was not his normal practice to go into all the detail of the mortgage. He thought that he would have mentioned the amount of the loan, the type of the loan, the term of the loan and the conditions of the loan which included the interest rate of 14.5% and that it was variable.

Mr Greer did not suggest that the mortgagor receive independent legal advice as that was not the practice in those days. Nor was it the practice to give a copy of the mortgage to the third party mortgagor and he did not do so.

The father remembered that the son signed the mortgage in the presence of Mr
Greer, the father and a couple of other people.

The father believed that Mr Greer called the document a mortgage. While there was some talk about 'Orana' Mr Greer did not state that the property could be taken if the loan was not repaid. The father said that he was aware that Bruce was at the bank to sign the mortgage. It is probable that the father did not communicate precisely that to Bruce.

The father said that what was in the mortgage was never discussed and that Mr
Greer said that he was not conversant with the mortgages and did not know much about them. That is probably true. Mr Greer handed the mortgage to the son to sign.

The father stated that Mr Greer did not refer to what might happen if the loan was not repaid. Nor did he say that the bank could take the place if the loan was not repaid. The father said that he understood that if the mortgage was a straight mortgage and the loan was not repaid the bank could take the place.
He did not understand that this was the position in relation to a third party mortgage. The father declared that if this had been explained to him "the son would have come home without signing it." At T124 the father said: 
Q: You understood that the mortgage in front of you was a mortgage over Orana? 
A: Orana, that's right.

Q: And that it was to secure repayment of the loan? 
A: Of 48,000.

Q: Of 48,000? 
A: Yes.

Q: You understood at the time that Bruce signed the mortgage, that if the ,000 was not repaid -- 
A: Yes.

Q: -- that the bank could sell up the property? 
A: I understood that amount, yes, but not to keep ongoing paying into the account and charge to the account when it is a third party mortgage.

These answers seem to be directed at the mortgage being an all moneys mortgage. The inference could also be drawn that the father was content if the property was mortgaged to the extent of the particular loan but not with other loans for other purposes.

During his cross examination the father was shown a document dated 20 November on which he had written "Bruce Peard assets". The father said that most of the assets listed did not belong to Bruce Peard but to the "Peard Trust".
The father insisted that Bruce Peard did not owe the State Bank any moneys.
The father agreed that the first liability was "bank $78,000". He agreed that the $78,000 was the money borrowed on the security of the mortgage in January
The father asserted that this had been paid by the son.

Part of the problem is that when the son signed the mortgage he was not told that it was an "all moneys mortgage". Nor was he given any explanation as to this. The mortgage in January 1983 was in response to an application for a loan for $8000 by way of temporary accommodation.

The son was given no adequate explanation of the mortgage. The bank manager's comments as to the mortgage were perfunctory and of no real use. The father's dominating personality would have pervaded the meeting at the bank. The son was apprehensive about signing the document but he was no match for his father. It would never have occurred to the son to obtain independent legal advice. The father had been the mainspring behind the Equity proceedings. The limited nature of the son's personality, understanding and ability were readily apparent. The father did not explain to the son much of what was happening. If the son had been referred to an independent solicitor of some competence it is probable either that the loan would not have proceeded and there would have been a family break up or the solicitors would have told the bank that the son was so under the father's influence it was unsafe to proceed or the transaction would have been recast. The son did not wish to borrow money and was prepared to proceed slowly and in a limited way.

The bank manager's minute of 25 January 1983 reads: "$20,000 Farm Equipment Loan settled 9.7.82 and funds to be used by father "Peard Trust" ...

Documents sent to bank solicitor today for up stamping to $20,000 stating additional loan $5000 approved 17.1.83 to avoid possibility of the bank being fined for late payment." 
August 1983 
The $8000 advance was not repaid on the due date of 20 July 1983. About 11
August 1983 the "Peard Trust" lodged two further applications with the bank.
One was for an advance of $3000 and was processed by the bank as agent for the
State Government. It was for permanent improvements. The application was completed by Mr D B Peard. He said that he acquired the property in 1970 from his father and "working arrangements 'Peard Trust' works 54ha & son works balance of property". To the question, "Have you ever been bankrupt or insolvent?", the father answered "No".

The second application was for a commercial bill rounded off to $30,000 to cover 1st up costs. The position of Mr D B Peard was attributed to the drought.

In the second application the applicant is described as "Peard Trust: Peard
Douglas (Nominee)" and the following details have been recorded "Personal
Factor: Satisfactory", "Reliability: Good", and "Managerial Ability:
Considered Good". The application also contains financial information relating to the customer's present and future income, commitments and expenditure. The last page contains a number of additional remarks from Mr Greer. He has specifically referred to a valuation being obtained as to the $3,000 advance application and it being used to "verify" the customer's position. He concluded: "Advance is strongly recommended". In his evidence he tried to play down his use of the word "strongly", suggesting that he used that word as a matter of course in relation to the majority of applications he recommended (T176 & 194).

The Hilpern Reports 
Document 193 (part of exhibit "C") is a request dated 12 August 1983 for an inspection of the property to be carried out for the purpose of obtaining a valuation in relation to the requested advance of $3000 from the Rural Bank of
NSW. Attached to it was a copy of the application for the commercial bill. The request was prepared on Mr Greer's instructions and sent to the Central
Southern Division at Wagga Wagga. Two responses dated 24 August 1983 were subsequently received from a Mr Hilpern. Page 3 of exhibit "AE" is a short memorandum addressed to the manager of the Batlow branch. It records that the client's taxation figures show cash losses in the 1980/81 and 1981/82 financial years and concludes: "The stated area of 54ha farmed by D Peard is incapable of producing adequate income to service current debts, even without the additional proposed
Commercial Bill Advance.

The son farms a similar area and there are approx 14ha of dense green timber.

It is recommended that no further advances should be made and customer should be advised to reduce current debt to agreed levels." 
In his second report (Ex "AG"), also dated 24 August 1983, Mr Hilton recorded the client as "Peard Trust [D Peard (Nominee)]". He estimated the market value of the property as $145,000. He briefly identified the client's proposed future program, revenue and commitments, in addition to existing stock and plant. He concluded: "It is apparent that applicant is currently over committed" and finished with a recommendation: "Application for an ASA(PI)
Advance of $3000 cannot be recommended in view of applicant's debt burden and limited income potential." 
Mr Greer did not remember seeing the report in August 1983. During cross- examination he steadfastly refused to accept the proposition that if he had read the reports before the end of August 1983 he would necessarily have declined to recommend the $30,000 advance (T182-6). During re-examination he stated that seeing the report would not have made him alter his decision to ultimately recommend the State Bank advance. Mr Greer attempted to down play the significance of the report suggesting that it was conservative and failed to take into account a number of relevant factors, such as drought and the effect that a cash injection of $30,000 would have on income earning potential. Mr Greer was uncomfortable if not evasive when dealing with the reports and I did not think he was being truthful. He was trying to justify the unjustifiable. He ultimately accepted, with some reluctance, the general proposition that a mortgagor should be kept abreast of any material facts of which the bank becomes aware which may affect the capacity of the borrower to repay the loan (T185).

In his report of 14 April 1986, Mr Greer suggested that he had previously "missed" Mr Hilpern's report because at the time of its receipt he was away on recreation leave and it was placed in the wrong section of the bank's file.
Upon being shown his short memo of 29 November 1983 to "Senior Manager, Rural
Agencies", Mr Greer conceded that, while he still had no actual memory of receiving the Hilpern report, he must have received it by 29 November 1983 at the latest. The memo read: "The application is not proceeding as the Valuer did not recommend the
Advance. Attached for your information is a copy of Valuer Hilpern's Report dated 24/8/83." 
The memo related to the application for the $3,000 advance from the bank as agent for the State Government, not the application for the commercial bill of $30,000 from the State Bank.

On 23 August 1983 the bank wrote to the father advising him that it was necessary for the son to consent in writing to the security being used to secure the additional moneys to be advanced to the trust and enclosed the letter to be signed. The father was asked to call to sign certain other documents. The bank did not write to the son but left it to the father to procure the son's signature.

Within the bank's files is a typed note bearing the stamp of the bank, Batlow dated 31 August 1983 addressed to the bank and signed by the son. Omitting formal parts, the note reads: "Re: PEARD TRUST: PEARD: Douglas (Nominee) 
I Bruce Douglas Peard, being registered proprietor of property contained in
Certificate of Title Volume 11085 Folio 159, agree to this property being used to secure a further advance of $30,000 being made available to the Peard Trust by way of Commercial Bank Bill." 
The note makes no reference to the existing mortgage. The son agreed that he read this document about the time he received it and appreciated that the property 'Orana' was being used to secure a further advance of money, that a further $30,000 was being made available to the "Peard Trust" by way of a commercial bill and that his father was borrowing more money.December 1984 
By letter of 18 December 1984 (part Ex AQ) addressed to Mr D Peard, "Peard
Trust", the bank advised that following a review of his position the bank had approved an increase of the temporary limit from $10,000 to $20,000 subject to repayment by 31 August 1985 and his son's consent (attached), deferring repayments of Farm Equipment Loan instalments to 31 July 1985 and commercial bill of $30,000 for 365 days with the existing bill to be repaid on settlement.

Amongst the bank's papers was an undated typed note addressed to the bank and signed by Bruce Peard. Omitting formal parts it reads: "Re: PEARD TRUST - PEARD: Douglas (Nominee) 
I Bruce Douglas Peard, being registered proprietor of property contained in
Certificate of Title Volume 11085 Folio 159, agree to this property being used to secure a further advance of $20,000 being made available to the Peard Trust by way of Temporary Overdraft Limit." 
The father was entrusted with the task of having the son sign this note. The note make no reference to the existing mortgage.

August 1985 
On 12 August 1985 Mr Greer submitted an application by the "Peard Trust" for further finance to the Regional Manager, Central Southern Region. This purported to summarise the position of the "Peard Trust" and recommended approval to a commercial bill of $78,000 for 365 days subject to a number of conditions. On 13 August 1985 the Regional Office granted approval on amended conditions. By letter of 14 August 1985 Mr Greer advised the father that the bank had approved a new commercial bill of $78,000 subject to specified conditions. These included the consent of the son to the additional advance.
There was to be a review in 12 months. The letter stated: "Also your son will have to sign the attached two forms as the land is registered in his name." 
It was again left to the father to procure the son's consent. Among the bank's papers was an undated typed note addressed to the bank and signed by the son.
Relevantly, it reads: "I Bruce Douglas Peard being the registered proprietor of the land contained in certificate of Title Volume 11085 Fol 159, over which the State Bank holds a 1st mortgage hereby consent to the said bank advancing the sum of Seventy
Eight Thousand Dollars ($78,000) to Peard trust, Douglas Bruce Peard,
Nominee." 
This does refer to the existing mortgage. As to the second document enclosed with the bank's letter, a copy of that document is probably attached to the affidavit of Mr G J Spring, a Relieving Manager. The document bears the date August 1985 and purports to be signed at Mannus. The son said that he signed it at home. It purports to be signed in the presence of Mr Spring. Mr
Spring was at Batlow and there is no suggestion of him travelling to Mannus.
If the document had been signed at Batlow I would have expected Mannus to be struck out and Batlow inserted but this could have been overlooked. The son could have travelled to Batlow but this does not seem to have occurred. Mr
Spring stated that he would not have signed the document unless the son signed it in his presence. I think that what probably happened is that the son signed the document at home and that Mr Spring probably accepted the father's assurance that it was the son's signature.

By this document the son noted that the bank was granting a further advance and gave his consent to such further advance being secured in the same manner as the advance to the "Peard Trust" which was secured by 1st mortgage. The form contains these clauses:
I fully understand the facts and circumstances surrounding the further advance to be made by the Bank.
I am not relying on any statement or representation made by either the
Bank and/or the Customer but rely totally on my own judgement or on the advice of a party independent of the Bank and/or the Customer in my consent and acknowledgement herein.
I affirm the terms and conditions of the further advance.

Clauses 3, 4 and 5 would have meant nothing to the son. Mr Greer did not contact the son directly to seek his approval of the new Bill but entrusted the father with the task of obtaining the son's signature and returning the documents to the bank. Mr Greer never told the son about any of the matters raised in the Hilpern reports. Given the father's beliefs that he was entitled to act as he pleased as to 'Orana' and to keep his own counsel, the son would not have been given adequate or accurate details as to what was happening. The son would not have known sufficient to rely on his own judgment. Nor did he seek advice. In that area he was a novice and relied on his father. The son did not know the terms and conditions of the further advance. Given the father's personality and dominance of his son it is improbable that the father would have shown the son the bank's letter of 14 August 1985. The son could not handle the father who prevailed upon the son to sign the documents. The son has sworn that "Peard Trust" was the trading name that his father used and that he never had any interest in and was told nothing about his father's business. I think that this statement is substantially correct.
 
About 14 February 1986 the father advised the Batlow Manager that the bill interest could not be met. On 17 February 1986 Valuer Glen was requested by the bank to call on the father and point out the bad state of his affairs as the father always took no notice of Mr Greer's advice.

On 26 February 1986 Valuer Glen reported that he had interviewed the father and inspected the property. The Valuer may have been under the impression that the father owned the property and the son separately farmed a discrete area.
Valuer Glen noted that the son was understood to be debt free. His report contains an analysis of the financial position of the "Peard Trust". It was serious to desperate. The Valuer stated that the father did not reveal his full debt position even when asked and that further debts to those discovered may exist. Sale of the property was recommended to arrest the declining equity situation. The Valuer regarded the father's position as totally unsatisfactory and advised against further borrowing.

In his report of 11 April 1986 Mr Greer referred to the father making "outside borrowings" to meet bank commitments and some hire purchase instalments and to his efforts to obtain a full list of the father's hire purchase contracts. Mr
Greer recorded that on 11 March 1986 the father was advised not to issue any more cheques and that no cheques had been paid since. It was recommended that the account be placed in liquidation and that if the Rural Assistance Board application was refused then the father be advised to sell the property or arrange alternative finance. This was approved by the Regional Manager. He noted that any RAB subsidy would be of small to no assistance. He required a report on the position by 15 June 1986.

By letter of 18 April 1986 the bank advised Mr D B Peard that the bank's debt was not to increase and that no further cheques could be paid until the account was placed in credit. The bank "strongly suggested that you discuss the position with Bruce, the registered owner of the land, and give very serious thought to placing the property on the market and accept a realistic price or alternatively arrange re-finance elsewhere." The terms of this paragraph suggest that Mr Greer perhaps doubted whether the father was taking his son into his confidence.

In May 1986 the bank solicitor's section wrote that the father appeared to be an undischarged bankrupt. Apparently, it had missed the discharge on 2
February 1986.

Mr Greer made a further review on 1 August 1986. He had held discussions with the father. Mr Greer reported that the father had lodged an application to the
Commonwealth for $53,000 (possibly in the son's name), that he had received a
State Interest Subsidy of $3800 which had been credited to the working account and was proposing to sell some stock and hoped to realise about $24,960. Mr
Greer recorded that when sale of the property was discussed with the father he was adamant that he could trade out of his present cash flow problems. Mr
Greer noted of the father, "considered honest with financial ability below average." The description of the father as honest shows how seriously Mr Greer had misjudged the position.

The Regional Manager required a further review by 15 September 1986 with a definite proposal.

The father continued to try to obtain money from other sources and succeeded in part. Mr Greer recorded the details in October 1986. On 23 October 1986 the father called on Mr Greer and caused a new application to be lodged with the
Commonwealth Development Bank for $117,500 in the name of his son Bruce. The application was refused in November 1986.

On 5 November 1986 the bank (via Mr Greer at the direction of the bank's regional office) wrote to the son advising that the commercial bill of $78,000 was due for payment on 1 February 1987 and that the cheque account was overdrawn by $18,161 The letter pointed out to the son that he was the owner of the land mortgaged to the bank to secure the advances made to the "Peard
Trust".
 
On 17 February 1987, the new Manager of the Batlow Branch, Mr K Krake, sought approval to issue a notice calling up the advance. He thought that this could lead to the son obtaining finance as he ran his operation debt free and may have sufficient funds to reduce the amount to be borrowed. The Regional Office did not grant approval to issue a call up notice. It directed the Manager and
Valuer to interview the father and the son. That interview took place about 15
April 1987. The father submitted a feed lot proposal which the Manager, the
Valuer and the son thought was beyond the physical and financial capacity of the father. The son indicated that finance was available from his bankers. The
Manager noted that the son was reluctant to take over his father's debt and that there appeared to be animosity between them but that at the conclusion of the interview the son agreed to approach his bankers to repay the State Bank debt. The bank's representatives had made it clear that the alternative was to sell the property.

By August 1987 no progress had been made. The father continued to put forward unrealistic proposals. The Regional Office remained reluctant to call up the advance. On 8 December 1987 the Manager, Mr Krake and Regional Valuer Munro spoke with the father and the son. The father stubbornly resisted sale of the property. It appeared that despite the reluctant agreement apparently reached in February 1987 the father and son "continued their separate and stubborn approach." It was recorded that despite assurances the son may well not operate the whole property. In my opinion the father would be quite unable to release the reigns and the son was wary of entanglements with his father.

Payments By Bruce Peard 
On 8 February 1988 Bruce Peard paid the State Bank $23,000 in reduction of his father's debt. The bank in its reply of 4 March 1988 stated that following that payment the debt stood at $94,618 and that the bank had agreed to carry that debt subject to annual principal reductions of $7,000 plus interest. It appears that an arrangement to this effect had been reached in December 1987.

On 31 May 1988 the bank wrote to the son enquiring when a further payment would be made. The father telephoned on 8 June 1988 and explained that $6000 had been expended on fodder for stock and that they were not in a position to reduce the bank debt at that time. On 15 December 1988 the Bank wrote to the son pressing for the payment due on 1 December 1988 of $23,500 being principal repayment of $7000 and interest of $16,500. On 20 January 1989 the bank wrote to the son pressing for payment. His mother telephoned, advised of $8000 spent for feed on cattle and $3500 paid to AGC and Custom Credit and suggested some arrangements. On 7 February 1989 the son forwarded a cheque for $7000 to the bank. On 14 March 1989 the bank received a cheque for a further $6000 from the son. On 7 July 1989 the son caused $3844.14 to be paid in reduction and on 18
July 1989 $2237.03. The son caused further payments to the bank of $7999.63 on June 1990 and $10,000 on 15 March 1991.

The bank relied on these payments as evidencing the son's acceptance of his liability under the mortgage and his agreement to liquidate the debt over a period. It pointed out that the son had not challenged the mortgage or his liability and contended that his present stance was due to his inability to meet the arrangements he had made with the bank.

Having seen and heard the son and having had the opportunity to assess his personality and that of his father I am not surprised at the course he took.
It would not have occurred to the son to contest his liability with the bank's representatives. He is a man of relatively few words with very little self confidence. He is not assertive. He is uncomfortable with business matters and his father dominated. The son had a love of the property which he received from his grandfather and wanted to keep it. He was prepared to try and pay off the bank's debt to do so although he did not believe that he should be responsible for the greatly increased debt which the father had incurred. It would not have occurred to the son to go and obtain legal advice for himself.
Those were the kinds of matters which his father attended to at the father's insistence.

On 13 November 1990 the Bank's District Valuer described the son as "frugal and hardworking however his managerial ability is below average." That assessment is, so far as it goes, substantially correct.
 
On 6 March 1990 "Peard Trading Co per D B Peard, Manager & Trustee" wrote to the bank advising of his plan to obtain certain stock and of certain financial dealings and payments which could be made by himself and Bruce. The letter indicates that the father was active and endeavouring to take charge.

On 15 March 1990 Bruce Peard, the son, signed a typed letter addressed to the
Rural Assistance Authority. While the terms of the letter do not seem to be those of the son the more important question is whether he adopted the contents. In the first paragraph of the letter there is a claim for an interest subsidy "on a debt taken over from Peard Trust (my father D B Peard), by way of a overdraft account at the State Bank, Batlow, NSW which was used for purchase of machinery and improvements to property as in list herewith."
The list reads: 
IMPROVEMENTS ALREADY PUT ON PROPERTY AND MACHINERY 
No 1: Tanks store 19,000 gallons of rain water, to get clean water free from sprays and general usage for house and to store in tanks and Hay Shed to store 7,000 bails of hay. $ 20,000.00 
No 2: New Hay shed to store 5,000 bails of Hay$ 14,000.00 
No 3: New room with toilet attached and cookery room with heating etc. $ 25,000.00 
Total $ 59,000.00 
Machinery etc, which is used on the farm in good order and condition includes a complete storage and Feed Lots to fatten head of cattle 
Total $ 62,000.00 $121,000.00 
Bruce built a good shearing shed and yards on the property. Worth $4,000 does all the shearing necessary.

The words "Bruce built a good shearing shed ... worth $4,000, does all the shearing" suggest that the son was not the author of the list.

In the detailed application signed by the son to the Rural Assistance
Authority which accompanied the letter of 15 March 1990 assistance of $60,000 is required for "Capital restructure or Interest subsidy." It was stated that the applicant hoped: "To reduce the State Bank debt by $60,000 so that I can be in a good position as I was before I had to pay this debt which was for machinery and improvements which were put on the property by my father to improve carrying capacity and to finish stock in feed lots for market. My father now has bad arthritis and can't help me." 
In a further application of 27 July 1990 signed by the son for an interest subsidy it is stated: "To reduce our interest burden following extensive capital expenditure to improve carrying capacity and to finish stock in feedlots for market." and "Large capital debt following extensive improvements to the farm." 
The letter and the list of 15 March 1990 were probably written by one or more of the parents or sister of the son. The son said that the father made the application. As appears from the notes of Mr Krake the idea of stock in feedlots was that of the father. Neither the bank representatives nor the son regarded it as practical.

In a further application of 31 May 1991 signed by the son for an increase in
Interest Subsidy of $12,500 and carry on finance of $20,000 the aim was stated to be: "To continue to meet our interest commitments to provide more conserved fodder. Extra for super for pastures, fencing and general." 
The causes of the present financial difficulties were stated to include: "Large capital debt following extensive improvements to the farm."  
In cross examination the son agreed that all the improvements mentioned in the letter of 15 March 1990 were permanent and had been funded by borrowings. He agreed that the amount stated was accurate but later doubted whether the fibro and timber house extension cost as much as $25,000. The son agreed that the moneys borrowed from the bank were used to finance extensions.

The son stated that the construction of a shed was financed from moneys from
AGC and erection and installation of the tanks was financed from moneys from
Custom Credit. The son said that he did not know what his father used the rest of the money for. However, it does seem that improvements were carried out on the property and that plant machinery and equipment were acquired. It is not possible to assess how much was truly spent on these items and how much of the money borrowed was squandered by the father or used on hopeless ventures.
There is the further consideration that the son would not have regarded much of the expenditure as prudent. It was his father's idea.

The applications were prepared at the behest of the father. He enlisted the help of the Murrumbidgee Valley Counselling Service. The rural counsellor who assisted was Mr S Constable who held a degree in Agricultural Economics. He first received a telephone call from the father who supplied some information over the telephone and probably also some handwritten information. The information was assembled and assessed. Some of it had to be adjusted. The service's role was to make the application seem good so that there was a chance of obtaining the money requested. The service did adjust income and expenditure if it seemed that the applicant would not receive any assistance.

Mr Constable never saw the father or the son. His only contact was with the father and that comprised telephone calls and the receipt of handwritten information. Although he signed the applications prepared by Mr Constable, the son regarded them as his father's applications. The son, in signing, was doing what his father wanted. Despite some of his answers in cross examination I think that the son signed the documents which his father had caused to be prepared in an effort to raise money. I do not think that the son paid much attention to their accuracy.

Building Applications 
From 1981 onwards the father signed and lodged a number of applications for building approval with the local shire council. These included a tractor shed estimated to cost $600 (1981) a hayshed estimated to cost $6400 (1984) and an extension to the house. I accept the son's evidence that these were all the brain-child of his father and that it was his father who pursued them. The father took no notice of the views of his son or other members of the family.
The father pursued his own course for his own purposes.

The situation which I think existed was a most unusual one. The son agreed that he left it to his father if it came to dealing with the local council or banks or matters of that sort. This was because the father was more experienced and planned all those things himself. The son did not agree with the father that he would take care of those things on his behalf. The true position is that the father took over and was determined to do what he wished and planned, no matter what opposition or reluctance the son expressed. The son was not able to resist or stop him. Evicting his parents would not have occurred to the son as a possibility. Given the father's disposition and behaviour I doubt if any course short of that would have stopped the father.
While the son objected to what the father did it was to no avail.

In either late 1978 or 1979 Mr Tate wrote to the Official Receiver's Office about the conduct of the bankrupt father. That office wrote to a member of the family and received a reply. On 25 January 1979 that office wrote to Mr Tate.
In his reply of 30 January 1979 Mr Tate wrote amongst other things: "It was obvious to me, the reply you would get, would be that Bankrupt had dealt through the Peard Trust, because the Trust was obviously formed so that bankrupt could get credit, and carry on business, outside the bankruptcy.

However, having received your letter, I went down to the farm, Friday, 27th instant, and spoke to Bruce Peard the son, and Mrs Marie Smith, the daughter of bankrupt. They both said, they were worried where the money was coming from to buy all equipment that had been bought, Bruce Peard also said he knew nothing of the Trust, or its activities, and said he had not put moneys into the Trust. He said he has signed some sort of a paper a few weeks ago, which is father had asked him to sign, but he did not know what it was, nor did he understand it. Mrs Smith said Bruce Peard had told her this too.

This also seems strange, but when it is realised the Bankrupt has run things his own way for the past 20 years or so, and tells his family nothing, then that may give you some idea why Bruce Peard knows little." 
The contents of this passage are substantially correct despite the denials in the letter of 3 March 1979 signed by Bruce Peard but written by his parents.

Over the years the father has engaged in untruths and sharp practice. The "Peard Trust" was a facade. The father refrained from disclosing his bankruptcy although he knew how important it was. He answered a question whether he had ever been bankrupt falsely. He told the Official Receiver, untruthfully, that in 1980 that the rent of his residence was $10 - per week.
He was paying no rent (see Ex W and T84). At T87-88 he claimed that the
Official Receiver told him "to carry on as I was carrying on, but not in me own name," that is to carry on the business. That is incapable of belief.

The father suggested, but I do not accept, that he received no income from his farming efforts carried on under the guise of the "Peard Trust". The father said that the son did not actually receive the money which was earned from the property. I think that that is correct.

While I have given much consideration to the oral and documentary evidence this was a case in which the opportunity to see and hear the witnesses and assess them was valuable. This applied to the father, the son and Messrs
Hancock and Greer. It provided useful insights and helped me in deciding what was the true picture. In some instances my assessment of the father has led me not to take the evidence which was given at face value.

I have reached the following conclusions: 
The father took control of about 53 acres of the son's property and ran it for his own benefit under the guise of the "Peard Trust". The son received no money from his father or the trust. However, he was allowed to use the plant equipment and machinery controlled by the father. As the father's physical capacity diminished over the years the son did more and more work on the section of the property which the father had allocated to himself. The father did very little work of any kind on the property during the 1980's but he still insisted on embarking on unrealistic ventures and trying to run the finances as late as 1991.

The father dominated the son who at the hearing was still not emancipated from the father. The son impressed as subjugated and limited. The son has never been able to handle his father.

On each occasion at the bank most of the conversation was between the bank manager and the father. The conversation did not at any stage focus upon the son's position. The son was treated as an appendage. He was given no adequate explanation of the document or its effect or what could happen. The father dominated each meeting. Neither bank manager matched the father in strength of personality. Each bank manager should have realised that the father was dominating the son and running part of the property. The son lived at home with his parents and was unmarried, the account was opened by the father although the son owned the property and was running his own farming. The money was intended for and went to the "Peard Trust" which the bank knew was run by the father.

When the son signed the mortgages of July 1982 and January 1983 he was under the dominating influence of the father. The explanations given by the two bank managers were cursory at best. I am inclined to the view that neither of them had a reasonable understanding of what he was asking the son to sign.
The son did not have a true and sufficient understanding of the documents which he signed and their effect. He was probably not told how much was being or could be borrowed. He did not understand that he could lose his property.
He was not told of the all moneys clause in the mortgage nor its effect.
Neither bank manager made any reference to the mortgages containing incorporated conditions or what they were.

The bank was careless in failing to have bankruptcy searches made against the father. Substantial sums were being advanced to the father but he was providing no security. The bank was dealing with an unusual situation and the management agreement was a curious document. The alteration at the top of p.1 to the date of commencement would have made a prudent banker cautious and questioning.

It is almost incomprehensible that the bank having ordered the Hilpern reports, would have made the loan without waiting for and studying them. The bank officer suggested that they had been mis-filed. I am not persuaded that this is so. If this did happen I would have expected the bank officer to look for them. As the account was opened in late 1981 and the amounts borrowed were small the file was not likely to be a large one. One alternative is that the bank officer did not like the reports. The officer could have fallen for the father's talk.

The Hilpern reports (or their contents) should have been disclosed to the son in August 1983 when the bank agreed to make a further advance under the mortgage. They were sobering and indicated that the father's ventures could not succeed. If the son had been told of these reports he would have been deeply shaken. The reasons advanced by the bank officers for proceeding with the further loan, notwithstanding these reports lack substance and are a vain attempt to justify the advances made in August 1983.

At the very least if there were to be no independent legal advice each of the bank managers should have seen the son separately from the father and explained the mortgages. In August 1983 they should have disclosed the Hilpern reports and explained the position. This did not happen.

Each of the bank managers should have insisted on the son obtaining independent legal advice unaccompanied by his father in respect of each of the mortgages and the notes consenting to extending his liability. As to the mortgages the son needed a full explanation of the extent of his liability and that that depended on what the father did. The son needed to understand that if the father was improvident he would be responsible to the bank for all moneys owed by the father to the bank and that he would lose his property if his father could not repay the moneys borrowed from the bank at any time.

As to the notes, if at the time of entering into the mortgage of 18 January the son had received a full explanation including the operation of the all moneys clause, no further explanation would normally be necessary or expected when the further advances were made. However, with the son's obvious restricted understanding it would be necessary to remind him of the position when the notes were signed prior to the further advances being made.

Because of the son's naivety and lack of understanding of business and mortgage matters and the dominating influence of the father, the son needed the fullest explanation away from his father so the effects of what was intended could sink in.

The disclosure of the Hilpern Reports to the son coupled with the appropriate explanation from an independent solicitor would have brought home to the son the serious position he was facing. There was likely to be default if he agreed to the further advance and he was likely to have to pay back the moneys borrowed (including all moneys owed to the bank for other and future advances). If he did not pay these moneys he would lose the farm. The position became worse with the subsequent two notes and the further advances.

Initially, if the mortgage with the all moneys clause had been adequately and plainly explained to the son, he would have refused to proceed. This would have led to sustained efforts by the father to subjugate the son's will over the ensuing days and weeks. If the bank had sensed that there was strain and difficulty, the bank may well have decided not to proceed with the loan.
Alternatively, the all moneys clause may have been deleted and a mortgage entered into in a fixed amount. If the all moneys clause remained and the son had succumbed and signed the mortgage a solicitor of reasonable competence would have been uneasy and would probably not have been prepared to say that the son had signed the mortgage of his own free will.

As to the note of August 1983, upon being told of the contents of the
Hilpern reports and having had the position explained by an independent solicitor, the son would have been mortified to realise that, if he signed that note, his father would probably cause him to lose the farm. Again, initially, if the position had been presented to the son with realistic starkness (and he needed that for the position to register) he would have refused to proceed. Again there would have been concerted efforts by the father to overcome the son and his will. The son would have been worried by the prospect of a family break up. On the other hand the loss of the farm was not something which he would entertain. It is not easy to assess the outcome but there would have been much strain between the father and the son as well as contact between the son's solicitor and the bank. There would have been either a modified arrangement or the bank would not have proceeded. The
Hilpern reports would have probably assumed greater importance in the mind of the bank manager at Batlow leading to the bank not proceeding.

If the son had not received independent advice a different result would have followed. The note would probably have been signed.

The father would probably have tried to persuade the son not to obtain independent legal advice and the son would have baulked at the cost. However, a reasonable bank manager would have appreciated the father's dominance of the son and his limited understanding and insisted on the son obtaining independent legal advice.

As to the two subsequent notes, they suffer from the lack of any prior advice to the son and an absence of appreciation by the son of what was happening and the consequences. It is hard to see any sensible basis for the bank making the further advances.

The son would never have embarked upon the ventures of the father. He would not have incurred any debts of any size. He would have waited until he could have afforded expenditure and accepted a slow rate of progress. In his own farming he managed his affairs modestly so as to remain in credit.

At the time the mortgage of January 1983 was entered into it was unjust in the circumstances. It was also executed as the result of the undue influence of the father.

The further amended defence and cross claim filed in court (see judgment of 26 October 1994) did not specifically raise the notes signed in August , December 1984 and August 1985. They were fully canvassed in the evidence. They were important on the question of whether relief should be granted and, if so, what relief. The bank also contended that the son would not have signed them if he had not known the effect of the mortgages and that they nullified any complaints about the lack of any explanation of the all moneys provision in the mortgage. I am of the opinion that each of notes was signed under the undue influence of the father and that at the time each was signed it was unjust in the circumstances.

I considered many of the authorities in Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd v.
Collings & Ors, unreported, 12 June 1992. I have found the discussion in the judgment of Cohen J in McNally v. GIO Finance Ltd & Ors, unreported, September 1994 and that of the President in Arbest Pty Ltd v. State Bank,
Court of Appeal, 4 August 1995, unreported at pp 36-40 helpful but the facts in those cases were somewhat different.

It must have been obvious to the bank officers that the father was manipulating the son and using the son's property to finance the father's ventures and that the son was under the father's domination. Any reasonable person meeting the son and the father would have been alerted quickly to the position which prevailed. The bank officers probably treated the son as inconsequential.

It is unnecessary for me to consider the further issue whether the bank should have insisted on the son obtaining independent financial advice. That would have been desirable. Any independent solicitor, appropriately informed of the facts, would probably have been able to deal with the situation. With the son, it would have been obvious that it would be of no use to give an abstract explanation or an explanation in general terms. What was needed was an explanation which was in concrete terms and related to the facts of the particular case.

I am persuaded that relief should be granted to the son but the question of what that relief should be is a difficult one. The son has paid the bank $60,080. The bank pushed the son to take over his father's indebtedness and the whole farm. As earlier indicated, the son entered into an arrangement to repay all the moneys which his father had borrowed, the son believing that he was obliged to do so. This led to the bank granting further time. Final resolution of the matter was delayed. For a period the bank did not take resolute action because it was worried about the effects of adverse publicity.
Before the commencement of the current proceedings the son never suggested to the bank even though he had discussions with its officers relating to the moneys advanced and the property that at the time of entering into the mortgage he did not understand what he was doing and the effect of the documents he had signed.

In August 1983 the son signed an acknowledgment that the property was being used to secure a further advance of $30,000. About December 1984 he signed a similar acknowledgment to secure a further advance of $20,000 and about August he consented to the bank advancing $78,000 to the "Peard Trust" to be secured in the same manner as the advance to the "Peard Trust".

The son probably received some benefit from the moneys expended by the father.
It seems that the cost of the house extensions came out of this sum. It is debatable whether the cost was as much as $25,000 and even more debatable if it increased the value of the property by $25,000. It is not clear how much of the money was used on other structures or plant, machinery and equipment.
Perhaps the son does not know but he was grudging in his approach and inclined to minimise what has been done on the property. Accuracy and precision is not possible. Unfortunately, only a rough and unsatisfactory estimate can be made.
I have selected a figure of $22,000 on account of house extensions and $23,000 for other items. These figures take into account the more frugal habits of the son. I regard the range as being $36,000 to $54,000. I have selected a figure of $45,000.

It is not appropriate to take into account the small sums paid by Government agencies by way of rural subsidy.

At the hearing I was told that over $215,000 was owed to the bank. That claim would now be higher and takes into account the $60,080 which has already been paid. During some years the interest rates were high. This sum of $60,080 should not be repaid by the bank. It falls far short of covering the interest accrued on the amount lent after the son agreed to repay the principal and interest. Nor would it be correct to ignore the benefits which the son has received albeit that he would not have expended the moneys as the father did and would have taken a more frugal course. Whilst the son signed the documents under the dominating influence of his father he did know the size of the amounts referred to in the notes and he did appreciate that he was being involved in his father's borrowings. The delay in resolving matters has further complicated the position.

In all the circumstances the fair and equitable result is to require the son to repay the principal sum of $65,000 and no other sum. This will excuse him from repayment of any sum by way of interest or arrears to date and any other sum by way of principal. Interest will commence to run on the sum of $65,000 three months from today at the usual bank rate applicable to rural loans secured by adequate real estate. The sum of $65,000 is to be repaid within 12 months. Upon this payment being made together with interest, the certificate of title and the mortgage of 18 January 1983 duly cancelled (or discharged) are to be delivered up by the bank to the son's solicitors.

I did give thought to requiring the son to repay either $45,000 or $78,000 and the overdraft. While good arguments could be advanced in support of each of these alternatives I felt that neither reflected the overall justice of the situation and that the figure selected was overall the fair result.

The son should bring in short minutes to give effect to the conclusions at which I have arrived.

The question of costs will need consideration. The initial hearing had to be adjourned as a result of some late amendments to the pleadings. I have ordered that the costs thrown away as a result of these amendments be paid by the plaintiff.

The matter may be relisted to settle the short minutes and for argument as to costs.
 * * * 
