

Permanent Trustee Australia Limited and Anor versus Fai General Insurance
Company Limited Matter Nos 3032/96 [1998] NSWSC 1011 (1 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 April 1998 
PERMANENT TRUSTEE AUSTRALIA LTD & ANOR v FAI GENERAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED /96 
PERMANENT TRUSTEE AUSTRALIA LTD & ANOR v FAI GENERAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED /96 April 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: . INTRODUCTION 
I am dealing with two proceedings each brought by Permanent Trustee Australia
Limited (which I will call "Permanent Australia") and Permanent Trustee
Limited (which I will call "Permanent Trustee"), which I will refer to together as the Permanent companies, against FAI General Insurance Co. Limited (which I will call "FAI") claiming to be indemnified, pursuant to certain professional indemnity insurance policies, against certain liabilities which the Permanent companies have incurred. One proceeding concerns what has been called the Target Fund claim, and the other concerns what has been called the O'Connell Street claim.

The latter is the far larger claim, and raises most of the issues involved in the former claim and many more issues; and accordingly, in outlining the facts and issues, I will be focusing mainly on the 1 O'Connell Street claim.

In 1988, Permanent Australia was the trustee of two property trusts which I will call the Aust-Wide trusts. In about May 1988, Permanent Australia as trustee of those trusts subscribed about $65 million for units in another trust, to be used towards purchase of the property 1 O'Connell Street, Sydney; and in about October and November 1988, subscribed a further sum of about $65 million for the same purpose. In December 1988, finance documents were executed under which a syndicate lent about $370 million for the construction of a building on the site, secured by a mortgage over the site. In 1990,
Permanent Australia as trustee of the Aust-Wide trusts paid a further sum of around $20 million towards the project.

By the middle of 1991, it appeared that the interest of the Aust-Wide trusts in the project was worth nothing, because the value of the project did not exceed the amount owed to the mortgagee. The project was ultimately sold in for about $328 million, an amount insufficient to pay out the mortgagee.
In the result, the Aust-Wide trusts lost the whole $150 million or thereabouts which they had invested in the project.

Various proceedings were commenced against the Permanent companies on behalf of the unitholders of the Aust-Wide trusts, claiming that Permanent Australia had committed breaches of trust causing the loss of the $150 million, and seeking orders to the effect that Permanent Australia and Permanent Trustee (as guarantor of Permanent Australia's liabilities) make good the loss plus interest. The Permanent companies put on cross-claims against four firms of solicitors and two valuers, seeking inter alia damages in respect of any liability the Permanent companies might have to unit holders.

The Permanent companies claimed to be insured against their liability to unitholders under a multi-layer professional indemnity insurance program with a number of insurers, entered into for the period 1st October 1990 to 30th
September 1991, and extended for thirty days to 30th October 1991, on the basis that the event triggering the insurance occurred in mid-October 1991.
The primary layer of this program, which included a number of Lloyds syndicates, was for $5 million. The first excess layer was for $10 million in excess of $5 million, the second excess layer was for $20 million in excess of $15 million, and the third excess layer was for $35 million in excess of $35 million. FAI participated in the first excess layer to the extent of $3.5 million, and in the second excess layer to the extent of $6.7 million.

Several of the insurers who participated in this program granted indemnity to the Permanent companies, and undertook the defence of the proceedings on their behalf. FAI did not, leading to the commencement of these proceedings against
FAI.

Ultimately, the proceedings brought on behalf of the unitholders were settled by a deed of 27th June 1997. Under that settlement, a total of $100.1 million was paid for the benefit of the unitholders, with $61.65 million contributed by the Permanent companies and $38.45 million contributed by various of the cross-defendants. Of the Permanent companies' $61.65 million, about $27 million was paid by the Permanent companies themselves, and the balance by the insurers who had granted indemnity. The Permanent companies now claim $10.2 million from FAI, plus interest and costs.

No issue has been raised by FAI as to Permanent's liability for breach of trust or as to the reasonableness of the compromise of the unitholders' proceedings; and in the circumstances, I can infer that the Permanent companies do have a liability of around $27 million of a kind which is prima facie within the terms of the insurance policies entered into with FAI. FAI contends that for various reasons the liability does not in fact fall within the terms of the policies; and that in any event, FAI has a number of defences to the Permanent companies' claims against it. It seems clear that the
Permanent companies' claim against FAI in respect of 1 O'Connell Street either succeeds in toto or fails in toto.

As I see the matter, if the claim succeeds in toto, the Permanent companies' other claim in respect of the Target Fund will not matter, because the
Permanent companies accept that they cannot be entitled to more than $10.2 million plus interest and costs from FAI. However, if the claim in respect of O'Connell Street fails, the Permanent companies claim about $600,000.00 plus interest against FAI under the first excess layer in respect of the Target
Fund, giving rise to some additional issues.
 . ISSUES 
It is convenient to begin by outlining the main issues which arise in these proceedings.
 .1 Notification 
The Permanent companies' policies with FAI are "claims made" policies. The agreement to indemnify the assured is in respect of legal liability for breach of duty "arising from any claim or claims made against them during the Period of Insurance". Condition 1 in each policy relevantly provided: . CLAIMS NOTIFICATION: The Assured shall give to Underwriters immediate notice in writing, .1 of any claim made against the Assured; or .2 of receipt of notice of an intention to hold the Assured responsible for any matter which could result in a claim under this Policy; or .3 any circumstances of which the Assured shall become aware which might subsequently give rise to a claim against the Assured.

Such notice having been given as required by 1.2 or 1.3 above, any subsequent claim made arising out of the circumstances so notified shall be deemed to have been made during the Period of Insurance. In all cases, the Assured shall give to Underwriters such information as Underwriters may reasonably require and shall not disclose the existance (sic) of this Policy to any person or persons, company, third party or their legal representatives making or intimating a claim upon the Assured without Underwriters' prior written consent.

By letter dated 15th October 1991 to Sedgwick James Limited (which I will call "Sedgwick Australia"), Permanent Trustee notified Sedgwick Australia that circumstances existed that could possibly lead to a claim. By letter dated th October 1991 (and received 25th October 1991) from Sedgwick Australia to
Sedgwick Non-Marine Limited Professional Indemnity & Financial
Institutions Claims Division (which I will call "Sedgwick London"), Sedgwick
Australia enclosed Permanent Trustee's notification as "providing initial notification of a circumstance which may lead to a claim". However, no notification was physically passed on to FAI itself until August 1992.

These circumstances raised three questions: 
Contractual requirement for notification. Did the notification to Sedgwick
London count as notice in writing to FAI within Condition 1 of the policies?
This in turn depended primarily on whether or not the FAI policies incorporated Item 11 in the Schedule to the policy of the lead underwriter, which was in the following terms: . NOTICE TO BE GIVEN (AS CONDITION 1.) TO: 
Sedgwick Professional Indemnity and Financial Institutions 
Services Ltd 
The Sedgwick Centre 
LONDON E1 8DX 
There was also a question whether this provision adequately identified
Sedgwick London.

Width of notification. Is the claim in respect of which the Permanent companies now seek indemnity from FAI a claim "arising out of the circumstances so notified"? 
Effect of s.54 on late notification. If there was no notification to FAI within Condition 1 of the policies until August 1992, or if the notification was too narrow, are the Permanent companies still entitled to indemnity pursuant to the policies for the period 1st October 1990 to 30th September , as extended to 30th October 1991, on the basis of s.54 of the Insurance [Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/)?
Section 54 is in the following terms: (1) Subject to this section, where the effect of a contract of insurance would, but for this section, be that the insurer may refuse to pay a claim, either in whole or in part, by reason of some act of the insured or of some other person, being an act that occurred after the contract was entered into but not being an act in respect of which subsection (2) applies, the insurer may not refuse to pay the claim by reason only of that act but his liability in respect of the claim is reduced by the amount that fairly represents the extent to which the insurer's interests were prejudiced as a result of that act.

Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section, where the act could reasonably be regarded as being capable of causing or contributing to a loss in respect of which insurance cover is provided by the contract, the insurer may refuse to pay the claim.

Where the insured proves that no part of the loss that gave rise to the claim was caused by the act, the insurer may not refuse to pay the claim by reason only of the act.

Where the insured proves that some part of the loss that gave rise to the claim was not caused by the act, the insurer may not refuse to pay the claim, so far as it concerns that part of the loss, by reason only of the act.

Where: the act was necessary to protect the safety of a person or to preserve property; or it was not reasonably possible for the insured or other person not to do the act; the insurer may not refuse to pay the claim by reason only of the act.

A reference in this section to an act includes a reference to: an omission; and an act or omission that has the effect of altering the state or condition of the subject-matter of the contract or of allowing the state or condition of that subject-matter to alter.
 .2 Retroactive Liability 
The Permanent companies' case is that the claim in question is deemed to have been made during the thirty-day extension of the 1990-1991 insurance policies from 1st October 1991 to 30th October 1991. FAI relies on the following term of its policies: 
RETROACTIVE LIABILITY: Unlimited (excluding claims or circumstances which may give rise to a claim which are known to the Insured prior to the inception of this insurance).

FAI says that "the inception of this insurance" means 1st October 1991, and that "circumstances which may give rise to a claim" were known to the
Permanent companies prior to 1st October 1991. Three main questions arise in relation to this matter.

Construction of retroactive provision. There are in fact two issues of construction: first, does the provision exclude circumstances which are in fact known to the insured and which may in fact give rise to a claim, even if the insured did not know that these circumstances may give rise to a claim (and if so, is it affected by s.33 of the Insurance [Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/), set out below); and second, is "the inception of this insurance" 1st October 1990, or 1st
October 1991? 
Rectification. If, as a matter of construction, the inception of this insurance means 1st October 1991, should there be rectification so that the relevant date becomes 1st October 1990? 
Application. Does this clause have the effect of excluding the present claims? This matter I will deal with under the heading Non-Disclosure and
Misrepresentation Concerning 1 O'Connell Street, in Sections 2.5 and [8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/s8.html) below.
 .3 Deliberate Act 
The applicable insuring clause is in the following terms: 
NOW THEREFORE, We, the Underwriters hereby agree to indemnify the Assured up to but not exceeding the sum stated in the Schedule for any sum or sums which the Assured may become legally liable to pay for breach of duty committed or alleged to have been committed in the professional conduct of their business, as stated in the Schedule arising from any claim made against them during the Period of Insurance stated in the Schedule as a result of any partner or previous partner or any person or party employed or engaged or appointed by the Assured or for whom the Assured are responsible.

FAI contends that the Permanent companies' liability is the result of a deliberate act or of deliberate acts, whereas the insurance was only against liability for neglect, error or omission.
 .4 Market Fluctuation Clause 
A term of the policies was as follows: 
It is also understood and agreed that this Policy excludes any claim or claims arising out of depreciation or loss of investments when such depreciation or loss is a result of normal or abnormal fluctuations in any financial, stock or commodity or other markets which are outside the influence or control of the Assured.

FAI contends that the claim in this case arises out of fluctuations in the market for commercial and/or development properties in the Sydney CBD, outside the influence or control of the Permanent companies, and accordingly is not covered by the policy.
 .5 Non-Disclosure and Misrepresentation Concerning 1 O'Connell Street 
In general terms, FAI says that facts known to the Permanent companies in , 1990, and 1991 (prior to 1st October 1991) concerning the 1 O'Connell
Street project individually and collectively amounted to matters relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk, and if so on what terms, and were either known to be relevant by the Permanent companies or were such that a reasonable person could be expected to know them to be relevant; and that, because there was failure to disclose these matters and/or was misrepresentation concerning these matters, FAI became entitled to avoid the contracts of insurance for the period 1st October 1991 to 30th October 1991, or to have its liability under them reduced to nil, pursuant to ss.21 and 28 of the Insurance [Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/). FAI relies on the same matters as being breaches of the Permanent companies' duty of utmost good faith under s.13 of the Act; and also as indicating knowledge by the
Permanent companies of circumstances which may give rise to a claim, so as to exclude the present claims by reason of the retro-active clause referred to earlier.

Sections 12, 13, 21, 26, 28, 31 and 33 of the Insurance [Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/) are in the following terms: The effect of this Part is not limited or restricted in any way by any other law, including the subsequent provisions of this Act, but this Part does not have the effect of imposing on an insured, in relation to the disclosure of a matter to the insurer, a duty other than the duty of disclosure.
 . A contract of insurance is a contract based on the utmost good faith and there is implied in such a contract a provision requiring each party to it to act towards the other party, in respect of any matter arising under or in relation to it, with the utmost good faith.
 (1) Subject to this Act, an insured has a duty to disclose to the insurer, before the relevant contract of insurance is entered into, every matter that is known to the insured, being a matter that: the insured knows to be a matter relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms; or a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know to be a matter so relevant.

The duty of disclosure does not require the disclosure of a matter: that diminishes the risk; that is of common knowledge; that the insurer knows or in the ordinary course of his business as an insurer ought to know; or as to which compliance with the duty of disclosure is waived by the insurer.

Where a person: failed to answer; or gave an obviously incomplete or irrelevant answer to; a question included in a proposal form about a matter, the insurer shall be deemed to have waived compliance with the duty of disclosure in relation to the matter. (1) Where a statement that was made by a person in connection with a proposed contract of insurance was in fact untrue but was made on the basis of a belief that he held, being a belief that a reasonable person in the circumstances would have held, the statement shall not be taken to be a misrepresentation.

A statement that was made by a person in connection with a proposed contract of insurance shall not be taken to be a misrepresentation unless the person who made the statement knew, or a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to have known, that the statement would have been relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms.

This section extends to the provision of insurance cover in respect of a person who is seeking to become a member of a superannuation or retirement scheme.
 (1) This section applies where the person who became the insured under a contract of general insurance upon the contract being entered into: failed to comply with the duty of disclosure; or made a misrepresentation to the insurer before the contract was entered into; but does not apply where the insurer would have entered into the contract, for the same premium and on the same terms and conditions, even if the insured had not failed to comply with the duty of disclosure or had not made the misrepresentation before the contract was entered into.

If the failure was fraudulent or the misrepresentation was made fraudulently, the insurer may avoid the contract.

If the insurer is not entitled to avoid the contract or, being entitled to avoid the contract (whether under subsection (2) or otherwise) has not done so, the liability of the insurer in respect of a claim is reduced to the amount that would place him in a position in which he would have been if the failure had not occurred or the misrepresentation had not been made.
 (1) In any proceedings by the insured in respect of a contract of insurance that has been avoided on the ground of fraudulent failure to comply with the duty of disclosure or fraudulent misrepresentation, the court may, if it would be harsh and unfair not to do so, but subject to this section, disregard the avoidance and, if it does so, shall allow the insured to recover the whole, or such part as the court thinks just and equitable in the circumstances, of the amount that would have been payable if the contract had not been avoided.

The power conferred by subsection (1) may be exercised only where the court is of the opinion that, in respect of the loss that is the subject of the proceedings before the court, the insurer has not been prejudiced by the failure or misrepresentation or, if the insurer has been so prejudiced, the prejudice is minimal or insignificant.

In exercising the power conferred by subsection (1), the court: shall have regard to the need to deter fraudulent conduct in relation to insurance; and shall weigh the extent of the culpability of the insured in the fraudulent conduct against the magnitude of the loss that would be suffered by the insured if the avoidance were not disregarded; but may also have regard to any other relevant matter.

The power conferred by subsection (1) applies only in relation to the loss that is the subject of the proceedings before the court, and any disregard by the court of the avoidance does not otherwise operate to reinstate the contract.  The provisions of this Division are exclusive of any right that the insurer has otherwise than under this Act in respect of a failure by the insured to disclose a matter to the insurer before the contract was entered into and in respect of a misrepresentation or incorrect statement.

These contentions give rise to the following issues.

Were matters known? This raises questions as to whether the matters alleged by FAI did in fact occur, and if so, were they known to the Permanent companies. The latter question involves some consideration of what is meant by "known".

Were the matters relevant? This involves among other things an assessment of expert evidence, including that of underwriters employed by FAI.

Was any relevance known or expected to be known? This question again involves consideration of the meaning of "known", and expert evidence; and it also involves questions of credit of Mr. Davis and Mr. Carson, who were officers of the Permanent companies.

Was there misrepresentation about these matters? 
Was there a breach of utmost good faith? 
Section 28(1). Essentially, this involves a question whether the Permanent companies can establish that FAI would have entered into the insurance contracts anyway.

Section 28(2). This involves the question whether FAI can prove that any failure to comply with a duty of disclosure or any relevant misrepresentation was fraudulent.

Section 28(3). This involves the question whether FAI has established that there should be a reduction of its liability, and if so in what amount. This in turn raises a question of whether compliance with the duty of disclosure would have amounted to or given rise to a notification of circumstances under the unextended policy, so that no detriment is established by FAI.

Section 31. This arises if fraud is proved under s.28(2), and raises the question whether it would be harsh and unfair not to disregard FAI's avoidance of the contract.

Section 54. This involves the question whether the claim could possibly be within the unextended policies (that is, the policies covering the period 1st
October 1990 to 30th September 1991) in that during that period there were circumstances that may give rise to a claim, and the lack of notification was an act (or omission: see s.54(6)) which FAI cannot rely on to refuse to pay the Permanent companies' claim.

Retroactive clause. Did the matters amount to circumstances which may give rise to a claim known to the Permanent companies, prior to 1st October 1990, or alternatively 1st October 1991? Does s.33 apply? .6 Non-disclosure and Misrepresentation Concerning Non-Inclusion of FAI 
FAI says that by 27th September 1991, the Permanent companies had decided and had instructed Sedgwick Australia to replace FAI on the insurance program, or at least to get quotes for professional indemnity insurance for the 1991-1992 year from insurers excluding FAI; and Sedgwick Australia had sent renewal material to current insurers excluding FAI. According to FAI, these were facts known to the Permanent companies which were matters relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk and if so, on what terms; and were either known to be relevant by the Permanent companies or were such that a reasonable person could be expected to know them to be relevant; and because there was failure to disclose these matters and/or misrepresentation concerning them, FAI became entitled to avoid the contracts of insurance for the period 1st October 1991 to 30th October 1991, or to have its liability reduced to nil, pursuant to ss.21 and 28 of the Insurance [Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/). FAI relied on the same matters as breaches of the Permanent companies' duty of utmost good faith under s.13 of the Act.

This gives rise to the following questions.

Were these matters known to the Permanent companies? This involves particularly questions concerning the meaning of "known", and when the knowledge of agents can be attributed to principals.

Were these matters relevant? This involves some expert evidence; and also the question of whether relevance within s.21 was limited to relevance to the risk undertaken by the insurer, or extended to relevance to other commercial considerations or to subjective or emotional aspects of the transaction.

Was any such relevance known or expected to be known? This again involves questions concerning the meaning of "known", and questions as to when the knowledge of agents can be attributed to principals.

Was there misrepresentation? This involves particularly a question whether a conversation on 27th September 1991 between Mr. Welsh of Sedgwick Australia and Mr. Hunter of FAI amounted to misrepresentation. If so, there is then the question whether it was made so as to affect the Permanent companies.

Utmost good faith. Do these matters involve a breach of the Permanent companies' duty of utmost good faith under s.13 of the Act? 
Section 28(1). Can the Permanent companies prove that FAI would have entered into the contracts anyway? 
Section 28(2). Has FAI proved that any failure to comply with the duty of disclosure or misrepresentation was fraudulent? 
Section 28(3). Has FAI established that there should be a reduction of its liability, and if so, in what amount? 
Section 31. If fraud is established, would it be harsh and unfair not to disregard FAI's avoidance of the contract? .7 Waiver or Election 
Two issues of waiver or election are raised: 
In relation to non-disclosure and misrepresentation concerning 1 O'Connell
Street, the plaintiffs say that FAI knew or ought to have known, before agreeing to the 30-day extension, that a proposal had been submitted to the lead underwriter of the primary layer and that the lead underwriter had required further information concerning property trusts; that FAI had agreed to the extension without making any enquiry as to the contents of the proposal or the further information; and that FAI thereby waived compliance with the duty of disclosure in respect of such matters.

In relation to non-disclosure and misrepresentation concerning the non- inclusion of FAI, the plaintiffs say that by 11th November 1991, FAI knew that the plaintiffs had decided not to invite FAI to quote for the 1991-2 year; that FAI made no enquiry as to when or why this decision was made; that in
January 1992 FAI accepted the premium for the 30-day extension; and that FAI thereby elected to affirm this extension.
 .8 Target Fund: Exhaustion of Primary Layer 
In fact, the primary layer of the multi-layer programme was largely exhausted by payments relating to No.1 O'Connell Street claim. The Target Fund claim alone would not have exhausted it. FAI argues that, if it is not liable for the No.1 O'Connell Street claim, it should be treated as not being prejudiced by the exhaustion of the primary layer by reason of the No.1 O'Connell Street claim.
 .9 Target Fund: Notification 
Essentially, this raises a similar point to the notification point concerning the No.1 O'Connell Street claim. There was notification to Sedgwick London during the term of the October 1990 to September 1991 policy, but not directly to FAI until substantially later.
 .10 Target Fund: Non-Disclosure and Misrepresentation 
FAI relied substantially on the same matters of non-disclosure and misrepresentation concerning No.1 O'Connell Street, which had occurred up to th September 1990. Further, FAI contended that if (contrary to its primary submission) the policy operative during October 1991 was a 13-month policy commencing 1st October 1990, and if FAI was entitled to avoid that policy for any of the reasons advanced in relation to the No.1 O'Connell Street claim, then the whole 13-month policy was avoided and the Target Fund claims were thereby defeated.
 . OUTLINE OF FACTS 
It is convenient here to outline relevant facts which are either not in dispute or else are clearly proved.
 .1 April and May, 1988 
I have already noted that in about May 1988 Permanent Australia, as trustee of the Aust-Wide trusts, subscribed about $65 million for units in another trust, to be used towards purchase of the property No.1 O'Connell Street. In connection with this transaction, Permanent Australia instructed Clayton Utz to act as its solicitors; and FAI rely on some communications from Clayton Utz at around this time as supporting its defence.

The first communication relied on is a facsimile dated 18th April 1988, from
Mr. Lyons of Clayton Utz to Mr. Loth, who had the carriage of the transaction for the Permanent companies. Paragraphs 1.2 and 2 were in the following terms: .2 the Facility Agreement provides for a facility of $95 million. This is a short term facility which terminates in November 1988. We do not have any indication as to the financing arrangements which will be required to replace that facility or which will be required to proceed with the construction.
 . We are given to understand that the property is currently valued at $165 million. We understand that the Lenders will be granted a first mortgage to secure their claim of $95 million so that the remaining equity in the property, based on the above valuation will be $70 million. The investment by the Trusts of $65 million will however only confer an interest of 15%.

In fact, it was proposed that the purchase of 1 O'Connell Street should be completed with $65.4 million provided by the Aust-Wide trusts and $95 million provided under a facility agreement; and in the event this is how it was done.
The agreement pursuant to which the $65 million was provided did have the effect that the Aust-Wide trusts would only be entitled to 15% of any profits from the project. However, in addition the Aust-Wide trusts were entitled to the return of the whole $65 million, plus interest, from the venturers' equity in the property, then estimated at $70 million, in priority to the other venturers (whom I will call Northbourne and IEL). (Upon provision of a further $65 million, the Aust-Wide trusts were to become entitled to a total of 30% of any profits from the project; but they were at risk of bearing the whole of any loss; whereas Northbourne and IEL were to be entitled to 70% of any profits, without being at any risk in the event that the project made a loss.)
The fact that interest was to be paid to the Aust-Wide trusts improved their position vis-a-vis the other venturers; but the fact that this interest was to be paid while the development was being built, and before the project earned anything, increased the risk that the project would make a loss.

The next communication relied on was a telephone conversation on 20th April between Mr. Loth and Mr. Toltz, a partner of Mr. Lyons. It is clear that in this conversation Mr. Toltz said to Mr. Loth words to the effect that a trustee had a duty not to speculate, and suggested that the investment which was proposed might possibly amount to speculation; and also that Mr. Loth became somewhat heated. Mr. Loth gave evidence that, after Mr. Lyons came to the telephone, he said words to the effect that, if Mr. Lyons thought the investment was speculation, he should put this in a letter: this was denied by
Mr. Lyons.

Later the same day, Mr. Lyons received a copy of the standard letter which
Permanent Australia sought from its solicitors before it executed a Trust
Deed. This letter ends with the sentence "Subject to the above, the Trust Deed is in order for execution by your Company". Mr. Lyons responded with facsimile to Mr. Loth. Paragraph 2 was as follows: . I think I should say at this stage that I see no prospect at all (in the time that is available to us) of our advising you along the lines of the letter which you have sent me even with elaborate and detailed qualifications. My reasons (very much summarised) for coming to this conclusion are that: we do not believe that we have had anything like a sufficient opportunity to consider either the commercial intentions and objectives of the Trustee in relation to the transaction or whether the draft documents give effect to those intentions; indeed we have had little opportunity to confer with you either with regard to those intentions or with regard to the draft documents; during the course of the weekend we urgently examined such documentation as was then made available to us. It was obvious even at that stage that more documents would have to be forthcoming; it was only today that the major part of new documentation began to filter through to this office as it has done intermittently throughout the day and further drafts are expected I should say that at this stage I have not managed (despite every endeavour) to peruse all of the documents which I have been receiving today and in order to report to you (as hope to do some time tonight) I do not anticipate that I will have any prospect of thoroughly reviewing those documents i.e. I will be limited to a relatively superficial review of the papers. A large part of the drafts which have been faxed to me have been handwritten and some parts are illegible; earlier today I (together with my partner Mr. R.M. Toltz) advised you of certain of our misgivings in regard to the transaction as a whole. Those misgivings included our concern as to the short term nature of the finance package which has been made available, the absence of any clear arrangements for the refinancing of the project and for financing the construction project (later on you did advise that Wardleys had provided some comfort by a "best endeavours" undertaking in relation to the finance), and the absence at this stage of firm construction and financing agreements lightening your dependence of the valuation of the property); we have not had the opportunity to examine the terms of or to advise you with respect to the Trust Deeds for the Australia Wide Property Trust No.3 and the Aust-Wide Trust; 
At that time, it was contemplated that settlement would be taking place on nd April. It was subsequently postponed to 29th April.

Mr. Lyons sent a further letter to Mr. Loth on 21st April. Paragraphs 4 and 10 were as follows: . Although we have not had sight of nor have we been requested to advise you with regard to the terms and conditions of the Trust Deeds applicable to the Aust-Wide Trusts, we understand that each of those Trust Deeds is an "approved Deed" as contemplated by the Companies Code ("the Code") and that the Trustee of each of the Aust-Wide Trusts is entitled to invest in "authorised investments" which include investments in a Trust which is itself an approved Trust for the purpose of the Code. You have instructed us that Aust-Wide Management Limited ("the Manager") is taking steps to procure that the Trust Deed in respect of the Trust be approved as an approved Deed by the Corporate Affairs Commission and that it is on that basis, that the Trustee of each of the Aust-Wide Trusts will invest in units in the Trust.
 . The basis of the Trustee's investment in the Private Trust and also of the investment by the Aust-Wide Trusts in the Trust is to be contained in a Unitholders Agreement. We have expressed certain reservations to you regarding that Agreement which need not be repeated here. Those reservations arise inter alia, from the fact that it has been necessary for the transactions to be considered and entered into in extreme haste. Yesterday we received a new draft of that Agreement. During the course of the day we continued to receive further amendments to that draft. The changes made were substantial and significantly affected the Agreement as a whole. Although we dedicated the entire day to the document, by the time we met with the relevant parties at the offices of Freehill, Hollingdale & Page at approximately 9p.m. last night we had not yet had the opportunity to fully read the revised document or the amendments to it and even less had we had the opportunity to fully comprehend the document or the ancilliary documents. On our arrival at the meeting, we were handed a further draft. It became obvious during the meeting, that the other parties who had been much more intimately involved with the drafting of the document were themselves having considerable difficulty in coming to terms with and grappling with the provisions of the Agreement. The meeting continued well beyond midnight. During the course of the meeting, it was obvious that many changes were being identified "on the run". In the circumstances, we cannot say that we have undertaken or had any opportunity to undertake anything more than a superficial overview of that document and the arrangements to which it relates. If time permitted, considerably more attention would have to be given to the transaction. We understand that that is not possible in the particular circumstances. Nevertheless, we have requested and we understand that there will be included in the Unitholders Agreement provisions to the effect that: 
Permanent contracts only as a Trustee and will not incur personal liability by entering into the Agreement or performing its terms and that its liability will be limited to the assets of the Trust concerned. Therefore, except in respect of any neglect, default, breach of duty or omission or (sic) the part of the Trustee, its liability under the Agreement will be limited in this way.
 the Unitholders of the Trust will expressly consent to and direct the Trustee to depart from the strict terms of the Trust Deed in so far as the provisions of the Unitholders Agreement or the actions required by the Trustee may conflict with or differ from the provisions of the Trust Deed (this being necessary because the Unitholders Agreement contains provisions which depart significantly from the terms and conditions of the Trust Deed and having regard to the time constraints involved we are given to understand that it has not been possible to attempt to incorporate the specific provisions contemplated by the Unitholders Agreement in the Trust Deed itself).

On 22nd April, Mr. Lyons sent a letter to the Permanent companies, which was delivered by hand to the managing director Mr. Davis, because Mr. Loth was in
Queensland on that day. It was in the following terms: . In accordance with your instructions we have acted for you in relation to the transactions referred to below. You have requested us to advise you in regard to the Agreements/Deeds relating to those transactions as to whether or not your liability, where you act as Trustee, is limited to the assets of the relevant Trust. In doing so, you have requested our advice with respect to the terms of the documents themselves but not with respect to the overall transaction or the commercial implications or objectives of the documents.
 . The following are the transactions concerned: .1 Unitholders Agreement 
The parties to the draft Agreement are Azolla Pty. Limited, Northbourne Finance Pty. Limited, Permanent Trustee Australia Limited in three different capacities namely as Trustee of the Australia Wide Property Trust No.3, Aust-Wide Trust and as Trustee of the "Trust" as defined namely the Northbourne Securities Property Trust, Aust-Wide Management Limited in four different capacities namely as Manager of the Trust, as Manager of the Australia Wide Property Trust No.3, in its personal capacity and as Manager of the Aust-Wide Trust and Delovan Pty. Limited. The draft Agreement provides in clause 1.16, inter alia that Permanent Trustee Australia Limited has entered into the Agreement as Trustee of the various Trusts which are referred to and it states that in those Trustee capacities Permanent does not incur any personal liability by entering into the Agreement or by performing or purporting to perform its terms and that any liability incurred is limited to the assets of the Trust or Trusts of which it is the Trustee or purports to act as Trustee. In our view this appropriately negatives any personal liability which might otherwise have arisen.
 .2 Share Sale Agreement 
The draft Share Sale Agreement is between Hargreave Securities Pty. Limited, Eriska Pty. Limited, Pitt Street Securities Pty. Limited, Edward Thomas Hutley and Permanent Trustee Australia Limited. That Agreement provides for the purchase by Permanent Trustee Australia Limited in its personal capacity and not as Trustee of a Trust of all of the issued capital of Northbourne Securities Pty. Limited for a consideration of $2,000. In that Agreement, Permanent clearly is liable in its personal capacity.
 .3 Offer 
The draft Offer is expressed to be an offer by Northbourne Finance Pty. Limited and Delovan Pty. Limited ("Offerors") addressed to Permanent Trustee Australia Limited pursuant to which those Offerors offer to sell to Permanent Trustee Australia Limited all of the issued units held by those Offerors in the Northbourne Securities Trust for a purchase price of $10. Although the draft that we have seen does not expressly state that Permanent acts in its capacity as Trustee for the Northbourne Securities Property Trust, it is common cause that it does so in that capacity and its liability is limited accordingly. In any event, the liability referred to amounts to only $10. Nevertheless we shall request that the document be amended to make it plain that Permanent acts in that particular capacity.
 .4 Deed 
The draft Deed is between Permanent Trustee Australia Limited, Northbourne Finance Pty. Limited, Delovan Pty. Limited and Aust-Wide Management Limited. In terms of the Deed, certain undertakings are given to Permanent Trustee Australia Limited as the holder of the issued capital of Northbourne Securities Pty. Limited (being the Company in which Permanent acquires all of the issued share capital - in its personal capacity - referred to above). As the undertakings contained in the document are given to Permanent and no obligations are imposed on Permanent it has no liability in terms of the Deed and accordingly there is no need to make any reference to a limitation of its liability.
 .5 Uniholders (sic) Deed 
This Deed is between Northbourne Securities Pty. Limited, Permanent Trustee Australia Limited acting as Trustee of the Northbourne Securities Property Trust and Aust-Wide Management Limited. The draft Deed provides for the appointment of Aust-Wide Management Limited to provide services to the Trust being the Trust established by Deed dated 14 May 1987 between Gordon David Cooper and Northbourne Securities Pty. Limited. Although the Deed does not expressly state that Permanent has no personal liability, it is clear from the Deed that it acts as Trustee of the Northbourne Securities Property Trust. Nevertheless we will request the inclusion in that Deed of the following clause: "The parties to this Deed agree that Permanent has entered into this Deed as Trustee of Northbourne Securities Property Trust and that it does not incur any personal liability in doing so or purporting to perform any of the terms of the Deed and that any liability incurred is limited to the assets of the Northbourne Securities Property Trust".

The inclusion of that clause will simply confirm what is already the position, namely that the Trustee has no personal liability in terms of that Deed.
 .6 Agreement 
There is a draft Agreement between Permanent Trustee Australia Limited as Trustee of the Northbourne Securities Property Trust and Northbourne Securities Pty. Limited as Trustee of the Northbourne Securities Trust. The Agreement refers to the subscription by Permanent for 65,400,000 units of $1 each in the Northbourne Securities Trust and records that the units concerned will be entitled to income equivalent to the "cost of funds" as defined therein. Again it is obvious from the document that Permanent acts as Trustee and accordingly does not incur personal liability. Nevertheless, we shall request the inclusion in that Agreement of a provision in substantially the same terms as that referred to in 2.5 above which will confirm the absence of such personal liability.

Despite the qualifications in paragraph 1 of the letter, and although the letter did not advise that the documents were in order for execution, the
Permanent companies treated the letter as what witnesses called a "sign-off" letter, and took it that it was in order for the documentation to be executed.
At 5.30pm on the same day, Mr. Loth spoke to Mr. Lyons on the telephone to the effect that there was no need for him to consider the commercial aspects of the transaction.
 .2 December 1988 
On behalf of the Aust-Wide trusts, Permanent Australia invested another $65.4 million in the project in about October and November 1988. In December 1988 it was necessary to consider the entry into contracts for financing the construction of the proposed building on the site. For this transaction,
Permanent Australia instructed Minter Ellison to act as its solicitors.

On 19th December 1988, Mr. Stewart of Minter Ellison sent a memorandum to Mr.
Loth. Paragraphs 1, and 3 to 9 inclusive, were as follows: . Minter Ellison have been asked to advise Permanent Trustee Australia Limited as Trustee of the Northbourne Securities Property Trust in relation to a proposed borrowing of $370,000,000. The structure is relatively complex and in the short time available it has obviously not been possible to assimilate all aspects. Nevertheless, a number of concerns arise, which it may be helpful to set out in this short Memorandum.
 . ...
 . The Aust-wide Trusts have thus provided essentially the whole of the purchase money for the acquisition of No.1 O'Connell Street. By virtue of the Trust Deed for NSPT, the units held by the Aust-wide Trusts entitle them to a 30% interest in the assets of that Trust, essentially the No.1 O'Connell Street property held through the caretaker trust. If that were all, they would have paid $130.8 million to acquire an interest worth about $40,000,000, or if the current value has increased to $160,000,000, their interest would be worth about $48,000,000.
 . However, under the Unit Holders Agreement dated 29th April, 1988, the unit holders in NSPT have agreed that notwithstanding the Trust Deed the Aust-wide Trusts will be entitled to income of a minimum of 10% (or higher under a formula) (Clause 3.01). In reality, there is no income, nor can there be, until a new building is built (unless the property is sold and the proceeds invested in an income producing form). The Deed provides that to the extent that income is insufficient then the relevant amounts are to be paid out of the capital (which may be funded by borrowings) to the extent of the insufficiency (Clause 3.01(g)).
 . Evidently distributions have been made, out of borrowings. If that were all, it would simply mean that the Aust-wide Trusts were receiving distributions of capital which were being represented by distributions of income and which were in fact diminishing progressively the value of the capital asset, namely, the net value of the caretaker trust, to which they were entitled. To the extent that this is the existing arrangement, the questions which arise are whether the Manager's proposals to the Trustees respectively of NSPT and the Aust-wide Trusts in relation to the respective investments totalling $130.8 million fully disclosed the nature of the transaction and the source of income and whether consideration was given by the Trustee to whether or not that represented a proper arrangement.
 . The present proposal involves a borrowing of $370,000,000 part of which will be applied to discharge existing borrowings (which at least in part presumably represent distributions to the Aust-wide Trusts) and part of which we are told represents amounts which will be similarly distributed in the future. The amount of the borrowing will be secured by a mortgage over No.1 O'Connell Street and, it is proposed, by a guarantee from Permanent Trustee Australia Limited as Trustee of NSPT. The actual borrower will be a shelf company, Persigny Pty. Limited which will make an unsecured loan to No.1 O'Connell Street Pty. Limited to enable it to meet its obligations under the proposed construction contract.
 . The effect of the combination of arrangements would appear to be that if there is default in payment or if for some reason it is necessary to sell the project before completion, the impact of any loss will fall entirely on the Aust-wide Trusts. This is because the other unit holders evidently will have no liability under the borrowing.
 . Given the extra load of borrowing representing "income" distributions to the Aust-wide Trusts, it is obvious that there will have to be a substantial increase in the value of the finished building, over and above the costs of purchase and construction, if the Aust-wide Trusts are not to lose. On the other hand, the Aust-wide Trusts at best will get 30% of the Notional Development Profit, that is, the value of the finished building minus costs of construction (including the distribution to the Aust-wide Trusts made out of borrowings). On the other hand, the remaining unit holders will share between them 70% of the Notional Development Profit, without having made any contribution and without having accepted any liability in relation to the proposed borrowings.
 . Obviously this transaction is still to become the subject of a detailed proposal which shows whether or not the transaction is one which the Trustee can properly enter into. Any such proposal, in our view, should contain sufficient detailed figures to project the outcome in a number of different circumstances, not merely the successful completion of the building within cost.

Later the same day, there was a telephone conversation between Mr. Stewart and
Mr. Loth in which, according to Mr. Stewart, Mr. Loth said words to the effect that he realised the Aust-Wide unitholders were in a terrible position. Mr.
Loth denied saying this.

On the same day, Permanent Australia wrote a letter to the manager of the
Aust-Wide trusts, composed by Mr. Loth and Ms. Byrne, who was now assisting him. This letter was in the following terms: 
As you know, the original negotiation of the Northborne (sic) Trusts was on the basis that the Aust-Wide Trusts put in equity to give them 30% of the profit with the other parties financing their 70% share in their own way. To date the other parties have financed this by debt. This has not concerned us up to the development stage because if the project failed it is likely that there would be sufficient funds to pay out the Aust-Wide Trusts. However, under the new proposal for the construction phase, the position is very different to the present because it is very likely that if the project failed, the value of the asset would be significantly less than the combined borrowings and the equity contribution from the Aust-Wide Trusts. We are surprised that the other two parties considered that the financing for the development stage could be structured similarly to that for the purchase and demolition stage.

We are very concerned that under the proposed borrowing documentation, the effect is that for 30% of the profit (if the project is successful), Aust-Wide Trusts are taking 100% of the development risk (if the project is not successful).

It appears to us that Northborne (sic) and IEL are providing no additional security or guarantees apart from their interest in this project. As we understand it, their interest has been and is to be financed by debt only and there is no recourse against them in their own right.

The above set of circumstances seems to us to be most unusual especially for a Trust. On the information presently before us we are having difficulty reconciling how the project financing proposal can be entered by us in the interests of unitholders of the Aust-Wide Trusts.

Please give us a detailed explanation urgently to justify the basis on which you believe the Aust-Wide Trusts can enter this deal in the light of the above. 
Issues we would like you to specifically address include: ) Should the borrowing documentation include an undertaking by lender that any distribution made to the Aust-Wide Trusts of Income/Capital not be recoverable upon default.
 ) If there is default why should not Northbourne and IEL provide some collateral security or guarantee for their 70% interest or part thereof; and ) From the amending deeds for Northbourne Securities Trust and the Northbourne Securities Property Trust, it would appear that in the Private Trust borrowings are limited to 100% of the gross value of the assets of the Trust. We consider that it should be the liabilities that should be limited to 100% of the assets.

Subsequently, Mr. Loth spoke by telephone to Mr. Kerr at the office of the manager, referring to the gravity of the issues they were raising, which he said might be a matter of fiduciary duty.

The manager responded with a letter dated 21st December, in the following terms: 
We refer to our discussions regarding the investment by Australia Wide Flexi Property Fund and Aust-Wide Trust in the abovementioned Trust, for the purchase and development of 1 O'Connell Street, Sydney.

Our letter of 21 April 1988 set out the broad basis of our proposal to develop this project indicating the amount of cash required and the development profit to be received, stated in percentage terms, ie 20% rising to 30% should certain options be exercised.

While this letter indicated that Aust-Wide's initial payment would be used to partly pay out the IEL Finance Loan which financed purchase of the site, it went on as follows: "The participants in the project are: 
AWT and AWPT No.3 30% (assuming all options exercised) 
Northbourne and IEL 70% %

Northbourne and IEL's 70% share of the project will be by way of loan funds (Wardley) secured by a first mortgage over 1 O'Connell Street, Sydney 
In this case the development profit will be shared: 
AWT and AWPT No.3 30% 
Northbourne and IEL 70% %" 
The final paragraphs of the recommendation for each trust stated: "(c) invests such borrowings in the Northbourne Securities Property Trust to facilitate the settlement and development of 1 O'Connell Street, Sydney." 
It has always been Aust-Wide's understanding that its 30% would become the deposit while non-recourse loan funds on a first mortgage facility would supply construction finance plus associated fees, interest costs and other charges.

In reaching a decision to obtain property for the trusts on this basis we considered the following factors: . Prestige properties located in prime locations within Sydney's central business district have outperformed all other property investments. Statistics by independent consultants confirm this statement.

Australia Square is an example of such a building owned by a property trust and which is reported to have returned growth and income of 24% per annum during its life.
 . At a time when there is likely to be an oversupply of office space in Sydney it is prudent to invest in a prime central business district location. During the mid 1970s when the vacancy rate in Sydney buildings rose from an equilibrium of 4%-5% to 13%, Australia Square for example enjoyed a vacancy rate of only 3%.

Should such factors re-occur, the trusts would maintain their cash flow even though rental increases might be moderate.
 . We were confident that a quality building in this location would achieve early leasings and as 50% of the property is already leased our assumptions were justified. Record rentals generally in excess of the budget supplied to you have been achieved.
 . The trusts cannot afford to purchase outright properties of this nature and the opportunities to participate in development profits are rare.

On balance we decided that any risks likely to be involved were offset by the potential development profit. We endeavoured to minimise risks by undertaking the following evaluation: . Land was included in the study at $126,015,000 (plus a further $6,500,000 for Northbourne's entrepreneurial activity) notwithstanding a written offer of purchase of $198,000,000 from an institution.
 . Drawings were inspected in detail and the quantity surveyors were subjected to intense and detailed questioning. We concluded that the construction cost estimate was adequate and the tender received justified this stance.
 . All sundry charges including interest were assessed independently and included in our feasibility study.
 . Industrial Equity Limited is an experienced financier while Northbournes are successful and experienced developers. Aust-Wide has successfully completed a number of smaller but relatively major commercial projects.
 . The estimated value on completion by Jones Lang Wootton to the order of $560,000,000 appeared realistic.
 . Clause 8.05 of the Unitholders' Agreement provided for the property to be sold should it become apparent that costs were likely to exceed value. We attach handwritten comments from Ternes & Salier on this point.
 . In our letter of 27 April 1988 we commented as follows: "It is proposed that Wardley will procure the construction finance in the period July-September 1988 when the building contract is negotiated. In this regard it is proposed to use the documentation that is presently in place for the construction finance. We believe that construction finance will be able to be secured on terms that will be acceptable to all parties and thereby enable the project to be completed in a profitable manner and in line with the feasibility study." 
In summary, we believe the documentation reflects our original understanding of the details of the project: 
That Aust-Wide funds became the deposit for a non-recourse loan to enable IEL-Northbourne to complete the development.

That from experience costs would be likely to exceed value only through inefficiencies which were protected by the execution of a lump sum, fixed term construction contract and our involvement in the project.

As a retention sum is always held back from progress payments it is unlikely that such an event could occur.

At the present time costs appear to have been fixed while value is increasing. It would appear that a valuation of $650,000,000 rather than $560,000,000 is now likely which increases potential development profit to approximately 37.5% of cost.

Under these circumstances we believe the decision to invest funds into this project, on terms outlined, was a prudent one which will be to the benefit of unitholders in the respective trusts.

This letter was shown by Mr. Loth to Mr. Stewart. According to Mr. Stewart, he said that he couldn't see that the letter addressed the issues, and Mr. Loth said that the problem was that they seemed to be already committed, and that they wanted Mr. Stewart just to concentrate on getting the loan facility in place. Mr. Loth denied saying this.

On 30th December 1988, Mr. Stewart wrote the following letter, which the
Permanent companies took as a "sign-off" letter advising that it was in order for them to execute the documents required for the financing of the project: 
We confirm that we have acted for Permanent Trustee Australia Limited as Trustee of the Northbourne Securities Property Trust in relation to certain financing arrangements with State Bank of New South Wales.

We refer to the following documents now presented for execution by Permanent Trustee Australia Limited, namely:- . Deposit and Set-Off Agreement and Charge Over Deposit with No.1 O'Connell Street Pty. Limited and the State Bank of New South Wales.
 . Guarantee and Indemnity with the State Bank of New South Wales.
 . Deed of Covenant and Indemnity with Northbourne Finance Pty. Limited, Delovan Pty. Limited and the State Bank of New South Wales.
 . Deed of Covenant and Indemnity with No.1 O'Connell Street Pty. Limited and the State Bank of New South Wales.
 . Trustee's Side Agreement with the State Bank of New South Wales and Persigny Pty. Limited.

Each of these documents contains a clause limiting the liability of Permanent Trustee Australia Limited to the assets of the Trust. These are respectively:- . Clause 20.2 . Clause 21.
 . Clause 12.2 . Clause 12.2 . Clause 4.1 
We confirm that, in our opinion, the respective documents have been prepared in accordance with our instructions and, on that basis, are in order for execution.
 .3 To March 1991 
During 1990 and 1991, there was a significant downturn in prices being obtained for commercial buildings in the Central Building District of Sydney.
This was noted by the Permanent Companies, and led them to be concerned about the liquidity of some of their trusts including the Aust-Wide trusts.

In March 1991, allegations of breach of trust were made against Permanent
Australia in respect of the Target Fund No. 1 trust.
 .4 May and June 1991 
On 1st May 1991, Mr. Davis sent a memorandum to Mr. Carson, the General
Manager-Corporate Trusts of Permanent, requiring a "review of where we stand legally" in relation to a number of problems, including "No. 1 O'Connell
Street, particularly how we protect our investment in it from a fire sale".

Mr. Stewart was instructed to prepare a report on the 1 O'Connell Street project. The report was addressed to the board of directors of Permanent
Trustee. The report described the proposal for the 1 O'Connell Street investment as follows: . In summary, the main elements of the proposal were as follows: 
Permanent would act as trustee of NSPT, a newly formed trust, which was an approved trust for the purposes of the prescribed interest provisions of the Companies Code; 
All of the units in NST would be held as assets of NSPT; 
NST would develop the entire O'Connell Street site, comprising an aggregation of several adjoining properties, for a cost of approximately $472,500,000 of which AWT and Flexi would contribute $130,000,000 and the remaining $342,500,000 would be borrowed (a copy of the feasibility study is attached as Schedule 1); 
AWT and Flexi would contribute $65.4 million to acquire a 15% 'interest' in the NSPT and would have the exclusive option to acquire a further 15% in return for a further investment of $65.4 million. The Unitholders Agreement subsequently entered into contained provisions which were apparently designed to entitle AWT and Flexi to a degree of priority in terms of recovery of the $120,000,000 which they invested.

In short, the two Trusts would acquire a 30% interest in NSPT profits (if any) in return for contributing the entire equity requirement of $130 million; 
We have not seen any valuation or independent appraisal of these arrangements; 
The remaining 70% of the units in NSPT would be held by Northbourne and Delovan Pty. Limited, a company associated with IEL. We believe that only nominal amounts were subscribed for those units. According to the letter of 27 April 1988: "Northbourne and IEL's 70% share of the project will be by way of loan funds (Wardley) secured by a first mortgage over 1 O'Connell Street Sydney."; 
Aust-Wide would act as Manager of NSPT, although investment decisions would be delegated to Azolla Pty. Limited, (now known as Northbourne Project Management Pty. Limited) a company owned in equal shares by Aust-Wide Management Limited and Northbourne Developments Limited.

In a section headed "Investigations", it stated: . The building contract was signed on 9 January 1989 with the intention that construction commence in January 1989 so as to enable completion in March 1991. In a file note (in Permanent's file) concerning a meeting between Permanent, Aust-Wide, Northbourne Securities and advisers on 14 April 1988, the point was made that: "When we eventually are requested to enter into a building contract or development contract we will require an independent appraisal to confirm the terms of the contract are commercial." . There appears to be no evidence in the Trustee's files to indicate that such an independent appraisal was ever obtained in relation to the building contract or the general structure of the arrangements.
 . In a letter dated 21 April 1988 Mr. M.B. Lyons of Clayton Utz solicitors advised Permanent, among other things, that: he had been given to understand that satisfactory valuations had been obtained and made available to Permanent; and he had reservations about the basis of the investment and the haste with which documentation had been prepared.

The letter stated that: "The basis of the Trustee's investment in the Private Trust and also of the investment by the Aust-Wide Trusts in the Trust is to be contained in a Unitholders Agreement. We have expressed certain reservations to you regarding that Agreement which need not be repeated here. Those reservations arise inter alia, from the fact that it has been necessary for the transactions to be considered and entered into in extreme haste ... in the circumstances, we cannot say that we have undertaken or had any opportunity to undertake anything more than a superficial overview of that document and the arrangements to which it relates. If time permitted, considerably more attention would have to be given to the transaction. We understand that that is not possible in the particular circumstances".
 . Audited financial statements for the period ended 31 March 1988 were obtained in relation to Northbourne Securities Pty. Limited and Northbourne Securities Unit Trust.
 . Land Title searches were conducted by Clayton Utz and it is assumed that other usual searches were obtained.
 . In December 1988 it was proposed that Permanent, in its capacity as Trustee of the NSPT, borrow the sum of $370 million. Minter Ellison were requested to provide an overview of the proposal and did so by Memorandum dated 19 December 1988. Of relevance are the following comments: "7. The effect of the combination of arrangements would appear to be that if there is default in payment or if for some reason it is necessary to sell the project before completion, the impact of any loss will fall entirely on the Aust-wide Trusts. This is because the other Unitholders evidently will have no liability under the borrowing.
 . Given the extra load of borrowing representing 'income' distributions to the Aust-wide Trusts, it is obvious that there will have to be a substantial increase in the value of the finished building, over and above the costs of purchase and construction, if the Aust-wide Trusts are not to lose. On the other hand, the Aust-wide Trusts at best will get 30% of the Notional Development Profit, that is, the value of the finished building minus costs of construction (including the distribution to the Aust-wide Trusts made out of borrowings). On the other hand, the remaining unit holders will share between them 70% of the Notional Development Profit, without having made any contribution and without having accepted any liability in relation to the proposed borrowing.
 . Obviously this transaction is still to become the subject of a detailed proposal which shows whether or not the transaction is one which the Trustee can properly enter into. Any such proposal, in our view, should contain sufficient detailed figures to project the outcome in a number of different circumstances, not merely the successful completion of the building within cost." . Pursuant to the Memorandum, Permanent requested Mr. N. Wright of Aust-Wide to provide a detailed explanation urgently to justify the basis on which the Trusts were to enter the deal. In a file note dated 20 December 1988 Michael Loth indicated that he had expressed disappointment to Aust-Wide at the lack of response 'and their apparent failure to understand the gravity of the issue we raise', namely that the Trusts would receive 30% of the profit, if the project was successful, but bear 100% of the development risk, if the project was not successful.
 . By letter dated 21 December 1988 Mr. Ron Kerr of Aust-Wide responded to Mr. Loth by confirming the basis of the recommendation which had been made and stating that: "In summary, we believe the documentation reflects our original understanding of the details of the project: that Aust-Wide funds became the deposit for a non recourse loan to enable IEL-Northbourne to complete the development; that from experience costs would be likely to exceed value only through inefficiencies which were protected by the execution of a lump sum, fixed term construction contract and our involvement in the project. As a retention sum is always held back from progress payments it is unlikely that such an event could occur." 
On 14th May 1991, Ms. Alderson, a trust officer employed by Permanent Trustee, saw Mr. Stewart and asked him to prepare a version of the report omitting areas where the trustee may be open to criticism. Mr. Stewart's note of this meeting referred to a "sanitised version" of the report. Although Mr. Carson said in evidence that he did not recall doing so, it is clear in my opinion that he gave instructions to Ms. Alderson to obtain such a version of the report; and it is also clear that this was done so that the manager could be shown a version of the report which did not suggest any deficiencies in the conduct of the Permanent companies.

Mr. Stewart then produced a version of the report omitting paragraphs 11(e) and 13 to 20. Neither the full report nor the modified version were shown to the board of the Permanent companies, although they were seen by Mr. Davis, and also Mr. Church (now deceased), a solicitor and partner in the firm of
Church and Grace, and Chairman of Directors of the Permanent companies.

The report was also shown to Ms. Byrne for her comments, Mr. Loth having left the Permanent companies in August 1990. In her memorandum to Mr. Carson dated th June 1991, Ms. Byrne commented as follows: 
I refer to your memo dated 15 May 1991 and the enclosed copy of Minter Ellison's report in relation to the above property.

My recollections of the Trustee's involvement in the establishment of the Northbourne Trust and the purchase of No.1 O'Connell Street commence (sic) on 15 April 1988 when I took over from Greg Hunter. I believe that the broad proposals were already being considered by Alan Ross and Michael Loth.

The Manager's joint venture partner, Northbourne, imposed very short deadlines which required Michael Loth and the solicitor acting for the Trustee, Mike Lyons from Clayton Utz, to attend meetings until all hours of the morning. In the end, I believe we took a commercial decision to sign the various documents, although Mike Lyons was not comfortable with the amount of time he had to review them. His letter dated 21 April 1988 which concluded that the Trustee's liability was limited, was the best he was prepared to give in the circumstances.

Later that year, when borrowing to complete the building was put in place, we changed solicitors and used Minter Ellison because we thought Clayton Utz had not been sufficiently responsive and commercial.

A valuation of the completed building was addressed to the Trustee, although this did not cover arrangements relating to ownership and share of the development profits. Minter Ellison in their report quoted their memorandum of December 1988 in which they commented on the financial arrangements which were that the Trust put up the capital, and Northbourne and IEL got a 70% interest, although further capital was required to be borrowed by Trustee, thus the Trust wore all the downside risks. My recollection is that we were well aware of this, but that we decided to concur with the Manager's recommendations.
 .5 1991 Valuations 
On 21st June 1991, a committee of directors of Permanent Australia became aware of a recent valuation obtained by the mortgagee, valuing the project at $407 million on completion, on the basis of the current 50% committed tenancies.

The Permanent companies commissioned a valuation from Chesterton International
Pty. Ltd. On about 22nd August 1991, the directors were informed that this valuation had the effect of valuing the investment of the Aust-Wide trusts in 1 O'Connell Street at nil.
 .6 JCLD Correspondence 
On about 18th July 1991, the Permanent companies received a letter of that date from Joseph Charles Learmonth Duffy Ltd.("JCLD"), a firm of investment advisors in Perth acting on behalf of a number of unitholders. This was followed up with a further letter dated 23rd July 1991. Ms. Alderson replied by a letter dated 25th July 1991. JCLD responded with a letter dated 6th
August 1991; and Ms. Alderson replied by a letter dated 2nd September 1991.
Copies of these letters are included in an Appendix to this judgment.

On 13th September 1991, JCLD wrote two letters, one for the attention of Mr.
Davis, and one for the attention of Ms. Alderson: copies of these letters are also included in the Appendix.

At Mr. Davis's request, Ms. Alderson prepared for him a memorandum dated 16th
September 1991; and Mr. Davis replied to the letter addressed to him by a letter dated 17th September 1991. Copies of this memorandum and letter are included in the Appendix.

In the afternoon of 30th September 1991, the Permanent companies received the first of a number of letters from unitholder clients of JCLD, all of which were in the same terms as a letter from Mr. de Francesch, a copy of which is included in the Appendix. Twelve of these letters were received on 30th
September, eleven more between 1st and 3rd October, and a further seven between 4th and 15th October.
 .7 Moves to Replace FAI 
Meanwhile, in May 1991, on reading a report indicating that FAI had been given a poor security rating, Mr. Ham, the officer of the Permanent companies responsible for insurance matters, wrote a letter dated 20th May 1991 to
Sedgwick Australia in the following terms: 
We recently received a "Claims Paying Ability Ratings" update which ranked the FAI Insurance Group relatively poorly at BBB-.

We require some comment in writing from you that gives our Company some assurances that there is no urgent need to replace this Insurer from within the coverage contained in our PI policy.

Would you kindly provide some comment in order for me to table a report to the Board.

On 13th June 1991, Mr. Ham spoke by telephone to Mr. Daly of Sedgwick
Australia about this matter. Mr. Daly said words to the effect that "Sedgwick is not recommending that FAI be replaced mid-term. It is an option that can be considered at the renewal of the policies at the end of September".

On 30th July 1991, Mr. Daly took the following letter to Mr. Ham: 
We refer to your letter dated May 20, 1991, enquiring about the security of the FAI Insurance Group who participate in the current excess Professional Indemnity Insurance Policies.

The insurers with whom your insurances have been placed are subject to our normal security review procedures and are acceptable to the Sedgwick Regional Security Committee. We endeavour to review regularly the markets (except Lloyd's Syndicates) currently used on behalf of our Clients. Naturally, we cannot foretell whether a subsequent review would result in a change in security status and are not in a position to give any guarantees regarding the ability or otherwise of insurers to fulfil their liabilities under policies.

Our Security Committee maintain a careful review of publicly available information regarding the FAI Insurance Group and other insurers in general. Certainly, if this Committee has any cause to vary their view regarding the acceptability of FAI as an appropriate insurer of your insurance we shall contact you immediately.

We trust this is sufficient to answer your question.

They had a conversation, during which Mr. Daly said words to the effect that, for the renewal of the policies, Sedgwick Australia "would try to get a quote without FAI and see what it looks like", to which Mr. Ham said "OK".

On 30th August 1991, Mr. Daly wrote to Sedgwick London that the Permanent companies had "requested that we replace FAI on the program". This was on the basis of the communications referred to above. It is also clear that during the relationship between FAI and the Sedgwick organisation was poor, with
FAI being replaced as insurers for many of the insureds for whom the Sedgwick organisation were the brokers.
 .8 Steps Towards Renewing Insurance for 1991-2 
On 27th August 1991, the Permanent companies wrote to Sedgwick Australia seeking quotations for the existing level of cover ($70 million) for consideration by the management, enclosing a completed proposal form for renewal for the period 1st October 1991 to 30th September 1992.

In early September 1991, Mr. Carson was in London, and on 6th September he met with Mr. Trickett and others from Sedgwick London. There was discussion concerning outstanding claims, but it is not clear what if anything was said about No.1 O'Connell Street.

On 18th September 1991, at a board meeting of Permanent Trustee attended by
Mr. Davis and Mr. Church among others, Mr. Ham asked the directors whether they were aware of any circumstances that might give rise to a claim against the Permanent companies, and was told that no further claims had arisen other than those already notified to the insurer.

On 18th or 19th September 1991, Mr. Daly instructed Mr. Welsh, a more junior employee of Sedgwick Australia, to prepare letters to Australian insurers AMP
General Insurance Ltd. (AMP), GIO Australia Ltd. (GIO) and CIC Insurance Ltd.
inviting them to participate in the renewal program, but to "hold off for now" as regards FAI. These letters were prepared, and were sent on 19th
September.

On 20th September 1991, Sedgwick Australia received the following facsimile from Mr. Trickett of Sedgwick London: 
I refer to your facsimile of 20th September 1991. I am sorry we have not reverted to you sooner but I have been waiting for Peter Holt to be ready to speak to me following his discussions with Tony Scotford.

I have just spent an hour discussing this with Peter Holt. Three main points emerged: . Tony Scotford is of the opinion that the Australian Courts are likely to increase a trustees (sic) duty of care over an (sic) above his strict contractual obligation on property trusts particularly where such trusts are in respect of speculative property deals. I appreciate that common sense would dictate that Permanent have behaved well in the Metrogrowth situation by, on two occasions, insisting that matters were referred to the unit trust holders, he is nevertheless of this opinion. You should also be aware that Peter Holt advises me that Tony Scotford is not somebody that spreads gloom and despondency for the sake of it. Furthermore, what none of us know is whether a trustee acting in a similar situation to the Metrogrowth situation would have had a duty to refuse to even refer the matter to unit trust holders and simply say certain things could not be done in accordance with the initial prospectus. (Our meeting notes are attached for your further information.) . Because the amount involved is so large it is probably fair to say that even if one agrees that the claim will not be settled for the full amount a percentage of it will fall in Permanent's lap which even if it is only 10% will be a great deal of money. You should also note that the costs on the Metrogrowth claim are already$AU69,000 above the self-insured excess.
 . In broad terms Peter Holt feels that we should differentiate between property trusts and the balance of the business and whilst I think he will be prepared to leave the excess unaltered for other business he will be looking for a larger excess in respect of property trusts. We can then split the renewal negotiations effectively between property trusts and the balance so that if we get stuck with a large increase it will not apply across the board. I do not believe that Peter Holt is looking to go mad with this one and is indeed trying to be helpful but he does have a feeling that perhaps the rating for property trusts is rather on the thin side as he has perceived the risk to be less than it in fact may be. In the circumstances I noted from our meeting with the client that they had made a conscience (sic) decision not to enter into any more property trusts so I will now need to know how many property trusts they currently have and what percentage of their income this represents. The more difficulty question to ask is some information about these property trusts as to whether they are similarly speculative or whether they are more confident that they are running well and "blue chip".

I am sorry that the information requested under the third point has only just come to light as I admit it should really have occurred to all of us before, nevertheless I think that this is the only sensible approach to form the basis of renewal negotiations with the Underwriter.

In view of the rapidly approaching expiry date I enquired whether Peter Holt would be prepared to grant an extension and he is very relaxed to do this. Normally as you know, extensions are given at pro rata of renewal terms, short period rates if not renewed, and full annual premium if a claim arises. If you would prefer, and I think this would be more sensible, Peter Holt would be prepared to grant an extension at pro rata plus 20%. Bearing in mind the fees have increased from $AU20.2 million to $AU25.1 million, I would have thought this is the best bet and it is of course subject to us gaining the necessary market support.

You have also enquired as to the possibility of securing a 100% London placement. This is very difficult to say on a renewal like this with a large outstanding claim as dependant upon the renewal terms we may lose some of the existing participating Underwriters. Having said that our first excess layer last year had written lines of 75% so there must be a good chance of certainly increasing London participation.

I also discussed with Peter the question of the market fluctuation clause. Peter Holt explained that the reason for including this clause was because many assureds had assumed that they had cover regardless of negligence where a client complained about losing money because of a fluctuation in market prices. He is reluctant to remove the clause in case the assured feels that they do have this cover. He would however be happy to amend the clause and I had in mind simply to add the following words "unless arising out of any neglect, error or omission". Strictly speaking I suppose one should reiterate the insuring clause but I think the words suggested will probably be sufficient. I would appreciate your views. It is really just a matter of tying down the Underwriters intention which is not to exclude legitimate professional negligence claims.

I now look forward to hearing from you further and in particular whether you wish us to try and achieve an extension at pro rata plus 20% and the additional information requested.
 .9 Negotiation of the 30-day Extension 
On 23rd September 1991, Sedgwick Australia wrote a letter to the Permanent companies containing the following material concerning the renewal of professional indemnity insurance: 
In view of this, Underwriters have now requested further information regarding Permanent's involvement in the Property Trust area before releasing quotation terms for the 1991/92 Policy period. Whilst in London, Keith Carson did say to Underwriters that Permanent had made a conscious decision not to enter into any more Property Trusts and perhaps you can confirm this to us so that we can reinforce this point in our current negotiations with Underwriters. Additionally, if possible, we suggest that more detailed information be supplied to us concerning Permanent's Property Trust involvement generally, including details such as whether the Trusts are "speculative" or whether they are running well and are "blue Chip". Anything that will allay Underwriters' obvious fears in this particular area will be of great assistance in our discussions, as will details of the level and/or percentage of Permanent's fee income derived from this area.

As you will appreciate, the compilation of this information on Property Trusts combined with the subsequent negotiations that will have to take place with Underwriters will leave us with a very tight deadline, bearing in mind the current expiry date of September 30, 1991. In appreciation of this, we have obtained agreement from the leading Underwriter to grant an extension of the current Policy period based on the existing terms, limits, excess and conditions. However, Underwriters' premium terms for this extension will be on a pro rata basis plus 20% (i.e the pro-rata equivalent of the 1990/91 annual Premium of $370,000 plus 20%, plus applicable Stamp Duty). The reason for the 20% increase is the overall increase in premium rates since September 1990, combined with the 24% growth in Permanent's actual fee income (which has risen from $20.2 million up to September 30, 1989 to $25.1 million up to September 30, 1990). Underwriters will generally work from the last actual fee income rather than rely on estimates/forecasts.

We must also add that, whilst the leading Underwriter has agreed to offer this extension, we must also obtain similar agreement from all the supporting Underwriters before being able to confirm that the extension is in place for the full $70 million coverage. This exercise may take a few days to see all relevant Underwriters.

Depending on the availability of the information relating to Permanent's Property Trust involvement, we would suggest a 30 day extension up to October 30, 1991. Before we respond to this offer of an extension we await your advices as soon as possible.

Finally, at this stage we have not been able to achieve any better "feel" for the terms required by Underwriters for 1991/92, although the fact that new/additional underwriting support will need to be obtained to replace certain local Australian Insurers will have an impact on the level of premiums payable. Whilst the leading Underwriters have offered the extension at a 20% increase on the 1990/91 premium, this cannot really be considered a guide as to the likely terms required for the full 1991/92 period.

The Permanent companies responded by instructing Sedgwick Australia to obtain a 30-day extension on the terms recommended in that letter.

On 23rd September, Mr. Daly obtained AMP's agreement to the 30-day extension at pro rata plus 20%, although AMP indicated it would want a substantial increase in premium for 1991-2.

On about 24th September, Mr. Daly instructed Mr. Welsh to contact FAI, CIC and
GIO to get their agreement to a 30-day extension, as he was going to Brisbane on business. Mr. Daly said to Mr. Welsh words to the effect of "be careful when speaking to FAI". Both appreciated that this was in reference to the fact that FAI had not been invited to participate in the 1991-2 program, whereas the other Australian insurers had been.

On 26th September, Mr. Welsh spoke to Mr. Hunter, an underwriter employed by
FAI, and they had a conversation to the effect of Mr. Welsh's contemporary note: 
Advised Stephen that London U/W's had not finalised renewal terms yet - ~~we had arran~~ London were agreeable to 30 day extension - at pro rata plus 20%. Permanent had already agreed to this extension; was Stephen agreeable to this? 
Stephen said that if it was alright by the lead U/W - he was also happy ~~for this extension~~ to give the extension and would support it accordingly.

I will confirm to Stephen in due course.

Stephen also said that if we were to send renewal information, this should be sent to Angus MacIver to look at, as Steve will be ~~away~~ out of the office from the end of next week for the rest of October.

On 27th September, Mr. Welsh sent placing slips to Mr. Hunter, under cover of the following facsimile message: 
As discussed during our recent telephone conversation, you will be aware that we have not yet finalised the leading market renewal terms for the above insurance.

The primary reason for London Underwriters' deliberation on this matter is so that further information can be obtained regarding Permanent's involvement in the Property Trust area, especially in view of the Metrogrowth Property Trust claim. Specifically, Underwriters requested details as to how many property trusts Permanent currently have and what percentage of their income this represents, and also whether these property trusts are "speculative" or are running well and "blue chip".

As it would have taken some time to compile this information, and with the expiry date looming, Underwriters proposed a 30 day extension, at pro-rata expiring terms plus 20%.

We therefore ask you to formally confirm your agreement to providing this extension by signing and dating the attached placing slips where appropriate, and returning same by facsimile.

Thank you for your assistance. We look forward to your reply.

On 30th September 1991, Mr. Hunter returned the placing slips, signed by him, to Sedgwick Australia.
 .10 Notification 
On 3rd October 1991, Messrs. Davis, Church and Carson met as a committee of directors to consider the following memorandum prepared by Mr. Carson: 
A meeting of unitholders of the Aust-Wide Trust is scheduled for 3.00pm Friday, October 4, 1991 to consider the following two resolutions: ) That the Trust be terminated in an orderly manner over a period of 3-4 years.
 ) (Only to be put if Resolution 1 is defeated).

That the Trust have a fixed life of 5 years expiring 30/9/96 with remaining properties sold in an orderly manner after that date.

Proxies received confirm that Resolution 1 will be carried regardless of the votes of any unitholders who have not submitted proxies.

There has been a high level of dissatisfaction from unitholders in the Trust particularly over the investment in No.1 O'Connell Street (Aust-Wide Trust holds 11.78% of the units in Northbourne Securities Property Trust). Under the contractual arrangements for this investment Aust-Wide Trust has the opportunity to share in any capital gain to the extent of its percentage holding. Against this, it stands to lose 100% of its investment if No.1 O'Connell Street was to be sold at a figure less than the total borrowings by the Northbourne Trust (that is close to today's valuation). The commercial arrangements which somewhat offset this risk were that the Aust-Wide Trust received income distributions equivalent to interest on the investment during the construction period and also the interest burden is to shift to the Northbourne interest 6 months after practical completion (viz. 17/12/91).

The most vocal group of unitholders are the W.A. financial adviser Joseph Charles Learmonth Duffy ("JCLD") with whom we have had several exchanges of correspondence. Unitholders advised by JCLD have now started submitting letters to the Trustee similar to the example enclosed. The letters call for 3 actions to be taken by the Trustee:- ) Commission and independent investigation into the nature of the Trust's interests in No.1 O'Connell Street with details of the risks undertaken and the appropriateness of the Manager's investment strategy.
 ) Provision of a detailed summary of the disclosure of such risks. ) That a unitholders meetings be called to discuss the performance of the Manager and the Trustee and the replacement of these, if appropriate.

These matters are certain to be raised at the unitholders meeting on October 4.

The requisitions for a unitholders meeting has not been made in the manner specified in the Deed nor, at this stage, are they sufficient to meet the minimum requirement. However this position may well change in the future.

We have requested the Manager to provide us with a detailed summary of disclosures and we plan to provide this as part of our response to the unitholders.

The most difficult issue however is the request for an independent investigation. We are satisfied that the Manager understood the commercial implications in recommending to us the investment as it was made, but we are not satisfied that disclosure was as extensive as it could have been. The disclosure did not highlight the risks that were involved in the investment. The prospectus did identify the contract as a material one and included a solicitor's letter (copy enclosed) confirming that adequate disclosure was made of material contracts. With the benefit of hindsight this does not seem to be so.

If a motion to commission an independent investigation is proposed at the meeting it will be out of order and of no effect.

It is suggested, however, that as an alternative, we could undertake to have a review of the risks and disclosure of the investment, and to circulate it to unitholders as soon as possible.

It is proposed to use the Trust's solicitors (Minter Ellison) for this purpose.

Recommendation: 
That the proposed course of action be confirmed.

They resolved to undertake to have a review of the risks and disclosure of the investment.

On 11th October, Permanent Australia (by Ms. Alderson) sent to Mr. de
Francesch, one of the unitholder clients of JCLD who had written concerning the Aust-Wide trusts, a letter, a copy of which is included in the Appendix.
Similar letters were written to other unitholder clients of JCLD.

On 14th October 1991, Messrs. Davis, Church, Carson and others met again as a committee, and considered a report dated 10th October 1991 prepared by Mr.
Carson. According to Mr. Davis, Mr. Church said words to the effect: 
There appears to be a lot of dissatisfaction by these unitholders at the loss of their investment. They seem to be getting organised. They have the ASC making some enquiries. They are clearly not satisfied with our responses and are talking of pursuing other remedies. There also appears to be some concern as whether the true nature of the risk was disclosed in the prospectus. I think as a matter of precaution we should notify the professional indemnity insurers.

The committee resolved that notification should be given; and on 15th
September the following letter was sent to Sedgwick Australia: 
Enclosed is a copy of a letter from J. DeFrancesch, together with our response.

We have received 30 such letters, and provided 30 similar responses to different unitholders in the above Trust. The letters were drafted by an investment adviser in Perth, Joseph Charles Learmonth Duffy, and distributed to their clients for completion and submission to us.

There has been no claim made by us, but since there is a reference to investigating the duties of the Manager and the Trustee, we are notifying you that circumstances exist that could possibly lead to a claim under our professional indemnity insurance.

Should any claim be made, we would expect to defend it vigorously.
 .11 Later Events 
There was considerable difficulty in obtaining quotes for professional indemnity insurance to the full amount of $70 million, and in fact this full cover was not obtained until some time after the 30-day extension expired.
Notwithstanding this, the Permanent companies instructed Sedgwick Australia not to seek a quote from FAI, and on 11th November 1991 Mr. Daly telephoned
Mr. Hunter, and told him that Permanent had asked them to replace FAI on the renewal.

Mr. Hunter says, and I accept, that he believed that this was only a recent decision, and that he was unaware of the notification of 15th October 1991.

In January 1991, FAI accepted the premium for the 30-day extension.
 . NOTIFICATION 
As noted under section 2.1, FAI itself did not receive direct notification of any claim against the Permanent companies or of any circumstances which might give rise to a claim, until August 1992. However, the Permanent companies contend that a letter dated 15th October 1991 to Sedgwick Australia, which was passed on to Sedgwick London by a letter dated 24th October 1991, was, by reason of the terms of the insurance contracts with FAI, notification to FAI for the purpose of those contracts. In the alternative, the Permanent companies claim that s.54 of the Insurance [Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/) prevents FAI relying on lack of notification.
 .1 Whether Notice Given As Required 
This first question primarily turns on the true construction of the insurance contracts between the parties. The plaintiffs provided extensive written submissions, while FAI provided substantial written submissions in reply. I will be brief in outlining the submissions of the parties.
 .1.1. Submissions for Plaintiffs 
Mr. Coles QC for the Permanent companies submitted that the letter of 15th
October 1991 and enclosures therewith notified circumstances, namely that losses had been suffered by unitholders in the Aust-Wide trusts, and that a question had been raised whether Permanent Australia was at fault in carrying out its duties. These were circumstances which might give rise to a claim: see
FAI General Insurance v. Hendry Rae & Court [(1993) 7 ANZ Ins.Cas.
-233.] The present claims arose out of those circumstances, not just by reference to subject matter, but also by reason of a chain of causation: see GIO v. R.J. Green <case>; [(1966) 114 CLR 437] at 445; SGIC v. Stevens Brothers <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 552] at 555; Dickinson v. Motor Vehicle Insurance Trust <case>; [(1987) 163 CLR 500] at 505. Mr. Coles also relied, as a notice in accordance with the policy, on the property trust schedule received by Sedgwick London on 17th
October 1991. (It will not be necessary for me to consider that submission, but I very much doubt that this schedule was sufficiently explicit to amount to notice of circumstances.) 
Whether or not the notice which went to Sedgwick London amounted to notice to
FAI involved the construction of the insurance contracts, and in particular whether or not Item 11 in the Schedule to the policy of the lead underwriter was incorporated into the contracts between the parties.

It was common ground that the insurance contracts for the period 1st October to 30th September 1991 were constituted by two placing slips, one for
FAI's participation in the first excess layer, and the other for FAI's participation in the second excess layer. It was also common ground that, subject to issues of rectification, the insurance contracts for the period 1st to 30th October 1991 were likewise constituted by two placing slips. All four placing slips, near the top of the first page, had this provision: "Form: 'Follow Form' of primary wording as expiring plus amendments as per Addendum
A." Expert evidence showed that the expression "Follow Form" was a well-known term of trade, meaning that an excess layer policy incorporated the wording of the policy of the lead underwriter of the primary layer, save for express amendments. Such evidence was admissible: Codelfa Construction v. State Rail
Authority of NSW <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] at 353; Burns Philp Hardware v. Howard Chia [(1987) 8 NSWLR ]
at 645; MMI v. Withers [(1988) 5 ANZ Ins.Cas. 60-853] at 75-343.

The Schedule to the policy of the lead underwriter was part of the "primary wording". It was referred to inter alia in the opening recital, the insuring clause, the excess clause, the claims handling clause and the retro-active date clause; and therefore Item 11 to the Schedule was part of the "primary wording" and was incorporated into the insurance contracts with FAI: Spunwill v. Bab [(1994) 36 NSWLR 290] at 299F.
This was confirmed by clause 3 of Addendum A to the placing slips, which amended one item of the Schedule. Other items of the Schedule were altered by pages 1 and 2 of the placing slips. Item 11 was in fact the only part of the
Schedule not amended.

Item 11 plainly specified that the notice which Condition 1 of the insurance contracts required to be given to the underwriter was to be given to the address in Item 11: see Bond v. Hong Kong Bank of Australia [(1991) 25 NSWLR ]
at 291-3; Hide & Skin Trading v. Oceanic Meat Traders [(1990) 20 NSWLR ]
at 313-4; FAI General Insurance v. Perry [(1993) 30 NSWLR 89] at 101;
Transport Industries Insurance v. NSW Medical Defence Union (1989) 4 ANZ
Ins.Cas.60-736 at 74-410-11. That this was the true construction was consistent with market practice. Evidence of market practice was relevant and admissible: see Codelfa and MMI above, Schenker & Co. Australia v.
Maplas Equipment <case>; [(1990) VR 834] at 844-50; Trawl Industries of Australia v. Effem Foods [(1992) 27 NSWLR 326] at 358-9. It was confirmed by post-contractual admissions: see White v. NZ Theatres <case>; [(1943) 67 CLR 266]; Hide & Skin Trading at 326-8; Spunwill at 304-312;
Singleton v. John Fairfax & Sons [(1982) 2 NSWLR 38] at 50-1.

Item 11 referred to "Sedgwick Professional Indemnity and Financial
Institutions Services Limited, The Sedgwick Centre": there has never been any such company, but Sedgwick Professional Indemnity and Financial Institutions
Services existed at material times as a division within the Sedgwick group, and it carried on business from the Sedgwick Centre. Accordingly, this entity was sufficiently identified by the wording in Item 11: see Nittan UK v.
Solent Steel Fabrication [(1981) 1 Ll.LR 633] at -9; Whittam v. W.J. Daniel & Co. [(1962) 1 QB 271] at 277;
Fitzgerald v. Masters <case>; [(1956) 95 CLR 420] at 427; BHP Petroleum (Timor Sea) v. Griffiths [(1994) 49
FCR 155.] 
The notice was "immediate notice" within Condition 1. The Permanent companies were not aware of the circumstances as circumstances which might give rise to a claim until 14th October, when this was pointed out at a committee of directors by the late Fred Church. Alternatively, if the Permanent companies became aware of circumstances which might give rise to a claim on 30th
September 1991 when the first letters of complaint were received from unitholders, the notice was still "immediate" having regard to the size of
Permanent Australia and the many matters occurring in the organisation.
Immediate notice meant notice given with all reasonable speed in the circumstances: see In Re Coleman's Depositories [(1907) 2 KB 798] at 807;
Vines v. Djordjevitch <case>; [(1995) 91 CLR 512] at 522; Newnham v. Baker [(1989) Qd.R. 393] at 402; Farrell v. Federated Employers Insurance Association [(1970) 3 AllER 632] at 635.
 .1.2 Submissions for Defendant 
Mr. Gee QC submitted that what the contracts between the Permanent companies and FAI were to follow was the "primary wording"; and that did not include the
Schedule to the lead underwriter's policy, which contained information special to that policy, such as the limit of liability, the excess amount, the premium, etc. The fact that the wording in the lead underwiter's policy itself referred to the Schedule was neutral. The distinction between the primary wording and other parts of the lead underwriter's policy was drawn by the placing slips themselves: the Addendum identified certain provisions as being on "page 1 of Policy Wording", and another provision as being in the "Schedule to Policy", that is, as not being part of the Policy Wording. Item 11 would, if the plaintiffs were correct, be the only part of the Schedule included in the contract between the Permanent companies and FAI; and Item 11 is in fact the only part of the Schedule not referred to in the earlier clauses of the lead underwriter's policy. In particular, Condition 1 of the policy does not refer to the Schedule.

This view was supported by extrinsic considerations. Insurance brokers are prima facie agents for the insured; so it would be curious if notification to a broker was notification to the insurer. Lloyds brokers did hold a special position vis-a-vis Lloyds' underwriters, so a provision for notice to a Lloyds broker as being notice to a Lloyds underwriter was understandable; but this did not apply to Australian insurers. Lloyds underwriters are not identified, but Australian insurers are, and there would be no problem in notifying them.
The provision for notice to Sedgwick London was understandable for the primary layer, which did not include any Australian insurer. There were two Lloyds insurers on the first excess layer, but the wording of their policies on the first excess layer was different from that in the FAI contracts. In fact, underwriters were directly notified, as FAI was in this very case, albeit out of time.
 .1.3 Decision 
The reference to the Schedule to the lead underwriter's policy, contained in the Addendum of each placing slip, is two-edged; but although there is force in Mr. Gee's submission that it draws a distinction between the Policy Wording and the Schedule, on balance, I think it tends to favour the plaintiffs by suggesting that, but for the amendment to the Schedule contained in the
Addendum, the Schedule would have applied without that amendment.

Furthermore, although as submitted by Mr. Gee notification to a Lloyds broker makes most sense in relation to Lloyds underwriters, it is not surprising that a Lloyds broker should be made the notification point in a multi-layered insurance scheme, in which a Lloyds syndicate is the leading underwriter and many Lloyds underwriters are involved. Generally, this does seem to accord with the practice in the business. It is also, I think, entirely consistent with the fact that the broker directly notifies the insurers themselves when it appears that their interests are likely to be involved.

For these reasons, in my opinion, Item 11 in the Schedule to the lead underwriter's policy does apply to the contracts between the Permanent companies and FAI. In my view, the slight misnomer of Sedgwick London does not raise any doubt as to the applicability of the item, and the contrary was not really contended. Furthermore, in my opinion, it is clear that the notification of circumstances in the letter of 15th October 1991 and the enclosures was sufficiently wide for the present claims to be regarded as claims arising out of the circumstances notified.

On the question whether there was "immediate notice" within Condition 1, I do not think there is any problem here for the Permanent companies, so long as it is found that it was not until the receipt of the unit holders' letters on th September 1991 that the Permanent companies became aware of circumstances which might give rise to a claim. In so far as it was submitted by FAI that the Permanent companies became aware of this earlier than 30th September 1991, this links with the question of non-disclosure to which I will come later. If the Permanent companies did become aware of circumstances that might give rise to a claim on 30th September, it could not be disputed that notice given on st October would have been immediate notice; and I think it is clear that any breach of contract by the Permanent companies which might have been involved in a delay from 1st October 1991 to 25th October 1991 would be immaterial. See also the discussion concerning s.54.
 .2 Section 54 
Section 54 was relied on primarily by the Permanent companies in case it was held that there was no notice given to FAI prior to August 1992, or else that the notice given was too narrow and that the present claims did not arise out of the circumstances notified. Since I have found those issues in favour of the plaintiffs, my discussion of s.54, so far as it relates to those issues, will be obiter.

However, the Permanent companies also relied on s.54 to support an argument that FAI could not refuse their claim if, contrary to the plaintiffs' primary submission, I found that there were circumstances that might give rise to a claim, of which the Permanent companies were aware during the year October to September 1991; and if also I found that the notice given in October was not immediate because the Permanent companies had been aware of the circumstances prior to 30th September 1991, or else I found that the Permanent companies could not rely on the one month's extension for October 1991. I note that Mr. Gee claimed that reliance in that way on s.54 had not been adequately pleaded or particularised; but having regard to my interpretation of s.54, I do not need to rule on that.
 .2.1 Submissions for Plaintiffs 
Mr. Coles submitted that s.54 was remedial legislation, and should not be construed narrowly: see East End Real Estate v. C.E. Heath Casualty &
General Insurance [(1991) 25 NSWLR 400] at 402-3;
Antico v. Fielding Australia <case>; [(1997) 146 ALR 385] at 388-9, 395-6; Akai v. The People's Insurance Co., Court of Appeal, unreported, 28/4/95 per Kirby, P. at p.12.

The question is whether, but for s.54, the insurer could refuse payment by reason of an act or omission. It was inappropriate to make fine distinctions between inaction and omission, as was done in FAI General Insurance v. Perry [(1993) 30 NSWLR 89] at 93, 107. This approach had been disapproved by the High
Court in Antico, at pp.396, 398. Perry was in any event distinguishable from the present case, because in that case there was no obligation to give immediate notice, as there was here: Sinclair Horder O'Malley & Co. v.
National Insurance Co. of New Zealand [(1995) 2 NZLR 257.] See also
Seery v. John Carr and Associates, Giles, C.J.Comm.D., 3/11/95;Kelly v. New
Zealand Insurance Co. [(1996) 9 ANZ Ins.Cas. 61-317]; Drayton v. Martin [(1996) 137 ALR 146] at 167-71.

Section 54 clearly applies where a policy attaches to claims made and notified within the policy period, and a claim was made but not notified within that period: see East End, approved in Antico. There was no relevant distinction between that situation and the present case, where the policy attaches to an assured becoming aware of circumstances that might give rise to a claim and notifying such circumstances: see Sinclair Horder O'Malley.

There was a question whether Condition 1.3 of the insurance contracts between the parties to these proceedings applied only where the assured became aware of circumstances which (as a matter of fact) might give rise to a claim and also aware that these circumstances might do so; or only where the assured became aware of circumstances which (as a matter of fact) might give rise to a claim and where a reasonable person in the assured's position would be aware that they might in fact do so. There were no authorities on this. If the former was the case, the Permanent companies contended that they were not aware of these matters until 14th October 1991; although if the Court found otherwise, the Court could give s.54 relief and find FAI liable under the
October 1990 to September 1991 contracts. However, Mr. Coles contended that the latter view was preferable because otherwise an insured, although it arranged for continuous cover from year to year, could fall between two stools. It could be deprived of any claim under a replacing policy, because, although it was not aware that the circumstances were relevant to the risk, a reasonable person would have been; yet on the other hand, be deprived of a claim under the policy being replaced, because it was not in fact aware that the circumstances were so relevant. On the other hand, in those circumstances, the Permanent companies did have an argument that s.28(3) would apply: see the later discussion concerning s.28(3).
 .2.2 Submissions for Defendant 
The policies in question responded to claims made within the period covered by the policies. If there was no claim made, then subject to the deeming provision in Condition 1, the policy lapsed at the end of its period.
Condition 1, like s.40(3) of the Act, equates the making of a claim with notification of circumstances, not with the existence or awareness of circumstances.

Section 54 was not intended to breathe life into dead policies, especially when one has regard to s.40. Here, assuming there was no claim made or notification of circumstances within a relevant policy period, there was no relevant insurance contract under which the Permanent companies could succeed in recovering from FAI. Furthermore, there was no relevant act or omission within the meaning of s.54. The decision in Perry was on all fours with the present case, and the High Court in Antico did not overrule Perry. See also GIO General v. Newcastle City Council [(1996) 38 NSWLR 558]; overruled Newcastle City Council v. GIO General Ltd. <case>; [(1997) 72 ALJR 97.] .2.3 Decision 
The case of GIO General concerned a claims-made policy, and it was held by the Court of Appeal that s.40 did not apply, because the policy did not contain (as required by s.40(1)) a condition excluding or limiting the insurer's liability by reason that notice of a claim against the insured was not given to the insurer before the expiration of the period of insurance cover; and that, since no claim was made against the insured during the period of the policy, the policy lapsed and the insured could not recover against the insurer. That decision was reversed by the High Court for reasons not here relevant ((1997) <case>; [72
ALJR 97).] In that case, it was not even suggested that the lack of a claim against the insured during the period of the policy was an omission within s.54, and therefore a matter on which the insurer could not rely to refuse payment. I believe such an argument could not in fact have succeeded; yet, given that the Council in that case had become aware of circumstances which it knew might give rise to a claim, and had notified the insurer of those circumstances, why would not s.54 apply, on the basis that the insurer was seeking to refuse to pay the claim by reason of the omission by some claimant or claimants to make a claim within the policy period? 
One possible answer would be that suggested by Giles, J. in Seery, namely that s.54 does not apply where the only relevant omission is by someone with no interest in the insurance policy, such as a person making a claim against the insured. However, this view seems contrary to statements by the High Court in Antico, notably at p.396.

Next, it could be suggested that s.54 would not apply because the making of a claim against the insured was something required for the insurance cover to attach at all, and was not a mere condition restricting the insured's right to recover. However, that kind of distinction was directly rejected in East End at p.303-4, Perry at p.92, and Antico at p.389.

Thirdly, it could be suggested that the lack of a claim during the period of the insurance would be a non-event or inaction, not an omission within s.54: see East End at p.405, Perry at p.93, and Kelly at p.76-518. Insofar as this distinction depends upon a distinction between something a person may choose to do (in which case, there is a mere non-event if the person does not do it) and something that a person has an obligation to do (in which case, there is an omission if the person does not do it), this is rejected in
Antico at p.396. But I think a similar distinction can be supported in another way. To take another (and plainly absurd) example. Suppose a person has fire insurance for 1995, and not 1996. An arsonist burns down the person's house in 1996. The insured claims under the 1995 policy, arguing that the insurer cannot refuse the claim by reason of the omission of the arsonist to burn down the house in 1995. Clearly, in that case, the reason for the refusal is that there was no fire whatsoever in 1995, whether caused by an arsonist or by accident or in any way whatsoever; so it would be bizarre to characterise the reason for refusal of cover in terms of an omission by the arsonist.

It seems to me that much the same applies to the lack of a claim in a claims- made policy: the gravamen of the refusal is not that someone omitted to do something, but rather that something did not happen. In my opinion, this is the true basis for the distinctions drawn in cases such as East End and
Perry. If the reason for refusal is fairly characterised as being that someone omitted to do something, then this is an omission to which s.54 can apply; but if it is fairly characterised rather as being that something did not happen, then this is not an omission to which s.54 can apply, even if it is the case that this something would have happened if one or more persons had acted in certain ways.

On this approach, it is not necessary to maintain as being decisive the discredited distinctions between provisions defining the scope of the cover and conditions affecting the insured's entitlement to claim, and between cases where the relevant person has a choice whether or not to do something and those where the person is under an obligation to do it. Yet, although these distinctions do not determine the question, both of them may be relevant to the proper characterisation of the reason for refusal.

If the reason for refusal is that the circumstances insured against did not happen, then this would tend to favour the view that the gravamen of this reason is non-occurrence of an event rather than someone's omission to do something. However, it is not conclusive. In East End, despite the wording of the policy, the Court considered that in substance the circumstance insured against was the making of a claim against the insured, and that notification of that claim was rather something the insured had to do. One might think it would have been unreasonable to regard it otherwise: if the making of a claim against the insured and the notification of that claim to the insurer were regarded as together being the circumstance insured against which had to occur within the policy period, this would mean that a claim received by the insured late on the last day of one policy period, and notified as soon as possible on the first day of the next policy period, would fall within neither of the policies.

Furthermore, if the insured has an obligation to do something, and cover is refused for the reason that this thing was not done, one would tend to regard the gravamen of the reason for refusal as being that the insured omitted to do it, rather than that some event did not occur. Looked at in that way, it seems to me that Perry is not inconsistent with Antico. In Perry, the policy was a claims-made policy; and the relevant term was that if, during the insurance, the insured became aware of circumstances which may give rise to a claim and gave written notice thereof, then any subsequent claim arising out of those circumstances was deemed to have been made during the period of the insurance. On my suggested approach, it is reasonable to say that the gravamen of the refusal in Perry was the non-occurrence of a claim during the insurance, or of anything else deemed to be a claim; and not that the insured omitted to notify circumstances. On that basis. I would respectfully doubt the correctness of the decision of the New Zealand Court of Appeal in Sinclair
Horder O'Malley.

The same reasoning applies to this case. In this case, it is a claims-made policy. A refusal by FAI to pay the plaintiff's claim on the ground that no claim was actually made within the period of the policy, and that no claim is deemed to have been made, focuses on the non-occurrence of an event, rather than the omission of the insured or anyone else to do something; so that s.54 does not apply. Accordingly, if I am wrong in holding that circumstances were notified to FAI during October 1991, and if in fact they were not notified until August 1992, s.54 would not help the plaintiffs.

However, if the circumstances were notified to FAI during October 1991, but this was not "immediate notice", then it could be that the gravamen of a refusal to pay for that reason would be the act or omission of the insured.
Condition 1 makes notification of circumstances equivalent to a claim when made immediately. It could be argued that the element of immediacy is just one element of the overall deeming; but as suggested by East End, the Court should guard against substance being defeated by form. In my opinion, in substance the requirement that notice be immediate is an obligation imposed on the insured, so that a refusal to pay in respect of circumstances notified during an insurance period, for the reason that the notification was not immediate, would be a refusal to pay by reason of an omission.

For that reason, if there is a lack of immediacy in the notification because the plaintiffs became aware of circumstances that may give rise to a claim on or shortly after 30th September, this would be overcome by s.54. As I noted earlier, if the plaintiffs became aware of such circumstances earlier, this issue becomes bound up with the whole question of non-disclosure and misrepresentation, to which I will come.
 . RETROACTIVE LIABILITY 
As noted in section 2.2, there are questions arising from a term of the policies purporting to exclude "circumstances which may give rise to a claim which are known to the insured prior to the inception of this insurance". This involved two questions of construction, a question of rectification, and a question of application. I will deal here with construction and rectification, and I will deal with application when I come to consider non-disclosure and misrepresentation concerning No.1 O'Connell Street.
 .1 Construction of the Retroactive Liability Clause 
There are two questions of construction: first, does the provision exclude circumstances in fact known to the insured which in fact may give rise to a claim, even if the insured did not know that these circumstances may give rise to a claim; and second, is "the inception of this insurance" 1st October 1990 or 1st October 1991? .1.1 Submissions for Defendant 
Mr. Gee submitted that, as a matter of language, all that is necessary to engage the term is that the insured know circumstances which, as a matter of fact, may give rise to a claim: it is not necessary that the insured know that these circumstances may give rise to a claim. This view is confirmed by the contra proferentem rule: the term was proffered by the insured's broker, on behalf of the insured; and in fact, had previously been changed by Mr. Daly, an employee of the broker, so that the words "but not in respect of" were changed to "excluding" prior to entry into the October 1990 to September 1991 policy. If in fact such circumstances existed, then the term excludes them from the policy, and s.33 of the Insurance [Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/) is simply irrelevant.

As for the meaning of "the inception of this insurance", it was clearly stated on the placing slips that the period of the insurance was "1st October 1991 to th October 1991, both days inclusive". Accordingly, there was no basis for saying that the inception of the insurance was other than 1st October 1991.
 .1.2 Submissions for Plaintiffs 
Mr. Coles submitted that circumstances would not be known to the insured, within the meaning of the term, unless the insured actually knew that the circumstances might give rise to a claim, or at least unless a reasonable person in the insured's position would know this. Any ambiguity should be resolved against FAI, which was the proferens: Darlington Futures v. Delco
Australia <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 500] at 510; Thomas National Transport (Melbourne) v. May &
Baker (Australia) <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 353] at 376. If the retroactive clause was given any wider effect than non-disclosure is given under ss.21 and 28 of the Insurance [Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca125/), to that extent the clause would be void under s.33 of the Act.

Next, Mr. Coles submitted that "inception of this insurance" means 1st October "Primary wording as expiring" means the terms of the policy for the year st October 1989 to 30th September 1990, because the amendments in Addendum A had to apply to that policy, since they were already incorporated in the policy for the year 1st October 1990 to 1st September 1991. The contract for the period 1st October 1991 to 30th October 1991 was plainly intended as a thirty-day extension of the existing policy: this was confirmed by oral evidence and file notes of Mr. Hunter (who could make admissions as a relevant agent of FAI), and also by FAI's notification of the No.1 O'Connell Street circumstances to its re-insurers.
 .1.3 Decision 
In my opinion, both questions should be answered substantially as contended by the plaintiffs.

The policy gives insurance against liability for breach of duty, and is a claims-made policy. If any breach of duty by the insured has occurred and damage resulted, and if a claim is subsequently brought, then ipso facto there must at the time of the occurrence have been circumstances which might give rise to a claim; and it is likely that the insured would have known of these circumstances at the time, although not have known that they might give rise to a claim. In my opinion, the retroactive clause should be interpreted as applying only if the insured knows the circumstances as circumstances which might give rise to a claim, because otherwise the clause would have the unreasonable effect of excluding many or even most circumstances that were purportedly insured against.

I do not think the contra proferentem rule applies with any appreciable force either way. Even if it were to be applied against the plaintiffs, I would still reach the same result.

In my opinion, the inception of the insurance is 1st October 1990. The circumstances show plainly that the contracts were intended as mere extensions of the existing twelve-month policies, as is confirmed by the reference to 'primary wording', which must be of the 1989-1990 policy. Although in the placing slips the period of insurance and the premium refer specifically to the period of thirty days, the clear effect of the overall transaction was to extend the existing policies, not to create new and independent policies. For example, in giving effect to the limits of indemnity in the placing slips, I have no doubt that FAI did not regard itself as committed to fresh limits (totalling $10.2 million) for the thirty days, entirely unaffected by claims which may have been made within the previous twelve months. I have no doubt that both sides understood that the limits of indemnity under each contract were limits applying to the whole extended thirteen-month policy, not to a thirty-day policy.

On the s.33 point, I will look at this, so far as necessary, when I consider the retroactive clause in connection with my discussion of non-disclosure and misrepresentation in relation to No.1 O'Connell Street.
 .2 Rectification 
In the event that, as a matter of construction, the contracts applied the retroactive clause to 1st October 1991 as the date of inception, the plaintiff sought rectification of this to 1st October 1990. Having regard to my decision on construction, the rectification point does not arise. However, in case I am wrong on construction, I will consider rectification briefly.
 .2.1 Submission for Plaintiffs 
Mr. Coles referred to Bush v. National Australia Bank [(1992) 35 NSWLR ]
at 405-407; Commissioner for Stamp Duties v. Carlenka [(1995) 41 NSWLR ]
at 331-2, 336-44, 345. He submitted that the evidence of Mr. Daly, Mr. Welsh (and his file notes) and Mr. Hunter confirmed that both sides intended to vary the existing arrangement in one respect only, that is to extend it by thirty days for a premium of pro rata expiring plus 20%; and that all other terms of the twelve month policies remain the same.
 .2.2 Submission for Defendant 
Mr. Gee pointed to evidence of Mr. Daly to the effect that he did not think about the date to which the retroactive clause applied; but that, if Permanent were at the time of the extension, aware of circumstances which may give rise to a claim, it was not his intention that those circumstances should be included in the cover. Mr. Hunter said he did not think about it, and he was not cross-examined as to his intention on the specific point.
 .2.3 Decision 
Plainly, it is not the plaintiffs' case that the parties really intended to use different words from those used; so the case is one of an alleged mistake as to the effect of particular words, being words as to which there was no mistake. Accordingly, the plaintiffs need to show that, although the parties intended to contract in accordance with the words used, they also had an intention to make a contract with an effect which was different from the effect of the words used; and also that the latter intention was clearly predominant over the former: see Bush at p.405-7, Carlenka at p.344. In my opinion, where the evidence from Mr. Daly and Mr. Welsh went only to generalities, and where the particular effect in question was not squarely put to Mr. Hunter in cross-examination, the plaintiffs' case falls far short of the clarity required for this kind of rectification.
 . DELIBERATE ACT 
The insuring clause is set out in section 2.3, and it was FAI's contention that it did not cover loss arising from a deliberate act, as was the case here.

Mr. Gee for the defendant submitted that the loss arose from the deliberate act of Mr. Loth. As at April 1988, Mr. Loth said that the Permanent companies were only buying land; yet in December 1988, he said that, although it was not in the interests of unitholders to go ahead with the matter, the Permanent companies were in effect locked into the transaction. In fact, Mr. Gee submitted, Mr. Loth deliberately decided to go ahead with the transaction in breach of trust.

As submitted by Mr. Coles for the plaintiffs, I consider that the terms of the insuring clause, covering as they do breach of duty as a result of neglect, error or omission, are wide enough to cover what happened in this case, at least unless deliberate fraud by the Permanent companies was alleged and proved. Although fraud is alleged in connection with non-disclosure and misrepresentation to FAI, it is not alleged in connection with the relevant breach of trust; and was not suggested in cross-examination to any of the
Permanent companies' witnesses. In those circumstances, the insuring clause is, in my opinion, wide enough.
 . MARKET FLUCTUATION CLAUSE 
This clause is set out in section 2.4. It was FAI's contention that the claim in this case arose out of fluctuations in the market for commercial and/or development properties in the Sydney CBD, and accordingly was not covered.
 .1 Submissions for Defendant 
Mr. Gee submitted that the property market for the Central Business District of Sydney was a relevant market, within the clause. He submitted that this was made clear by correspondence concerning the 1990 renewal, when the Permanent companies asked for the clause to be taken out, and this request was refused.
Such an interpretation would not make the insurance nugatory: it would still cover the case of an initial bad investment, and a case of waste. In the present case, whether or not there was negligence or other fault by the insured, the losses were equally and truly caused by market fluctuations.
 .2 Submissions for plaintiff 
Mr. Coles submitted that the operation of the clause depended upon the identification of a market, ejusdem generis with the specified markets; and there was no such market in relation to commercial property in the Central
Business District of Sydney. There was no market with any structural organisation, no common price for units of any property or commodity, and each item sold was unique. Accordingly, there was no particular market identified in which one could identify fluctuations.

Furthermore, it was necessary to characterise the claim in question. The present claim arose out of matters expressly within the insuring clause, namely out of a breach of duty or negligence. Even if it were the case that there would have been no claim but for a fall of property prices, this was not enough to engage the clause. Even without a fall of property prices, the claim could have been brought; and the clause does not say that, in relation to claims otherwise available, the quantum of the claim should exclude so much as is a result of a fluctuation or fall within a market.

It could be suggested that, on this interpretation, the clause is superfluous: having regard to the terms of the insuring clause, even without this clause there would be no claim in respect of losses arising out of fluctuations in markets. However, it appeared that the clause was inserted out of an abundance of caution, as confirmed by the use of the word "understood" in addition to the word "agreed". The clause should be construed contra proferentem.
 .3 Decision 
I accept the plaintiff's first submission on this matter. Financial, stock, and commodity markets all have in common that they deal in items which have standard unit prices, and that they are quite readily identifiable as broadly unified markets. In my opinion, there is no market in relation to Central
Business District commercial properties which has these characteristics; and I do not think there is any market for such properties within the meaning of the market fluctuation clause.

Having regard to that finding, I do not need to make a final decision on the other submission, namely that a claim such as the present is not a claim "arising out of" fluctuations in a market. However, I consider that the contra proferentem rule does apply to this clause, and there is force in the plaintiff's submission to this effect.
 . NON-DISCLOSURE AND MISREPRESENTATION CONCERNING NO.1 O'CONNELL STREET 
As noted in section 2.5, FAI claimed that it was entitled to refuse indemnity because facts known to the Permanent companies prior to 1st October 1991, concerning No.1 O'Connell Street, were matters relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk, and if so on what terms, and were either known to be relevant by the Permanent companies or were such that a reasonable person could be expected to know them to be relevant; and because there was failure to disclose these matters and/or misrepresentation concerning them.

Matters concerning non-disclosure and misrepresentation were pleaded in the following way in FAI's Defence: . In further answer to the Plaintiff's Statement of Claim the Defendant says that at all material times prior to and as at 30 September 1991 the following matters were known to the First Plaintiff and ought to have been disclosed to the Defendant at the times hereinafter referred to: 
Non-disclosure particulars .1 That on or about 18 April 1988 the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Clayton Utz) had warned the First Plaintiff that the investment of $65 million would only confer a 15% interest in a property which at that time had a net equity of $70 million.
 .2 That in or about April 1988 the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Clayton Utz) had warned the First Plaintiff that those solicitors had not had sufficient opportunity to consider the proposed transaction and that they held misgivings in relation to the undertaking as a whole.
 .3 That on or about 20 April 1988 the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Clayton Utz) had warned the First Plaintiff or had advised the First Plaintiff that in the absence of development approval and/or a building contract and/or lease details, the overall viability of the investment was indeterminate and that it was not possible to assess the feasibility of the project and that in those circumstances the Trustee, if it entered into the transaction, was speculating.
 .4 That on or about 18 April 1988 the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Clayton Utz) had warned the First Plaintiff that there was in place at that time only a short term finance facility terminating in November 1988 and an absence of any indication as to the financing arrangements required to replace that facility for the financing of construction and that the First Plaintiff thereafter proceeded with and committed the trusts to proceed with the transaction without being satisfied as to those matters and without being satisfied that entry in to such a transaction did not constitute speculation on the part of the Trustee.
 .5 That the First Plaintiff had at the time of or after receipt of the warnings and advice referred to in paragraphs 22.1 to 22.4 above instructed its solicitors Clayton Utz not to advise on the commercial aspects of the transaction; not to advise on whether the Trustee should proceed without finance and without a development contract; and had thereafter entered into the transaction in the face of the warnings and the instructions given.
 .6 That the First Plaintiff had committed itself to proceed with financing and development in the face of the advice and warnings and instructions referred to in paragraph 22.1 to 22.5 above without being satisfied that the investment was appropriate for a Trustee.
 .7 That in or about April 1988 the First Plaintiff had committed the trust to enter into and proceed with the transaction in circumstances where at the construction stage such a course would expose the trust to 100% of the losses with only 30% of the returns and that the First Plaintiff had done so in the face of the advice and/or warnings of its solicitors referred to in paragraphs 22.1 to 22.5 above. .8 That the First Plaintiff had in the face of and/or against the warnings and advice of the First Plaintiff's solicitors referred to above invested trust funds in No.1 O'Connell Street on and after 29th April 1988.
 .9 That on or about 19 December 1988 the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Minter Ellison) had warned the First Plaintiff and/or expressed concern to the First Plaintiff that the First Plaintiff had paid $130.8 million to acquire an asset worth between $40 million and $48 million.
 .10 That on or about 19 December 1988 the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Minter Ellison) had warned the First Plaintiff and/or expressed concern to the First Plaintiff: 
The effect of the proposed arrangements were such that in the event of default or sale before completion the impact of any loss fell entirely on the Australia Wide Trusts as other unit holders had no liability under the borrowings; and 
At the best the Austwide Trusts would get 30% of the profit whilst taking all of the risk for borrowings and remaining unit holders receive 70% of the profit without making any contribution and without having accepted any liability in relation to the then proposed borrowings.
 .11 That the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Minter Ellison) had expressed concern to and/or warned the First Plaintiff that the unit holders were in a terrible position and that the financing arrangements proposed for December 1988 placed unit holders in a worse position if the First Plaintiff proceeded with the transaction.
 .12 That the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Minter Ellison) had expressed concern to and had warned the First Plaintiff in or about December 1988 that it was difficult to see how the proposed arrangement was equitable to unit holders and that entering into the transaction compared with selling the investment at that stage resulted in the unit holders being worse off; that relying on the manager's proposal was not enough, and that the Plaintiff in discharge of its obligations as Trustee and in discharge of its fiduciary duties may be in a position where it had to refuse to accept a proposal given to it by the manager and/or that thereafter the First Plaintiff entered into the syndicated finance facility on 21 December 1988.
 .13 That the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Minter Ellison) in or about December 1988 had warned the First Plaintiff and/or advised the First Plaintiff that the syndicated facility agreement had the effect of relieving Northbourne and Delovan of liability for existing borrowings and threw the entire risk on the Austwide Trusts which resulted in an adverse chance to unit holders and that thereafter the First Plaintiff entered into the syndicated finance facility on or about 21 December 1988.
 .14 That in or about December 1988 the Plaintiffs had expressed concern to AWM that: 
Under the proposed borrowings the Austwide Trusts in return for 30% of the profit (if the project was successful) were taking 100% of the development risk (if the project was not successful); 
That Northbourne and IEL were providing no additional security or guarantee and that their interest had been financed by debt with no recourse against them in their own rights; and 
That the circumstances referred to in the preceding two paragraphs were most unusual for a trust and that the Plaintiffs were having difficulty in satisfying themselves that the project financing proposal could be entered into in the interest of unit holders of the Trusts. .15 That the First Plaintiff entered into the syndicated finance facility on or about 21 December 1988 without being satisfied of the matters referred to in paragraph 22.14.
 .16 That the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Minter Ellison) had warned the First Plaintiff that AWM's response to the matters raised by the First Plaintiff and referred to in paragraph 22.14 did not address or alleviate those concerns.
 .17 That the First Plaintiff's solicitors (Minter Ellison) in December 1988 had expressed concern and warned the First Plaintiff that AWM in responding to the Plaintiff's concerns referred to above had proceeded on most optimistic assumptions and had failed to address adequately or at all the issues of potential loss to Austwide unit holders or the other matters which had been raised with the manager and referred to in paragraph 22.14 above and that thereafter the First Plaintiff had entered into the syndicated finance facility on 21 December 1988.
 .18 That the First Plaintiff had proceeded with the syndicated finance facility on 21 December 1988 and the transaction without satisfying itself that it was in the interest of unit holders to do so and that it had proceeded on the basis that it had committed itself to do so.
 .19 That the First Plaintiff had approved entry into and had entered into the syndicated finance facility on 21 December 1988 without being satisfied as to the concerns raised by it with the manager and without having been satisfied that entry into the transaction was in the interest of unit holders.
 .20 That the First Plaintiff had entered into the syndicated finance facility agreement on or about 21 December 1988 against the warning and advice of the First (sic) solicitors and/or in the knowledge that the agreement and further investment of trust funds involved risks of an ordinary and speculative nature of which unit holders may not have been aware and/or that the taking of such risks might constitute a breach of the First Plaintiff's fiduciary duties. .21 That the First Plaintiff had entered into the syndicated finance facility agreement in breach of its fiduciary duties and/or without satisfying itself that the transaction was in the interest of unit holders and without considering whether it was committed to entry into such transaction prior to entering into it.
 .22 That the Plaintiffs had in or about May 1991 received from their solicitors (Minter Ellison) a report in which those solicitors had recorded the matters set out in each of the preceding paragraphs.
 .23 That the First Plaintiff in 1990 and 1991 had concerns as to the liquidity of the Trusts of which the Plaintiff was trustee.
 .24 That advisers to investors in Target Funds in 1990 and 1991 had expressed concerns to the Plaintiffs as to liquidity and redemptions.
 .25 That there had been allegations of breach of trust in Target Fund No.1 in March 1991.
 .26 That the First Plaintiff had received valuations in June and August 1991 and/or was aware that between June and August 1991 and at all times prior to 1 October 1991 that valuations of the 1 O'Connell Street project showed that the entire investment of the unit holders funds were effectively reduced in value to nil so that the First Plaintiff became aware that the circumstances against which it had been warned by its solicitors in April 1988 and December 1988 had come to pass.
 .27 That the First Plaintiff had received and/or was aware of concerns, complaints, threats and demands expressed orally and in writing to the First Plaintiff by and (sic) behalf of unit holders about the No.1 O'Connell Street project during the period from July 1991 to October 1991; those complaints, threats, concerns and demands included allegations of failure on the part of the First Plaintiff to make or to ensure proper disclosure, complaint about loss of investment, an expression of concern about the discharge of the duties of the First Plaintiff as Trustee.
 .28 That the First Plaintiff had received and/or was aware of advice from the First Plaintiff's Manager, Unit Trust that unit holders had indicated concerns in relation to the First Plaintiff's approval of the 1 O'Connell Street investment and as to the First Plaintiff's performance as Trustee in relation to that investment and that advice had been given to the Managing Director by the Manager of Units Trusts that in the area of the adequacy of past disclosure of risks of the 1 O'Connell Street investment that the First Plaintiff may be exposed to liability and further advice that the issues then arising included past disclosure of financing arrangements, the Trustee's approval of the 1 O'Connell Street investment and the performance of the Trustee in the management of that investment.
 .29 That the Plaintiffs had in or prior to August 1991 and in any event, prior to 30 September 1991, decided that the Defendant was to be replaced as an insurer of the Plaintiffs and the suppression of that fact in the course of seeking agreement to the October 1991 excess policies.
 .30 That the Plaintiffs had in or prior to August 1991 and in any event, prior to 30 September 1991, decided that the Defendant be replaced as an insurer of the Plaintiffs and that one month's cover was required from the Defendant for the period of the October 1991 excess policies while a replacement insurer was found.
 .31 Alternatively to 22.29 and 22.30 that the Plaintiffs or one of them had prior to 30 September 1991 authorised their broker to obtain quotations for renewal terms for professional indemnity insurance for the period 1 October 1991 to 30 September 1992 but to refrain from involving the Defendant in participation of that renewal.
 .32 Alternatively to 22.31 the Plaintiffs or one of them instructed, or alternatively asked, or alternatively authorised their broker to seek the October 1991 excess policies while continuing to refrain from seeking involvement of the Defendant in the 1991/1992 renewal.
 . None of the matters set out above had been disclosed to the lead underwriter of the primary layer nor to the Defendant prior to 1 October 1991 and in respect of such matters which predated 1 October 1990 had not been disclosed to either the lead underwriter of the primary layer nor to the Defendant prior to 1 October 1990.
 . The matters in paragraph 22 hereof and each of them were matters that were relevant to the decision of the Defendant whether to accept the risk in September 1991 and if so on what terms and such of them as predate 1 October 1990 were relevant to the decision of the Defendant whether to accept the risk in September 1990 and if so on what terms.
 . That matters in paragraph 22 hereof and each of them were matters which the First Plaintiff knew in September 1991 to be relevant to the decision of the Defendant whether to accept the risk and if so on what terms or were matters which a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know to be matters so relevant.
 . Such of the matters in paragraph 22 hereof which pre-date 1 October 1990 and each of them were matters which the First Plaintiff knew in September 1990 to be relevant to the decision of the Defendant whether to accept the risk and if so on what terms or were matters which a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know to be matters so relevant.
 . Had the Defendant known about the matters in paragraph 22 hereof and each of them it would not have entered into the October 1991 excess policies. Alternatively, the Defendant would have expressly excluded from the October 1991 excess policies and the 1990/1991 excess policies all claims arising out of the No.1 O'Connell Street project and all claims arising out of the First Plaintiff's role in the administration of the Australia-wide Target Funds. Alternatively, the Defendant would have expressly excluded from the 1990/1991 and the October 1991 excess policies all claims arising out of the 1 O'Connell Street project. . The First Plaintiff prior to 1 October 1991 knew that the matters referred to in paragraph 22 hereof and each of them were or might be relevant to the Defendant's decision whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms and either deliberately or recklessly chose not to disclose them to the Defendant.
 . At the time of seeking and obtaining the October 1991 excess policies the First Plaintiff's broker, Sedgwick James Limited, knew of the decision of the Plaintiffs that the Defendant be replaced as insurer of the Plaintiffs. The broker knew that the First Plaintiff's decision to replace the Defendant was or might be relevant to the Defendant's decision whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms and the broker either deliberately or recklessly chose not to disclose that the (sic) decision to the Defendant.
 . In the premises the said non-disclosures were fraudulent. Further the non-disclosure matters were not disclosed so as to enable the Plaintiffs to obtain insurance or to obtain insurance on the best possible terms.
 . Pursuant to an entitlement under [Section 28(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), the October 1991 excess policies of insurance were avoided for fraudulent non-disclosure by letter dated 19 October 1995.

Non-Fraudulent Non-Disclosures . In the alternative, had the non-disclosures referred to above not occurred the Defendant would not have agreed to enter into the October 1991 excess policies. Alternatively, the Defendant would only have agreed to enter into the 1990/1991 excess policies and the October 1991 excess policies on terms which expressly excluded liability for any claims arising out of the 1 O'Connell Street investment and claims arising out of the First Plaintiff's administration of the Australia-wide Target Funds. In the premises, by reason of [Section 28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), if the insured was not entitled to avoid the October 1991 excess policies, its liability under the policy is reduced to nil as is its liability under the 1990/1991 excess policies.

Fraudulent Misrepresentations . The First Plaintiff's conduct when seeking the October 1991 excess policies amounted to a representation that there was nothing to be disclosed which was or might be of relevance to the Defendant other than that which was disclosed in communications between the First Plaintiff's broker, Sedgwick James Ltd., and Mr. Stephen Hunter on behalf of the Defendant.

Particulars of Conduct .1 Telephone conversation on 26 September 1991 between Mr. Rick Welsh on behalf of Sedgwick James Ltd. and Mr. Stephen Hunter during the course of which Mr. Welsh requested a thirty day extension and informed Mr. Hunter that the lead underwriter had already agreed to this.
 .2 Facsimile from Mr. Welsh to Mr. Hunter dated 27 September 1991 in which Mr. Welsh advised that "the primary reason" for the lead underwriters' deliberation on renewal terms "is so that further information can be obtained regarding Permanent's involvement in the property trust area, especially in view of the Metrogrowth Property Trust claim. Specifically, Underwriters have requested details as to how many property trusts Permanent currently have and what percentage of their income this represents, and also whether these property trusts are running well and 'blue chip'".
 .3 The inclusion of the Placing Slip(s) submitted on behalf of the Plaintiffs by the broker to the Defendant, under the heading "Information" of the words: "Refer proposal form dated 7th September 1990 and attachments (as forwarded with our letter dated 17th September 1990" .4 Silence on the part of the Plaintiffs and their broker during all the negotiations leading up to the signing of the placing slip by Mr. Hunter on 30 September 1991 as to all of the matters referred to under the heading "Non-disclosures" in paragraph 22 above.
 .5 Representing to the Defendant and/or permitting and/or inducing the Defendant to believe that the Defendant was to be a participant in the policies anticipated to be written for the year following the 1990/1991 excess policies when in fact the decision had been made to replace the Defendant and that fact had been suppressed.
 .6 Concealing the fact that although cover was sought for a one month period from 1 October 1991 to 30 October 1991, the Defendant was excluded from consideration as a participating insurer for the 1992 renewal year.
 . The representation was false because of the matters set out under the heading ("Non-disclosures" in paragraph 22 above and because such matters were relevant to the Defendant's decision whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms.
 . The First Plaintiff's representation was made knowing it to be false, without actual and honest belief in its truth or recklessly indifferent to its truth or falsity. It was made in order to obtain insurance or to obtain it on the best possible terms.
 . So far as concerns the decision of the Plaintiffs that the Defendant be replaced as insurer of the Plaintiffs, the broker's representation and/or inducement and/or concealment were made knowing them to be false, without actual honest belief in their truth and recklessly indifferent to their truth or falsity. They were made in order to obtain insurance or to obtain it on the best possible terms.
 . In the premises the Defendant was entitled to avoid the October 1991 excess policies on the ground of fraudulent misrepresentation.

Non-fraudulent misrepresentations . Had the misrepresentations referred to above not occurred the Defendant would not have agreed to the October 1991 excess policies. Alternatively, the Defendant would only have agreed to the October 1991 excess policies on terms which expressly excluded liability for any claims arising out of the 1 O'Connell Street investment and claims arising out of the First Plaintiff's administration of Australia Wide Target Funds. In the premises, by reason of [section 28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth), even if the Defendant was not entitled to avoid the October 1991 excess policies its liability under the policy is reduced to nil.
 . Further, in relation to the 1990/1991 excess policies, the Defendant says that the amount that would place the Defendant in the position in which it would have been had the misrepresentation particularised below not occurred is such that by reason of [Section 28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth), the liability under the 1990/1991 Excess policies is reduced to nil.

Misrepresentation Particulars .1 The proposal form dated 7 September 1990 contained the representation: "I/We hereby declare that the above statements are true, that 
I/We have not suppressed or mis-stated any facts ..." .2 Silence on the part of the Plaintiffs constituted a representation that there was no material information which had not been disclosed.
 . The representations were false because of the matters under the heading "Non Disclosure Particulars" in paragraph 22 above, which predated 1 October 1990 and because such matters were relevant to the Defendant's decision whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms.
 .1 Submissions on [Section 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html), Misrepresentation, and Fraud .1.1 Submissions for Defendant 
Mr. Gee first made submissions concerning the meaning of "fraud" in [s.28.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html)
In relation to non-disclosure, Mr. Gee submitted that if an insured knows something, knows it is relevant to the insurer's decision, and deliberately withholds it because the insured believes it would affect the insurer's decision, then this amounts to fraud: see Twenty-First Maylux v. Mercantile
Mutual Insurance Australia <case>; [(1990) VR 919] at 925-6. There could be fraudulent non-disclosure even in cases where the insured does not know that the matter in question is relevant: so long as a reasonable person would know the matter is relevant, it would be sufficient if the insured knows the matter, suspects it is relevant, and deliberately withholds it in order to obtain insurance, or obtain insurance on the best available terms: see Thompson v. Government Insurance Office of
NSW, Rolfe, J., 15th June 1994 at pp.71-2; Burns v. MMI-CMI Insurance ANZ Ins.Cas. 61-228 at 75-507-8.

As regards misrepresentation, it is sufficient for fraud that the representation is false and made either without belief in its truth or recklessly without caring whether it was true or false: see Plasteel Windows
Australia v. C.E. Heath Underwriting Agencies [(1989) 5 ANZ Ins.Cas.
-926] at 75-970.

Next, Mr. Gee submitted that knowledge of Sedgwick Australia was knowledge of the Permanent companies. Thus, for example, where Sedgwick Australia knew that
FAI was being omitted from the 1991-2 insurance programme and knew that this was relevant to FAI's acceptance of the risk and/or the terms of such acceptance, and Sedgwick deliberately withheld this information, Sedgwick's knowledge would be attributed to the Permanent companies, and so would its fraudulent conduct.

On the attribution of knowledge, Mr. Gee referred me to Lindsay v. CIC
Insurance [(1989) 16 NSWLR 673], where it was held to be sufficient if the matter was known to "a relevant agent", which included an employee to whom the matter of insurance had been delegated, or to whom management of the relevant property had been delegated; and see also
Ayoub v. Lombard Insurance Co. [(1989) 97 FLR 284] AT 295. Mr.
Gee also referred me to Macquarie Bank v. National Mutual Life Association [(1996) 40 NSWLR 543] at 610-14, where it was held that the attribution of knowledge to a principal was not limited to knowledge acquired in the course of the agency while preparing to effect the particular insurance.

On the attribution of fraud, Mr. Gee referred me to Lloyd v. Grace Smith <case>; [(1912) AC 716], where it was held that a principal was liable for the fraud of an agent within the scope of the agent's authority; and that it was not necessary that the fraud be for the benefit of the principal. Here, it was within the scope of Sedgwick Australia's authority to make arrangements for renewal of the insurance, to obtain the thirty day extension, and to leave FAI out of the following year's programme.

Next, Mr. Gee submitted that relevance in [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) did not have to be relevance to the risk as such, but could extend to relevance to other commercial considerations: see Pan Atlantic Insurance v.
Pine Top Insurance [(1995) 1 AC 501] at 538, -3.

Mr. Gee further submitted that the fact that a witness has told untruths may support the inference that the truth would be unfavourable to the witness or interests associated with the witness: see Steinberg v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1975) 134 CLR 640] at 694-5. Mr. Gee submitted that I should find fraudulent conduct committed by Mr. Davis and by Mr. Carson.

Mr. Gee submitted that I should not accept Mr. Davis' evidence that he did not believe the JCLD correspondence was relevant to insurance. He had received the
May 1991 report from Minter Ellison, which made it clear that the Permanent companies were open to criticism in relation to the entry into this transaction. The property market was rapidly falling during 1991, Mr. Davis wrote concerning the possibility of a fire sale, and valuations were received showing the interest of unit holders had been reduced to nil. Then, Mr. Davis was confronted with the letter dated 13th September 1991 from JCLD. He called for a report from Ms. Alderson which, among other things, indicated that the
Permanent companies could be "exposed" in relation to non-disclosure. Mr.
Davis' evidence that he did not read this as suggesting possible liability in the Permanent companies, but rather the possibility of exposure if comment was offered to JCLD, was inherently incredible. Mr. Davis then composed his response to that letter, dated 17th September, which could best be described as an attempt to fob off JCLD. Then, on the next day, at the board meeting dealing with the application to renew insurance, Mr. Davis was asked whether there was anything that needed to be disclosed and said there was not.

The motive for deliberately withholding information was that it became clear in September that insurers were very concerned about involvement in property trusts, and it was clear that the insurance terms for the following year would be affected by this and would be more expensive. The notification only occurred at all because Mr. Church, two weeks into October, said that the matter had to be disclosed. The conduct of Mr. Davis was the conduct of an insured which knew something and hoped it would go away. He refrained from notifying, although he could no longer have thought, by late September, that the circumstances were not notifiable.

Mr. Gee gave page references to various parts of the evidence of Mr. Davis. In particular, to evidence that in May 1991 he was aware of a significant drop in the value of Sydney CBD property; evidence concerning his "fire sale" memo, and evidence to the effect that he knew that a forced sale would cause loss.
Next, his evidence that he did not circulate the memo of May 1991 because it did not do what he had wanted it to do; and his denial that he refrained from showing it to the Board because he thought it was critical. Mr. Gee pointed to a conflict with Mr. Carson's evidence, where Mr. Davis said that he did not ask Mr. Carson to get a report from Ms. Byrne.

Mr. Gee referred to Mr. Davis' evidence concerning the Alderson memo, the JCLD letter of 13th September, and his response of 17th September. Mr. Davis admitted that he was mistaken in his letter to say that there must have been sufficient disclosure because of JCLD's present understanding of the matter; but Mr. Gee submitted that even if Mr. Davis was truthful in saying he did not read the letter of 13th September as being directed at Permanent's conduct, then at least he was reckless in taking that view; and the need for disclosure must have become obvious when he became aware that the underwriters were seeking more information in relation to property trusts.

Mr. Gee submitted that the case for fraud was stronger in relation to Mr.
Carson. Although Mr. Carson claimed that he did not read the May 1991 report as containing any criticism of the Permanent companies, he did decide to request a version of the report in which the material critical of the
Permanent companies was removed. Furthermore, he asked Ms. Byrne for a report on the matter, claiming (contrary to Mr. Davis' evidence) that this was at Mr.
Davis' request; yet did not pass this report on to Mr. Davis. Mr. Carson had been responsible for insurance matters, before Mr. Ham; and so was very much aware of the need for disclosure. He saw the underwriters in London in early
September, and then was confronted with Sedgwick's letter of 23rd September specifically asking for information concerning property trusts.

Mr. Gee referred me to the transcript of Mr. Carson's evidence. Mr. Gee submitted I should reject his evidence that the reason for obtaining the May report was an anticipated request for renewed borrowings. He submitted that his evidence that there was not a hint of concern shown in the May 1991 document concerning Permanent's allowing No.1 O'Connell Street to proceed was deliberately false; and I should also find that his evidence that he did not give instructions in substance for a "sanitised" version of this report was deliberately false; particularly having regard to Ms. Alderson's evidence about that matter. Mr. Gee submitted that the inference from this deliberately false evidence was that Mr. Carson knew the significance of the matter, and this confirmed that his withholding of this information from FAI was fraudulent. Mr. Gee submitted that Mr. Carson's evidence that Mr. Davis directed him to get a memorandum from Ms. Byrne should be rejected, and that I should hold that Mr. Carson sought this because he saw there was a problem. I should also reject Mr. Carson's evidence that he regarded the reference to haste in Ms. Byrne's memorandum as merely reflecting a commercial reality. I should also reject Mr. Carson's evidence that he believed Ms. Alderson was wrong insofar as her memorandum suggested that the trustee could be exposed by reason of non-disclosure. Mr. Carson knew of the Sedgwick letter of 23rd
September, requesting for a review of the property trust situation, and knew that the terms of renewal were likely to be more onerous. Mr. Gee submitted it was impossible to accept that Mr. Carson could honestly have believed that the
JCLD letters did not suggest possible legal liability in Permanent. Mr.
Carson's suggestions that the unitholders' letters, which began coming in on th September, did not indicate that unitholders were seeking to consider the trustee's position, or were concerned and seeking an investigation of the trustee's conduct, were false. If that had been correct, why was there no discussion when Mr. Church suggested that there should be notification on 14th
October? I should accept Ms. Alderson's evidence that at meetings in late
September, Mr. Carson was "rather alarmed".

Turning to the question of relevance, Mr. Gee submitted that I should accept
Mr. McIver's evidence that, if the particularised matters occurring in 1988 had been disclosed, No.1 O'Connell Street circumstances would have been excluded from cover in the 1989-1990 and 1990-1991 policies as well as from the thirty day extension. As regards the circumstances occurring in 1991, I should accept the evidence of Mr. Hunter, Mr. McIver, Mr. Agnew and Mr. Brown that these matters were relevant to an underwriter's decision whether to accept the risk and if so, on what terms. A contrary view was obviously untenable. Even Mr. Daly, when shown the JCLD correspondence, said it was notifiable.

As regards the Permanent companies' witnesses, Mr. McMillan was not an expert underwriter. Mr. Flaxman did not have experience of underwriting insurance in the context of the Australian [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/); and his views on disclosure were untenable even according to the UK law: see Aldridge
Estates Investment v. McCarthy, Astell, J., Queen's Bench Division, 29th
October 1996. Mr. Flaxman's position to the effect that the insured only need provide a fair general picture of the risk, and that more particular information should be sought by the insurer if the insurer wanted it, was untenable: cf. Lindsay and Ayoub (supra). The relevance of questions asked by the insurer was rather that an insured, having been asked specific questions, could not assert that it did not know the matter was relevant or that a reasonable person could not have been expected to know this.

In the present case, the enquiry made by the underwriters about property trusts in general meant that the Permanent companies must have known that the particular problems concerning No.1 O'Connell Street were relevant, or at least should have known this: cf. Thompson (supra).

I could more readily draw the inference of relevance because the Permanent companies did not call Mr. Holt, the very underwriter who made the decision on behalf of the Michael Payne syndicate to accept the risk. He is still with the
Michael Payne syndicate, and no explanation was given for not calling him.
 .1.2 Submissions for Plaintiff 
Mr. Coles submitted that [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) provided a statutory code which replaced the common law duty of disclosure:
Advance Insurance Agencies v. Matthews <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 606], at 615; Prime Forme Cutting v. Baltica General Insurance
Co. [(1991) 6 ANZ Ins Cas 61-028], at 76,877. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) related to matters; and a matter is not just an isolated fact, but rather has to be considered within a web of surrounding circumstances which explains its significance: see Barclay Holdings (Australia) v. British National
Insurance [(1987) 8 NSWLR 514.] FAI had formulated thirty-two matters; and it could succeed only in relation to each matter separately or all matters together. That was how its case was pleaded, and an allegation involving fraud must be distinctly pleaded. Furthermore, the matters as formulated in FAI's defence provided the basis of the evidence of
FAI witnesses: they were asked to assume the existence of the matters pleaded, and were not asked to assume the existence of any combination of the matters pleaded less than the totality.

Furthermore, they were asked to assume the matters as pleaded, which in many cases constituted an unbalanced and unfair expression of what actually happened. This considerably affected the weight to be given to that evidence, particularly when it was based on assumptions and hindsight.

As regards the test of relevance, in professional indemnity insurance what is insured is the risk of a breach of duty and negligence. Accordingly, it is assumed that breaches of duty and negligence will occur, and will not be recognised as such by the insured. The insured's judgment on such matters is thus explicitly recognised as being fallible. Accordingly, relevant matters might include circumstances which might give rise to a claim and which are seen as such by the insured; circumstances the subject of specific enquiries in a proposal; circumstances the subject of specific enquiries prior to renewal; and particular unusual or extraordinary circumstances. Relevant matters would not include matters which were part of the minutiae of day-to- day operations. This was the substantial truth in Mr. Flaxman's evidence: what needed to be disclosed should be sufficient to enable the insurer to decide if it wanted to know more. There was a close interplay between what is material and the proposal. Features of the overall business likely to cause claims were relevant, but not day-to-day glitches which might become apparent with hindsight. Otherwise, the proposal was a trap.

English experts called for the Permanent companies had enormous expertise and insight and understanding of the practical, commercial and legal significance of matters concerning disclosure. By contrast, FAI's independent expert Mr.
Brown gave undue weight to the knowledge that a claim had been brought, and to the hindsight that this provided.

Mr. Coles submitted that FAI's approach drew an artificial distinction between disclosure and notification: such a distinction would raise the real possibility of a lack of continuity in insurance.
 [Section (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) required actual knowledge: Advance Insurance Agencies v. Matthews [(1987) 4 ANZ Ins Cas 60-813], at 74,998. To know means more than to suspect or believe:
Anderson versus Lynch [(1982) 17 NTR 21], at 28-9;
Ditchburn v. Seltsam Ltd. [(1989) 17 NSWLR 697], at 707;
Blackley v. National Mutual Life [(1972) NZLR 1038], at 1047; R.
v. Fallon [(1981) SASR 394]; Anderson v. Pacific Fire and Marine Insurance Co.
[(1872) 7 LRCP 65], at 69. Cf. Vines v. Djordjevitch <case>; [(1955) Argus LR 431], at 434; Barnes v. Addy [(1874) LR 9 Ch App 244], at 251-2; Eagle Trust v. SBC Securities [(1992) 4 AllER 488], at -500. It does not extend to something forgotten: Re Montagu's Settlement
Trusts [(1987) Ch 264], at 284.

As regards [s.21(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html), this applied only to matters actually known to the insured, and one had to suppose that a reasonable person knew that same matter in the same circumstances. Where the circumstances are extremely complex, as in this case, it is difficult for the Court to be confident that a fair view of the circumstances has been established, and it is difficult to know what a reasonable person would make of the circumstances. It was not enough that the reasonable person might be expected to think the matter was relevant. The matter must be such that a reasonable person could be expected to know it was relevant: Delphin v. Lumley General Insurance [(1989) 5 ANZ Ins Cas -941], at 76,134-5; Twenty-First Maylux, at 925; Prime Forme
Cutting, at 76,879.

So far as the "sanitisation" of the May 1991 report was concerned, to give an instruction to remove areas where the trustee may be open to criticism, was not to acknowledge that the trustee was justifiably open to criticism, much less that there was any legal liability or breach of duty. Even if criticism was justifiable, it could be a mere commercial criticism. The instruction accordingly was no more than designed to have a report available for the manager, which could not be construed or misconstrued as being critical of the trustee. The thrust of the cross-examination of Mr. Carson was that he saw the report as indicating an exposure to legal liability, and Mr. Carson correctly rejected that: he may have overlooked an intermediate view that the report might indicate that the trustee was open to commercial criticism, in which case disclosure to the manager would introduce complications should the trustee be called upon to resist a call by the manager for more funds, or to seek to remove the manager.

Mr. Stewart did not perceive that there was any legal liability in the
Permanent companies; so why should the Permanent companies read into his report suggestions of liability, when this was not intended by Mr. Stewart?
Ms. Alderson did not perceive any flagging of any potential for legal liability, but only potential for criticism, perhaps ill-judged, of commercial steps taken.

Insofar as Mr. Carson disclaimed any perception of possible criticism, it should be noted that at first he did not remember being involved at all, although subsequently he was prepared to admit that he must have been. His rejection of the suggestion that there was any criticism suggests that he understood criticism to refer to criticism indicating legal liability. He had been in the witness box for some time, and the questions were susceptible to various interpretations. He was prepared to make admissions, for example, of his opinion that there had been insufficient disclosure; and although it could be said that this was made necessary because it was recorded in a memorandum of 3rd October, Mr. Carson admitted that he held this belief earlier. Mr.
Coles submitted that Mr. Carson had answered questions directly; and that the evidence of Mr. McMillan and Mr. Flaxman supported the view that Mr. Carson genuinely believed that there were no matters which needed to be disclosed.

Mr. Davis frankly admitted that he made a mistake in his letter. He commissioned the May 1991 report in order to help the Permanent companies deal with the manager; and the report was not very helpful in that direction. Both he and Mr. Church read it, and his evidence that he saw nothing untoward in it should be accepted.

There was no commercial reason for any fraud to be committed. The suggestion that it was recognised in September 1991 that renewal of the insurance was going to be difficult did not take account of the fact that it would not make commercial sense to suppress the existence of circumstances that could give rise to a claim. A notification of another matter had been made in the middle of the 1990-1991 insurance; and then a further notification was made in the middle of October, which was about the worst time which could have been chosen, so far as obtaining renewed insurance on favourable terms was concerned. The minutes of the meeting of directors which took place in
September 1991 showed that the obligation to disclose was taken very seriously.

The matters alleged in the various particulars under paragraph 22 of the
Defence were expressed inaccurately or misleadingly. For example, in particular 22.1, the use of the word "warned" gave a misleading impression, in relation to a letter which essentially asked for comments and made enquiries.
In general, many of the particulars involved matters taken out of context or misdescribed; and very often they put a character on events which the
Permanent companies did not know that the events had. In general terms, it had to be remembered that the trust deeds authorised a wide range of investments, which could be called speculative, such as acquisition of land, development of land, and futures contracts; and also provided that the trustee should accept the manager's proposals. The trustee never received advice that there was a breach of trust involved, and it was reasonable to rely on what had hitherto been a successful manager. At various times, the Permanent companies were concerned about No.1 O'Connell Street, and also about other property trusts; but this concern was not directed to its own liability, but rather towards protecting the interests of unitholders.
 .2 Credit 
Particular attacks were made by FAI on the credit of Mr. Loth, Mr. Davis and
Mr. Carson.

As regards Mr. Loth, it was submitted that I should find that he deliberately went ahead with the transaction, knowing that it was a breach of trust, at least by December 1988. I am not satisfied that he actually knew this; but in any event, he left the Permanent companies in August 1990. Even if his knowledge could be attributed to the Permanent companies while he was employed by them, I do not think it could be attributed to them thereafter; and he was not employed by the Permanent companies in September 1990, when the policy for
October 1990-September 1991 was arranged; nor was he employed by the Permanent companies at any time thereafter until September 1991, when the thirty-day extension was arranged. However, I do think Mr. Loth was very concerned to justify his role in what turned out to be a disastrous investment, and was for example disingenuous in seeking to deny the plain fact that he was the person with primary responsibility for organising the original investment in April-
May 1988. Where his evidence conflicts with those of the solicitors Mr. Lyons,
Mr. Toltz and Mr. Stewart, the evidence of the solicitors is in my opinion more reliable.

As regards Mr. Davis, I accept that he gave evidence honestly and with reasonable recollection: I do not disbelieve his evidence as to his reasons for obtaining the May 1991 report, or for not submitting it to the Board; or his evidence that he did not read Ms. Alderson's memorandum as suggesting possible liability in the Permanent companies. Nor do I consider that the mistaken assertion in his letter of 17th September 1991 indicates any consciousness of any such liability. With hindsight, it is easy to say that he was very much mistaken as to the significance of the JCLD correspondence, but this does not lead me to reject his evidence. Although there was a commercial reason to withhold disclosure, namely the need to renew insurance in a difficult climate, I do not believe this weighed at all with Mr. Davis; and the countervailing consideration, that failure to notify during the 1990-1991 year would risk losing cover for any disclosable circumstance, is in my opinion far more weighty, and counts heavily against there being motivation for deliberate fraud.

As regards Mr. Carson, I accept that Mr. Stewart was told to prepare a version of the May 1991 report omitting the parts of it which could be seen as involving criticism of the trustee; and I accept that this was the result of instructions given by Mr. Carson to Ms. Alderson. Certainly, that is how Ms.
Alderson understood her instructions. I think it is probable that instructions along those lines were given by Mr. Carson to Ms. Alderson, and accordingly that it is probable that Mr. Carson did at the time recognise that there were parts of the report that could be seen as involving criticism of the trustee.
Mr. Carson denied this in his evidence. I am not satisfied that this denial involved deliberately false evidence; although it does mean that I cannot be confident as to the accuracy of his recollections and reconstructions.
Otherwise, much the same comments apply as to Mr. Davis.
 .3 Whether Matters Known 
In my opinion, "known" in [s.21(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) means more than suspected or believed. What is required is that the matter should be the subject of a true belief, held with sufficient assurance to justify the term "known". However, it must be remembered that a belief may sometimes itself be a matter relevant to the decision of an insurer. An insured may know that it has a particular belief, and know that its having that belief is relevant to the decision of an insurer, in which case that belief itself is a matter which must be disclosed. It is possible that the belief of the insured in Khoury v. GIO NSW <case>; [(1984) 165 CLR 622] that his sons were systematically stealing from the business was a matter known to be relevant to the decision of the insurer, in which case that case could be decided under the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) in the same way as it was at general law.

I do not accept Mr. Coles' submissions concerning the interpretation and effect of FAI's pleading; in particular, his submissions that FAI could only succeed if I found that the Permanent companies knew either one or all of the particulars to paragraph 22 of the Defence, and knew one or all of them under the precise description adopted in the particulars. In my opinion, it will be sufficient if I find, in respect of any combination of the particulars under paragraph 22, that the Permanent companies knew matters under a description which falls fairly within the ambit of the description adopted within the pleading; and if I am satisfied that the matters known under that description were, either singly or in combination, known by the Permanent companies to be relevant to the insurer's decision, or were such that a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know them to be so relevant.

Of course, insofar as evidence concerning relevance and knowledge of relevance, relied on by FAI, is directed to all of the matters (rather than just some combination of a few of them), or to a description under which I find the facts were not known, then such evidence may have little weight on the questions of relevance and of knowledge of relevance.
 .3.1 1988 Matters: Particulars 22.1 to 22.21 
In many cases, these matters are given a description in the particulars which is influenced by the wisdom of hindsight, isolated from the circumstances, and expressed in such a way as to imply that a breach of trust had occurred; so that it can be said that, if these matters had been known by the Permanent companies under that description, then the Permanent companies must or should have recognised there had been a breach of trust.

I accept that, in a general way, the Permanent companies knew of the events which are referred to in particulars 22.1 to 22.21, to the extent indicated in my outline of facts; but, generally for reasons given in detail in the written submissions of the Permanent companies, I am not satisfied that it knew these matters under the descriptions adopted in those paragraphs.
 .3.2 May 1991 Report: Paragraph 22.22 
The Permanent companies knew that they had the May 1991 report, and I accept that they knew what the terms of that report were. However, in my opinion, the report did not record the matters under the descriptions adopted in particulars 22.1 to 22.21; and so I am not satisfied that Permanent knew that this report "recorded the matters as set out in each of the preceding paragraphs", as alleged in particular 22.22.
 .3.3 Other 1991 Matters: Paragraphs 22.23 to 22.28 
The Permanent companies accept that they knew the matters set out in particulars 22.23 and 22.25; and FAI has not referred me to any evidence supporting particular 22.24.

As regards particular 22.26, the Permanent companies accept, correctly, that the Permanent companies knew this matter, as expressed down to the words "reduced in value to nil". However, as regards the balance of this paragraph, in my opinion it has not been shown that the Permanent companies knew that these circumstances were circumstances against which it had been warned by its solicitors in April 1988 and December 1988.

As regards particular 22.27, the Permanent companies knew that they had received the JCLD letters. However, it received the first of the letters from the unitholders only on 30th September 1991, by which time the thirty-day extension contract had been made. Even if it could be argued that the duty of disclosure persisted up to the date of commencement of the extension, I do not think it can be said that the Permanent companies knew of the receipt and the effect of the unitholders' letters in time for it to make a disclosure prior to 1st October.

Returning to the JCLD letters, I am not satisfied that the Permanent companies understood them to be or to contain allegations of failure by the first plaintiff to ensure proper disclosure, or expressions of concern about the discharge of the duties of the first plaintiff as trustee.

Ms. Alderson, in her report, expressed a belief that, in relation to the matter of disclosure, the trustee could be exposed; and also that the JCLD letters raised the issue of the performance of the trustee. However, I do not think that this amounts to knowledge by the Permanent companies that they could be exposed or that the issue of the performance of the trustee had been raised. However, I do accept, that by reason of Ms. Alderson's memorandum, the
Permanent companies knew that this view had been expressed by Ms. Alderson, and this is the matter dealt with in particular 22.28.

As regards particular 22.28, I accept that the Permanent companies knew that
Ms. Alderson had submitted a memorandum, in which there was reference to the possibility that, in the matter of disclosure, the Permanent companies could be exposed; and which also expressed the view that the JCLD letters raised an issue concerning the first plaintiff's discharge of its duties as trustee.
However, the memorandum did not say that the Permanent companies may be exposed "to liability": the exposure referred to could be exposure to criticism.
 .4 Whether Relevance Known 
Both parties accepted, in my view correctly, that the "insurer" in [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) means the particular insurer, here FAI. The particular insurer may have idiosyncrasies, and may be different in various ways from the hypothetical reasonable insurer; but the possibility of an untoward effect from these considerations is to some extent avoided by the requirement that either the insured know that a matter is relevant, or that a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know that it is relevant.

It may also be that the effect of idiosyncrasies of a particular insurer are further minimised by reason of the words "relevant" and "whether to accept the risk and if so, on what terms". This matter does not arise in relation to disclosure or misrepresentation concerning the No.1 O'Connell Street circumstances, but does arise directly in relation to the alleged non- disclosure or misrepresentation concerning the non-inclusion of FAI, so I will defer discussion of it until I deal with that issue.

Evidence was given by Mr. Hunter and Mr. McIver as to what would have been relevant to them. I believe that evidence was given honestly, albeit to some extent affected by the wisdom of hindsight in relation to the No.1 O'Connell
Street circumstances.

Evidence as to relevance was also given by independent experts. This evidence would appear to bear directly only on the question of relevance to a hypothetical reasonable insurer, which is not in issue. However, this could in turn be relevant to (i) the fact of relevance to FAI (to be considered along with FAI's own evidence); (ii) whether this relevance was known to the
Permanent companies (to be considered along with the Permanent's own evidence); and (iii) whether a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know of this relevance.

I found Mr. Agnew the least helpful of the independent experts, having regard to the inflexibility of his views. Mr. Brown gave useful evidence, although it was somewhat affected by hindsight, and lost some weight because of his incorrect initial assertion that he did not grant extensions. Mr. McMillan's expertise in dealing with claims was clear, and although he was not an expert underwriter I considered his evidence to be cogent. Mr. Flaxman had no experience of underwriting under the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), and in my opinion, had too narrow a view of the duty of disclosure, but still gave useful evidence.
 .4.1 1988 Matters: Particular 22.1 to 22.21 
The facts referred to in these particulars were known in a general way by reason of the Permanent companies' participation in them. If the Permanent companies had known that these matters meant that there had been a breach of trust, or actually believed there had been a breach of trust, then the breach of trust or Permanent's belief that there had been a breach of trust would very probably have been known to be relevant by the Permanent companies, and a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to have known that they were relevant. However, I am not satisfied that the matters were known under a description such that a breach of trust was suggested, much less that the Permanent companies actually knew or believed there had been a breach of trust. In those circumstances, I am not satisfied that the Permanent companies knew these matters to be relevant, or that a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know this.
 .4.2 May 1991 Report: Particular 22.22 
The evidence of Mr. Hunter and Mr. McIver does not satisfy me that they actually read and considered the contents of the May 1991 report: their evidence is to the effect that they understood that this report in effect conveyed the matters already summarised in particulars 22.1 to 22.21, and on that basis they asserted it was relevant to their decision. Although Mr. Gee submitted that FAI's independent expert Mr. Brown perused relevant documents, he did not refer me to any specific evidence that he had actually read the May report; and Mr. Brown's evidence also seems to proceed on the assumption that its effect is fairly set out in particular 22.28. In those circumstances, particularly having regard to the evidence of Mr. McMillan and Mr. Flaxman, I am unable to find as a fact that the existence of the May 1991 report was relevant to FAI's decision whether or not to accept the risk, and if so upon what terms.

Although there is material supporting an inference that Mr. Carson, and possibly other employees of the Permanent companies, suspected that this report might be so relevant, I am unable to conclude that the Permanent companies knew that it was relevant. In the light of the evidence of Mr.
McMillan and Mr. Flaxman, I am unable to conclude that a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know that it was relevant.
 .4.3 Other 1991 Matters: Particulars 22.23-22.28 
I do not think it was strongly urged that particular 22.23, on its own, was relevant to the insurer's decision, or that the Permanent companies knew it to be a matter so relevant. Since particular 22.24 does not appear to have been established by the evidence, the question as to whether it was relevant to the decision of the insurer, or known to be relevant, does not arise.

As regards particular 22.25, it is common ground that the Permanent companies did become aware of circumstances that may give rise to a claim in respect of
Target Fund No.1, and that those circumstances were notified to Sedgwick
London. In accordance with my decision on the question of notification, that would have amounted to notification to FAI for the purposes of bringing claims arising out of those circumstances within the ambit of the 1990-1991 policy.
Furthermore, the circumstances were disclosed in the proposal form submitted in relation to the renewal for the 1991-1992 year, though of course that proposal was not submitted to FAI. I do not understand any evidence led for
FAI to focus directly on the relevance of this matter, and in the circumstances I am not satisfied that this matter would have been relevant to
FAI's decision in relation to the proposed thirty-day extension, or that the
Permanent companies knew it to be relevant, or that a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know it was relevant.

It is convenient to consider together particulars 22.26, 22.27, and 22.28. It does seem to me arguable that the plaintiff's awareness of valuations showing that the entire investment of the unit holders was effectively reduced in value to nil (this translating to a loss of $150 million or more) coupled with the receipt of the JCLD letters and Ms. Alderson's memorandum referring to the trustee being exposed and the performance of the trustee being an issue, amounts to a matter or matters relevant to the decision of a reasonable underwriter whether to accept the risk and if so, on what terms. The plausibility of this proposition tends to support the evidence of Mr. McIver and Mr. Hunter that they would have regarded these matters as relevant to their decision. However, the real question is whether the Permanent companies knew that these matters were relevant to FAI's decision, or whether alternatively a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know these matters to be relevant. Having regard particularly to the evidence of Mr. Davis, and also the evidence of Mr. Carson and Ms. Alderson, I am not satisfied that the Permanent companies knew these matters to be so relevant.
In the light of the evidence of Mr. McMillan and Mr. Flaxman, I am also unable to conclude that a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know them to be relevant.

I reach the same conclusion, whether particulars 22.26, 22.27 and 22.28 are considered in isolation, or in combination with the facts referred to in the earlier paragraphs which I found to have been known to the Permanent companies.
 .5 Misrepresentation, Fraud, and Utmost Good Faith 
I believe it follows from my decision concerning non-disclosure that there has been no relevant misrepresentation, fraud or failure to act with utmost good faith in connection with the alleged non-disclosure concerning No.1 O'Connell
Street.
 .6 [Section 28(1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html)) 
If, contrary to the views I have expressed, the matters referred to in particulars 22.26 to 22.28 were matters know to the insured which the insured knew to be relevant to FAI's decision, or which a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know to be relevant, then I would accept that it has not been proved that FAI would have entered into the thirty-day extension contract, for the same premium and on the same terms and conditions, even if these matters had been disclosed to it. Accordingly, the Permanent companies would not, in that event, be assisted by [s.28(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) of the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/).
 .7 [Section 28(3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html)) 
Again, if contrary to my views expressed above, there was non-disclosure or misrepresentation, a real question would arise under [s.28(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html)
The Permanent companies say that, if they had disclosed concerns concerning
No.1 O'Connell Street, then, either ipso facto or as a consequence, they would have notified to FAI circumstances that might give rise to a claim, so that claims concerning No.1 O'Connell Street would have been covered under the -1991 policy.
 .7.1 Submissions for Plaintiff 
Mr Coles submitted that, if FAI had informed the Permanent companies that it would be excluding the No.1 O'Connell Street circumstances from ensuing insurance contracts, as a result of Permanent disclosing the matters referred to in particulars 22.1 to 22.28, then the Permanent companies would have ensured that there was notification of circumstances which might give rise to a claim to FAI under the expiring contracts. There appears to be no case on whether [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) applies in this situation: cf. Fruehauf Finance Corp. v. Zurich Australian
Insurance [(1990) 6 ANZ Ins.Cas. 61-014] at 76-790-2, Rocco Pezzano v. Unity Insurance Brokers [(1995) 8 ANZ Ins.Cas. 61-288] at 76-204. Although conceivably FAI's position with its re- insurers could be affected (see Prime Forme Cutting v. Baltica General
Insurance [(1991) 6 ANZ Ins.Cas. 61-028] at 76-886), FAI had not led any evidence of prejudice or change of position, these being matters in respect of which FAI bears the burden of proof: see Zurich Australian Insurance v. Contour Mobel Pty. Ltd.
 <case>; [(1991) 2 VR 146]; Manchester
Unity Total Care Building Society v. MGICA [(1991) 6 ANZ Ins.Cas.
-062] at 77-154.
 .7.2 Submissions for Defendant 
Mr. Gee submitted that it was not the intention of the Act to allow a person guilty of non-disclosure to avoid the consequences in this way. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) ties the duty to a particular contract, and [s.28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) requires analysis of the position of the insurer under that contract.

The plaintiffs' submission would have unreasonable consequences. For example, suppose an insured took out insurance for $10,000.00, and then renewed this insurance. The insured makes a claim under the renewed policy. The insurer says that there was non-disclosure of material facts; and that if those facts had been disclosed, it would have imposed a $1,000.00 excess. If the plaintiffs' submission is correct, the insured could answer that disclosure would have involved notification of circumstances under the previous policy, therefore the insured is entitled to the whole $10,000.00, without deduction of any excess. The effect would be that the Court would order the insurer to pay $10,000.00 under the second policy, even though there would have been an excess of $1,000.00 in the circumstances postulated.

Mr. Gee further submitted that there was obvious prejudice to the insurer in notionally depriving the insurer of the benefit of the bargain that was made in respect of the previous year's insurance: but for any notional notification, the insurer could keep the premium for the previous year as profit, and would not be obliged to make a payment in respect of that year.
Furthermore, at the time when the hypothetical notification is being considered, all legal relationships between the insurer and the insured under the earlier contract are at an end. To suggest that a liability should be imposed on an underwriter in respect of a contract which has come to an end, and under which the underwriter has come under no liability, could not be considered as striking a fair balance between the rights of the insured and the underwriters.

Mr. Gee also pointed to problems that could arise out of competition between actual notifications under the earlier policy, and a hypothetical negotiation supposed pursuant to [s.28(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html)
He submitted that moneys paid by an insurer pursuant to a hypothetical notification could defeat claims subsequently brought in respect of circumstances actually notified, and could thereby defeat the rights of third parties who have an interest in those claims.
 .7.3 Decision 
In my opinion, there are no sufficient grounds to read the words in [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) "in a position in which he would have been" as restricted to the insurer's position under the particular contract of insurance pursuant to which the claim is being made. Where an insured has continuity of insurance, in relation to claims-made policies, it would seem harsh to me that a mistake as to whether circumstances existed which might give rise to a claim, occurring near the end of one policy, could completely deprive the insured of cover in respect of those circumstances. It seems more reasonable to me that the insured should have some cover, whether the circumstances are notified shortly before the end of one policy or shortly after the beginning of another policy.

I do not think this view does involve serious problems, as suggested by Mr.
Gee, of competition between claims arising out of circumstances actually notified under the earlier policy, and circumstances in respect of which there is a hypothetical notification under the earlier policy. The liability arising in connection with the hypothetical notification is under the later policy.
Accordingly, there will be no reduction of the insured amount under the earlier policy, by reason of the hypothetical notification. The position of the insurer must be considered having regard to its total liability in respect of all claims covered by the earlier policy. If those claims exhaust the earlier policy, then the insurer would be worse off if it had to pay anything under the later policy pursuant to the hypothetical notification, and [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) would not assist the insured.

In the present case, this problem does not arise, because I have already held that the thirty-day extension did not involve the introduction of any fresh limit to the insurance: the same limits applied to the extended thirteen-month policy as had applied to the original twelve-month policy.

In my opinion, it is clear that if there had been disclosure of concerns about
No.1 O'Connell Street, there would at least as a consequence have been notification to FAI under the 1990-1991 policy of circumstances relating to
No.1 O'Connell Street that might give rise to a claim. Accordingly, even if I had held there was non-disclosure or misrepresentation concerning No.1
O'Connell Street, then, so long as this non-disclosure or misrepresentation was not fraudulent, I would have held that [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) prevented FAI from relying on it.
 .8 [Section 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s31.html) 
The application of [s.31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s31.html) would only arise if I was wrong in my finding that there was no non- disclosure, and if I was also wrong in finding there was no fraud.

It seems to me that, for the same reasons that I gave in relation to [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html),
FAI was not prejudiced by any failure by the Permanent companies to comply with the duty of disclosure in relation to the No.1 O'Connell Street circumstances. Accordingly, the question would be whether it is harsh and unfair not to disregard FAI's avoidance of the contract of insurance. I have some difficulty expressing a view on this, in circumstances where I have found against both non-disclosure and fraud: it seems to me that the question of harshness and unfairness would depend upon precisely what fraud was considered to be involved.
 .9 [Section 54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) 
For reasons given in section 4.2.3, in my opinion [s.54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) cannot help the Permanent companies on this aspect of the case, except to overcome any deficiency in the immediacy of notification of circumstances that might give rise to a claim.
 .10 Retroactive Clause 
I held in section 5.1.3 that the retroactive clause applied to exclude FAI's liability only if the Permanent companies were aware of circumstances that might give rise to a claim concerning No.1 O'Connell Street, and were aware that those circumstances might give rise to a claim, prior to 1st October
It follows that the retroactive clause cannot assist FAI on this aspect.

Even if the correct date should be 1st October 1991, rather than 1st October , I would reach the same result; or at least I would do so unless the
Permanent companies knew there were circumstances that might give rise to a claim when it received the first of the unit holders' letters on 30th
September 1990. I do not think the Permanent companies knew this until the discussion involving Mr. Church on 14th October 1990.

If the retroactive clause had the effect of excluding liability for something which was in substance a non-disclosure, then I think [s.33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s33.html) would in any event prevent the retroactive clause excluding liability.
 .11 Waiver 
As noted earlier, the plaintiffs submitted that FAI knew or ought to have known, before agreeing to the thirty-day extension, that a proposal had been submitted to the lead underwriter of the primary layer and that the lead underwriter had required further information concerning property trusts; that
FAI had agreed to the extension without making any enquiry as to the contents of the proposal or the further information; and that FAI thereby waived compliance with the duty of disclosure in respect of such matters.

It seems to me arguable that those circumstances could amount to waiver in relation to matters actually disclosed in the proposal or otherwise to the lead underwriter of the primary layer. However, I do not think it could amount to waiver in respect of matters not disclosed to the lead underwriter of the primary layer; and accordingly, if I had found non-disclosure in relation to the No.1 O'Connell Street circumstances, I would not have upheld a defence of waiver.
 . NON-DISCLOSURE AND MISREPRESENTATION CONCERNING NON-INCLUSION OF FAI 
As noted in [section .6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s2.6.html),
FAI claimed it was entitled to refuse indemnity because facts known to the
Permanent companies prior to 1st October 1991, concerning the Permanent companies' intention not to invite FAI to quote for professional indemnity insurance for the 1991-1992 year, were matters relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk, and if so on what terms, and were either known to be relevant by the Permanent companies or were such that a reasonable person could be expected to know them to be relevant; and because there was failure to disclose these matters and/or misrepresentation concerning them.

I have set out earlier the relevant parts of FAI's defence.
 .1 Submissions on [Section 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html), Misrepresentation, and Fraud 
Although FAI bore the onus on this point, I will set out first the Permanent companies detailed submissions, because FAI's submissions in chief were very brief. Mr. Gee simply submitted that it was plainly relevant to FAI's decision that other participants in the 1990-1991 insurance program had been invited to quote for the 1991-1992 program, but FAI had been deliberately left out. It was plainly known to Sedgwick Australia, and in particular to Messrs. Daly and
Welsh, that this was a matter relevant to FAI's decision; and they had deliberately withheld it, in order to ensure that the insurance was granted.
This amounted to fraud. Furthermore, the effect of Mr. Welsh's conversation with Mr. Hunter was to convey to Mr. Hunter that FAI would be invited to quote for the 1991-1992 program, so that there was misrepresentation as well as non- disclosure. What Sedgwick Australia did was within the scope of its authority; and accordingly its actions and its knowledge should be attributed to the
Permanent companies.
 .1.1 Submissions for Plaintiffs 
Mr. Coles submitted that it would be surprising if the intentions of an insured as to whether or not it was going to use a particular insurer would be relevant to an assessment of risk and would need to be disclosed. The
Permanent companies themselves did not in fact know that the topic of re- engagement of FAI had the slightest significance: its witnesses so swore, and they were not cross-examined on this. It had to be remembered that the
Permanent companies were not aware of the problems in the relationship between
Sedgwick and FAI, that extensions were not unusual, and that FAI acceded very readily to the extension, and never raised any issue about any relevant matter. Having regard to its relationship with Sedgwick and the way it had sagged in ratings of insurers and was losing clients, FAI could not have assumed that it would be invited to renew the Permanent companies' insurance.
Even when FAI found out it was not to be invited to renew, it still went ahead and accepted the premium and, when it heard about the claim, made a reserve to cover it.

The Act in its language distinguishes between entering into a contract of insurance and accepting the risk: see s.11(9), s.21(1). The case of Pan
Atlantic Insurance v. Pine Top [(1995) 1 App.Cas. 501], at 530-41, gave a wide definition of materiality, as not requiring that a matter be decisive in the decision of the insurer; but still did not suggest that anything could be material which did not relate to the risk itself. See also
Bradford v. Symondson [(1881) 7 QBD 456], at 464; In re George and the Goldsmiths General Burglary Insurance Association Ltd.
[(1899) 1 QB 595], at 611. Section 21 did not in any event apply to matters relevant to the terms on which the risk was accepted, unless they were relevant to the decision whether to accept the risk at all.

If it were submitted that the length of the term of the insurance was relevant, at least to the terms on which the risk was accepted, in that much higher premiums were charged for very short-term insurance, this was not a matter relevant to the risk but rather was a factor reflecting proportionately higher administration costs for short-term insurance. In any case, it was clear that that aspect of the matter was not in the least relevant to FAI's decision: Mr. Hunter and Mr. McIver did not even claim to have adverted to it, but rather claimed that, had FAI known that it was not being invited to participate in the following year's insurance, it would simply have refused the extension outright. Their evidence was in any event given with hindsight, and would not satisfy the Court that FAI would in fact have refused the extension.

Matters relevant to the decision of an insurer whether to accept the risk should not extend to idiosyncrasies of particular insurers, such as an emotional reaction to not being invited to participate in continuing insurance. Furthermore, it should not be interpreted so as to require an insured to disclose its bargaining position, such as its budget for the relevant insurance, or the competing quotes which it had obtained.

In any event, no decision to replace FAI, as alleged in particulars 22.29 and .30 of the Statement of Claim, had been made prior to late October or early
November.

There was no misrepresentation. Mr. Welsh, in his conversation with Mr.
Hunter, did not withhold anything or say anything so as to convey something he did not believe. He understood Mr. Daly's instruction to him to be careful as merely indicating that he should not lead Mr. Hunter to believe either that
FAI was to be invited or was not to be invited to renew the insurance. Mr.
Hunter did not raise the topic, so there was no occasion for Mr. Welsh to say anything about it. Mr. Hunter's reference to what should happen if renewal material was to be sent in fact indicated that FAI did not have a settled belief that it was to receive renewal material. There was no duty on Mr. Welsh to say anything to Mr. Hunter on this matter, nor did Mr. Welsh say anything which implied the false position. Mr. Hunter did not suggest that any statement had misled him, merely that he did not believe that FAI would have been asked for the extension unless the Permanent companies had intended to offer renewal to FAI. That was not sufficient to amount to a misrepresentation: see Kahlbetzer v. Cincotta [(1982) NSWConvR 55-105] at ,804-5.

In any case, by reason of s.26(2), there could be no misrepresentation, unless there was a statement which the person making it knew, or a reasonable person would know, to have been relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk and if so, on what terms. For reasons given earlier, this statement was not relevant; and in any event, the suspicion of Mr. Daly and
Mr. Welsh that it could affect FAI's decision was insufficient to amount to knowledge. FAI never told Sedgwick Australia or Mr. Daly or Mr. Welsh that it was relevant. An opinion or suspicion is not enough for knowledge: see
Anderson v. The Pacific Fire & Marine Insurance Co. [(1872) 7 LRCP ] at ; Blackley v. National Mutual Life Association of Australasia [(1972) NZLR ] at .

Even if Sedgwick Australia or Mr. Daly or Mr. Welsh knew that this matter was relevant, the Permanent companies did not; and knowledge should not be imputed to them. Sections 21 and 26 dealt with the knowledge of the insured and the knowledge of the person making the representation, and there is no relevant provision in the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) about imputing knowledge; so one needs to consider the general law. Not all knowledge of an agent is imputed to the principal: see Blackburn Low &
Co. v.Thomas Vigors [(1887) 12 App.Cas. 531] at 542-3, , 540-1; Blackburn Low & Co. v. Haslam [(1888) 21 QBD 144]; P.C.W.
Syndicates v. P.C.W Reinsurers [(1996) 1 AllER 774.] Knowledge which an agent gains in the course of carrying out the agency may be attributed to the principal (see Ayoub); and knowledge concerning a particular piece of property held by an agent given full authority to manage that property may be attributed to the principal (see Lindsay). However, any knowledge which Sedgwick Australia or Mr. Daly or Mr. Welsh had about the relevance of not inviting FAI to participate in future insurance was not gained in the course of exercise of the agency, nor did it relate to property or business managed by the agent; and so would not be attributed to the
Permanent companies. Nor was this a case like Macquarie Bank where the principal had left the agent to do whatever he liked in relation to the arranging of insurance. In this case, Mr. Ham of the Permanent companies was involved in arranging the insurance, he did not know these matters were relevant, and his belief and that of other officers of the Permanent companies should not be overridden by any contrary belief by the agent.
 .1.2 Submissions for Defendant 
Mr. Gee submitted that the distinction sought to be drawn between matters relevant to the risk on the one hand, and commercial considerations on the other, was extremely artificial; and was not supported by the decision in
Pine Top.

The evidence of Mr. Hunter and Mr. McIver was clear: if they had been told that FAI was not being invited to participate in the following year's insurance, they would not have granted the extension; and that evidence was not challenged in cross-examination. Mr. Welsh knew that he had conformed to
Mr. Daly's earlier request not to send the renewal material to FAI; he knew that the normal course of events was that FAI would be sent that material, along with the other insurers; and he knew that this was expected by Mr.
Hunter. He had a problem withholding the information from Mr. Hunter, and knew that what he did was capable of misleading. Mr. Welsh knew why Mr. Daly had told him to be careful, and knew that if he had disclosed the true position,
FAI might not grant the extension. Even if Mr. Welsh, who was very inexperienced in 1991, did not know that this matter was relevant, Mr. Daly certainly did.

This knowledge should be imputed to the Permanent companies. Sedgwick
Australia had been employed to use its general knowledge acquired in its practice, and Permanent had left it to Sedgwick Australia to arrange the extension; and accordingly, the case was governed by the Macquarie Bank decision.
 .2 Whether Matters Known 
In the written submissions for the plaintiffs, it was submitted that particulars 22.29 and 22.30 of the Defence were not in fact true, in that the plaintiffs had not, prior to 1st October 1991, decided that FAI was to be replaced as an insurer of the Permanent companies. It was further submitted that particulars 22.31 and 22.32 of the Defence were not in fact true, because the plaintiffs had not, prior to 30th September 1991, authorised their broker to refrain from involving the defendant in participation of the renewal for the period 1st October 1991 to 30th September 1992; nor had they instructed or asked or authorised their broker to continue to refrain from seeking involvement of the defendant in the 1991/1992 renewal.

In my opinion, the true position is that the Permanent companies had, prior to th September 1991, decided that quotes should be obtained from insurers other than FAI, which should then be considered before any approach was made to FAI, and had through Sedgwick Australia actually set about doing this; the
Permanent companies contemplated that, so long as the quotes from other insurers were satisfactory, then FAI would not be invited to participate; and their broker, Sedgwick Australia, had been instructed accordingly. In my opinion, it is not therefore strictly correct to say that the plaintiffs had, prior to 30th September 1991, decided that FAI was to be replaced as an insurer of the plaintiffs. It may be that the matters I have found proved are sufficiently within the ambit of particulars 22.29 and 22.30; but in any event, in my opinion, the matters I have found are clearly within particulars .31 and 22.32.

The matters as I have found them were known to the Permanent companies, through Mr. Ham, who was the officer of the Permanent companies responsible for arranging insurance. They were also known to Mr. Daly and Mr. Welsh of
Sedgwick Australia. I will later be considering the extent to which their knowledge can be attributed to the Permanent companies.
 .3 Whether Relevance Known 
I accept that these matters were not known to be relevant by any employee or officer of the Permanent companies; so the crucial questions are whether they were known to be relevant by Mr. Daly or Mr. Welsh, and if so whether this knowledge is to be attributed to the Permanent companies.
 .3.1 Whether Matters Known To Be Relevant By Mr. Daly and Mr. Welsh 
Mr. Welsh agreed that he knew that the normal course of business was for existing Australian underwriters to be asked to renew; and that it was probable that an underwriter being asked for an extension, who was told that he was not to be asked to renew the following year, would refuse the extension.

Mr. Daly agreed in cross-examination that the fact that an underwriter was not to be asked to participate in the following year's insurance was relevant to the underwriter's decision whether to grant an extension and if so on what terms: an underwriter not being asked to participate might be willing to offer a form of extension, but was likely to set terms that were different or special because it was not being asked to renew. In re-examination, he said his belief was that this matter was not relevant to an underwriter's accepting and underwriting the risk, but was relevant in that the premium might be varied or made dependent on what happens after an extension. (It is in fact clear on the evidence that insurers generally require higher rates of premium for a short period of insurance, in order to cover the greater proportional overheads; but that extensions to existing policies are generally granted for short periods on much more favourable terms than for short periods standing alone.) 
Mr. Daly also agreed that he believed that if he told Mr. Hunter that FAI was not being invited to participate, it was likely that Mr. Hunter would not agree to a thirty-day extension; and that his telling Mr. Welsh to be careful when speaking to Mr. Hunter was sufficient to convey to Mr. Welsh that he should not volunteer that FAI were not being invited.

Although Mr. Coles submitted that this evidence does not relate at all to the true position, namely that the only decision was to obtain quotes from insurers excluding FAI and to accept them if they were satisfactory, in my opinion this distinction is too fine. So in my opinion the evidence justifies the conclusion that Mr. Daly and Mr. Welsh believed that, if they had disclosed to FAI the matters referred to in section 9.2, it was likely that the thirty-day extension would not have been granted. I accept the evidence of
Mr. Hunter and Mr. McIver that the extension would not in fact have been granted; with the result that, if these matters had been disclosed, they certainly would have been relevant to FAI's decision whether or not to grant the extension. Mr. Daly and Mr. Welsh believed the matters were relevant in this sense; and as I have said, that belief was true. With some hesitation, I think the belief was held with sufficient assurance to amount to knowledge.

However, Mr. Coles contended that this still was not within [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) of the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), because the matters were not relevant to the assessment of the risk as such; (2) even if they could be relevant to the terms on which a hypothetical insurer would have accepted the risk, this relevance was not adverted to by Mr. Daly or Mr. Welsh; and (3) in any event, this relevance would not have been relevant to FAI's decision, which would have been to react emotionally and reject the insurance entirely. In support of this proposition, Mr. Coles submitted that it could not be relevant and disclosable that an insured had approved a budget for a particular insurance, or that it had competing quotes in specified amounts, even though these matters could well be relevant to the terms on which an insurer offered insurance. Similarly, it was not relevant that an insured had bargained away a right to reimbursement for loss from third parties, thus affecting the insurer's right of subrogation: see Guthrie
House v. Cornhill Insurance [(1982) 2 ANZ Ins.Cas. 60-466.] 
In my opinion, there should not be drawn for the purposes of [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) a sharp distinction between matters relevant to the assessment of the risk, and purely commercial considerations. I think this is too fine a distinction, and I think that [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) does apply to matters which are relevant in a commercial sense to the terms on which an insurer is prepared to give insurance. Accordingly, if an insurer would require higher pro rata premiums for a short period of insurance, in order to cover the greater proportional overheads in relation to such a policy, then that in my opinion is a matter relevant to the terms on which the insurer is prepared to grant insurance. Another reason why I think this suggested distinction should be rejected is that otherwise [s.26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s26.html) could amount to a charter to lie on commercial matters. It would appear that, on Mr. Coles' submissions, an insured could deliberately lie about its intention to ask for a quote for future insurance, or about its subrogation position: on his submissions, the Permanent companies could have deliberately lied to FAI by saying that they intended to ask FAI to participate, knowing that this would induce FAI to grant the extension, yet this would not have been a misrepresentation within [s.26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s26.html), because it would not be relevant to FAI's decision whether to accept the risk and if so on what terms; and it could not have been otherwise relied on as misleading conduct, because of [s.33.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s33.html) 
However, there is another distinction which I think has some support from the
Guthrie House decision. [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) requires disclosure of every matter known to the insured (or to a reasonable person) "to be a matter relevant" to the insurer's decision; but does not in terms require disclosure of every matter which, if volunteered, would be known to be relevant to the insurer's decision.

It could be that, if an insured had volunteered that it had a budget for insurance of $10,000.00 and that the only competing quotes it had obtained were for $15,000.00, then an insurer which quoted $5,000.00 for the insurance would not have done so; and that these matters were known to the insured.
However, if the distinction I have suggested is a valid one, the budget and competing quotes would not be relevant to the decision if they were not disclosed, because the questions of the insured's budget and competing quotes would not have been factors in the insurer's actual decision. The insurer would have made no assumption about these matters, nor would it have made any assumption that they would have been disclosed by the insured. By contrast, anything relevant to the risk itself would be relevant whether disclosed or not, because the insurer would make a decision on the basis that the insured had disclosed everything relevant to the risk known to the insured.

The case of Guthrie House was a decision concerning the general law duty of disclosure, so it is not directly applicable to [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html), and in any event, I express no view on its correctness. However, that case did distinguish Tate & Sons v. Hyslop [(1885) 15 QBD 368], a case in which the insured had not disclosed the terms of a contract limiting the liability of a third party for the loss insured against, and thus affecting the insurer's right of subrogation. In Tate & Sons v. Hyslop, this was held to be material, because the insurers had given notice that they would charge different rates according as to whether or not liability was limited.
In those circumstances, the limitation of the liability of third parties was material; whereas in Guthrie House, where the insurers had not given such notice, a limitation of the liability of third parties was held not be material. Guthrie House could be explained on the basis that insurers did not in fact take into account whether or not subrogation was limited in deciding whether to enter into an insurance contract or deciding the terms on which insurance was given, even though this matter, if known, could be relevant to the actuarial calculation of premiums which an insurer needed to charge.

On this basis, a statement actually made about that kind of matter could be relevant under [s.26(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s26.html) even if, had the statement not been made, the matter itself would not have been relevant under [s.21.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html)
Thus, if an insured stated that it had competing quotes at $500.00, and that it would give insurance business to the insurer if the insurer matched these quotes, whereas in truth it only had competing quotes for $1,500.00, that statement could be relevant under [s.26(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s26.html) and thus be a misrepresentation, even though, if nothing had been said, the existence of competing quotes would not have been relevant under [s.21.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) 
The evidence in the present case indicates that, in the absence of a wider relationship between the insurer and the insured, an insurance for a term of one month would generally involve much higher rates than insurance for one year. However, an extension for a short period such as one month is sometimes sought from and granted by existing insurers; and in such cases, the extension is generally granted either pro rata or pro rata plus a percentage (20% in this case), perhaps with provision that if there is a claim a full year's premium will be paid, and/or a provision that if the insurance is not renewed the premium will be charged at short-rate terms. This is done as something of a favour to the insured (because short-rate terms would be very much higher), generally on the basis of the business relationship and/or on the assumption that the insurer will be given the opportunity to continue that relationship.

In my opinion, where an extension of this kind is sought, the prospect that the insurer would be asked to quote for a renewal would, for a hypothetical reasonable insurer, be relevant to whether the extension is granted and if so on what terms, whether specifically raised or not. Generally, a decision whether or not to grant such an extension would not be made without advertence to the possibility that renewal would be sought, or at least an assumption that renewal would be sought. This does not, of course, mean that an extension would only be granted if there was to be a renewal: in the present case, AMP granted an extension, even though it had indicated that it was not interested in continuing the insurance. However, in my opinion, it does mean that the prospect of renewal is relevant, whether or not the issue of renewal is explicitly raised or not. It seems to me that whether this relevance is because, if the insurer was told there was to be no renewal sought, it would disinterestedly calculate higher short-term rates, or because it would in that event emotionally refuse the extension altogether, is not to the point.

In giving their reasons why they would have refused the extension, Mr. Hunter and Mr. McIver adverted to such things as the bad relations between FAI and the Sedgwick organisation, the sentiment that if FAI was not good enough for insurance for the ensuing year why was it good enough for a one month extension, and a belief that there is a tendency for relatively more claims to be made in an extension period. These considerations were attacked as unreasonable and emotional. However, even if these considerations are somewhat subjective and emotional, I do not consider them to be entirely unreasonable.
And in any event, this attack does not touch the point that in asking for a short extension, an insured is trading on its business relationship with the insurer, so that it is relevant to the grant of the extension that the insured is intending to sever that relationship; and that since an insurer asked for an extension would assume that the extension is sought on the basis of the business relationship, an intention to sever the relationship is relevant even if the matter is not expressly raised.

In that sense, in my opinion, Messrs. Daly and Welsh believed the matter in question to be relevant to FAI's decision, and this belief was true. In my opinion also, this belief was held with sufficient assurance to amount to knowledge.
 .3.2 Whether the Knowledge of Mr. Daly and Mr. Welsh is to be Attributed to the Plaintiffs 
I accept Mr. Coles' submission that not all knowledge of an agent is to be attributed to the principal. I accept that, if a matter comes to the notice of an agent in another transaction, and is not adverted to in connection with the transaction in question, then normally that knowledge will not be attributed to the principal: see Blackburn Low & Co. v. Thomas Vigors [(1887) 12
App.Cas. 531.] Furthermore, knowledge that an agent is acting in fraud of the principal will normally not be attributed to the principal: In Re
Hampshire Land Co. [(1896) 2 Ch. 743] at 749; and cf. Deutsche Ruckversicherung Aktiengersellschaft Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Walbrook [(1995) 1 Ll.LR 153],
P.C.W. Syndicates v. P.C.W. Reinsurers [(1996) AllER 774.] 
However, there are a number of categories of knowledge which are attributed to principals.

The case of Lindsay is authority for the proposition that, in relation to the insurance of a particular piece of property, the knowledge concerning that property of a person to whom the management of the property is delegated is attributed to the principal. In my opinion, that is reasonable, because an insured seeking insurance, and having a duty of disclosure, would be bound to enquire from a person to whom it had delegated the management of the property to be informed of matters concerning the property that could be relevant to insurance. So the manager's knowledge of matters concerning the property would be attributed to the insured; although I doubt that the manager's knowledge of relevance of these matters would be so attributed: I think the duty of the insured would be to ask the right questions to get information from the manager about the property, but not to ask or rely on the views of the manager as to the relevance of these matters to the insurer.

The cases of Ayoub and Macquarie Bank are authority for the proposition that, if an insured leaves it to an agent to obtain insurance and to discharge the insured's duty of disclosure, then the knowledge of the agent, both of matters and of their relevance, is to be attributed to the insured.

There may be further questions that arise in an intermediate position, where the insured itself undertakes to discharge a duty of disclosure, but also uses an agent such as a broker. In that case, the broker may have a duty to pass on its knowledge to the insured, in which case the insured would be attributed with knowledge which the broker should have passed on. That knowledge would include knowledge obtained in the very transaction, it may include knowledge which has been specifically adverted to by the broker in the course of the same transaction, and it may include knowledge which the agent has been engaged to obtain and/or use. In this situation, there may be a problem where the knowledge and beliefs of the insured itself, and those of the agent, are contradictory: cf. Brambles Holdings Ltd. v. Carey [(1976) 15 SASR ];
Re Chisum Services Pty. Ltd. [(1982) 1 ACLC 292.] 
In the present case, it seems to me that the Permanent companies did themselves undertake to discharge the duty of disclosure in relation to renewing insurance for the 1991-1992 year, so that in relation to that matter there could be this problem of combining contradictory knowledge or beliefs of different persons. However, in relation to the obtaining of the thirty-day extension, this matter was left entirely to Sedgwick Australia, and fulfilment of the associated duty of disclosure was left entirely to Sedgwick Australia.
In those circumstances, I think authorities such as the Macquarie Bank case require me to hold that Sedgwick Australia's knowledge, including Mr. Daly's and Mr. Welsh's knowledge of relevance, is to be attributed to the Permanent companies.

It follows that, in my opinion, in respect of the matters substantially alleged in particulars 22.31 and 22.32 of the Defence, a breach of [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) by the Permanent companies is made out.
 .4 Misrepresentation, Fraud, and Utmost Good Faith .4.1 Misrepresentation 
I accept that, when he agreed to grant the thirty-day extension, Mr. Hunter believed that FAI would be invited to participate in the renewal for -1992; that is, that the Permanent companies and Sedgwick Australia intended to invite FAI to quote renewal terms. If this was impliedly asserted to Mr. Hunter by what Mr. Welsh said and did not say, then this would be a misrepresentation.

What Mr. Welsh actually said was that the London underwriters were considering the terms on which insurance would be renewed, so that the Permanent companies needed a month's extension; and this was true. Mr. Welsh also asked FAI to join in the extension; and this was a request, not a representation. Mr. Welsh knew that the Permanent companies and Sedgwick Australia did not at that time intend to invite FAI to quote for renewal terms, unless satisfactory terms could not be obtained from other insurers; and Mr. Welsh was careful not to convey this to Mr. Hunter, because of a concern that if he did so, FAI would not grant the extension. But he was also trying to be careful not to give the false impression that FAI would be invited to quote.

I accept that Mr. Hunter took what Mr. Welsh did say as indicating that the
Permanent companies and Sedgwick Australia intended to invite FAI to quote for renewal. In my opinion, the crucial question is whether this was just a conclusion that Mr. Hunter arrived at, or was something that was actually asserted by implication in what was said to him.

On the whole, taking into account the circumstance that extensions of this kind are normally granted in the context of a continuing relationship, as something of a favour predicated on the continuing relationship, I think what was said was enough to assert to Mr. Hunter that FAI was to be invited to quote renewal terms. However, I do not think that Mr. Welsh intended to assert this to Mr. Hunter; so that while what was said was, in my opinion, enough to constitute a misrepresentation, I am not satisfied that it was enough to base a finding that the misrepresentation was fraudulent.
 .4.2 Fraud 
I have said that, while what Mr. Welsh said to Mr. Hunter was enough to amount to a misrepresentation, I do not think an intention has been shown sufficient to justify a finding that the misrepresentation was fraudulent.

On the other hand, in relation to non-disclosure, it could be said that Mr.
Daly and Mr. Welsh knew certain matters, knew them to be relevant to FAI's decision, and deliberately withheld them in order to ensure that FAI made a favourable decision; and there is authority that that is enough for fraud in relation to non-disclosure. However, it seems to me that would be a harsh finding in circumstances where, in my opinion, Mr. Daly and Mr. Welsh believed that there was no duty to disclose the Permanent companies' commercial intentions. I have found that these matters were disclosable under [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html) only after making a decision which I have found very difficult, and which I have reached after some weeks of reflection. Mr. Daly and Mr. Welsh had to make a quick decision in a difficult situation. I do not think either Mr. Daly or Mr. Welsh are dishonest persons; and I think they did what they thought appropriate when they had to make a quick decision in a difficult situation. I am not prepared to find that the non-disclosure was fraudulent.

In any event, there will be no difference in the result on the No.1 O'Connell
Street claim whether I find fraud or not. In my opinion, FAI would not have granted the extension at all if there had been the disclosure required by [s.21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html), and the effect of [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) is then that FAI's liability is reduced to nil, or possibly to the return of the premium.

Of course, the question of any possible liability of Sedgwick Australia to the
Permanent companies is not before me. I note however that, if the relevant matter had been disclosed and if FAI had refused insurance, it may be that no- one else would have covered FAI's share of the insurance for the thirty-day extension. That possibility is highlighted by the circumstance that, because of the non-inclusion of FAI in the 1991-1992 insurance, the Permanent companies were in fact not fully insured for some time after the thirty-day extension finished on 30th October 1991.
 .4.3 Utmost Good Faith 
I do not think the requirement of utmost good faith would affect this matter one way or the other.
 .5 [Sections 28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html), [31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s31.html) and [54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) 
I have already found, as a fact, that FAI would not have granted the thirty- day extension had it been told that the Permanent companies had decided that quotes should be obtained from insurers other than FAI, which should be considered before any approach was made to FAI; and that it was contemplated that, so long as the quotes from other insurers were satisfactory, FAI would not be invited to participate. The effect of [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) is that FAI is entitled to be placed in the position it would have been in if the non-disclosure and misrepresentation had not occurred; so that its liability is reduced to the amount of the premium it received for the thirty- day extension. I do not think the plaintiffs can be assisted by [s.31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s31.html) of the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/); and I think it also follows from my earlier discussions of [s.54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s54.html) that they are not assisted by this section either.
 .6 Affirmation or Election 
As noted earlier, the plaintiffs say that by 11th November 1991, FAI knew that the plaintiffs had decided not to invite FAI to quote for the 1991-1992 year; that FAI made no enquiry as to when or why this decision was made; that in
January 1992 FAI accepted the premium for the thirty-day extension; and that
FAI thereby elected to affirm the extension.

However, in circumstances where FAI did not know, even then, that in substance the decision not to invite FAI to renew had been made before the extension was negotiated, and where FAI did not know that a notification had been made under the thirty-day extension, I do not think that this could amount to affirmation or election. A subsequent decision by the Permanent companies not to invite
FAI to renew would not itself be a ground for avoiding the thirty-day extension.
 . TARGET FUND 
It follows from my earlier discussion that defences relating to the notification point, and relating to non-disclosure and misrepresentation concerning No.1 O'Connell Street, fail in relation to the Target Fund claim, as they did in relation to the No.1 O'Connell Street claim. Accordingly, the remaining live issue concerning the Target Fund claim concerns whether FAI's layer of the multi-layer policy is reached.

In my opinion, the major difficulty which the plaintiff companies face in this matter is that, on the basis of the previous discussion, FAI was entitled have its liability reduced to what it would have been if there had not been a non- disclosure or misrepresentation, that is, in view of my findings, if FAI had not granted the thirty-day extension. In this respect, it may be no different from the situation which would have obtained had I found that FAI was entitled to avoid the thirty-day extension for fraud, and had done so. The penetration of FAI's layer under the twelve-month policy, under which it would be liable, could only occur by reason of a claim made during the thirty-day extension granted by the other insurers; that is, a claim falling outside the period for which FAI (on this hypothesis) granted insurance. Could FAI's twelve-month policy be engaged, when the primary layer is exhausted only by a claim made outside that twelve-month period? .1 Submissions 
For FAI, it was submitted that FAI's first excess layer can only be reached if the claim or claims which exhaust the $5 million primary layer are a claim or claims made during FAI's period of insurance of the first excess layer. This was confirmed by the terms of FAI's first excess layer placing slip for the twelve months ended 30th September 1991, which provided that the period of insurance was "1 October to 30 September 1991 both days inclusive", and that the limit of indemnity was: "$10 million any one claim and in aggregate for all claims during the period of insurance including costs and expenses IN
EXCESS OF $5 million any one claim and in aggregate for all claims during the period of insurance including costs and expenses". The Target Fund claim was the only claim during the period of insurance, and it did not exceed $5 million.

For the Permanent companies, it was accepted that, at least if FAI was entitled to avoid the thirty-day extension and did so, and if the No.1
O'Connell Street claim did not fall within the twelve month insurance, any sum spent on the No.1 O'Connell Street claim must be disregarded. However, it was contended that this left FAI liable for 35% of $119,116.91, that is $41,690.92.
 .2 Decision 
In the event, I have not found fraud, so I have not found that FAI was entitled to avoid the thirty-day extension. However, I have found that, but for non-disclosure and misrepresentation, FA would not have granted the thirty-day extension; and thus that it is entitled to be placed in the position in which it would have been if it had not granted that extension.

If FAI had not granted the extension, it would not have received the premium for it, and it would not have contracted for insurance beyond the twelve month period 1st October 1990 to 30th September 1991. In those circumstances, in my opinion, its excess layer would be reached only by virtue of the claims made within that twelve month period, and not by virtue of claims made within an extended period granted by insurers on the primary layer but not (on this hypothesis) by FAI.

However, assuming the correctness of figures given in paragraph 84 of the affidavit of Mr. Daly of 7th June 1996, it would appear that payments of $5,119,116.91 have been made in respect of the Target Fund claim. Unless FAI can satisfy me of some error in those figures, it would follow that it is liable, as submitted by the Permanent companies, to pay $41,690.92 in respect of that claim.
 . CONCLUSION 
In the result, all defences of FAI have failed except one; but that defence has been sufficient to defeat substantially the claim of the Permanent companies, apart from an amount equal to the premium paid to FAI for the thirty-day extension, and a sum of a little over $40,000.00.

I have held:
It was relevant to FAI's decision to accept the risk of the thirty-day extension of insurance from 1st October 1991, on the terms on which it did, that the Permanent companies had decided to obtain quotes for the following insurance year from insurers excluding FAI and had actually set about doing so; and that they had decided to seek insurance from FAI only if satisfactory quotes could not be obtained from insurers excluding FAI.
Sedgwick Australia through Messrs. Daly and Welsh knew these matters, and knew them to be relevant to FAI's decision.
Since the Permanent companies left the organisation of the extension entirely to Sedgwick Australia, Sedgwick Australia's knowledge is to be attributed to the Permanent companies.
These matters were not disclosed to FAI.
The effect of Mr. Welsh's communication to Mr. Hunter on or about 27th
September 1991 was to represent that FAI was to be asked to quote for insurance for the following year.
Had the non-disclosure and misrepresentation not occurred, FAI would not have granted the thirty-day extension.
I am not satisfied that fraud has been established.
The Permanent companies' claim in respect of No.1 O'Connell Street was made during the thirty-day extension, and is covered if at all only by the thirty-day extension.
Under [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) of the [Insurance Contracts
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), the liability of FAI in respect of the No.1 O'Connell Street claim is reduced to the amount of the premium FAI received for the thirty-day extension.
The claim in respect of the Target Fund was made during the twelve months insurance from 1st October 1990 to 30th September 1991, and FAI is liable to pay just over $40,000.00 in respect of that claim.

I will need to hear submissions about costs.
 * * * 
