

Australian Guarantee Corpn Ltd versus J M Bradbury, L Crowley and Anor, Cross-
Defendants [1996] NSWSC 344 (9 August 1996) 
AUSTRALIAN GUARANTEE CORPORATION LTD versus JUDITH MARY BRADBURY, LYN CROWLEY and
ANOR, CROSS-DEFENDANTS /93 
FRIDAY 9 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff seeks to enforce what it claims is its security over units 3 and 4 on the 5th floor of The Astor at 123-125 Macquarie Street, Sydney in respect of the indebtedness of the defendant as guarantor for the liabilities of International Rigging (Aust) Pty Limited ("IRA").

Introduction 
The defendant is the registered proprietor of two parcels of shares in The
Astor Pty Limited, ("the Astor") a company which owns a block of home units at -5 Macquarie Street, Sydney. Article 8(1) of the company's Articles of
Association, as amended by special resolution dated 26 June 1981, is as follows: "8. (1)(a) The capital of the Company is three hundred and sixty two thousand three hundred and twenty dollars ($362,320.00) divided into shares of two dollars each. The registered holder for the time being of each group of shares whose serial numbers appear in the first column hereunder shall be entitled to the grant in writing by the Company of the right subject to these Articles to the exclusive use and occupation of the home unit the number of which appears opposite such serial numbers respectively in the second column hereunder in the building known as "The Astor" 123 Macquarie Street, Sydney together with the right to use in common with all others similarly entitled the entrance hall elevators stairways and passage ways in the building and in rooms in common use.
 (There follows a table setting out the unit entitlement of particular parcels of shares. The defendant's parcels of shares are those conferring rights of occupation to units 3 and 4 on the 5th floor).
 
The right granted to a holder of a group of shares as aforesaid to use the common ways and rooms shall at all times be subject to the directions and regulations given or made by the Directors.

A holder of a group of shares may with the consent of the Directors and subject to such conditions as they may from time to time impose grant a license to a person approved by the Directors to exercise the right of use and occupation granted to such holder." 
By a document described as Deed of Mortgage bearing date 1 November 1985 (the "Mortgage") the defendant as mortgagor assigned and transferred the shares to the plaintiff as mortgagee subject to an equity of redemption, to secure all moneys owing or to become owing or payable by the defendant to the plaintiff either alone or on a joint or partnership account and whether as principal debtor or pursuant to any guarantee or indemnity etc. The maximum amount secured was said to be $600,000 (clause 2(b)). Clause 7 contained covenants for further assurance and clauses 9, 10 and 11 were as follows:- "9. The Mortgagor hereby irrevocably appoints the Mortgagee and its duly appointed agent or officer jointly and severally the attorney of the Mortgagor in the Mortgagor's name and on the Mortgagor's behalf at any time and from time to time and in any manner as the Mortgagee in its absolute discretion shall think fit to deal with the Subject Shares and to execute and deliver all deeds, instruments and documents and to do all acts necessary or proper for that purpose and to give receipts for all or any dividends bonuses or other moneys from time to time becoming due or receivable in respect of the Subject
Shares and to sign and deliver fresh transfers of all or any of the Subject
Shares in favour of the Mortgagee or any other person or persons as the
Mortgagee shall deem fit.
The Mortgagor shall not let sub-let or otherwise part with the possession or occupation of the Premises or permit the Premises to be used otherwise than for his own domestic use and occupation without the prior written consent of the Mortgagee.
In the event of default being made hereunder the Mortgagor shall forthwith upon demand in writing being made by the Mortgagee deliver to the
Mortgagee vacant possession of the Premises." 
At or about the same time the defendant also executed and caused to be delivered to the plaintiff signed, undated Transfers of Shares in blank, an undated Statutory Declaration by her acknowledging that the shares were hers, fully paid, not subject to any charge or lien or liable to forfeiture, and that she was aware that the plaintiff would rely upon the correctness of the declaration in providing accommodation to IRA on the security of, inter alia, a mortgage over the said shares, and (with her husband) an Authority to
Complete security documents dated 28 October 1985 addressed to the plaintiff's solicitors, Henderson Lahey Trout Bernays.

Previously, on 18 October 1985 the defendant had executed a document entitled
Master Lease Agreement by which she guaranteed the payment by IRA of all moneys which might at any time in the future be owing by IRA pursuant to any supplemental lease agreements as therein provided for. Between 27 November and 5 September 1990 the defendant executed a number of Deeds of Loan and
Guarantee, and other documents by which she and others guaranteed the liabilities to the plaintiff of IRA in respect of particular items of equipment and loans of money and a Deed of Variation dated 15 February 1991 (Exhibits B to H, N, O) which further provided for her liability for the debts of IRA to the plaintiff.

IRA was a company involved in the construction industry mainly in the leasing, hiring and operation of cranes and other heavy equipment, and the loans, lease agreements, and other advances which the defendant guaranteed were to provide finance to IRA to enable it to carry on its business.
 
In June 1991 IRA defaulted on the instalments due under the various loans and lease agreements and by notice dated 19 February 1992 the plaintiff made a demand on the defendant and her fellow guarantors for payment of amounts owing by IRA. The demand not having been complied with, the plaintiff by notice dated 13 February 1992 required the defendant to "deliver up vacant possession" of the relevant home units within 14 days and when she failed to do so, the summons was issued on 16 March 1993. As at 3 July 1995, the first day of the hearing, IRA and (provided the relevant documents were binding on her) the defendant owed the plaintiff a total of $8,685,011.15.

In the original Summons, the plaintiff claimed possession of the two units and leave to issue a writ of possession, but during the hearing attention was drawn to the fact that as the defendant only enjoyed a right to occupy the relevant units pursuant to the articles of association she was not possessed of any estate in land and so could not by the Mortgage convey any such estate to the plaintiff, with the result that the plaintiff was not entitled to bring proceedings for possession of land under [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) <case>, which proceedings have the same incidents as the former action of ejectment: cf H H Halls Ltd versus Lepouris (1964) 65 SR 181, affd [(1966) 39 ALJR ], nor was it a mortgagee under the provisions of the Real Property act 1900 and entitled to rely on the provisions of [s (c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s60.html) of that Act.

Consequently the summons was by leave amended to seek additional orders as follows:- "3. A declaration that upon the true construction of the Deed of Mortgage executed 1 November 1985 between the plaintiff and the defendant, and, in the events which have happened, the plaintiff is entitled as against the defendant to vacant possession of units 3 and 4, 5th floor 123-125 Macquarie Street
Sydney.
An order that the defendant vacate units 3 and 4, 5th floor, 123-125
Macquarie Street Sydney forthwith or within such other period of time as this
Honourable Court deems fit.
An order that the defendant forthwith deliver up to the plaintiff the keys to units 3 and 4, 5th floor, 123-125 Macquarie Street Sydney." 
Whilst not disputing the indebtedness of IRA to the plaintiff, the defendant denies that the plaintiff is entitled to the relief claimed on the grounds of unconscionability and on account of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) and [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and by the first cross-claim seeks to have the Mortgage and other documents set aside on similar grounds. She has also brought a second cross-claim against solicitors trading as Crowley and Greenhalgh alleging that that firm, or rather Mr Lyn
Crowley, who was at the relevant time in sole practice as L Crowley &
Company, was negligent in failing to give her certain advice in relation to the Mortgage and other documents.

In the documents filed in court the defendant as cross-claimant only claimed to have set aside the Mortgage and other documents identified as annexures
IGM1 to IGM7 to the Affidavit of Ian Garth McNeil sworn 9 February 1993, (now
Exhibits B to H), but during final addresses it was pointed out that even if those documents were set aside the defendant would still be liable to the plaintiff for the indebtedness of IRA pursuant to other guarantees she had given in the Master Lease Agreement of 18 October 1985 (Exhibits X10, X11) a later Master Lease Agreement of 18 August 1988 (Exhibit X4) a number of deeds of loan and guarantee (Exhibits B to H), a number of bills of sale which she had guaranteed and a mortgage over her unit in the Pacific Mirage on the Gold
Coast (Exhibit N) and the Deed of Variation dated 15 February 1991 (Exhibit O) and would have to sell her units in the Astor to satisfy such liability. It was accordingly agreed (transcript p 556) that without the need for any further formal amendment of the pleadings, the first cross-claim should be read as seeking relief in respect of those documents also.
 
Facts 
For some time prior to the end of 1984 the two shares in IRA were held by the defendant and her husband, Raymond Bradbury, but about December 1984 they contracted to sell their shares to interests connected with a Mr John Visona ("Visona").

In March 1985 the Visona transaction was varied to provide for the sale of Mrs
Bradbury's share only. In September 1985, the sale of Mrs Bradbury's share in
IRA was effectively reversed and the share that had been brought by Visona's company was transferred to Jalpoole Pty Ltd ("Jalpoole") a company in which Mr and Mrs Bradbury were the only shareholders, of which they were both directors, and which was the trustee for the Bradbury Family Trust. Whilst Mr
Bradbury had retained his share at all times, what had formerly been Mrs
Bradbury's share had been transferred in a March 1985 to Visona and then in
September 1985 from Visona to Jalpoole, so that by September 1985 IRA was again totally owned by Bradbury interests and was managed by Mr Bradbury.
Although until sometime in 1985 (probably September) the defendant was a director and although she was in receipt of a regular and not insignificant income from IRA, she played no active part in its management or other activities, and her roles as director and employee were purely nominal, all decisions being made her husband.

In order to carry on its business, IRA needed finance and from about 1980 to such finance was obtained through Citicorp Australia Ltd ("Citicorp"), and the resulting indebtedness was secured by a number of personal guarantees by Mr and Mrs Bradbury and mortgages over various assets including shares held by the Astor.

Unit 3 was initially purchased in the joint names of the defendant and her husband in 1983. She agreed she did not have any funds of her own to pay half the purchase price, and said she did not know that the purchase was financed by Citicorp, her impression being that the money came from her husband or IRA.

In 1985 a decision was made (she claims by her husband) to purchase unit 4 as well with the intention (which was subsequently carried out) of turning the two units into a single family residence; and since 1989 the family has lived there as its permanent home. Unit 4 cost $250,000, and it was registered in the defendant's sole name although again she had no funds of her own to put towards the purchase, but she said she understood the funds for this purchase came from the sale of her share in IRA to Visona. At about the same time unit was transferred from joint names to her sole name.

In 1985 she and her husband were sued by Citicorp but although other evidence satisfies me that she with her husband consulted Mr Crowley about the matter on 19 July 1985, she claims not to be able to recall anything about this matter. It however became necessary to find another financier to replace
Citicorp.

In mid 1985 Frank Edge who was then employed by Moorgate Finance Pty Limited ("Moorgate") submitted two applications for refinancing on behalf of IRA to
NZI Securities Australia Ltd ("NZI") and the plaintiff respectively. The defendant was not involved in either application and the units were listed on the application to the plaintiff as being her husband's assets (which at law they were not). The first applications were to borrow $4.1 m to pay out
Citicorp. Although AGC indicated it was prepared to advance the money the advance was ultimately taken from NZI and as part of the security to NZI, Mrs
Bradbury granted to NZI a mortgage of her interest as sole proprietor in the then family home at 68 Kenmore Road, Kenmore, a Brisbane suburb.

Later, in about September 1985 Mr Edge submitted a further application through
Moorgate on behalf of IRA for a lease facility of $1.5 m, to finance additional and replacement equipment.

Mr Bradbury told Edge that his wife owned shares in the Astor entitling her to possession of 2 units and that she would be prepared to mortgage those shares to support her guarantee, but Edge had no conversation directly with Mrs
Bradbury.

Upon the loan being approved by Barry Lumley on behalf of AGC on 2 October a so called "letter of offer" was written by AGC to the company outlining the terms, including the mortgages required over the Astor units and the guarantees of Mr and Mrs Bradbury, Ray Bradbury Holdings Pty Ltd and confirmation that the guarantees held by Citicorp had been cleared. Mr Edge said he probably took this letter around to the company's premises. It was accepted by Mr Bradbury the same day, his signature being the only one, and returned to AGC who on 10 October instructed its solicitors, Henderson Lahey
Trout and Bernays, to prepare the security documentation in relation to the
Astor units and Mr Bradbury's vessel, whilst AGC indicated it would prepare the Master Lease Agreement and guarantee documentation itself. Mr Edge cannot recall taking the security documents from Henderson Lahey Trout & Bernays to IRA, the Bradburys or Lyn Crowley and Co, and I believe it can be inferred that, in accordance with the usual practice between solicitors, the mortgagees' solicitors sent the documents to the company's solicitors, Lyn
Crowley and Company, for execution.

On about 15 October 1985 Lyn Crowley & Co wrote to Mr Drobitko of AGC advising details of Mrs Bradbury's unit holding in the Astor, this information having been obtained from her Sydney solicitors, Maxwell Miles & Co following a request. Because there was some delay in preparing the security documents and there was a need for an immediate advance of $270,000 to purchase some vehicles, it was decided that the Master Lease Agreement would be executed before the other documents, and I am satisfied that this was done on 18 October 1985 at Mr Crowley's office, and that Mr and Mrs Bradbury and Mr
Rounsfell (of Moorgate) attended for that purpose.

The next set of documents which are relevant to the present case are the
Mortgage, the blank Transfers of Shares, the Statutory Declaration, the
Answers to Requisitions relating to the shares and the Authority to Complete, all of which are signed by Mrs Bradbury. The evidence is not specific as to on which day these were signed but in my view for reasons which will later appear they were probably all signed on the 29th of October 1985, again at Mr
Crowley's office.

The defendant's signature on the Mortgage and also on the undated Statutory
Declaration purports to be witnessed by Mrs Fay Morley, a secretary employed by Lyn Crowley & Co, whose evidence was that it was not her practice to sign a document as witness without either having seen the person sign, or having had an express acknowledgment from that person with whose signature she was familiar and if she knew that person. Mrs Morley was a very cautious witness and was careful not to agree to any proposition unless she was absolutely certain that it was correct without qualification, and I accept her evidence. She also gave evidence concerning the so called "Visitors Book" kept at the practice of Lyn Crowley & Co in which the attendance of clients at the office was recorded. This shows that Mrs Bradbury attended the office on October and twice on 29 October. It appears to me unlikely that Mrs
Bradbury would have signed the Mortgage elsewhere, and then merely acknowledged her signature to Mrs Morley at Lyn Crowley's office when the
Visitors Book shows she was actually at the office on the day it signed, and I am satisfied she signed it at Crowley's office on that day. In addition, the
Authority to Complete in favour of the plaintiff's solicitors signed by both
Mr and Mrs Bradbury would, one expects, be signed at the same time as the other security documents. Their signatures are not witnessed by anyone, but it is dated 28 October 1985. Mr Crowley says she signed the transfers of shares and answers to requisitions in his presence and the transfers of shares were witnessed by Mr Crowley, probably on the same day.

The fact that the defendants' signatures on the Mortgage and Statutory
Declaration are witnessed by Mrs Morley and her signatures on the Transfers of
Shares by Mr Crowley who also wrote the Answers to Requisitions which she signed, is consistent with her visiting the office twice on that day, as recorded in the Visitors Book.

In her affidavits the defendant said that during the course of her marriage she signed numerous documents at her husband's request relating to their affairs and those of their companies but she was never involved in the companies except to sign documents, she never asked him about the nature or effect of documents she was asked to sign and he never explained the documents to her. She also said that apart from some documents signed at his office in
Jindalee in about 1990, all documents signed by her were signed at home, and she believed that also applied to the Mortgage, and that at the time of signing it she was not aware of its nature or contents.

After the plaintiff's further affidavits became available, she swore in a later affidavit that she did not recall signing the Mortgage or any other documents in Mrs Morley's presence or expressly acknowledging her signature to her. She also claimed that she never told her husband she was prepared to mortgage her shares in the Astor nor did he ask her to do so.

In oral evidence she said that if she had known in October-November 1985 that she was executing a mortgage of her shares in the Astor she would not have signed it.

She agreed she had signed a lot of documents when told to by her husband; in particular she was shown mortgage documents relating to the Kenmore Road properties, but claimed to be unable to recall whether she knew they related to Kenmore Road at the time she signed them.

As a witness she tended to make general assertions which later needed to be, and were in fact, qualified or resiled from. For example, she said that when she signed documents her husband always said "sign here", but later conceded this did not happen when documents were signed at a solicitor's office, in which cases the solicitor indicated where to sign. Other examples were the use of a particular airline ticket to travel from the Gold Coast to Sydney and whether she was interstate on a particular day. There were a vast number of matters which she claimed to be unable to recall; so many that, although one is not expected to remember all or even a lot of detail, her claim to be unable to recall almost anything stretched credibility.

She denied that she had signed the Mortgage at Lyn Crowley's office and likewise the Statutory Declaration, Transfers of Shares or Requisitions but I am satisfied that she did sign those documents at that office. She further denied that she ever went to that office to sign documents relating to the company's affairs but the office Visitors Book records her attending on a number of occasions, including 19, 23 and 26 July, 2 September, 1 October, 18
October, and 29 October, 1985 on which last occasion she is indicated as attending twice. She initially denied in her first affidavit filed in the proceedings that she had ever signed the Mortgage at all, and her explanation for doing that and the reasons why she changed her mind, as set out in her affidavit of 14 September 1993 paras 1 to 6 (which was tendered by consent during counsels' final addresses), I find particularly unconvincing. Her answers were generally evasive and unconvincing and a lot were non-responsive or qualified by answers such as "possibly" or "generally". She claimed that she would not have knowingly mortgaged her shares in the Astor because that was the family home, but at the time of the mortgage in 1985 it was not the family home and did not become such until the end of 1989. In 1985 the family home was at 68 Kenmore Road, Kenmore in Queensland, another property which was registered in her sole name, although she had not personally contributed to the purchase price, and she certainly executed a number of mortgages and encumbrances over that property. In all the circumstances I am not prepared to accept her evidence except where it is corroborated or supported by other evidence.

Her husband, Raymond Bradbury, was also an unsatisfactory witness. Firstly in his affidavit of 27 December 1993 he gave evidence about the execution of documents, which after the evidence of other witnesses became available, turned out to be clearly untrue in a number of respects. In paragraph 3 of his affidavit of 9 March 1994 he denies that he told Frank Edge that his wife was prepared to mortgage her shares in the units but I am satisfied that he did so because such mortgage was one of the terms of the offer. In his affidavit of September 1993 he said that he and his wife signed the Mortgage and other documents on the kitchen table at home and he later took the Mortgage and
Statutory Declaration to Mr Crowley's office to have Mrs Morley witness the signatures, but this is inconsistent with what appears in the Visitors Book and with Mrs Morley's evidence of her practice on witnessing signatures, and fails to explain Mr Crowley's witnessing of the defendant's signatures on the
Transfers of Shares.

He claimed that he did not know that the Astor units were to be the subject of a mortgage but he signed the acceptance of the offer of loan dated 8 October , a copy of which is Annexure B to the Affidavit of George Drobitko sworn November 1993. When confronted with this, he asserted that he probably did not read it yet he was the person running IRA, this was an arrangement for a loan of up to $1,500,000 and I find it incredible that he did not check to see on what terms the loan was to be granted including the amount provided for and what security was required.

That same day he telephoned Crowley's office (documented by a telephone message note recorded by Crowley's secretary) and when Crowley rang him back he said, according to Crowley "we will be mortgaging the units - he (ie
Drobitko) needs the title references from you, can you give them to him when he calls?" to which Crowley replied that he probably did not have the information but would get it from Maxwell Miles or McDonnell Moffitt, which he did (Annexure D to Mr Drobitko's Affidavit). He later claimed that he did not believe the Astor units had been mortgaged and when Mr Edge took the share certificates when he found them under the door of the premises on an occasion when they were both at the units, that was the first time that he became aware that the shares must have been mortgaged, but he was not concerned about it because he believed that without the approval of the directors of the Astor such mortgage would not be effective. However, he continued to lie to his wife telling her not to worry, but if he did not believe that the Mortgages was effective, there was no reason for him to continue lying to his wife. His evidence on this aspect of the case was full of inconsistencies, contradictions, non-sequitiurs and quite unbelievable. Ultimately, I formed the impression that he was prepared to say anything if he thought it would suit the purposes of him and/or his wife. I likewise reject his evidence wherever there is any dispute about it.

There is however one piece of evidence given by both the defendant and her husband which I do accept because it is consistent with all their dealings disclosed by the evidence, and that is that they regarded the assets and funds of IRA and each of themselves as a common fund and did not distinguished between their personal assets either separately or together and the assets of the company. It was as they said all "intermingled" or "washed around" as a "common fund", a genuine partnership or mixing of funds.

The other principal witness was Mr Crowley. I found him an honest witness whose evidence was consistent with such records as there were, and in respect of some major matters, such as the names of persons who visited his offices and the execution of the Master Lease Agreement in his office on the 18th
October 1985, there was contemporaneous documentation supporting what he claimed. He may have tended to cut a few corners in responding to liquidator's requests for statements of affairs of companies in liquidation, but as a witness he impressed me as honest and truthful who was doing his best to recall events as they had happened, and when he was not sure, he was prepared to say he was not sure, and did not make any assertions which he did not honestly believe, particularly as to what he explained to the defendant at their various meetings.

I also accept the evidence of Mr Edge and Mr Drobitko. In relation to Mr
Rounsfell, I am satisfied that he is mistaken as to whether he was present at the execution of the Master Lease Agreement in Lyn Crowley's office on 18
October 1985. I have come to this conclusion for two reasons notwithstanding that his name does not appear in the Visitors Book for that day; firstly, because of Mr Crowley's diary note made immediately after the meeting (part of
Exhibit X13), and secondly, because his signature as witness to the common seal of IRA on page 2 of the Master Lease Agreement, (Exhibits X10 and X11) which also appears on the photo-copy (Exhibit X13) made that same day before the originals left Mr Crowley's office, can only have been placed there if he did so at that time. His signatures witnessing other signatures on page 3 of
Exhibit X10 (which do not appear on the photo-copy) would appear to have occurred at a later stage after the documents were returned to the office of the plaintiff.

I turn now to examine the documents themselves. The form of the Mortgage on the page where Mrs Bradbury placed her signature on page 14, is such that if she glanced at that page at all, she must have seen in the Schedule references to "Unit 3", "Unit 4" and share numbers, and almost immediately above her signature appears the word "Mortgagor". Moreover, when she signed the
Transfers of Shares in blank, which are only one page documents, it is inconceivable that she was not aware that she was signing transfers of some shares, and the words "The Astor Pty" stand out as typewriting as opposed to the printing on the face of the document. Finally when one comes to the
Statutory Declaration a cursory glance at that document, which after a lot of prevarication and evasion she admitted she would not have signed without reading, must have drawn her attention to the fact that it related to units 3 and 4, 123-125 Macquarie Street Sydney and that she was giving a mortgage over such units. She claims that it was not her practice to read documents, but I am of the opinion that she could not have signed all these documents without being aware that she was signing something relating to her units in the Astor, and most likely she would have noticed that at least some of the documents contained the word "mortgage". I accordingly totally reject her evidence that she was not aware that she was signing a mortgage over her interest in the
Astor units.

But the matter does not end there because I also accept Mr Crowley's evidence that he would not have witnessed her signature to the Transfers of Shares unless she signed in his presence and that he would have said words to the effect of those set out in his statement, namely "They are in blank. They are connected with the mortgage of the unit. The effect would be that if the company defaulted, AGC would have the right to take the unit to satisfy the amount owing". He does not assert that he explained the effect of the "all moneys" clause or in particular that it covered guarantees of future borrowings as well as past ones; but I am satisfied that, although she may not have known how the various documents related to each other, not only did she know that she was signing a mortgage over her Astor units, she knew that all the companies, hers and her husband's assets including the Kenmore Road properties, the Astor units, her husband's yacht had all been put up as security for the debts of IRA, whatever those debts might turn out to be. If she had any doubts or queries at all, she had ample opportunity to ask Mr
Crowley for an explanation, but did not do so. She conceded she knew what a guarantee was and I am satisfied on the evidence that she knew what a mortgage was.

The Plaintiff's Claim 
By her Further Amended Defence, in relation to the plaintiff's original claim for relief the defendant relies on the considerations referred to at the beginning of the judgment that as the defendant was not possessed of an interest in land by virtue of her ownership of shares in the Astor the mortgage could not found a cause of action for possession of land. This point is now conceded by the plaintiff and the relief claimed in paras 1 and 2 of the Summons are not pressed.

In relation to the balance of the plaintiff's claim, the defendant claims that the mortgage and other security documents are null and void, or alternatively unenforceable against her, because: 
She executed them as a result of unjust and unconscionable conduct on the part of the plaintiff.

They were unjust within the terms of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).

The plaintiff engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct contrary to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).

By her First Cross-Claim she claims orders setting them aside pursuant to the general law and/or the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), damages pursuant to <case> [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and consequential relief.

In his submissions however, Mr Blackburn, counsel for the defendant, raised a preliminary point. He submitted that neither the declaration nor orders sought in paras 3, 4 and 5 of the Amended Summons could be made because the Astor had not been jointed as a party. He pointed out that article 8, set out earlier in these reasons, deals with the members' rights to occupy their respective units and articles 36 and following deal with the transfer of shares; article 38 provides that a transferor shall be deemed to remain the holder of such shares until the name of the transferee is entered in the shareholders' register and article 39 confers on the directors a discretion to refuse to register any transfer of shares.

The Mortgage did not effect a transfer of the shares on the register. However, it was expressed in terms of assignment of the shares by way of mortgage (clause 1), was accompanied by deposit of the share certificates and duly executed forms of transfer in blank (recital D), and contained a covenant for further assurance (clause 7); and accordingly was effective as an equitable mortgage enforceable under the equitable jurisdiction of the Court: Fisher & Lightwood's Law of Mortgages Aust ed (1995) at 26. The remedies sought are remedies in personana against the defendant only arising under the
Mortgage itself in the form of a declaration limited by the words "as between the plaintiff and the defendant" and orders in the nature of mandatory injunctions for the defendant to comply with clause 11 by vacating the units and delivering up the keys. No orders are sought against the Astor or which would be binding on it; in particular no order is sought in these proceedings that the directors assent to the registration of any transfer of shares; although it appears that the defendant would be under an obligation to use her best endeavours to obtain such approval: Butts versus O'Dwyer <case>; [(1952) 87 CLR 267] at 285, Booker Industries Pty Ltd versus Wilson Parking (Qld) Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 600.] I am satisfied that it is not necessary for the Astor to be joined and subject to the matters raised in the Defence and First Cross-Claim the plaintiff is entitled to the relief sought.

Defence and First Cross-Claim 
The claim that enforcement of the mortgage would be inequitable and unconscionable is based, as I understand it, primarily on the conduct of Frank 
Edge who in 1983 was the Executive Director, Corporate Finance Division, of
Citicorp at the time that company made a further advance to IRA and, as part of the security, took a mortgage over the interests then held by the defendant and her husband in the Astor and the Kenmore properties. In 1985 he left
Citicorp and was for a time the general manager of IRA whom he left early in to take up employment with Moorgate, and in such capacity and at Ray
Bradbury's request, on 20 May 1995 he prepared loan applications to the plaintiff and NZI. Initially the finance was taken from NZI but in about
September 1985 the application to the plaintiff was renewed and the earlier
May application was re-used. That application was, it is said, untrue in that it stated Ray Bradbury received $900,000 from the Visona interests whereas in fact the defendant received the money and in the annexed List of Assets the
Astor units were shown as belonging to Ray Bradbury and not to the defendant.
Mr Edge agreed that at the time he prepared that application the Astor units were owned by Mrs Bradbury and to that extent at least his application was incorrect but to describe it, as Mr Blackburn did, as "mendacious, quite dishonest and quite false" is in my view not justified by the circumstances.

In any event the plaintiff indicated that more security than originally offered was required and Mr Bradbury told Edge that the defendant would be prepared to mortgage her Astor shares to support her guarantee, and this information was passed on to AGC. It was submitted that when taken with the statement in the application that Ray Bradbury had total control, together with the fact that Edge had an interest in the form of his commission (paid by
AGC) in ensuring that the loan was approved, should have put AGC on notice that Mr Bradbury was taking advantage of Mrs Bradbury and that she was not a person who was sufficiently able to protect her own interests in relation to her shares in the Astor, and that this was re-enforced when the letter of offer setting out the terms of the loan dated 8 October 1985 and addressed to
IRA was returned with acceptance signed only by Ray Bradbury. Finally Mr
Blackburn relied on the fact that the defendant did not have access to legal advice at the time of executing the relevant documents, was not aware of what she was signing, and her lack of education and business experience.

In this regard he relied on what was said by the High Court in Commercial
Bank of Australia Ltd versus Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447.] The principles in that case in my view have no application to the facts here. That case concerned a bank obtaining a guarantee from elderly parents of a principal debtor who were illiterate in written English and who to the knowledge of the Bank had been misinformed about the contents of the instrument they were executing. Here on the other hand, the misrepresentation as to the ownership of the Astor shares in the loan application was, in my view, immaterial in the circumstances because of the way in which the defendant and her husband regarded their respective assets and income and those of IRA as a common fund; and in any event such representation did not mislead the defendant. She was at all times, I am satisfied, prepared to do what was necessary to advance the business interests of her husband and his companies (from whom she benefitted in the form of an affluent lifestyle and other benefits) and if that included mortgaging her Astor units, then so be it, as she had done previously to Citicorp. Her education was only to secondary level but could reasonably be described as "average", she was not unintelligent, and as I have already found she received some explanation about both the Master Lease Agreement and the blank Transfers of Shares (in relation to the Mortgage) from Mr Crowley. Finally, unlike Amadio's case, the transaction was not one from which she could derive no benefit but her interests were inexorably linked with those of her husband and IRA, and through IRA's profits earned by use of the moneys advanced, she profitted for a number of years. See also Mortgage Management Ltd versus Fakhri (unreported,
McInerney J, 28 September 1993).

Much of what has been said concerning the submissions that the mortgage and guarantees were inequitable and unconscionable apply also to the submissions that they were unjust at the time they were made within the terms of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). Mr
Blackburn did not rely in particular on the matters referred to in [s (2)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), but on the considerations specified in [s (2)(e)(f)(g)(h)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) and (j), namely: "(e) whether or not - any party to the contract (other than a corporation) was not reasonably able to protect his interests; or any person who represented any of the parties to the contract was not reasonably able to protect the interests of any party whom he represented, because of his age or the state of his physical or mental capacity; the relative economic circumstances, educational background and literacy of - the parties to the contract (other than a corporation); and any person who represented any of the parties to the contract; where the contract is wholly or partly in writing, the physical form of the contract, and the intelligibility of the language in which it is expressed; whether or not and when independent legal or other expert advice was obtained by the party seeking relief under this Act; the extent (if any) to which the provisions of the contract and their legal and practical effect were accurately explained by any person to the party seeking relief under this Act, and whether or not that party understood the provisions and their effect; whether any undue influence, unfair pressure or unfair tactics were exerted on or used against the party seeking relief under this Act - by any other party to the contract; by any person acting or appearing or purporting to act for or on behalf of any other party to the contract; or by any person to the knowledge (at the time the contract was made) of any other party to the contract or of any person acting or appearing or purporting to act for or on behalf of any other party to the contract;" and in particular on the fact that there was, as he described it, unfair pressure and unfair tactics brought to bear on Mrs Bradbury by her husband, in not telling her that the units were going to be mortgaged. In other words, to use the phraseology adopted by McHugh JA in West versus AGC Ltd [(1986) 5 NSWLR ]
at 620, the defendant relies on what she claims was "procedural injustice".

Mrs Bradbury was not suffering any disability or difficulty on account of her age or the state of her physical or mental capacity which rendered her not reasonably able to protect her interests [(s (2)(e)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html)
At most she chose to accede to whatever business transactions her husband requested and to sign a large number of documents without reading them although she was perfectly capable of reading them, at least to the extent of understanding the nature of the transactions and the subject matter of them. I am satisfied for the reasons already given that she knew she was guaranteeing the debts of IRA, she knew she was giving a mortgage over her Astor units to secure such debts, and was aware of the general nature of a guarantee and of a mortgage.

As I have already observed her educational background and literacy [(s (2)(f))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) were sufficient to understand the matters I have already referred to, and the physical forms of the documents [(s (2)(g))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) must have indicated to her the nature of the documents she was signing, even though the detailed wording of them was expressed to a large extent in legal jargon printed in small print such as would require a lawyer a considerable time to absorb the detailed meaning of the documents. In relation to the physical form of the documents, the Master Lease Agreement of 18 October 1985 had immediately under the place where she signed on the third page the words "signature of guarantor" the Mortgage had clear references to the unit and share numbers on the page (14) on which she signed and the word "Mortgagor" appeared also most directly above her signature, the Transfers of Shares clearly referred to the Astor; and if she had read the Statutory Declaration which she swears she would have, the nature of the mortgage transaction would have been quite clear to her.

I am satisfied she did have legal advice in relation to the transaction from
Mr Crowley [(s (2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) and (i)) and even if she did not, the plaintiff, having had the mortgage documents sent by its solicitors to her solicitors, had no reason to believe she had not had such advice. Finally no undue influence, unfair pressure or unfair tactics were exerted on or used against her by the plaintiff or any person acting or appearing or purporting to act on behalf of, or to the knowledge of, the plaintiff [(s (2)(j)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) 
The only person whom it could possibly be said put any pressure on the defendant was her husband, and he did not do so on behalf of, or to the knowledge of, the plaintiff. Moreover she was quite willing to acquiesce in what he wanted. The remarks of Giles J in Carrington Confirmers Pty Ltd v
Akins (unreported - 23 April 1991) at p 34 are, in my view, equally applicable here: "She undertook the role of homemaker and mother, and devoted her attention to the small children and, I have no doubt, to the refurbishment of (the house).
She left business and financial matters to (her husband). That was the division of functions by which she proceeded. She was content to sign the documents which (her husband) asked her to sign..... because she was content to act in that way in furtherance of the business which provided the not inconsiderable material welfare which she enjoyed. For that reason, ..... she signed the documents presented to her by (her husband) she was content not to read them or to give great thought to the effect they might have upon her." 
There was in effect a true partnership between IRA and Mr and Mrs Bradbury.
The funds of each were mixed, and so its only fair that their liabilities should also be mixed. Mrs Bradbury, who put no money into the company when it was started, did not work outside the home but received considerable benefits from the company, and the details of her affluent lifestyle are described in the evidence. The funds for the purchase of one unit came from Citicorp and for the other from the sale of her share in IRA, which share she had acquired without investing any initial capital sum. In these circumstances it seems to me not unjust that she should be liable for the debts of the company which were in effect the debts of herself and her husband. In addition, she was quite happy to let her husband make decisions on her behalf, negotiate financial arrangements and instruct solicitors on her behalf.

As Gleeson CJ said in Baltic Shipping Co versus Dillon [(1991) 22 NSWLR 1] at 9 the general policy of the law is that people should honour their contracts, and in the circumstances of this case I see nothing unjust in the defendant being bound by the contracts she knowingly deliberately and intentionally entered into and from which for a number of years she enjoyed the benefits, irrespective of whether she did so at the behest of her husband or not, whether she understood the minute detail of each of the documents or not, and even if she deliberately closed her eyes to the specific terms of the documents.

For these reasons I am not satisfied that the various contracts were unjust either in the way they were made or on account of their terms.

No submissions were made concerning the claim for relief under the [Trade
Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) but, as I understand it, the only misleading conduct alleged is the misrepresentation contained in the original credit application prepared by Mr Edge relating to ownership of the Astor units. This was however a misrepresentation made to the plaintiff, not the defendant, and the latter was in no way misled by it.
Accordingly the defence and cross-claim under that Act fail.

Second Cross-Claim 
In the Amended Second Cross-Claim the cross-claimant claims that at all material times the cross-defendants purported to act for and on behalf of her in relation to the Mortgage (para 7) but that at no time did she retain them to act for or on her behalf in relation to such Mortgage (para 9). Some time was spent considering the circumstances, if any, in which the solicitors could be liable to the cross-claimant if she had not instructed them to act on her behalf, and reference was made to Midland Bank Trust Co Ltd versus Holt Stubbs & Kemp [[1979] Ch 384] and Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR 539. However, in view of the fact that he acted in relation to the refinancing of IRA by the plaintiff, that the Mortgage of the Astor units was part of that series of transactions, that he obtained information for the plaintiff's Sydney
Solicitors in relation to the particulars of the Astor units, that he prepared the answers to requisitions in respect of the Mortgage, and personally witnessed Mrs Bradbury's signature on the blank Transfers of Shares and that the Mortgage and the Statutory Declaration were (as I find) executed in his office in the presence of his employee, Mrs Morley, I am satisfied that he was acting on behalf of Mrs Bradbury in respect of the Mortgage. He received instructions to do so as part of the general instructions from Ray Bradbury to act in respect of the refinancing transactions, and the previous course of dealing whereby he had received instructions from Mr Bradbury which had in effect been ratified by Mrs Bradbury subsequently signing the relevant documents, justified him in accepting and inferring such instructions to act.
It is therefore irrelevant to consider what his obligations might have been if he was only purporting to act rather than acting in accordance with instructions received.

The documents in respect of which complaint is made fall into three categories, namely (a) the Master Lease Agreement (Exhibits X10 and X11) of 18
October 1985 incorporating a guarantee by the defendant of the indebtedness of
IRA; (b) the Mortgage over the Astor units; and (c) other security documents executed by Mrs Bradbury during 1986 to 1991, namely Exhibits B to H, N and O.

In relation to this last group, it has never been alleged, and is not alleged, that the cross-defendants acted on these matters or were involved in them in any way, even as witnesses to the defendant's signature, and in my view there can be no possible claim against the cross-defendants in respect of those documents.

In relation to documents (a) and (b) above, a number of Particulars of
Negligence are alleged. Firstly, it is claimed that the cross-defendant failed to explain to Mrs Bradbury adequately or at all the nature and effect of the documents and failed to give her any proper and adequate or any legal advice in relation thereto.

I have already indicated that I accept the evidence of Mr Crowley, supported as it is by his diary note and Visitors Book, that she attended his office on October 1985 along with her husband and Dennis Rounsfell when the Master
Lease Agreement was signed on which occasion Mr Crowley says he told her in effect that the purpose of the document was to facilitate future leasing arrangements with the plaintiff which would be guaranteed by her, her husband and Ray Bradbury Holdings Pty Ltd. She was also made aware that she was guaranteeing not the only existing indebtedness, but any future indebtedness, of IRA.

Then or on a later date, (probably 29 October 1985) she executed the Transfer of Shares and signed the answers to requisitions in the presence of Mr
Crowley, and I am satisfied that in relation to the Transfer of Shares he told her that they were connected with the Mortgage of the units and the effect would be that if IRA defaulted, the plaintiff would have the right to take the units to satisfy anything that might be owing. This in my view was a sufficient explanation as to the nature, not only of the Transfer of Shares but also in relation to the Mortgage which I infer was probably also signed on October along with the Statutory Declaration in the presence of Mrs Morley.
True it is there is no evidence that she was taken through the mortgage either generally or clause by clause, but I am satisfied that she was fully aware that she was giving a mortgage over her units in the Astor and that it was being given as security for the present and future debts of the company which she had guaranteed by the Master Lease Agreement signed by her on 18th of that month. In my opinion no further explanation was necessary. If she had any queries or doubts about it, it was perfectly open to her to request further information, which apparently she did not do. She carries the onus of proving that she was given no advice or inadequate advice, and her evidence is that she did not go to Mr Crowley's office on that day and did not sign any documents in his presence but signed them all in the kitchen at her home in
Kenmore, a claim which I have already rejected for a number of reasons.

Next, it is alleged that the cross-defendant was negligent in failing to advise Mrs Bradbury that it was not in her interest to execute any of the documents and failing to caution her against executing any of them. But there is no evidence that it was against her interest to execute the Mortgage. By executing the Master Lease Agreement and the Mortgage she facilitated the loans and financial accommodation to IRA which enabled it to earn profits from which she benefitted for many years. It cannot be said, in those circumstances that it was against her interest to execute the documents. Furthermore, as already noted, Mr Crowley did warn her in relation to the Transfer of Shares, that the plaintiff would have the right to take the units to satisfy anything that might be owing.

Finally, it is alleged that the cross-defendant was negligent in purporting to act on behalf of Mrs Bradbury when he had no instructions from her to act, but this is already covered by my finding that in view of the course of dealing over many years he was entitled to act on the instructions which came from her husband.

Although not alleged as a particular of negligence, it was further submitted that there was a conflict of interest in Mr Crowley acting for Mrs Bradbury because he was also acting for IRA and Mr Bradbury, and in addition was at the relevant time a director (although not a shareholder) of IRA and accordingly had a duty to IRA to do what was best for that company including securing financial accommodation for it from the plaintiff. However, in the circumstances of this case those matters did not, in my view, give rise to a conflict of interest because for the reasons already given the interests of
IRA, Mr and Mrs Bradbury were identical and complementary to each other.

The cross-claimant therefore has failed to establish any negligence or other breach of duty on the part of the cross-defendant, and even if breach of duty were established, I would not be persuaded that the cross-claimant has suffered any damage as a result thereof, as I am left with the distinct impression that no matter what Mr Crowley might or could have said to her about the Mortgage and the Master Lease Agreement, she would nevertheless have signed them if her husband, on whom she relied and whom she trusted, told her to. The Second Cross-Claim accordingly fails and it is unnecessary to consider the limitation point taken on behalf of the cross-defendants in submissions.

Conclusions 
For these reasons the plaintiff is entitled to a declaration and orders as claimed in paras 3, 4 and 5 of the Amended Summons and there will be judgment for the Cross-Defendants on each of the Cross-Claims.
 * * * 
