

Cullen and Ors versus Galloway Cattle Society of Australia Inc Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 86 (11 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 `

EVE CULLEN & ORS versus GALLOWAY CATTLE SOCIETY OF AUSTRALIA INC` ` 4730/97` `11 March 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This dispute concerns whether the plaintiffs were validly expelled as members of the defendant association. The defendant has existed for many years but took advantage of incorporation under the [Associations Incorporation Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aia1984307/), so that the rights between the parties must be dealt with as being governed by that Act. 
The real dispute between the parties appears to be strongly held opinions from two different points of view as to what are pure-bred Galloway cattle. That is what lies behind this dispute, but it is not a matter on which I have to adjudicate. The legal question that arises concerns an annual general meeting which was held on 8 March 1997 and a subsequent purported meeting of the council of the defendant association held on 11 October 1997.

The [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of the association as registered with the Director General of the Department of
Fair Trading, who is the relevant Commissioner under the Act, is not in as full a form as one would expect for a [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of a corporation with over 100 members, but doubtless its [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) took this form because of the relatively informal structures that are permitted under this particular Act.

Clause 2 of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) sets out its objectives. Clause 3 provides that the members of the association are to be in certain categories and that membership is open to individuals or organisations. Clause 15, the interpretation clause, purports to define "organisation" as including not only a corporate body but also "any partnership, any unincorporated association or any other entity comprised of two or more individuals or any other entity approved by the council". How this operates as a matter of law is luckily a matter I do not have to consider.
However, it would seem that this sort of provision has led the defendant to treat husband and wife members who operate under a particular trade or brand to be treated as one member. Whether this is valid or not is something that may have to be considered in the future but it explains some of what happened in the instant case.

Clause 5 is headed "Disciplining of Members". 5(a) is as follows: "Any member whose conduct in any respect shall be deemed derogatory or prejudicial to the interests of the Society may be expelled by resolution of two-thirds majority of Council ...".

The part of (a) I have omitted deals with notice to the members of council and to the member affected.

Clause 6 deals with management by the council and provides in sub-clause (n): "Questions arising at any meeting of the Council shall be decided by the majority of votes of those present. In case of inequality of votes the person appointed to chair the meeting shall have a second or casting vote." 
The only other provisions that I believe I need draw attention to are the second 10(b), the second 10(d) and cl 11(b)(iii) and (iv) hereunder: "10(b) Returning Officer 
Where there are more nominations than vacant positions the meeting shall appoint a Returning Officer and Assistant Returning Officer, who shall not be candidates in the election, to conduct a ballot. The Returning Officer shall determine the order of the names on the ballot paper by lot and shall initial all ballot papers issued according to the list of eligible voters.
 (d) Appeal Provisions 
If any member wishes to appeal against any action taken by the Returning
Officer or another candidate in a ballot, he must lodge an appeal with the
Secretary within seven (7) days. Any appeal shall be determined by Council, the decision of which shall be final, conclusive and binding on all members.
 (b) A special resolution shall be passed in the following manner: ....
 a quorum of fifteen (15) financial members must be personally present at the meeting; at least three-quarters of those personally present must vote in favour of the resolution." 
The annual general meeting of the Society for 1997 had to, pursuant to the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), elect four members of council who would be members of the council for three years. Apart from a situation where there was a retiring president, which does not apply in the instant case, the council consisted of twelve members, one- third retired each year, so there was a requirement for four to be elected.

At the 1997 general meeting there were eight nominees. The persons nominated were nominated in two groups of four which the first plaintiff refers to in her affidavit as the first group and the second group. As they were nominated the Returning Officer wrote the eight nominees on a board and later the names were written on the ballot papers in that order. There was a protest by some including at least one of the plaintiffs that cl 10(b) had not been complied with in that the Returning Officer had not determined the order of the names on the ballot paper by lot.

The point was made at the meeting and the Chairman was told by various members to "get on with it" and, after speaking to the Returning Officer and ascertaining that the procedure of doing what the Returning Officer had done had been carried out that way for many years previously, said that the procedure adopted by the Returning Officer should be followed. The first group was then elected, one candidate getting 45 votes and the other three 43 votes as opposed to the second group, three of whom scored 37 votes and the fourth votes. Accordingly, there was a 6 vote different between the lowest vote received by an elected candidate and the highest vote received by a non- elected candidate. Putting it another way, if three members had voted a different way then there may have been a tie. If four members had voted a different way then some of the second group may have been elected. The
Chairman declared that all members of the first group had been duly elected.

There is a provision which I have set out above, 10(d) allowing an appeal to the council. The plaintiffs purported to exercise their rights under 10(d) but the appeal was dismissed. It is on the face of it a most extraordinary way of dealing with an appeal because not only, as Mr Murr of counsel for the defendant has put, is it an appeal from Caesar to Caesar, it is also an appeal concerning Caesar. There is no provision in the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) specifying the moment at which a councillor ceases to hold office.

Clause 6(e)(i) specifies that one-third shall retire annually in rotation, but does not deal with the situation where there is an invalid election. It seems to me that cl 10(d) cannot affect the matter in any event. One reason is that if there is no council because there has been an invalid election, there is no body which can entertain the appeal. The second reason is that even though (d) ends with the words "final, conclusive and binding" the way in which that sort of provision is usually approached by the courts is that it does not create the ability in the council or other named body to determine questions of law (see for instance Re Caratal (New) Mines Limited [[1902] 2 Ch ] and
Tractor Spares & Equipment Co Pty Ltd versus Smith [[1962] NSWR ).] 
Mr Murr strongly put that in a constitution of a body under the [Associations
Incorporation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aia1984307/), which is a non-profit body, a more benign attitude should be taken to the construction of clauses such as 10(d) because it would not be expected that the parties would intend anything less than a quick and cheap determination of a dispute and that the parties must have intended to commit to the council all of the relevant decisions including decisions on questions of law and construction. I can see strength in that argument, but it does not seem to me to outweigh the general rule that has been applied in these situations as illustrated by cases like the Tractor Spares case where it was applied to a relatively small trading corporation.

Accordingly, in my view 10(d) does not affect the outcome.

At the council meeting there were present ten people. The first and third plaintiffs were members of the council even though they were the people who were sought to be expelled. The person who had made the complaint about their conduct was the president, Mr Barklamb, but through unavoidable business activities elsewhere he was not able to attend the meeting. Including the two plaintiffs (but not including the second plaintiff who was present by invitation) there were ten councillors present.

A large part of the evidence has been directed to the question as to whether there was a denial of natural justice to the plaintiffs. I do not intend to traverse this evidence in detail because if the plaintiffs are successful the parties will at least in the short term have to work together to achieve the aims of the Society and an exposition of the evidence may not aid the healing process. Accordingly, I will reserve my decision on the matter of whether there was a denial of natural justice to be decided if need be. I will decide the matter purely on technical questions. It may be necessary to resolve the other matter when dealing with costs, but I hope not.

The meeting voted in favour of expulsion of the first and second plaintiffs, who were wife and husband, by 7 to 2. The first plaintiff did not vote because the matter affected her and thus she was ineligible. There was then in the absence of the first plaintiff a similar vote against the third plaintiff.

Simple mathematics tell one that if there are twelve members of the council two-thirds majority means that eight people had to vote in favour. If, on the other hand, the two-thirds refers to people who are present and voting or even present at the meeting then the two-thirds majority was attained.

Both Mr Finch SC for the plaintiffs and Mr Murr took me through the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and pointed to indications one way or the other as to whether cl 5(a) meant two-thirds of the total number of councillors or two-thirds of those present (or present and voting). Really there is not much either way to give an indication. Mr Murr's strongest point I thought was to refer to cl 6(n) which
I have set out but 6(n) is directed to make sure that in ordinary circumstances there does not have to be a unanimous vote of members of the council before something is adopted, as would be the situation at common law.
There is no need for that provision when the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) has already adopted a particular method of making a decision for the purpose of 5(a).

The second part of 6(n) clearly applies only to a simple majority because that is the only case in which there is an inequality of votes. Furthermore, the provision that the chairperson would have a second or casting vote is difficult to fit within cl 5(a). I accordingly do not consider that 6(n) really assists the matter at all.

Mr Finch SC's high point was probably cl 11(b) and that is that there is reference to a special resolution and a requirement that three-quarters of those be personally present. I think Mr Murr is correct when he says that the words "personally present" really mean those there rather than those represented by proxy, though his point is blurred to a degree by the fact that there is an inadequate provision for corporations or organisations who are voting by a nominee. However, I do think that there is at least a scintilla of significance in 11(b)(iv).

Although these documents have to be considered as the acts of the people involved in this particular Society and no general principle of construction can decide the matter, where one sees that there has been over the years a particular approach to clauses of this nature one can take some comfort in that approach. Last century that esteemed equity lawyer Chancellor Kent from
New York said in a passage which is conveniently quoted by the Supreme Court of Missouri in Foster versus Mullanphy Planing-Mill Co [4 SW (2d) 260] at 262: "There is a distinction taken between a corporate act to be done by a select and definite body, as by a board of directors, and one to be performed by the constituent members. In the latter case a majority of those who appear may act; but in the former a majority of the definite body must be present, and then a majority of the quorum may decide." 
Many of the American cases seem to go along that line as can be seen in volume of the American Words and Phrases at p 143. There are, of course, some authorities going the other way and some of the American authorities in this area of the law diverge from Australian law, see on slightly different points Frischer & Co versus Bakelite Corp  <case>; [389 US 179] .

In England the only two reported cases seem to be exceptions to the rule. The first is Clay versus The Grand Junction Waterworks Co [(1904) 21 TLR 31] where the judge thought that the prima facie meaning of the word "shareholders" was "all the shareholders", and further that the particular parts of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of the corporation then in question reinforced this view.

Then in Knowles versus Zoological Society of London [[1959] 1 WLR 823] the English
Court of Appeal thought that in the particular charter of the society in question "majority of the council" meant majority of those entitled to vote.

The only Australian case seems to deal with the difference between majority in number and majority in value at a creditors meeting, Re Simonsen (1890) 4
QLJ 22, so it is little assistance.

It seems to me that Chancellor Kent's approach gives some indication, and a fairly logical indication to the general approach to these provisions. That is, when one is referring to a board or a council, the ordinary meaning of two-thirds majority is two-thirds majority of the whole council and that unless there is something else in the instrument which shows a contrary indication that is usually the answer the court will reach. That is the answer
I reach in this case because I do not consider that there is sufficient contrary indication.

Accordingly, it follows that the vote at the council meeting to expel the plaintiffs was invalid.

The next matter that I must consider is whether the council itself was validly constituted and that turns on whether the four persons who were declared to be elected at the 1997 general meeting were validly elected. It is said that they were not because first there was a non-compliance with cl 10(b) and secondly because two persons voted whose qualification as a member was not made out.

The court has been concerned on many occasions recently where small technical points have been taken by small minorities of members of a corporation or club, where something has affected an election. I personally have always been troubled with these cases because challenges to the Supreme Court are very expensive matters and where there is a clear majority in favour of a particular point of view so that the court can almost assume that were the matter revisited the same result would be reached, I often wonder whether the court should encourage such actions. However, it is necessary for the court to look carefully at the rights of minorities because otherwise majorities can just bully their way through disregarding anyone else's rights. I am not saying for a moment that that is what happened in this case, but that is what could well happen as a general rule if the courts did not seriously listen to minorities, even small minorities. One way of dealing with the problem is just to refuse in the court's discretion to grant a declaration. If something is a nullity then it seems to me to matter little whether the court makes a declaration or not, it is still a nullity. However, there may be some matters which could be called mere irregularities which do not go to the heart of the matter, in which the court may just pass over something that happened at a meeting which should not have happened but it did not really affect the result.

In my view the participation of the two purported members falls within the category I have just outlined. Although I am not aware of any decision on the matter it seems to me that rules such as those stated in Ethell versus Whalan [[1971] 1 NSWLR 416] that participation in a meeting to expel a member of an association by persons who are not entitled to participate invalidates the decision, does not apply, generally speaking, to a meeting of members who are holding an annual general meeting. The reason for this is the amount of influence that one or two people can have in a meeting of over one hundred people is ordinarily rather slim. Of course, there are exceptions such as the famous case of Globe Woolen Co versus Utica Gas & Electric Co [121 NE 378 (1918)] where the dominant figure in the corporation was pulling the strings behind the scenes, but that is not this case. Secondly, the votes of two people one way or the other could not have affected the result.

Accordingly, I believe that the participation of the two people whose eligibility to vote must be contentious could not be a matter for which the court should give relief.

However, having said that, my view is that those two people were not members at the 1997 meeting. The [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) provides in cl 3 that it is the council that is to admit people to membership.
There was a minute of August 1992 that "applications for membership be approved by the Executive officer in consultation with the President and two
Vice-Presidents and to be subsequently ratified by the next Council meeting".
The general rule is delegatus non potest delegare. That is a delegate has no power to sub-delegate. In the present case the council was the delegate of the
Society. There is nothing in the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) which authorises a sub-delegate so to my mind it was not possible for the council to delegate to the Executive Officer or anyone else the power to approve applications for membership. Moreover, as this was a regal function of the council rather than a mere managerial function there would, prima facie, be no power to delegate. What was done by the resolution of 1992 was quite sensible, that is to allow an informal process to take place between quarterly meetings of the council but when it is vital to know who are the members the informal procedure breaks down and in my view unless the decision of the delegate is ratified by the council before the event in which the person purportedly admitted as a member by the Executive Officer takes place then the person is not a member.

It must be remembered that when there is a ratification ordinarily ratification does not retrospectively apply: Dibbins versus Dibbins [[1896] 2
Ch 348.] 
Accordingly in my view these two people were not entitled to participate or vote at the meeting but, however, as I have said, I would not give relief if that were the only matter involved.

The more important matter is the disregard of 10(b). I can understand why that happened. There was a meeting with a lot of people present, a lot of busy people, a lot of non-lawyers who very quickly tire of what they consider to be "formalities" who were urging the Chairman to hurry up and get on with the real business. The procedure had been that the constitutional provisions had been disregarded for some years without objection and so one can understand how it came about that the Chairman did not direct the Returning Officer to do what the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) said.

Mr Murr submits that 10(b) is only directory and not mandatory and that I must not read too much into the word "shall" in 10(b). However, it seems to me that all the provisions in cl 10 on p 10, except perhaps (d), are very clearly expressed in mandatory language. The words "shall" or "must" consistently appear and I cannot escape from the conclusion that on the true construction (b) was mandatory.

It is not at all unknown for there to be a donkey vote and that is why both in parliamentary and other elections there are provisions for the order of candidates to be determined by lot. I consider that the disregard of the provision invalidates the election.

The other matters raised are that there was a denial of natural justice in the way in which the council meeting was conducted and the failure to notify the plaintiffs of the precise grounds and the particulars of those grounds for which they were up for expulsion. A further matter was that it either was not possible for the council meeting as a matter of law or it could not as a reasonable body as a matter of fact have determined that the plaintiffs were or any of them was acting in a way that could be classed as derogatory or prejudicial to the interests of the Society.

There is a further problem in that 5(a) uses the expression "deemed derogatory or prejudicial to the interests of the Society". I prefer, for the reasons I have already said, not to rule on the significance, if any, of the word "deemed" or indeed any of these matters at this stage. It is not necessary to do so in order to achieve a result but I will reserve my decision on these matters and not give that decision unless either sets of parties asks for a decision, but it may be that they will affect the matter of costs.

There was filed on 29 January 1998 a notice of motion by the plaintiffs that the defendant not hold any election of council members until at least thirty days after judgment at first instance in these proceedings. That notice of motion came before Cohen J whose decision was that it should stand over to the hearing of the proceedings. The 1998 general meeting is set down for next
Sunday. Although I do not consider it at all appropriate to stop that meeting occurring I do consider that in view of my decision the plaintiffs must be considered at all material times to have been members of the defendant and as their chances of participating in the electoral process have been affected by what happened at the council meeting in question it is appropriate to direct the defendant not to hold any election of council members until at least a date that I will specify in the order.

The summons asks for a series of declarations in the form that the expulsion and the election be declared invalid for certain reasons. The court does not make a declaration in that form and will only make a declaration if it is called for that something was invalid without specifying any reason, Trans
Realties Pty Ltd versus Grbac [[1975] 1 NSWLR 170.] 
I should finally say that it was necessary to give a decision before the meeting next Sunday and I have been greatly assisted in being able to do so by the excellent way in which both counsel presented the arguments for their respective points of view.

The order on the notice of motion is the defendant not hold any election of council members until 30 April 1998.

As far as costs are concerned, it follows that the general rule applies, that is, that he or she who wins gets costs from he or she who loses, so I will order the defendant to pay the costs of the proceedings.

Accordingly - 
I make order 1 in the summons up to the word "invalid".

I make order 4 in the summons up to the word "invalid".

Order that the defendant not hold any election of council members until after 30 April 1998.

Order that the defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings to date.

Reserve further consideration.

Exhibits should be retained.
 * * * 
