

Jazairy versus Najjar and Anor Matter No Ca 40543/96 [1998] NSWSC 228 (25 May )

Last Updated: 19 June 1998 
JAZAIRY versus NAJJAR & ANOR 
CA 40543/96 May 1998 
Mason P, Sheller JA, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT - WILLIAMS ADCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40543/96 
DELIVERED: 25 MAY 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 2 MARCH 1998 
PARTIES: JAZAIRY V NAJJAR & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, SHELLER JA, POWELL JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: G SEGAL 
Respondent: M WILLIAMS 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: GERARD MALOUF & PARTNER 
Respondent: KEDDIES 
CATCHWORDS: 
Negligence - evidence - res ipsa loquitur - motor vehicle accident - failure of defence to proffer explanation of accident - other possible causes than negligence.

Fraud - procedure - whether fraud must be pleaded - whether duty to confront plaintiff with suggestion of fraud.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 35 
JAZAIRY versus NAJJAR & ANOR 
Negligence - evidence - res ipsa loquitur - onus of proof - motor vehicle accident - failure of defence to proffer explanation of accident - other possible causes than negligence 
Fraud - procedure - whether fraud must be pleaded - whether duty to confront plaintiff with suggestion of fraud - Jones versus Dunkel rule 
On 2 November 1990 a car being driven by Mrs Najjar along President Avenue,
Kogarah crashed into a telegraph pole. Mrs Jazairy, the sister of Mrs Najjar, was the front seat passenger in that vehicle. This accident gave rise to two actions. The first action was brought by Najjar against the Nominal Defendant, and the second was brought by Jazairy against Najjar and Chama Motors Pty Ltd (the owner of the car as agreed by the parties).

Najjar's case was that she had suffered injuries when the car which she was driving was forced off the road by an unidentified truck. Najjar gave evidence and was cross-examined by counsel for all other parties. However, at no stage did counsel put to Najjar any questions suggestive of fraud on her part in relation to the accident. Subsequently, three witnesses were called by the
Nominal Defendant, each giving evidence denying the existence of a white truck or any other vehicle that forced Najjar's car off the road.

The possibility of fraud was raised and debated during the addresses of counsel. At first instance, verdict was for the Nominal Defendant in the first action and for Najjar in the second. On appeal, Jazairy sought a new trial in the action against Najjar and Chama Motors. Jazairy submitted that the trial judge erred in law in failing to find negligence in reliance upon the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur. Further, it was submitted that the trial judge was not entitled to consider the possibility of fraud as an explanation for the accident, since the matter was neither pleaded nor put to Najjar.

HELD, allowing the appeal: 
The failure of the defendants to proffer an explanation for the happening of the accident does not mean that the plaintiff is entitled to a verdict.

Government Insurance Office of NSW versus Best (1993) ATR 
P81-210, applied.

A plaintiff who tenders evidence suggestive of a particular (negligent) cause of an accident is not barred from falling back upon res ipsa loquitur if otherwise available.

Anchor Products Ltd versus Hedges <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 493], applied. 
It was not incumbent upon the Nominal Defendant to plead fraud in answer to a motor negligence claim. However, there is a duty, in fairness, to confront a plaintiff with such a contention before it is proper to rely upon fraud as a possible answer to an otherwise clear case of negligence.

Inzaurralde versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales, Court of Appeal, unreported, 28 October 1992; Ghazal versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales [(1992) 29 NSWLR 336], applied. 
ORDERS
Appeal allowed.
Set aside the verdict for the first and second defendants in Action No of 1994 (Jazairy versus Najjar & Ors).
Order a new trial on all issues as between the plaintiff and the said defendants in that action.
Costs of the first trial in the said action as between the parties to this appeal are to abide the result of the new trial.
Respondents to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and to have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if qualified.

JUDGMENT 
MASON P: Three actions involving personal injuries arising out of two separate motor vehicle accidents were heard together in the District Court. The three actions were:- - No 1408/1992: Hanah Najjar versus Nominal Defendant (the first action) - No 1499/1994: Haifa Jazairy versus Moran Salahi (the second action) - No 2754/1994: Haifa Jazairy versus Hanah Najjar, Chama Motors Pty Ltd & the Nominal Defendant (the third action).

The second action, which concerned an accident that occurred on 1 May 1991, resulted in a verdict for the plaintiff. It is of no relevance to this appeal.

The first and third actions each involved the same accident, which occurred at about 2pm on 2 November 1990, when a car being driven by Mrs Najjar along
President Avenue, Kogarah crashed into a telegraph pole. Mrs Jazairy was the front seat passenger in that vehicle. Mrs Jazairy and Mrs Najjar are sisters.
Both liability and damages were put in issue.

The proceedings were heard by Williams ADCJ. Directions had previously been given that the three cases be heard together in the interests of justice. When the cases were called, the following appearances were announced in the first and third actions: - Mr J Keesing represented Mrs Najjar, the plaintiff in the first action - Mr G Segal represented Mrs Jazairy, the plaintiff in the third action - Mr C Hoeben QC with Mr S Fitzsimmons represented the Nominal Defendant, a defendant in the first and third actions - Mr M Williams represented Mrs Najjar and Chama Motors Pty Ltd ("Chama
Motors") who were defendants in the third action. (At the start of the second day Mr Williams confirmed that he was instructed by the third party indemnifiers of his clients.) 
In the first action (in which Mrs Najjar was the plaintiff) there was only one defendant, the Nominal Defendant. From start to finish Mrs Najjar's case was that she had suffered injuries when the car which she was driving was forced off the road by an unidentified white truck. By contrast, Mrs Jazairy brought the third action against three defendants, pleading her case in the alternative. As against the first and second defendants she pleaded that Chama
Motors was the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the accident, and that Mrs Najjar was the driver as agent of Chama Motors. There were the standard particulars of negligence by a driver. The alternative claim pleaded against the third defendant (the Nominal Defendant) was effectively the same as that which Mrs Najjar had asserted in the first action.

Shortly after the commencement of the trial on Monday 19 August 1996, Mr Segal (counsel for Mrs Jazairy) informed the learned trial judge that the matter between his client and the Nominal Defendant had in effect been resolved (AB ). After a short adjournment he applied for an order that the matters proceed separately on the basis that Mrs Jazairy was no longer suing the
Nominal Defendant. The thrust of the application was that it would be unfair for Mrs Jazairy to have to suffer the cost, delay and possible prejudice of having to conduct her case while her sister's case against the Nominal
Defendant proceeded. This application was rejected (AB 29).

At one stage during the debate in the application for a separate trial, Mr
Segal indicated that he considered that his client's case (ie in the third action) would be "essentially ... a quantum case" (AB 26). Mr Williams was quick to disabuse Mr Segal on this ground. At AB 27 he stated that: "the situation on liability is that there are circumstances surrounding this case where we require proof of all aspects of liability." 
At the commencement of the joint trial it had been agreed that each action would proceed, initially, on liability only. And, although no formal order was made, the trial was run on the basis that evidence in one action was evidence for the purpose of any other. It will be seen that Mr Williams and Mr Segal were allowed to cross-examine Mrs Najjar, when she was called as a witness in the first action, even though their respective clients were not parties in that action.

The evidence commenced with Mr Keesing calling his client, Mrs Najjar, the plaintiff in the first action. Her testimony was given through an interpreter, although she chose to answer questions in (fairly good) English from time to time. Mrs Najjar gave evidence that she was a director and employee of a "family business" - Chama Motors Pty Ltd - a company which sold second-hand cars. She said that her sister, Mrs Jazairy, purchased the vehicle from the company on 31 October 1990, then returned it on 1 November 1990 because she was unsatisfied with how it went. On 2 November 1990, the day of the accident,
Mrs Najjar had driven the car to Mrs Jazairy's place and picked up her sister for a test drive to show her that the car was satisfactory. It was Mrs Najjar who continued driving.

The material relating to the ownership of the car involved in the accident was unsatisfactory on several counts. The vehicle was a 1982 Toyota Corona and it was completely destroyed in the accident. In the third action Mrs Jazairy had pleaded that the owner of the car was Chama Motors. That allegation was not admitted. No evidence was adduced by Mr Segal relevant to that issue. However,
Mrs Jazairy's statement that was admitted over his objection asserted that Mrs
Jazairy had "just purchased" the car on the day of the accident. Mrs Najjar's oral evidence to the same effect, suggesting that the car had already been sold by Chama Motors to Mrs Jazairy at the time of the accident, was adduced by leading questions from her counsel, but no relevant documents were tendered. At one stage later in the trial it was suggested in cross- examination by Mr Hoeben QC that Mrs Jazairy was still making up her mind about the car on the day of the accident. Mrs Najjar effectively denied this (AB 39). However, the matter was not further pursued. Neither was there any evidence as to where the burden of the loss of the completely damaged vehicle ultimately fell. The trial judge made no finding on the issue of ownership.

To add to an unsatisfactory situation on a potentially critical issue, I record that counsel for the appellant (Mrs Jazairy) submitted to us that the car was owned by Chama Motors at the time of the accident, and this was not disputed by counsel for the respondents (Mrs Najjar and Chama Motors Pty Ltd).

Mrs Najjar's evidence about the accident was that she was driving the vehicle in the first (inside) lane at about 50km per hour when a truck suddenly swerved from the second into the first lane forcing her off the road into a telegraph pole. (It is pertinent at this stage to note that the P4 Traffic
Collision Report put into evidence showed that the accident occurred on a fine day with an open view on a level, straight piece of roadway with a light traffic density.) 
Mrs Najjar was then cross-examined by Mr Hoeben QC, Mr Williams and Mr Segal.

Despite challenge from senior counsel representing the Nominal Defendant, she adhered to her case involving the white truck that forced her off the road.
Nevertheless, that cross-examination showed potentially significant inconsistencies in her evidence. For example, initially she said that she first saw the truck in her side mirror (AB 39X); whereas later she said that it was first seen at the front of her right side (AB 40Q).

Mr Williams next cross-examined Mrs Najjar. He asked her some questions about
Mrs Jazairy's injuries, and what Mrs Jazairy did after the accident. He had
Mrs Najjar confirm that she was having no difficulty with the car prior to the accident and that she felt comfortable driving the car until the accident happened. And he had Mrs Najjar identify her signature on a statement dated 14
December 1992 which was marked for identification. (Later this was tendered and admitted as Exhibit 5. It is generally consistent with Mrs Najjar's oral evidence. It describes her as "self-employed with Chama Motors". Relevant to any question of negligence, Mrs Najjar deposes that she had not had anything to drink prior to the accident nor was she on any medication that may have affected her ability to drive. She "felt comfortable driving" the vehicle. She was forced from the lane closest to the gutter into the telegraph pole by a white truck which veered over from the middle lane. On the question of injuries the statement said that both sisters were taken to St George
Hospital, that Mrs Najjar was allowed to return home later that day, and that
Mrs Jazairy had remained for about two weeks.) 
Mr Williams put no question to Mrs Najjar suggestive of fraud on her part in relation to the accident.

Towards the close of her evidence in chief Mrs Najjar had identified the signature of her sister on a statement that was marked for identification (AB ). Although his client was not a party in the first action, Mr Segal also cross-examined Mrs Najjar. He confined himself to suggesting that she was mistaken in her evidence identifying Mrs Jazairy's signature on the statement.
(The statement was later admitted over Mr Segal's objection.) It was not suggested she was in error in her evidence about the white truck. And nothing was put to support an alternative hypothesis of Mrs Najjar's own negligence as driver.

At the commencement of the second day of the trial Mr Segal renewed his application for separate hearings. This was unsuccessful. It is however very pertinent to note that the trial judge said (AB 53): "...if you've discontinued against the nominal defendant you may have some problems establishing negligence on the part of Mrs Najjar which is [sic] the manner of her driving. There is no cross-examination directed to the manner of her driving in relation to the accident, so the only real issue basically is whether or not there is another vehicle there." 
No application was made then or later to recall Mrs Najjar for further cross- examination.

Counsel for Mrs Najjar then called Senior Constable Muddle who had attended the scene of the accident on 2 November 1990. He tendered an extract from the officer's notebook that recorded Mrs Najjar's contemporaneous statement about the white truck that swerved from lane 2. She is noted as having said: "A vehicle, I think a white truck was travelling in lane 2 and it tried to come across into my lane. I swerved to miss the truck and collided with a telegraph pole. ... I would just like to add that the truck was very fast and cut across into my lane." 
An ambulance report was tendered referable to Mrs Jazairy's injuries. Mr
Keesing then tendered Mrs Jazairy's statement that had previously been marked for identification. The document was admitted over Mr Segal's objection. In her statement Mrs Jazairy deposed that she was an experienced driver. She said that she had just purchased the car on the day of the accident from Chama
Motors. The car was "in very good condition". Mrs Jazairy described her sister as sober and healthy at the time when she took her on a test drive. As to the accident, Mrs Jazairy's statement was that a big white truck came across at the car. As it was about to collide she sang out to her sister "look, the truck", but it was too late for Mrs Najjar to do anything.
 "I do not know whether the truck hit the car before we collided, with what I found out to be was [sic] a telegraph pole. ... There was no time for
Hanah Najjar to take any action to avoid this accident. I only saw the truck just moments before the collision had knocked me unconscious. She was driving quite carefully and was in her lane when this truck came across at us." 
Mrs Jazairy stated that the car was unable to be repaired due to the extent of its damage.

Mr Keesing then closed his case. Mr Segal indicated that he proposed to call no evidence.

Thereupon Mr Hoeben QC called three witnesses in the case of the Nominal
Defendant (who was still a defendant in the first action). These were Mr and
Mrs Shepherd and their daughter Mrs Rapley. Each of the witnesses was travelling in a car immediately behind the vehicle being driven by Mrs Najjar.
Each gave evidence denying the existence of a white truck or any other vehicle that forced Mrs Najjar's car off the road.

Mr Shepherd said that he was sitting as a front seat passenger in a car being driven by his daughter in the middle lane of traffic. He observed the car in front. "[It] just turned off the road at an angle and went straight into the pole and I observed that I thought the steering must have gone." Mr Shepherd saw no brake lights and he was firm in his evidence that no vehicle had forced the car ahead off the road. He gave evidence to the effect that, from his observation, neither of the ladies in the car that crashed appeared to be injured.

Mr Shepherd's evidence was vigorously tested in cross-examination by Mr
Keesing. However he adhered to his account of the accident. He agreed that, shortly before the accident, he had told his daughter to keep a wide berth or keep an eye out for the car ahead of them (AB 83).

Mrs Shepherd was a backseat passenger in the car being driven by her daughter.
She had heard he husband say "watch this woman, she's all over the road, or watch this car" (AB 98). She too saw no white vehicle swerve in front of Mrs
Najjar's car. She adhered to her evidence despite being challenged by Mr
Williams. The only matter put to her in cross-examination by Mr Segal was to get her to identify the statement she had made in 1993 and to agree that it described the passenger seen in Mrs Najjar's vehicle (after the accident) as being "hysterical". There was no challenge from Mr Segal in relation to the evidence concerning the circumstances of the accident itself.

Mrs Rapley gave evidence that: "There was a car up ahead that was moving, sort of hesitating slowly, appeared to be stopping. My father said, `lookout'...so I just slowed down to a steady pace, kept on going. Then we saw that car veer off to the left and hit a telegraph pole." (AB 106) 
Mrs Rapley was challenged in cross-examination by Mr Keesing but adhered to her evidence. She was briefly questioned by Mr Segal, but not challenged in any way as to her evidence concerning the accident itself. Mrs Rapley's statement was also tendered by Mr Hoeben, and it was admitted without objection. It states that she saw no evidence that the driver of the car ahead used brakes before crashing into the telegraph pole.

The case for the Nominal Defendant in the first action was then closed. Mr
Keesing indicated that he was calling no evidence in reply. No further evidence was called by any party referable to liability in the accident of 2
November 1990.

Counsel then addressed. It is clear that the possibility of fraud was raised and debated during address. The next day Mr Segal was asked by the trial judge whether he wished to make any submissions in relation to liability in the first action. He declined. Judgment was then given in the first action (Najjar versus Nominal Defendant). The judge observed that the plaintiff had the onus of establishing on the balance of probabilities that there was another vehicle, and that it was being driven negligently. He summarised the evidence of the witnesses, noting that the preponderance of evidence suggested that there was no other vehicle. After some general comments about reliability and motivation his Honour continued: "On the principal issue however Mr Shepherd and Mrs Rapley are unshaken and that is that the Plaintiff's vehicle left the road without the intervention of any other vehicle on the road. I can see no reason as to why they would have made this up or would have got the situation so fundamentally wrong. Both say that there was little traffic on the road at the time. President Avenue is a two lane road at its commencement at the Grand Parade and widens to three lanes well before the accident site. It is not logical that if the Plaintiff was in lane one when she turned into President at the Grand Parade, she would have stayed in that lane when the road widened which would then place her in lane two where Mr Shepherd and Mrs Rapley saw her. I find on the balance of probabilities that she was in that lane.

The only support for the Plaintiff is the statement of Mrs Jazairy, the passenger in her vehicle. She was not called and so was not subject to examination or cross-examination. The weight that I can attach to her statement in those circumstances, if I can attach any weight to it, is minimal. In fact it is arguable that as she was not called in the Plaintiff's case it was for the reason that her evidence would no longer support the
Plaintiff. I note that Mrs Jazairy has withdrawn her claim against the Nominal
Defendant.

In considering all these matters I have difficulty in saying that any valid reason has been advanced for me rejecting out of hand the evidence of the
Shepherds and Mrs Rapley or for preferring the evidence of the Plaintiff. In fact there are good reasons for me preferring the independent evidence of the
Shepherds and Mrs Rapley over the somewhat vague evidence of the Plaintiff.

I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there was no other vehicle involved and consequently there must be a verdict for the Nominal
Defendant." 
After hearing further addresses his Honour then delivered his reasons in the third action (Jazairy versus Najjar & Ors). He noted that the judgment was to be read in conjunction with the one previously given in the first action. After some general remarks about the principle in Jones versus Dunkel he noted that the plaintiff's evidence in the case consisted of her statement and the evidence in chief of Mrs Najjar. He observed that counsel for Mrs
Jazairy had not cross-examined Mrs Najjar on the question of liability. He then read those portions of Mrs Jazairy's statement which corroborated the evidence of Mrs Najjar in relation to the white truck incident. He recorded that he had found on the balance of probabilities that there was no such vehicle. Reference was made to the evidence of Mr Shepherd and Mrs Rapley to the effect that the vehicle in which Mrs Jazairy was a passenger was being driven erratically in lane two, before it veered into lane one onto the footpath and collided with a telegraph pole. It was noted that Mr Shepherd had said that there were no brake lights illuminated before the vehicle collided with a telegraph pole. His Honour continued: "Fraud has not been pleaded, nor was it put to Mrs Najjar, the only relevant witness to whom it could have been put.

The plaintiff has an onus of establishing affirmatively on the balance of probabilities that it was negligence on the part of the driver of the vehicle that caused the accident and consequently her injuries. The plaintiff relies on res ipsa loquitur, although that has not been pleaded, and other particulars regarding manner of driving.

In not accepting Mrs Najjar's version of how the accident happened, clearly on the balance of probabilities and having regard to the only evidence I have from the plaintiff, which is a statement that supports Mrs Najjar, as well as having regard to the evidence of the Shepherds and Mrs Rapley as to what happened both before and after the accident, the question (meaning possibility) of fraud although not pleaded does arise. As I indicated to counsel during address, this fraud may have been limited to supporting a claim against the Nominal Defendant, or it may be purposive of the whole incident and thus purposive of the plaintiff's damage. Mr Williams says that the evidence of Mr Shepherd and Mrs Rapley as to the behaviour of the motor vehicle could be indicative of a number of situations which would not involve negligence on the part of the driver, such as illness, mechanical problems, or some supervening event, like a bee entering the cabin of the vehicle. He says that given these possibilities as well as the possibility of fraud the plaintiff has a positive onus to show that in fact the accident was caused by a negligent act as opposed to a non-negligent or fraudulent one. Res ipsa loquitur is a rebuttable presumption of evidentiary negligence. That is that unchallenged the facts point to a negligent act and only a negligent one. The doctrine is not really available if there are multiple causes of an act, some of which could be non-negligent.

The evidence of Mrs Najjar is silent as to any question of illness, mechanical defect or other cause for the reason she says the vehicle was forced off the road by another vehicle. Given that did not occur, there is therefore no available evidence from her as to how the accident occurred, or from the plaintiff as to how the accident occurred that would eliminate these possibilities.

The only evidence which can be relied on, which is not really evidence of negligence but evidence of how a vehicle was seen to be moving on a roadway, does not of itself exclude those other possibilities referred to.

I am of the view that while those possibilities exist and have not been met by the plaintiff, the plaintiff cannot rely on res ipsa and has not been able to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities that there was something about the defendant's manner of driving that was negligent as opposed to a non-negligent cause.

In those circumstances, regrettably then, there must be a verdict for the defendant." 
The appellant, Mrs Jazairy, seeks a new trial in the third action against the remaining defendants, Mrs Najjar and Chama Motors. I shall deal with the grounds in a different order to that advanced in argument.

Res ipsa loquitur 
It is first submitted that the learned trial judge erred in law in failing to find negligence in reliance upon the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur. The evidence is said to be entirely one way, pointing to the negligence of Mrs
Najjar in the control of the vehicle - once the white truck scenario was rejected.

This submission seeks to revive an ancient heresy long rejected in Australia.
It is well established that the res ipsa loquitur principle does not cause the onus to shift: Government Insurance Office of NSW versus Fredrichberg <case>; <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 493] at 500: "To say that an accident speaks for itself does not mean that if no evidence is given for the defendant the plaintiff is entitled in law to a verdict in his favour. The occurrence speaks of negligence, but how clearly and convincingly it speaks depends upon its circumstances. It is evidence from which an inference of negligence may be drawn: it does not mean that this inference must necessarily be drawn, although in some cases it may be evidence so cogent and compelling that any other conclusion would be perverse...." 
The appellant's submission was that there was no evidence of any cause for the accident other than the (rejected) white truck scenario or the (asserted) negligence of Mrs Najjar, proved through the res ipsa principle. This may be true, in the sense of direct evidence. But (a) consistent with the authorities just cited, such a submission cannot be used to reverse the plaintiff's onus of proof and (b) there was material capable of giving rise to an inference that (in the trial judge's words) "possibilities" other than the two causes I have mentioned brought about the accident. This was a case where there was positive evidence that indicated that the accident was not the result of negligence on Mrs Najjar's part. That evidence, coupled with the conduct of Mrs Jazairy's case at trial, enabled the judge as the tribunal of fact to be satisfied that res ipsa loquitur did not satisfy him that negligence was established in this particular case.

In Government Insurance Office versus Fredrichberg the deceased was a passenger in a car travelling on the correct side of the highway. The car swerved suddenly to the right on the incorrect side of the road and collided with an oncoming semitrailer. The crash incinerated the deceased and the person said to have been the driver of the car in which he was travelling. The jury had been instructed that it was open to find negligence on the part of the driver, even though there was no proof of some specific act of negligence.
This direction was upheld. However, the jury's verdict for the defendant was not overturned by the High Court, since it was open to the jury not to be satisfied of the driver's negligence. (It was apparently possible that the movement of the car from its correct to its incorrect side was caused by an antecedent movement of the truck across the road: see at 405.) Of course, the judgment in the present case is not a jury verdict, and the grounds of challenge are broader. However, this is not the present ground of appeal.

A more specific submission was that it was not open to the judge to find a verdict for the defendants because the defendants had not proffered an explanation for the happening of the accident. In particular, it was submitted that nothing had been advanced to support the hypotheses of illness, mechanical problems and a bee attack adverted to by the judge in his reasons for dismissing the third action. It is, however, possible that the observation by Mr Shepherd and Mrs Rapley of erratic movement in the car ahead could (coupled with the indication that there had been some problems with the car) support the hypothesis of mechanical problems, although I do not think that a submission to this effect was made. But the submission itself misunderstands the proper application of the res ipsa loquitur doctrine. In Government
Insurance Office of NSW versus Best (1993) ATR |P 81-210 Clarke JA said (at p62,097): "... it does not follow that if a defendant does not proffer an explanation for the happening of the event that the plaintiff will automatically be entitled to a verdict based upon the inference which arises out of the occurrence. The defendant may, for instance, be unable to explain how the event occurred but nevertheless succeed upon the basis of evidentiary material tendered by it designed to show that it had exercised all reasonable care in the circumstances (see Fitzpatrick versus Walter E Cooper Pty Ltd & Anor <case>; [(1935) 54 CLR 200)] or it may lead evidence of other matters which add to the picture emerging from the evidence given by the plaintiff and which gives rise to other possible hypotheses which are inconsistent with negligence. In that event the tribunal of fact would be required to decide whether the plaintiff had discharged his or her onus of proof upon all the evidence which the tribunal found acceptable. Where the tribunal of fact is not satisfied that, upon all the evidence, the event more probably than not occurred because of the defendant's negligence then it will find for the defendant. Likewise if the tribunal considers that the happening of the accident is as consistent with the absence of negligence as it is with the presence of negligence the plaintiff will fail." 
The judge was not bound to find in the appellant's favour.

There remains a third issue concerning the use of res ipsa loquitur. In dismissing the third action the learned judge said: "Res ipsa loquitur is a rebuttable presumption of evidentiary negligence.
That is that unchallenged the facts point to a negligent act and only a negligent one. The doctrine is not really available if there are multiple causes of an act, some of which could be non-negligent.
 ...

I am of the view that while those possibilities exist and have not been met by the plaintiff, the plaintiff cannot rely on res ipsa and has not been able to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities that there was something about the defendant's manner of driving that was negligent as opposed to a non-negligent cause." (emphasis added) 
In my view, these passages betray an error in the use of the principle. A plaintiff who tenders evidence suggestive of a particular (negligent) cause of an accident is not barred from falling back upon res ipsa loquitur if otherwise available: Anchor Products; Fleming, Law of Torts 9th ed p359. Of course, resort to the principle may be precluded because the plaintiff persuades the tribunal of fact that there was a particular cause of the accident and such cause is not shown to be negligent. This is illustrated by Barkway versus South Wales Transport Co Ltd [[1950] AC 185], where a bus careered into a ditch by reason of a tyre-burst which was eventually traced to a previous impact fracture. There the facts ceased to speak for themselves and fell to be decided on the narrower basis of whether the defendant's system of maintenance was at fault. See also Mummery versus Irvings Pty Ltd <case>; [(1956) 96 CLR 99] at 121-122.

Here, the rejection of the white truck scenario left room for res ipsa to operate. The judge was not driven to find for the plaintiff. But, he was not entitled to spurn the doctrine's assistance. There was ample material that would justify a verdict for the defendants, but not on the basis that res ipsa could not be relied upon. I have considered anxiously whether the use of the words "not really available" in the first passage I have highlighted suggest that we are dealing only with infelicity of expression. However, the second passage appears to preclude this.

I shall address below whether this leads to a new trial.

Regard to the possibility of fraud 
It is contended that the learned trial judge was not entitled to consider the possibility of fraud as an explanation for the accident since the matter was neither pleaded nor put to Mrs Najjar, the necessary co-conspirator in any fraudulent arrangement.

It was not incumbent upon the Nominal Defendant to plead fraud in answer to a motor negligence claim: see Inzaurralde versus Government Insurance Office of
New South Wales Court of Appeal, unreported, 28 October 1992; Ghazal v
Government Insurance Office of New South Wales [(1992) 29 NSWLR 336] at 347.
But the cases just cited emphasise the duty, in fairness, to confront a plaintiff with such a contention before it is proper to rely upon it as a possible answer to an otherwise clear case of negligence, including a case that attracts the application of the res ipsa loquitur principle. In
Inzaurralde the trial judge was not satisfied that the accident had occurred at all. In Ghazal the trial judge was not satisfied that the plaintiff was in the vehicle at the time of the accident. In each case the plaintiff gave evidence, but was not clearly confronted in cross-examination with the suggestion that the claim was fraudulent on the bases indicated.
Since the possibility of fraud was an hypothesis adverted to by the respective trial judges in each case when they found the plaintiff's cases "unproved", each trial was held to have miscarried.

In Ghazal, Kirby P said at (344-5 and 346, omitting citations): "The duty to confront a person fairly with the suggestion that a case is false, even fraudulent, cannot be doubted. The duty arises from common fairness and the proper administration of justice.... The rule, which is often expressed as one of court procedure or of the law of evidence, has lately been explained as a basic obligation of procedural justice: ....

Particularly against the background of a series of facts which tended to support the appellant's contention, the conclusion that the judge was not in a position safely to act on the appellant's account that he was in the vehicle required that such a contention should be put directly to the appellant. The judge said that it was. But an examination of the transcript does not bear out that assertion. If, as it emerged, the assertion was crucial to his Honour's conclusions it was vital that it should have been put directly to the appellant, in unequivocal terms, so that he could have his opportunity to answer it. If it was not put by the insurer, it was the duty of the judge himself to put it before deriving the conclusion stated. The appellant might himself, alerted to the suggestion, have called Mr El Sheik. He might have called Mrs Mustafa or tendered hospital or ambulance records to confirm that
Mr Mustafa and his wife were taken from the scene of the accident. He might have had other objective evidence to set at rest the judge's finally expressed conclusion." 
Mahoney JA said (at 349): "Had it been made clear at the trial that the defendant was to contend that the plaintiff's case was what now is suggested, it is probable that the plaintiff would have called other evidence. Reference has been made by Kirby P to evidence which could have been given by the plaintiff's brother and a medical practitioner. And it may be that the plaintiff could have produced other corroboration of the fact that on the evening in question he was with the driver of the car and that he was injured as he claimed to have been. Such evidence might have affected the trial judge's assessment of the plaintiff and of Mr Mustafa as witnesses or his conclusion upon the ultimate issue of the presence of the plaintiff in the car. The failure properly to raise the issue therefore went to the heart of the present problem." 
Mahoney JA considered whether, having respect to these principles, the presence of the plaintiff in the car had been raised as a real issue at the trial. Like Kirby P, he concluded that it had not.

Clarke JA agreed with Kirby P's reasons on this matter.

I have not found it easy to apply these principles to the facts of the present case. There is one very significant difference between the two earlier cases and the present one. Here the plaintiff chose not to enter the witness box.
Her sister did, but the successful challenge to Mrs Najjar's claim in the first action did not require the Nominal Defendant to go further than render the white truck allegation improbable. Counsel for the Nominal Defendant in the first action ran his client's case, as he was entitled to, on the basis of contesting Mrs Najjar's claim about the white truck. The verdict for the defendant in the first action was clearly sustainable for the reasons given, and those reasons did not include any hypothesis based on fraud involving one or both of the sisters. The Nominal Defendant was effectively discharged from the third action from its outset, even though formal orders to that effect were only made later in the joint trial.

The continuing defendants were Mrs Najjar and Chama Motors. They had put liability in issue in the pleadings, and were not obliged to plead fraud . Through their counsel Mr Williams, they had made it clear in the exchange already noted, that "there [were] circumstances surrounding this case [which meant that] we require proof of all aspects of liability".
The meaning and implication would not have been lost on Mrs Jazairy's experienced counsel. But what happened? Not a word was put to Mrs Najjar by Mr
Segal to cast any doubt on her self-exculpatory account of the accident given in oral evidence and the statement that had already been marked for identification. This, despite the dark clouds already on the horizon as regards her white truck story.

It has not been suggested that the trial in the third action miscarried due to the incompetence of counsel for Mrs Jazairy failing to take an obvious step in his client's interests (cf R versus Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR 677).] Mr Segal is an experienced and competent advocate. His repeated application for a separate trial showed lively awareness of the difficulty his client was placed in as a consequence of the pre-trial ruling for joint trials "in the interests of justice", which was adhered to despite the effective discharge of the
Nominal Defendant in the third action.

Having considered the matter anxiously, I must conclude that there was a reason why the appellant chose to keep all her eggs in the white truck basket, long after it had developed gaping holes. It is possible that the strength of the Nominal Defendant's case based on the yet to be called evidence of the
Shepherds and Mrs Rapley was underestimated. But that alone does not explain the failure to advance a positive case based on Mrs Najjar's negligence as driver. The two sisters whose evidence could have supported such a case were not asked a single question about it, although each was very much available to
Mr Segal. It was appropriate for the trial judge to apply the principles of
Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] in relation to the questions not put in cross-examination to
Mrs Najjar, as much as to the questions not put to Mrs Jazairy in any evidence in chief: see Commercial Union Assurance Company of Australia Ltd versus Ferrcom
Pty Ltd [(1991) 22 NSWLR 389.] 
Even where there is direct evidence suggesting negligence, the principle in
Jones versus Dunkel will mean that, provided the preconditions for its application are satisfied: "the direct evidence of the party carrying the onus may be more readily rejected, and the inferences from which he contends may be treated with greater reserve." (Payne versus Parker [[1976] 1 NSWLR 190] at 201 per
Glass JA) 
Those principles apply a fortiori to a case based on res ipsa when the written evidence of the plaintiff (Mrs Jazairy) and the oral evidence of a witness whom she might have cross-examined (Mrs Najjar) attest to the absence of negligence on the driver's part.

We need not speculate about Mr Segal's actual instructions from his client about her version of the accident. If they were consistent with the statement she had earlier given, then the view might have been taken that to call Mrs
Jazairy to repeat the account in sworn evidence could be pregnant with the risk of having her exposed as someone who might lie on oath. If Mrs Jazairy's instructions to her counsel were inconsistent with the account she had given in the earlier statement, this too presented significant risks of which experienced counsel would have been acutely aware. One was the potential to destroy what remaining hope Mrs Najjar had of securing a verdict in her favour. The fact that the extent of the injuries of the two sisters was not explored leaves one in the dark as to which sister might have been prepared to step aside in favour of the other if a choice arose involving one alone having the prospect of recovering damages. (For this reason, if there is to be a new trial it should be on all issues.) 
If matters had stood there, then the submission that the trial miscarried, in the sense discussed in Inzaurralde or Ghazal, would have to be rejected. But the position in which the parties found themselves was more complex than this. Although Mrs Najjar's claim in the first action was brought only against the Nominal Defendant, counsel for the parties in the third action were permitted to cross-examine her. Mr Williams went first. Although his clients were Mrs Najjar and Chama Motors he was, as everyone knew, instructed by the third party insurers of the vehicle. Mr Williams' brief was to oppose Mrs Jazairy's claim in the third action.

Was it incumbent upon Mr Williams to put to Mrs Najjar one or both of the fraud "possibilities" ultimately relied upon by the trial judge in dismissing the plaintiff's claim in the first action? With considerable hesitation I have concluded that it was. One of the hypotheses relied upon by the learned trial judge as a possible explanation for the accident was "fraud ...purposive of the whole incident and thus purposive of [Mrs Jazairy's] damage". Since Mrs
Najjar was the driver, she would have had to have been complicit in any fraudulent scheme of this nature. In those circumstances it was incumbent on counsel for the remaining defendants in the third action to confront the person who would have been a co-conspirator in the fraud hypothesised when the opportunity presented itself. That obligation was not satisfied by the warning earlier given by Mr Williams to the effect that the plaintiff in the third action be put to strict proof. Nor was its breach excused by the fact that one of Mr Williams' nominal clients was Mrs Najjar herself. I do not think that this placed him under an ethical duty to protect her interests in the first action. That was Mr Keesing's brief. Mr Williams cross-examined Mrs Najjar on some issues. And everyone knew that his real client was the insurer who was required by law (see [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), ss17 and ) to stand behind the first two defendants in the third action. In those circumstances "logic and justice alike seem to require" that counsel for the remaining defendants in the third action pull out all the stops, including putting fraud to Mrs Najjar, if this possibility was to be relied upon. Cf
McCann versus Parsons <case>; [(1954) 93 CLR 418] at 431. Mr Williams would have avoided this difficulty if he had spurned a fraud-based case in final addresses. But this did not happen.

This ground is made out.

Should negligence have been inferred? 
The appellant does not challenge the rejection of the white truck scenario.
Nor could she, in the light of the compelling evidence from the occupants of the car that followed the two sisters. In some cases the rejection of one hypothesis leads inexorably to another as a proposition of fact. The appellant submits that this is the situation here. Putting to one side what I have termed the heretical approach to res ipsa loquitur, it is contended that everything pointed to Mrs Najjar's negligence. While res ipsa loquitur did not compel such a conclusion as a matter of law, nevertheless (it was submitted) it should have led the tribunal of fact to conclude negligence on
Mrs Najjar's part. Since the present is not an appeal from a jury verdict, the
Court of Appeal was invited to draw the inference of negligence which the trial judge was not prepared to do.

This case involved considerably more than the rejection of one hypothesis (the white truck scenario) and the offer of another (driver's negligence, inferred through res ipsa loquitur). There was positive evidence negating negligence on the part of Mrs Najjar. The rejection of the white car scenario raised the question why the two sisters have been so emphatic about it. That question became even more clamant when Mrs Jazairy did not enter the witness box. And two of the witnesses sitting in the car behind the sisters said that they saw erratic movement followed by no brake lights as the car veered off the road into the telegraph pole. These matters render it inappropriate that the Court of Appeal should enter a verdict for the plaintiff.

Disposition of appeal 
The result is that there should be a new trial.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed.
Set aside the verdict for the first and second defendants in Action No of 1994 (Jazairy versus Najjar & Ors).
Order a new trial on all issues as between the plaintiff and the said defendants in that action.
Costs of the first trial in the said action as between the parties to this appeal are to abide the result of the new trial.
Respondents to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and to have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if qualified.

SHELLER JA: I agree with Mason P. 
POWELL JA: I agree with Mason P. * * * 
