

Regina versus Darren Paul Johns [1996] NSWSC 304 (26 July 1996) 
R versus DARREN PAUL JOHNS /96 
FRIDAY 26 JULY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SULLY J, HULME J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Sully J to give the first judgment.

SULLY J: This is an application by Darren Paul Johns for leave to appeal against sentences of imprisonment imposed upon him by Maguire DCJ in the Newcastle District Court on 23 February 1996.

The applicant had pleaded guilty before his Honour to a number of offences. He pleaded guilty, first, to a conspiracy to rob, a common law misdemeanour, in respect of which he was given a recognisance upon stated terms. The recognisance is not disputed for present purposes and nothing more need be said about it.

The applicant pleaded guilty as well to three particular counts of breaking, entering and stealing, and asked the learned sentencing Judge to take into account on the question of sentence twenty-three further matters on a schedule. Twenty-one of those matters involved other discrete offences of breaking, entering and stealing. The twenty-second matter was one of stealing simpliciter; and the final one was a charge of assault.

In relation to all of those matters his Honour imposed upon each of the three particular counts to which the plea of guilty was formally entered, a sentence of imprisonment comprising a minimum term of two years and six months and an additional term of one year and six months. The sentences so imposed were ordered to be served concurrently.

So far as concerns the objective facts of the offences, it is not, I think, necessary to say anything more than was said by the learned primary Judge. The material before his Honour, and the material before this Court, indicates that the applicant over a period of time in fact took part in a succession of organised burglaries. Of those burglaries the sentencing Judge said, and in my opinion correctly, that they manifested an overall pattern of behaviour calling for a distinct, and a properly severe, punishment.

There were, of course, subjective matters personal to the applicant and requiring to be brought to proper account by the sentencing Judge. Those matters have been rehearsed before this Court in a handwritten document put in by the applicant, the contents of which document are eloquent in the picture that they paint of his deprived and disadvantaged childhood and adolescence.
Those considerations are always troubling considerations for this Court, especially in the case of such an applicant as Mr Johns, who is, even now, a young man in his twenties. Nonetheless, the present application cannot be decided by this Court, and that as a matter of law, upon the basis of proper sympathy that this Court might feel for Mr Johns. This Court's power to interfere depends upon its being shown that the primary sentencing Judge made an appellable error of law.

I have read with some care the remarks on sentence of his Honour Judge
Maguire. It seems to me that in so far as they deal with the objective facts of the crimes in question, they deal fairly and comprehensively, and in a way faithful to the relevant evidence, with those matters. In so far as his
Honour's remarks deal with the admittedly troubling and difficult personal circumstances of Mr Johns, it seems to me, once again, that his Honour was at pains to do what he properly could to make allowance for those matters. The balance that his Honour struck seems to me to have resulted in a sentence which cannot on a fair and sensible view be said to have been outside the permissible range for a pattern of conduct of the kind with which his Honour was dealing.

In those circumstances it seems to me that it would be proper, in deference to
Mr Johns' appearance in person and without legal representation, to grant leave to appeal; but the appeal must be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

HULME J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the court will be as proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
