

Smilie Pty Limited versus Bruce Matter No Ca 40073/98 [1998] NSWSC 681 (21
December 1998) 
Last Updated: 14 January 1999 
SMILIE PTY LIMITED versus PAULA MARGARET BRUCE 
CA 40073/98 December 1998 
Meagher JA, Handley JA, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Equity Division (Bryson J) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40073/98; ED 4023/97 
DELIVERED: Monday 21 December 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: Monday 2 November 1998 
PARTIES: SMILIE PTY LIMITED versus PAULA MARGARET BRUCE 
JUDGMENT OF: Meagher Handley Powell JJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: A B Rayment QC/J Drummond 
Respondent: R B Coles QC/D G Duncan/D A Allen 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Bolzan & Dimitri 
Respondent: Booth Mather Blackmore 
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACT - repudiation - test objective 
SALE OF LAND - refund of deposit - [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/)  [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s55.html) (2a) 
SALE OF LAND - vacant possession 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE - rescission - whether vendor acted unconscionably 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
NO OF PAGES: 17 
SMILIE PTY LIMITED versus PAULA MARGARET BRUCE 
CONTRACT - repudiation - test objective 
SALE OF LAND - refund of deposit - [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/)  [s 55](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s55.html) (2a) 
SALE OF LAND - vacant possession 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE - rescission - whether vendor acted unconscionably 
This was an appeal by the purchaser from the dismissal of its claims for specific performance or the refund of its deposit following rescission by the vendor. It had failed to comply with a notice to complete given by the vendor, and Bryson J had held that the rescission was valid and declined to order the return of the deposit.

HELD: Dismissing the appeal: (1) The appellant's attempts to establish that the vendor had committed an actual or anticipatory breach of its obligation to deliver vacant possession failed. Roadshow Entertainment Pty Ltd versus CEL Home Video Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 42 NSWLR 462] applied. (4) The vendor had done nothing to disentitle herself from forfeiting and retaining the deposit. The trial Judge's discretion to refuse the purchaser relief under [s 55(2A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s55.html) of the [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/)  had not miscarried. 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

SMILIE PTY LIMITED versus PAULA MARGARET BRUCE 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Handley JA. 
HANDLEY JA: The appellant purchaser challenged the decision of Bryson J that the vendor had validly rescinded the contract of sale and was entitled to retain the deposit. The relevant facts giving rise to the dispute were fully found by the trial Judge and his findings on the matters in dispute which involved the assessment of the credibility of witnesses were not challenged. The essential facts which I take from his Honour's reasons may be shortly stated. 
On 17 July 1997 the purchaser exercised an option to purchase a house property at 9 Berwick Street, Coogee for $1,275,000 and paid the usual 10% deposit. The completion date fixed by the contract was 28 August 1997 but this time was not essential.

The contract was not completed on 28 August and on 29 August the vendor gave a notice to complete which specified 3 pm on 15 September at the Law Society
Settlement Rooms as the time and place for completion. The notice to complete was valid and allowed a longer period than the 14 clear days provided for such a notice in the contract. On 12 September the solicitors for the parties agreed that a representative of the purchaser could inspect the property at .30 pm on 15 September and that settlement would take place at 2 pm that day at the Law Society's premises. The vendor was bound to tender vacant possession on completion but special condition 15 provided: "The parties agree that the vendor may prior to completion remove from the property in her discretion the improvements or any part of the improvements including the fixtures and fittings. The purchaser acknowledges that the purchaser is purchasing the property for redevelopment and consequently attached no value to the improvements, fixtures or fittings and shall (not) make any objection, requisition or claim with respect to this special condition for the removal by the vendor of the improvements, fixtures or fittings or part thereof or failure by her to remove same".

The relevant events on 15 September occurred both at the property and in and around the Law Society premises in Phillip Street. The vendor, with the assistance of friends and removalists, took away her furniture and effects and then, pursuant to special condition 15, removed cedar skirting boards, window frames and doors and painted and stained glass windows.

Mr Christofidellis, who controlled the appellant, was at the property to conduct the pre-settlement inspection at 1.30 pm. There was still some rubbish and other articles to be removed, and the work was still in progress. He completed his inspection before 2 pm. The Judge found that little, if any, of the removal process happened after 2 pm.

The Judge held that if the purchaser had been ready to settle at 2 pm the vendor could then have performed in substance her obligation to give vacant possession, and there was no reason why the removal of goods and fixtures should not proceed during and after the pre-completion inspection. The vendor completed moving out at 2.10 pm and was then in a position to give vacant possession.

Mr Blackmore, the vendor's solicitor, arrived at the Law Society Settlement
Rooms at 2.03 pm and was joined at 2.05 pm by Mr George Antonas, acting for the incoming mortgagee, who had a bank cheque for the balance of the purchase money. No one having arrived for the purchaser, Mr Blackmore telephoned Mr
Bailey, the purchaser's solicitor, at 2.15 and informed him that if the sale was not settled by 3 pm he had instructions to rescind. At 2.50 pm Mrs Judge,
Mr Bailey's clerk, left his office to go to the Law Society Settlement Rooms bearing a letter from Mr Bailey addressed to Mr Blackmore. A few minutes earlier Mr Antonas left the Settlement Rooms to attend to other business at the Land Titles Office.

Mrs Judge arrived at the Settlement Rooms about 2.55. In answer to Mr
Blackmore's question, "Are you ready to settle?" she gave him Mr Bailey's letter. Mr Bailey had instructed Mrs Judge not to settle without further instructions. Shortly after 3 pm Mr Blackmore said to Mrs Judge, "Since it is after 3 pm my instructions are to terminate the contract". Shortly afterwards he said, "You can't settle, your incoming mortgagee isn't even here. I am instructed to terminate under the notice. Any further problems will be a matter for litigation". He left the Settlement Rooms about 3.11. Mrs Judge left shortly afterwards. On her way back to the office Mr Bailey telephoned her about 3.15 and told her that Mr Christofidellis wanted to settle. At 3.20
Mr Antonas returned to the Law Society Settlement Rooms.

On these facts, which were not in dispute, the purchaser was not able to settle the purchase at and after 3 pm when Mr Blackmore rescinded and left. Mr
Antonas was not present and the funds were not physically available to the purchaser. Nor was it ready and willing to settle, because Mrs Judge did not have instructions from Mr Bailey to do so.

The purchaser attempted to rely on the vendor's inability to give vacant possession at 1.30 pm when the pre-completion inspection commenced. However the vendor's obligation was to deliver vacant possession on settlement.
Although she was not in a position to give full vacant possession at 1.30, it was apparent that the task was well in hand. Mr Christofidellis was not confronted with an anticipatory breach of this obligation. The vendor had not repudiated it and was getting on with the job having adequate assistance on hand to complete it well before the time fixed by the notice to complete.

The purchaser however chose to rely upon the incomplete performance of this obligation as at 1.50 pm to refuse performance of its obligations under the contract in the face of the notice to complete. It thus undertook the task of establishing that the vendor was not ready willing and able to complete the contract in accordance with its terms before 3 pm. This was a heavy onus as the following passage from the Court's reasons in Roadshow Entertainment Pty
Ltd versus CEL Home Video Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 42 NSWLR 462] at 480-481 demonstrates: "Readiness and willingness to perform imports capacity to do so: (see De
Medina versus Norman <case>; [(1842) 9 M & W 820] at ; <case>; [152 ER 347] at 350 and Foran versus Wight at 397, 424, 451). By 31 October at the latest CEL/Vision were no longer ready and willing to perform their obligations under the agreement until 31 December 1994 when they could terminate without breach. In the words of Lord Sumner in British &
Bennington's Ltd versus North Western Cachar Tea Co Ltd [[1923] AC 48] 71-72, referred to by Dixon CJ in Rawson versus Hobbs <case>; [(1961) 107 CLR 466] at 481, CEL/Vision had `become wholly and finally disabled from performing essential terms of the contract'. They had `a substantial incapacity' which would prevent them `doing in the future what the contract requires' and had `neither the means nor the intention of performing': (see also Foran versus Wight at 404-6, 409, 424-5 and 453).

The incapacity of a party to perform essential terms of a contract may involve an anticipatory breach: (see Universal Cargo Carriers Corporation versus Catati [(1957) 2 QB 401] at 436 per Devlin J; Foran versus Wight at 406, 423, 4). `The injured party is allowed to anticipate an inevitable breach' (per Devlin J at )".

The Judge's finding that vacant possession was available from 2.10 pm onwards was the end of the plaintiff's case on this point. Moreover the obligation of a vendor to give vacant possession is not absolute and questions of breach must be judged as a matter of substance. The leading decision is Cumberland
Consolidated Holdings Ltd versus Ireland [[1946] KB 264] at 270-1, where
Lord Greene MR said: "Subject to the rule de minimis a vendor who leaves property of his own on the premises on completion cannot, in our opinion, be said to give vacant possession, since by doing so he is claiming a right to use the premises for his own purposes, namely, as a place of deposit for his own goods inconsistent with the right which the purchaser has on completion to undisturbed enjoyment ... the right to actual unimpeded physical enjoyment is comprised in the right to vacant possession. We cannot see why the existence of a physical impediment to such enjoyment to which a purchaser does not expressly or impliedly consent to submit should stand in a different position to an impediment caused by the presence of a trespasser ... When we speak of a physical impediment we do not mean that any physical impediment will do. It must be an impediment which substantially prevents or interferes with the enjoyment of the right of possession of a substantial part of the property".

Given the existence of special condition 15 and the purchaser's intention to demolish the property for redevelopment, the objects sighted by Mr
Christofidellis, as still on the property at 3 pm were not remotely capable of causing a breach of this obligation even if his evidence had been fully accepted.

Mr Rayment QC for the appellant also relied on the vendor's willingness to settle conveyed by Mr Christofidellis to Mr Bailey at 3 pm, the return of Mr
Antonas to the Law Society rooms by 3.20 pm and the tenders of performance made by the purchaser at the office of the solicitors for the vendor at 3.53 and 4.18 pm and at the Law Society at 4.33 pm in support of a claim by the purchaser to be relieved from the forfeiture of its interest under the contract consequent upon its rescission by Mr Blackmore between 3.04 and 3.11 pm.

The power of a Court of Equity to grant specific performance to a purchaser despite an otherwise valid rescission by the vendor has been established by the decisions in Legione versus Hateley <case>; <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 489], but those decisions depended upon findings of unconscionable conduct by the vendors. Equity will only interfere with a valid rescission in "exceptional circumstances". See Ciavarella versus Balmer <case>; [(1983) 153 CLR 438], 454.

Mr Rayment was asked to identify the matters relied upon to establish unconscionable conduct by the vendor in this case. He referred to the purchaser's expenditure in obtaining development approval from the Land and
Environment Court, the value thus added to the land, the increase in its value due to market forces and the relatively short period which elapsed after 3 pm before the purchaser was ready, willing and able to tender due performance.

The purchaser's expenditure in obtaining development approval from the Land and Environment Court did not benefit the vendor who had no right to use the approved plans belonging to the purchaser. The rescission transferred to the vendor the benefit of any increase in the value of the land due to market forces, but this was not the result of the work or expenditure of the purchaser. In this respect both Legione versus Hateley and Stern versus McArthur are distinguishable.

The shortness of the period between the vendor's rescission and the purchaser's related offers to settle does not establish that the vendor acted unconscionably in insisting on her rescission. The purchaser's conduct on 15
September must be viewed objectively as it was by the vendor and her solicitor at the time. The purchaser made no attempt to settle on the day fixed by the contract. Its solicitors agreed to an appointment to settle at 2 pm on 15
September. They did not appear at the agreed time and at 2.15 Mr Blackmore informed Mr Bailey by telephone that his instructions were to rescind if the transaction was not settled by 3 pm. Mr Bailey did not promise to settle by that time, or within a short time thereafter, and offered no explanation for the delay. He said he was drafting a letter which would be delivered to Mr
Blackmore shortly.

At 2.55 Mrs Judge delivered this letter to Mr Blackmore. It complained of the removal of doors, windows and skirting boards from the property and the damage this had caused. It also complained of damage to a dividing fence and the presence of accumulated rubbish on the property. It claimed that the removal of the doors etc offended requirements of the Randwick Council which, subject to an inspection, would issue a notice requiring the property to be secured.
It asserted that the vendor was bound to make good the damage to the property and the fence. It claimed that "the indications are that your client will not actually vacate the property until well after 3 pm today" and that the vendor "has not yet given vacant possession of the property", although of course she was not bound to do this until settlement. Mr Bailey offered to settle subject to setting aside the sum of $10,000 to cover the matters in dispute and to settle under protest if that was unacceptable, reserving the purchaser's rights.

The Judge took a most unfavourable view of this letter. As he held, it made claims which ignored the vendor's rights under special condition 15 and printed condition 11 relating to Public Authority notices received after the date of the contract. Mr Bailey had known of the damage to the fence for some time and had not raised it earlier. This question was not litigated at the trial and, as the Judge held, printed condition 7, as amended by special condition 11, prevented the purchaser from insisting on completion subject to a claim for compensation for such damage. The statement about the attitude of the Council, attributed to one of its officers, was knowingly false as Mr
Bailey eventually admitted, and can only have been made in an attempt to deceive Mr Blackmore. The Judge said: "Although on a careful reading the later statements in the letter professed readiness to settle, it would be difficult to appreciate that this was so when presented with the letter in circumstances of urgency. The letter called for response and its indication of readiness to settle under protest is conditional on a response; it is not unqualified ... The terms and use of the letter serve to show that the plaintiff, while prepared to profess readiness to settle, was seeking to avoid settlement except on the basis of obtaining some advantage".

The Judge found that Mr Bailey had spent the time from 2 o'clock onwards trying to devise reasons to avoid settlement, or to bluff the vendor out of insisting on it, and the letter was the product of these efforts.

When Mr Blackmore purported to rescind prior to leaving the Law Society's premises at 3.11 pm the purchaser, as he knew, was not then be able to settle because the mortgagee's representative was not present with the necessary funds. Moreover the purchaser, through Mrs Judge, had not offered to settle forthwith in accordance with the contract, or even to do so as soon as Mr
Antonas returned with the bank cheque. The purchaser's offer in Mr Bailey's letter was not to settle under protest forthwith, but to do so at some uncertain time in the future, after being advised that its offer of settlement with the sum to be held back in trust, was unacceptable.

Accordingly the time fixed by the notice to complete had elapsed without a tender of performance from the purchaser, or even an offer of immediate performance. The purchaser was therefore in fundamental breach of an essential term of the contract, and the vendor was entitled to rescind. See Ciavarella v Balmer <case>; [(1983) 153 CLR 438.] In the absence of unconscionable conduct by the vendor, which would prevent her relying on the rescission, it must stand. The attempts to tender performance later that afternoon were too late. See Union Eagle Ltd v
Golden Achievement Ltd <case>; [[1997] AC .] 
There is no need to consider what the position may have been if the purchaser had been willing to settle but had been prevented from doing so for a short time by some accident or misadventure. This purchaser did not evince any such intention before or immediately after the vendor rescinded. The letter delivered by Mrs Judge contained no such offer but was an attempt to delay settlement by raising claims which, viewed objectively, were false or unfounded.

Mr Christofidellis telephoned Mr Bailey at 3 pm and instructed him to settle the purchase, but this change in attitude was not communicated to the vendor or her solicitor prior to the rescission of the contract a few minutes later.
The question of repudiation is not to be judged by the actual or subjective intention of the party in default. The test is objective as Lord Herschell LC said in Carswell versus Collard [(1893) 20 R (HL) 47] at in the following passage approved in Forslind versus Bechely-Crundall [(1922)
SC 173 (HL)] at 179, 190, 191; and Laurinda Pty Ltd versus Capalaba Park Shopping Centre Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 623] at 648, :
 "... the question was not what actually influenced the defender, but what effect the conduct of the pursuer would be reasonably calculated to have upon a reasonable person".

In the latter case, ibid at 647, Brennan J said: "Repudiation is not ascertained by an enquiry into the subjective state of mind of the party in default; it is to be found in the conduct, whether verbal or other, of the party in default which conveys to the other party the defaulting party's inability to perform the contract or promise or his intention not to perform it or to fulfil it only in a manner substantially inconsistent with his obligations and not in any other way".

Deane and Dawson JJ said at 658-9: "It is not necessary for repudiation of a contract that the repudiator make plain that he will never perform his contractual obligations at all. What Lord
Dunedin described (Forslind ibid at 190) as the assumption of `a shilly- shallying attitude in regard to the contract' and what Lord Shaw of
Dunfermline (ibid at 192) called `procrastination ... persistently practised' can in some circumstances reach the stage of repudiation even though accompanied by assurances of ultimate performance at some future time".

Their Honours at 659 approved the following passage from the speech of Lord
Shaw in Forslind (ibid at 191-2): "If in short, A, a party to a contract acts in such a fashion of ignoring or not complying with his obligations under it, B, the other party is entitled to say: `My rights under this contract are being completely ignored and my interests may suffer by non-performance by A of his obligations, and that to such a fundamental and essential extent that I declare he is treating me as if no contract existed which bound him' ... in business over and over again it occurs - as, in my opinion, it occurred in the present case - that procrastination is so persistently practised as to make a most serious inroad into the rights of the other party to a contract. There must be a stage when the person suffering from that is entitled to say `this must be brought to an end'." 
The question of repudiation in such a case is a question of fact and as Deane and Dawson JJ said at 659 the question can be answered in the affirmative when procrastination or non-performance has reached the stage of conveying to a reasonable person, in the situation of the other party, "repudiation or disavowal either of the contract as a whole or of a fundamental obligation under it". In this case, completion of the purchase on or before 3 pm had become a fundamental obligation of the purchaser under the contract, and the shilly-shallying attitude of the purchaser between 2 and 3 pm, and the purchaser's procrastination, in my judgment evidenced its repudiation of this fundamental obligation and its intention to fulfil it only in a manner substantially inconsistent with its obligations.

The repudiatory conduct of the purchaser in the face of the notice to complete amply justified the vendor's rescission. There is no basis for a finding that the vendor's conduct was unconscionable in any respect. Accordingly relief from forfeiture of the purchaser's interest under the contract and specific performance of it must be refused.

The purchaser also sought an order for the return of the deposit of $127,500 under [s (2A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s55.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/). This relief was refused by the trial Judge because he found that the vendor had done nothing to disentitle herself from forfeiting and retaining the deposit.
She had been bound either by an option in favour of the purchaser or by the contract brought into existence on its exercise since 16 September 1996. She had also relied on special condition 15 of the contract to remove doors, windows and other items from the property which rendered it uninhabitable unless and until those items or their equivalent were reinstated. In my judgment the appellant failed to establish any basis for this Court's interference with his Honour's exercise of discretion. Indeed in my opinion his decision to refuse relief under the section was correct.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

POWELL JA: I agree with Handley JA. * * * 
