

Associated World Investments Pty Ltd versus Aristocrat Leisure Ltd Matter No /97 [1997] NSWSC 497 (21 October 1997) ` 
Associated World Investments Pty Ltd versus Aristocrat Leisure Ltd` ` 4072/97` `21 October 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 - ASSOCIATED WORLD INVESTMENTS PTY LTD versus ARISTOCRAT LEISURE LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This case is in the list today for an interim injunction. The matter can be heard finally on 30 October, 1997. To my mind it is far better that it be heard finally rather than to spend two occasions going over the same facts, and accordingly I will fix it for final hearing before Windeyer J on Thursday, 30 October, 1997. 
The question then is whether there should be an interim injunction until then.
Mr Kunc for the defendant resists an injunction. He says that the plaintiff has left each step in this action until the very last moment. So that there is no reason on the last day to grant an injunction even for a further week and, in any event, the matter is one which only sounds in damages and that for a mere $200,000 to $300,000. If that latter proposition were correct then the matter should be sent to the District Court but Mr Kunc resists that on the basis that there are complicated issues.

The present case is not a frivolous one. It seems that it may well raise complex issues. It is appropriate to have it dealt with on a final hearing rather than on an interlocutory basis. It is a principle of practice that is applied to this Division that, if a matter is able to get a final hearing in a short period of time and there is no real commercial prejudice to the defendant, the matter is fixed for final hearing and such interim order made as will preserve the status quo in the meantime. So even after taking account of what Mr Kunc says I think I should grant some form of injunction until
Thursday of next week.

I will make upon the plaintiff, by its counsel giving the usual undertaking as to damages, order 5 in the summons up to and including 30 October, 1997. It is to be noted that this order should not prevent the defendant from determining a price under Article 8.11.

Costs reserved. I note that Mr Gyles QC for the plaintiff, applies for costs on the basis of the documents MI1001.
 * * * 
