

Torrealba versus District Court of NSW and Victims Compensation Corporation
Fund [1996] NSWSC 416 (6 September 1996) 
TORREALBA versus DISTRICT COURT OF NSW & VICTIMS COMPENSATION CORPORATION
FUND /95 DC 600/94 
Friday 6 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, POWELL JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS: Administrative Law - Statutory appeal - Victims Compensation Tribunal - Right of apeal to District Court - When lies - From "a determination" - Whether refusal by Tribunal to extend time for filing application "a determination".

Ex Tempore/Reserved:Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Order of District Court quashed.
 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: I agree with the orders proposed by Cole JA and generally with his reasons. I wish, however, to make some observations on the appeal to the District Court and the procedural fairness aspect of the proceedings.

Under the Victims Compensation Act 1987 ("the Act") a scheme was set up for compensating victims of crimes of violence, central to which is the Victims
Compensation Tribunal ("the Tribunal").

Applications for compensation under the Act are provided for in <case> which, in s 17(2)(d), states that, "applications shall be lodged within 2 years (or within such longer period as the Tribunal may ... allow) after the ... injury ... occurred".

By <case> of the Act it is provided that the Tribunal should, after considering an application, determine the application by - making an award of compensation; or by dismissing the application.

An appeal to the District Court may be brought by an applicant for compensation from "any determination of the Tribunal in respect of the application" (s 29(1) of the Victims' Compensation Act 1987 ("the Act").

The question is whether a statement by the Chairman of the Tribunal that "I do not propose to grant her leave to present an application as a secondary victim at this stage" is a determination. The statement is somewhat ambiguous but I would understand it to mean that as the application had not been lodged within years of the injury the Chairman would not grant the applicant leave.

There are, as it seems to me, two views reasonably open. The first is that where an application is made to lodge an application under <case> out of time the refusal of the application leads to the consequence that the substantive application has never been properly lodged and should be regarded as incompetent. If that is the correct characterisation then the order made in this case was not a determination dismissing the application.

The alternative view is that in declining to grant leave to bring the application after the expiration of the two year period the Tribunal should be regarded as having dismissed the proceedings.

Central to this view are the provisions of <case> which provides: "39. The Tribunal may dismiss proceedings before it, before or during a hearing under this Part, if it is satisfied: that the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious; or that, for any other reason, the proceedings should not be entertained." 
The argument is that where, as here, the Tribunal is satisfied that, because the application was not brought within 2 years of injury, and because no extension was granted, the proceedings should not be entertained. Accordingly, the Tribunal dismissed it or should be taken to have dismissed it. In other words a decision not to entertain an application constituted a dismissal, and thus a determination under <case>.

The first view possibly fits more comfortably with the words actually used in the legislation. But the court is bound to adopt a purposive interpretation of what is, on any view, remedial legislation which should be construed beneficially (Kingston versus Keprose [[1987] 11 NSWLR 404], at 423).

A consequence of the adoption of the first view would be that persons who made application under <case> a week late, and whose applications were arbitrarily dismissed, would be deprived of a right of appeal whilst persons whose rights were much less dramatically affected could appeal.

Although it is possible that the Legislature intended this consequence it is difficult to understand on what basis one of two orders made by the Tribunal would be reviewable on appeal while the other would not.

In my opinion the second view provides a much more reasonable interpretation and, being open on the words of the statute, is the one that should be preferred.

Turning to the procedural fairness point it should be observed that the
Tribunal's decision was based on: the lapse of time; the patently false material presented in para 8 of the applicant mother's affidavit of 28 May 1993.

In that paragraph the claimant referred to instructions she had given her then solicitors in 1986 to lodge an application for compensation for myself as secondary victim.

The reason given by the Chairman of the Tribunal for saying this contained a false assertion was that the Tribunal did not come into existence until 15
February 1988 when the Act became law and it was only then that a "secondary victim" (which the claimant asserted she was) came to be recognised.

That this was a superficial, and almost certainly erroneous, conclusion by the
Chairman of the Tribunal becomes clear when regard is had to evidence before him which showed that as early as June 1986 the claimant's solicitors had written to the claimant about her application for Criminal Injuries
Compensation.

In that letter the solicitors advised the claimant that legal aid had been granted to seek counsel's opinion as to her eligibility to claim compensation.
The solicitors also pointed out that a claim made by her may be successful as nervous shock was covered by the Act in question and went on to seek information as to the ill-effects she had suffered and incidental matters.
While it may be that no express reference was made in 1986 to secondary victims it is apparent that the substance of the matter under discussion was the possibility that she could claim as a person whose daughter had been assaulted. In those circumstances, what she said in para 8 seems to me to have been essentially correct. At least it is not axiomatic that it was false as the Chairman of the Tribunal appears to have thought.

Nonetheless, when McDevitt DCJ came to rule on the appeal he relied in part on the Chairman's statement that the claimant had made a false assertion, and he did so without any relevant submission by opposing counsel or any prior indication that he would do so.

In the circumstances that the appeal was a hearing 'de novo' (Goldsmith v
Victims Compensation Tribunal & Anor [(1993) 30 NSWLR 410)] the decision of the Chairman of the Tribunal was of no relevance except insofar as it provided the terms of the order. If the judge had wished to rely on irrelevant material to reflect on the claimant's credibility common fairness dictates that he should have warned her that he proposed to do so. (See
Brinkley versus Brinkley [(1965) P 75.)] 
Whether or not these matters should be regarded as constituting a procedural injustice requiring a new hearing does not much matter for the irregularities went much deeper than that in my opinion. The evidence presented at the hearing before the judge included the Tribunal's file which was supplemented by the report of Professor Hayes. The file contained an affidavit sworn by the claimant which asserted that she had suffered shock as a result of the attack on her daughter. When that was read with the report of Professor Hayes there was clear evidence that the claimant was a secondary victim who had suffered injury.

So much was conceded by counsel for the opponent who neither cross-examined the claimant nor tendered evidence to counter the claimant's case. Nonetheless counsel submitted that it was open to his Honour to accept or reject the claimant's case. This was, of course, true but the case could only have been rejected on rational grounds. Given the absence of a conflict of testimony, and cross-examination of the claimant, it is difficult to see what those rational grounds could have been.

His Honour's reasons for dismissing the appeal appear in the last paragraph of his decision and were: "I could not be persuaded that the appellant suffered any injury if she gave no evidence of it. In any event I think that her credibility would be very seriously in doubt if she had. In the original application to the Tribunal the applicant swore an affidavit dated 28th May, 1993 which the Chairman of the
Tribunal found to be false. Before me, it was conceded that no application for compensation was made by the appellant until 28th May, 1993 , some nine years after the event, contrary to what she had sworn in her affidavit." 
In my opinion the expression of that conclusion demonstrates that the claimant was denied a fair trial. It is true that the question of secondary victim was in issue in the sense that I have mentioned but the claimant's credibility was not. Nor was it correct to say that she gave no evidence. Those fundamental errors, compounded by the reliance on an irrelevant finding of the Tribunal
Chairman (which was itself, prima facie, erroneous) establish, in my view, an unanswerable case of procedural unfairness.

In saying that I am not disagreeing with counsel's statement that his Honour was entitled to reject the claimant's case. He could have done so after a fair hearing and for rational reasons. What he did in this case was to deny the claimant a fair hearing and his decision cannot stand.

I agree with the orders proposed by Cole JA.
 
POWELL JA: Two questions call for determination upon the present application to the Court, they being: - whether, when the Victims Compensation Tribunal ("the Tribunal") declined to extend the time within which an application for compensation might be made (Victims Compensation Act 1987 ("the Act") s.17(2)(d)) the Claimant had a right of appeal to the District Court pursuant to the provisions of s.29 of the Act; and if, the Claimant had such a right, whether, in the circumstances revealed by the material which is before the Court, the Claimant has made out any of the grounds upon which she has sought to found her claim to have the orders made by the District Court (McDevitt DCJ) quashed.

The facts which have given rise to those questions are as I set out below.
Regrettably, those facts reflect, on the one hand, what appears to have been an extraordinarily casual, and dilatory, approach on the part of the Claimant and some, at least, of those who have acted for her from time to time over the years in relation to the enforcement of such rights as the Claimant conceived herself to have, and, on the other, quite extraordinary delay on the part of the bureaucracy - in fairness to the bureaucracy, however, one should perhaps add, first, that, in Goldsmith v. Victims Compensation Tribunal 1, the court was informed, in 1993, that there were some 8,000 applications to the
Tribunal each year, and, second, that, in 1990, the Tribunal was complaining of lack of staff and the difficulty in obtaining copies of transcripts and judgments.

The Claimant, who is now 40 years of age, and who appears to have been a native of Chile, is the mother of a female child, now almost 22 years of age ("the daughter"), who, at the date of her birth, was an ex-nuptial child. In
February 1979, the Claimant, in Santiago, in Chile, married her former husband, Fernando Torrejon ("the husband"), who appears now to be about 45 years of age. Although the position is not entirely clear, it would appear that, either, the daughter was, by Chilean law, "legitimated" when the
Claimant and the husband married, or, alternatively, that the daughter was "adopted" by the Claimant and the husband. The Claimant, the husband, and the daughter came to Australia in February 1980, since which time, so it would seem, the Claimant and the daughter - except for short periods when they have returned to Chile - have lived in Australia. Each of the Claimant and the daughter is now an Australian citizen.

It would appear that the marriage was a less than happy one, the Claimant and the husband separating for a period of months in 1981, and, following a period of reconciliation, separating finally in about May 1982 - despite the fact that the daughter was later to allege that, even before the separation, the husband sexually assaulted her, the cause of the separation appears not to have been any allegation of sexual assault.

Following the separation, the daughter returned to Chile to live with her maternal grandparents for a time, not returning to Australia until late 1983.
After the daughter returned to Australia, the husband would have her for access periods on each week-end.

In about March 1984, the daughter, so it would seem, informed the Claimant that, on a number of occasions when she had visited the husband for access periods, the husband had sexually assaulted her. These allegations appear then to have been referred to the Police and, following investigation - which investigation included an examination of the daughter at the Child Abuse Unit at the Royal Alexandria Hospital for Children - the husband was charged with carnal knowledge of a child under 10 years, and of committing an act of indecency with the daughter, upon which charges he was later committed for trial.

The husband was thereafter arraigned before Lusher J and a jury of 12 at the
Central Criminal Court in September 1985, at which time he was acquitted on the charge of carnal knowledge, but convicted on the lesser charge.

Despite the conviction of the husband, no application was then made to Lusher
J to have him direct, pursuant to the provisions of s.437 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) ("the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)"), that compensation be paid to the daughter. However, on 3 October 1985, the
Claimant executed a form of application to the Australian Legal Aid Office ("the ALAO") for legal aid to enable her to make an application for "criminal injuries compensation for daughter", and to enable her to make an application for "custody/guardianship of daughter". Thereafter, on 31 January 1986, the
Australian Legal Aid Office notified the Claimant's then solicitors that legal aid had been granted to the Claimant in a sum of a maximum amount of $330.00 plus disbursements in order to prepare a claim for criminal injuries compensation up to the stage of notification that there would be a defended hearing.

Despite the letter to which I have just referred, a letter written by the
Claimant's then solicitors to the Claimant on 6 June 1986 suggests that, at about that time, the ALAO had informed them (the Claimant's then solicitors) that the ALAO had not granted the Claimant legal aid to pursue her daughter's claim for criminal injuries compensation, but had granted the Claimant legal aid to obtain counsel's opinion as to her (the Claimant's) eligibility to claim compensation "under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act". To say the least, I find this letter puzzling in the extreme, first, since no application could be made to the Undersecretary of the Department of the Attorney-General and Justice for the payment, pursuant to the provisions of the Criminal
Injuries Compensation Act 1967 ("the Compensation Act"), of compensation from
Consolidated Revenue except by "person aggrieved" (see Compensation Act ss. 3, ) and, second, since the phrase "any aggrieved person" was limited to the immediate victim of the crime complained of (see R. v. McCafferty &
Ors. 2).

Following his conviction the husband had lodged an appeal in relation to that conviction, which appeal would appear to have come on for hearing in the Court of Criminal Appeal ("the CCA") on 19 June 1986, on which day the CCA ordered that the conviction be quashed and that a verdict of acquittal be entered.

It is said that, on 20 August 1986, the Claimant's then solicitors received from counsel advice to the effect that the Claimant had good prospects of success in relation to both the daughter's, and her own, claims for compensation. If counsel's advice were to the effect which has been stated, then I find it, in its turn, surprising in the extreme. I say this, first, since, following the acquittal of the husband, the daughter would not have been able to seek a direction that she be paid compensation out of the property of the husband; second, since, following the acquittal of the husband, the Claimant's rights to receive compensation depended upon the grant by Lusher J, pursuant to the provisions of s.4(1) of the Compensation Act , of a certificate stating the sum which he would have directed to be paid by way of compensation had the husband been convicted, and upon the Treasurer being satisfied that the making of a payment out of consolidated funds was justified (s.5 Compensation Act 1967); and, third, since, as I have earlier recorded, the Claimant, not being a "person aggrieved", had no right to make any application for compensation.

Be all that as it may, it would appear that, in September 1986, the Claimant's then solicitors, wrote to the Registrar of the CCA seeking a copy of the
Judgment of the CCA on the appeal by the husband against his conviction. It is said that "despite regular attempts to obtain the transcript (the Claimant's former solicitors) did not receive it until on or about February 1988" - whether this statement is intended to be limited to the Judgment of the CCA or the transcript of the trial before Lusher J is anything but clear.

Section 437 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and the
Compensation Act 1967 were both repealed by the Miscellaneous Acts (Victims
Compensation) Repeal and Amendment Act 1987 ("the Repeal Act"), which Act and the Victims Compensation Act 1987 came into operation on 15 February 1988.

Schedule 2 - Savings, Transitional and Other Provisions of the Repeal Act contained the following (inter alia) provisions: - "Definitions . In this Schedule - `Principal Act' means the Victims Compensation Act 1987; `repealed Act' means the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 1967.
 . (1) Any direction in force, immediately before the commencement of the Principal Act, under section 437 of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) shall be deemed to be a direction for compensation in force under Division 1 of Part 6 of the Principal Act and may, as regards any amount unpaid under the direction, be enforced accordingly.
 
Without limiting the generality of subclause (1), a direction in force, immediately before the commencement of the Principal Act, under section 437 of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) shall, for the purposes of clause 5, continue to have effect as such a direction to the extent to which it relates to compensation for injury.
 ...........
 . (1) The repealed Act continues to apply to - a direction referred to in clause 2(2) or 4(2); and a certificate granted under section 4 of the repealed Act before the commencement of the Principal Act.
 as if this Act and the Principal Act had not been enacted.
 
In section 7 of the repealed Act, as continued by subclause (1) - a reference to section 437 of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) shall be construed as including a reference to section 53 of the Principal Act; and a reference to section 457 of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) shall be construed as including a reference to section 57 of the Principal Act.
 ...........
 
Applications for compensation may be made by the Secretary of the Attorney General's Department . (1) The Secretary of the Attorney General's Department may make an application under section 17 of the Principal Act on behalf of any person in respect of an act of violence (within the meaning of the Principal Act) that occurred before the commencement of the Principal Act.
 
Such an application shall be dealt with in accordance with the Principal Act as if it had been made by the person on whose behalf it has been made and as if the act of violence had occurred immediately before the commencement of the principal Act.
 ..........
 . (1) The Governor may make regulations containing provisions of a savings or transitional nature consequent on the enactment of this Act and the Principal Act.
 ..........
 
A provision referred to in subclause (1) shall, if the regulations so provide, have effect despite any other clause of this Schedule." 
In pursuance of the provisions of clause 8 of Schedule 2 of the Repeal Act there was made the Miscellaneous Acts (Victims Compensation) Repeal and Amendment Regulation 1987 - since repealed by virtue of the provisions of [s.10(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sla1989250/s10.html) of the [Subordinate Legislation Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sla1989250/) - which Regulation, so far as is relevant, was as follows: - "Definition.
 . In this Regulation, `act of violence' has the same meaning as in Part 3 of the Victims Compensation Act 1987.
 
Application of Victims Compensation Act 1987 to previous acts of violence . The Victims Compensation Act 1987 applies to an act of violence committed before the commencement of that Act but in relation to which no application or claim for compensation was made or finally determined before that commencement in the same way as it applies to an act of violence committed after that commencement. 
Continuation of [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) in relation to compensation which is only for loss.
 .(1) The [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) continues to apply to enable the payment of compensation which is only for loss as if the Miscellaneous Acts (Victims Compensation) Repeal and Amendment Act 1987 had not been enacted.
 
The [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) continues to so apply where the loss arises from an offence committed before the commencement of the Victims Compensation Act 1987.
 
The [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) continues to so apply where the loss arises from an offence committed on or after the commencement of the Victims Compensation Act 1987 but continues to so apply only if the offence was committed before 1 January 1989." (As the parties have conducted this application upon the basis that, by virtue of the provisions of the Regulation, it was open to the Claimant and her daughter to make the Applications for compensation to which I later refer, I set to one side my doubts on that question).

What appear to be the relevant provisions of the Act are as follow: - "

PART 1 - PRELIMINARY ..........
 .(1) In this Act: `act of violence' means an act or series of related acts (as referred to in subsection (3)), whether committed by one or more persons: that has apparently occurred in the course of the commission of an offence; and that has resulted in injury or death to one or more persons; ...........
 `injury" means: actual physical bodily harm; nervous shock; mental illness or disorder (whether or not arising from nervous shock); ...........
 any combination of the foregoing; ..........
 
PART 3 - COMPENSATION AWARDED BY THE TRIBUNAL ..........
 . (1) In this Part: `award of compensation' means an award of compensation under section 19; ..........
 `compensation for injury' means: in relation to a primary or secondary victim of an act of violence or in relation to a law enforcement victim: compensation for pain and suffering; and compensation for loss of enjoyment of life; ..........
 `notice of determination' means a notice given under section 19; `primary victim', in relation to an act of violence, means a person who has sustained injury as a direct result of that act, but does not include a deceased victim of that act; `secondary victim', in relation to an act of violence, means a person who has sustained injury as a direct result of witnessing, or otherwise becoming aware of, injury sustained by a primary victim, or injury or death sustained by a deceased victim, of that act.
 ..........
 
In this Part, a reference to a secondary victim of an act of violence who claims through a primary victim or a deceased victim of that act is a reference to a secondary victim who has sustained injury as a direct result of witnessing, or otherwise becoming aware of, injury sustained by the primary victim, or injury or death sustained by the deceased victim, of that act.
 ..........
 . A primary victim of an act of violence is eligible to receive: compensation for injury; compensation for expenses; ..........
 . A secondary victim of an act of violence is eligible to receive: compensation for injury; and compensation for expenses; ..........
 . (1) A secondary victim of an act of violence is not eligible to receive compensation under this Part if: the primary victim through whom he or she is claiming is not eligible to receive compensation under this Part; ..........
 . (1) An application for compensation under this Part may be made: by a primary or secondary victim of an act of violence; ..........
 
An application: shall be in the prescribed form; ..........
 shall be lodged with: the Registrar; ..........
 within 2 years (or within such longer period as the Tribunal may, in a particular case, allow) after the relevant act of violence or injury sustained in the course of law enforcement occurred.
 ..........
 . (1) The Tribunal shall consider each application made to it.
 
For the purpose of considering an application, the Tribunal may conduct a hearing under Part 4.
 
In deciding whether or not to conduct a hearing, the Tribunal shall have regard to, but is not bound to observe, the preference of the applicant.
 ..........
 . (1) After considering an application, the Tribunal shall determine the application: by making an award of compensation; or by dismissing the application.
 
An award of compensation shall not be made unless the Tribunal is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the person to whom the application for compensation relates: is: a primary or secondary victim of an act of violence; ..........
 
The Tribunal shall cause notice of its determination to be given to the applicant.
 
Such a notice shall be in the prescribed form and shall include: if an award of compensation is made: a statement of the amount (if any) payable by way of compensation for injury; a statement of the amount (if any) payable by way of compensation for expenses; ..........
 together with a statement of its reasons for awarding those amounts; a statement of the amount (if any) payable by way of costs; if the application is dismissed - a statement of the reasons for its dismissal; ..........
 . (1) In determining whether or not to make an award of compensation to or in relation to a victim of an act of violence and in determining the amount of compensation to award, the Tribunal shall have regard to: any behaviour, condition, attitude or disposition of the victim that directly or indirectly contributed to the injury or death sustained by the victim; whether the act of violence was reported to a member of the police force within a reasonable time; whether the victim participated in the commission of the act of violence, encouraged another person to commit the act of violence or otherwise gave assistance to any person by whom the act of violence was committed; whether the victim has failed to provide reasonable assistance to any person or body duly engaged in the investigation of the act of violence or in the arrest or prosecution of any person by whom the act of violence was committed or alleged to have been committed; and such other matters as the Tribunal considers relevant.
 
In subsection (1), a reference to a victim of an act of violence is a reference to: a primary victim; a secondary victim; ..........
 of that act.
 ..........
 . (1) An applicant for compensation under this Part may appeal to the District Court from any determination of the Tribunal in respect of the application.
 
An appeal by a person under this section shall be instituted: within the period of 1 month after the day on which the relevant notice of determination was given to the person; or within such further time as the District Court may allow.
 
The District Court shall hear and determine the appeal and may make such orders as it thinks appropriate in the light of its decision.
 
Without affecting the generality of subsection (3), the orders that may be made by the District Court on an appeal include: an order affirming or setting aside the determination of the Tribunal; and an order remitting the application to be considered and determined again by the Tribunal (either with or without the hearing of further evidence) in accordance with the directions of the District Court.
 ..........
 
PART 4 - COMPENSATION HEARINGS ..........
 . The Tribunal may dismiss proceedings before it if, before or during a hearing under this Part, it is satisfied: that the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious; or that, for any other reason, the proceedings should not be entertained.
 ..........
 
PART 7 - MISCELLANEOUS ..........
 . The Governor may make rules, not inconsistent with this Act, for or with respect to: the practice and procedure of the Tribunal; costs awarded by the Tribunal; and the service of documents under this Act.
 . The Governor may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act, for or with respect to any matter that by this Act is required or permitted to be prescribed or that is necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to this Act and, in particular, for or with respect to: the forms to be used for the purposes of this Act.
 .........." 
No rules have been made by the Governor in relation to the practice and procedure of the Tribunal; the only rules which have been made (see Statutory Rules Nos. 260 of 1988, 636 of 1989, 276 of 1990 and 266 of 1992) relate to witnesses allowances and expenses (see s.37 of the Act) and professional costs (see s.41 of the Act) to be allowed in respect of an application for compensation.

Regulations (see Nos. 259 of 1988, 737 of 1988, 275 of 1990, 568 of 1990, 248 of 1991 and 181 of 1996) prescribing forms to be used in relation to applications for compensation have been made by the Governor. For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that, among the forms prescribed, are an
Application for Compensation (Form 1), a Notice of Determination awarding compensation (Form 3), a Notice of Determination dismissing an application (Form 4) - however, the forms which have been prescribed do not include any form of application for an extension of the time within which an application for compensation might be made (see s.17(2)(d) of the Act), the form of
Application for Leave (Form 9) in fact in use having - so we were informed - been drafted by the Registrar of the Tribunal.

Part 6 Division 7 of the District Court Rules makes provision for appeals under the Act. Those provisions deal (inter alia) with the manner in which an application for further time to institute an appeal must be made (r. 49; see also Part 5 Division 3 r. 11), the manner of instituting an appeal and the form of any Notice of Appeal (rr. 52, 53), the evidence on any appeal (rr.
,57) and the hearing of any appeal (rr. 56,59). So far as the evidence on any appeal is concerned, any material forming part of the Tribunal record - which is to be transmitted to the District Court (r. 54) - is, in the absence of objection, admissible, no further evidence being admissible unless, in the case of lay witnesses, given, in the first instance, by affidavit, or in the case of medical witnesses, given by way of medical report, which affidavits or reports must be served within the times prescribed (rr. 56,57).

Before returning to record the facts which have ultimately given rise to this application, it is, perhaps, as well to record, here, the following: - although the majority of the District Court judges - including, in the present case, Smyth DCJ and McDevitt DCJ - appear to have proceeded upon the basis that the right of appeal provided for by s.29 of the Act extends to a right of appeal against a decision of the Tribunal declining to extend the time within which to bring an application for compensation (see, for example, the decision of Barbour DCJ in Beck v. Victims Compensation Tribunal 3,
Kirkham DCJ (see Jones v. Victims Compensation Tribunal 4) has expressed the view that the Tribunal has no power to require an intending applicant, who is otherwise out of time, to lodge an application for an extension of time within which to bring an application and, seemingly, that the Tribunal has no power to refuse to extend time - in this respect his Honour has said: "The application should be lodged by an applicant for compensation and dealt with on its merits by a member of the Tribunal, under s.17(2)(d). If an applicant is aggrieved by the determination of the Tribunal in refusing to entertain the application for compensation out of time, then that appellant has the right of appeal to this court in accordance with s.29." . although it would appear that, at some stage, the former Chief Judge of the District Court, Judge Staunton, had expressed the view that an appeal to the District Court pursuant to s.29 of the Act was an appeal by way of rehearing rather than a hearing de novo (see Jones v. Victims Compensation Tribunal) the decision of this Court in Goldsmith v. Victims Compensation Tribunal 5 established, both, that the right of appeal to the District Court given by s.29 of the Act applies in respect of both "desk determinations" under Part 3 of the Act and determinations made following a hearing under Part 4 of the Act, and, that, taking into account the nature of the Tribunal's proceedings, an appeal to the District Court under s.29, is a hearing de novo; the decision of this Court in Director-General of the Attorney Generals
Department v. District Court of New South Wales 6 is to the effect that, as an appeal to the District Court under the Act is a hearing de novo, rather than a rehearing, it is ordinarily to be expected that the application the subject of the appeal will be determined on appeal by the District Court itself rather than by returning it to the Tribunal.

On 26 April 1988 the Claimant's then solicitors wrote to the Claimant, who, by then, had moved to South Australia, a letter which (inter alia) contained the following: - "
 ..........
 
In our view, we should proceed with the claim or claims as follows: 
Firstly, an application should be made on Suzanna's (sic) behalf for compensation. Secondly, and depending on the success or otherwise of that claim (noting that the maximum amount payable in total is in the region of $40,000.00) we should have an application waiting in the wings on your behalf. The total amount payable is as set out above and for example, should Suzanna receive $40,000.00, it would be pointless making any claim on your behalf. However, if Suzanna were to receive an amount less that (sic) referred to above, a claim on your behalf would be worth pursuing.
 .........." 
Thereafter, on 16 August 1988, the Claimant's then solicitors wrote to the Registrar of the Tribunal ("the Registrar") a letter which (omitting formal parts) was as follows: - "Re: Application for compensation - 
Susanna Alejandra Torrealba 
Please find enclosed: . Application for leave.
 . Application for compensation.
 . Report of Ms. Sheila Metcalf.
 . Affidavit of Gillian Calvert dated 10 September 1986.
 . Unsigned statement of Consuela Del Carmen Torrealba undated and unsigned.
 . Statement of Susanna Alejandra Torrealba made to the police on 6 March 1984.
 
Please note that Ms. Torrealba has retained our firm to assist her with the application and that she will be seeking costs in that regard.
 
We look forward to hearing from you in due course." 
The receipt of the application, which was given proceeding No. 4C88/3374, was later acknowledged on behalf of the Registrar.

So far as the material before the Court permits one to judge, nothing further was done by the Claimant's then solicitors in relation to that application until October 1989, when the Claimant's then solicitors wrote to the Tribunal inquiring as to progress. Little of any consequence appears to have occurred thereafter until 10 September 1990, on which day the Registrar wrote to the
Claimant's then solicitors a letter which, was, in part, as follows: - "In view of the result that the accused was found not guilty to the charge of carnal knowledge under 10 years, and was acquitted of the charge of committing an act of indecency with the applicant, it is necessary to ask for your submissions that on the balance of probabilities the applicant is a primary victim of an act of violence. (see section 19(2)(a)(i) of the Act)." (The delay appears to have been at least in part due to the fact that the Tribunal, in its turn, had had difficulties in obtaining copies of the transcript of the trial before Lusher J and of the Judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal.) 
Although the Claimant's then solicitors later - but not until late November - wrote to the Claimant, who was still resident in South Australia, advising her of the letter which had been received from the Registrar, and although the Registrar wrote, on a number of occasions, to both the Claimant's then solicitors and another firm of solicitors which replaced them, no submissions were forwarded to the Tribunal until 2 September 1991. Since the form of the letter containing those submissions appears to have contributed to the misapprehension which was later to occur, it should be noted that the letter in which those submissions were contained was, in part, as follows: - "Re: Susanna Torrealba 
Consuela Del Carmen Torrealba 
Re: Your ref: C88/3374 
We make the following submissions with respect to s.19(2)(a)(1) (sic) of the Victims Compensation Act 1987.
 ..........
 
The conviction was quashed but not because of any problems inherent in the substantive evidence of either Susanna or Mrs. Torrealba. The Judgment in our submission does not preclude the finding on the balance of probabilities that Susanna is the primary victim of the acts of violence or that Mrs. Torrealba is the secondary victim of the same `acts of violence'. ..........
 
The evidence of Susanna given in her statement to police on 6.3.1984 as well as the reports by Hearing Counsellors Gillian Calvert and Sheila Metcalf as well as the evidence of Mrs. Torrealba are on our submission sufficient to satisfy the Tribunal that Susanna is the primary victim of the acts of violence and Mrs. Torrealba is the secondary victim of the same acts.
 .........." 
Thereafter, on 8 October 1991, the Registrar wrote to the Claimant's then solicitors a letter which was in part as follows: - "Re: TORREALBA Susanna Alejandra 
TORREALBA Consuela 
Your matter has been listed/relisted for determination in chambers during the week commencing 04/11/1991. (No personal attendance is necessary.) 
Any matters listed below must be addressed and response must be received at this office 7 days prior to the above date.
 [ ] Please provide applications for compensation and for leave to apply out of time and all supporting documents for Consuela Torrealba's claim as a secondary victim.
 
Failure to address these matters will result in a determination on the material in the Tribunal's possession.
 
If there are any submissions, including request's (sic) for extension of time which you intend to provide to the Tribunal they must be received in writing 7 days prior to the above date.
 .........." 
Despite what appears to have been an extension of time granted by the Tribunal, and an adjournment of the original "fixture" no application was filed on behalf of the Claimant apparently because the Claimant's then solicitors were unable to contact her. 
On 23 December 1991, the Registrar wrote to the Claimant's then solicitors a letter which was, in part, as follows: - "Re: Application for Victims Compensation by Susanna Alejandra & 
Consuela TORREALBA 
I refer to the above application for compensation.
 
Please be advised that the Tribunal Member considered the matter on 18 December 1991 and dismissed the application.
 
The following comments were made: `Not established on the onus of balance of probabilities that she was the victim of an act of violence.' .........." 
On 22 May 1992, there were filed in the District Court what purported to be two Notices of Appeal - give Plaint Nos. 2719/92 and 2720/92 - on behalf of the daughter and of the Claimant in respect of what, one assumes, was said to be the dismissal of claims for compensation made by the Claimant's daughter and the Claimant herself. Those "appeals" appear to have been listed for call-over in the District Court at Sydney on 22 June 1992.

On 17 June 1992, the Registrar wrote to the Claimant's then solicitors a letter which, omitting formal parts, was as follows: "APPEAL BY: SUSANNA ALEJANDRA AND CONSUELO TORREALBA 
Plaint No: 2719/92 and 2720/92 
Listed for Call-over Sydney District Court on 22 June 1992 
The notification of your appeal in the above matter has been received. The file containing the material on which the Tribunal based its award will be forwarded by the Tribunal the District Court (sic).
 
As there will be no appearance on behalf of the Tribunal at the appeal hearing, I have attached to my file brief submissions for the consideration of the court. A copy of those submissions are enclosed for your information.
 
At the completion of the appeal the Tribunal will require a sealed copy of the decision from the District Court prior to payment of award." 
Despite the fact that the only file which was forwarded to the District Court was that relating to a claim for compensation on behalf of the daughter, the material which is before the Court contains the following (Affidavit Janine DeSaxe sworn 7 December 1994): - "37. On 6 October, 1992 his Honour Judge Smyth heard submissions from counsel on behalf of both (the Claimant) and Susanna. The (Claimant's) appeal was conducted on the basis that the Tribunal had lost the Claimant's file. His Honour gave both (the Claimant) and Susanna leave to appeal out of time. In relation to the injuries sustained by Susanna, his Honour considered that there should be further medical evidence filed and served. His Honour adjourned the matter part heard to 19 November 1992 ....
 ..........
 . On 19 November 1992 his Honour stated that he could not decide whether an act of violence had occurred without reading the transcript of the trial of the offender. The transcript was not available to the court and the matters were accordingly remitted to the Tribunal." 
Thereafter, on 20 November 1992, the Claimant's then solicitors, wrote to the Registrar a letter which was, in part, as follows: - "Re: Torrealba, Susana( sic) and Consuelo (sic) 
Re: Appeals to the District Court.
 
We confirm that the appeals in the above matters were heard by Judge Smyth in the District Court on 19 November 1992.
 ..........
 
The following orders were made: . That the matter be remitted to the Tribunal, and suggest that the Tribunal takes into account the summing up of Judge (sic) Lusher, the Supreme Court transcript of the trial, the additional statements tendered in Court on 19 November 1992 together with any fresh medical evidence in considering the applications.
 . Order Respondent to pay costs of the appeal as agreed or taxed on District Court scale for matters which are undefended at less than $20,000.00, such costs to be taxed before the finalisation of the application.
 ..........
 
We also request that the Tribunal locate the file for the secondary victim, Consuelo (sic) Torrealba, as it would appear that only Susanna's file was sent to the District Court in respect of the appeals. 
We note that it is many years since our clients lodged their Applications for Compensation, and a perusal of the Tribunal's file indicates the delay which the applicants have experience in this matter. It is a source of continuing anxiety and distress to both Applicants, and we request that a finalisation of this matter is expedited. In particular, we request that the matter be listed for determination at a hearing before a Tribunal Member at the earliest available date. We note that the Applicant's (sic) both live in South Australia, and the expense of returning to Sydney in relation to this matter is becoming prohibitive. We do not anticipate that our client will return to Sydney in 1992, and accordingly we request that the matter be allocated a hearing date as early as possible in 1993." 
Despite the fact that correspondence appears to have passed between the Claimant's then solicitors and the Tribunal over the course of the months that followed, no application for an extension of time within which to file an Application for Compensation nor any Application for Compensation was filed until 31 May 1993, when there were filed with the Tribunal an Application for Compensation, an Application for Leave and an Affidavit of the Claimant sworn 28 May 1993. So far as is relevant, the Affidavit was as follows: - "5. In March 1984 Susana disclosed that the offender had sexually abused her and the offender was charged in March 1984.
 . From the time that Susana made her disclosure I was shocked and distressed, both at the assault on Susana, and the betrayal I felt from the offender. My relationship with Susana was severely strained.
 . Susana and I were exposed, over the following three years, to a great deal of counselling, police and other interviews, the trial, the appeal and attendances at Lawyers and Doctors. It was an extremely traumatic and distressing time of my life.
 . In 1986 I instructed Ferrier & Associates to lodge an Application for Compensation for myself as secondary victim and Susana as primary victim with the Victims Compensation Tribunal.
 . I subsequently changed Solicitors but was always of the opinion that an Application had been submitted by my former Solicitors both for Susana as primary victim and myself as secondary victim. I was informed by both my former Solicitors and the Social Worker and I verily believed that the Victims Compensation Tribunal had lost the whole file relating to my claim as secondary victim.
 . It is now nearly 10 years since Susana first disclosed the sexual abuse and we are still awaiting compensation. I still feel unable to put these distressing events behind me and this has been exacerbated by the confusion relating to this application and the delay in finalising this Application.
 . I respectfully request this Tribunal to grant my application for Leave to Apply out of Time." 
It would appear that the Application for Compensation on behalf of the daughter and the Application for Leave and the Application for Compensation on behalf of the Claimant were considered by the Chairman of the Tribunal, Dr.
Elms, on 1 July 1993. Thereafter, the Registrar forwarded to the Claimant's then solicitors, under cover of a letter of 20 August 1993, a form of Notice of Determination recording the award of compensation in favour of the daughter in the sum of $10,325.00 plus costs in the amount of $605.00, a form of
Application for Payment and a form of Reasons for Determination. The form of
Reasons for Determination, after recording the Reasons for Determination and
Award in relation to the daughter continued: - "Application by secondary victim, Consuelo Torrealba 
On 31/5/93 the Tribunal received an application for compensation by Susana's mother, Consuelo Torrealba, Together with an application for leave and an application (sic) sworn 28/5/93. The applicant's mother who it appears now resides in Tasmania, and her Solicitor assert that an application in respect of the mother as a secondary victim has been lodged with the Tribunal and that the Tribunal has lost the file. I am confident that that is not the case, and that there has never been an application lodged by Consuelo Torrealba as a secondary victim in this matter. The internal practice of the Tribunal is that applications for primary and secondary victims are linked up in the same file.
 
Portions of the affidavit of 28/5/93 are patently false. For example, paragraph 8 says, `In 1986 I instructed Ferrier & Associates to lodge an application for myself as secondary victim and Susana as primary victim with the Victims Compensation Tribunal.' However, the Victims Compensation Tribunal did not come into existence until 15/2/88, the enabling Act which gave it its charter not being passed until 1987. The concept of `secondary victim' in the law of Criminal Injuries Compensation in New South Wales was unknown prior to the passing of the Victims Compensation Act. Further, I do not suppose that the applicant used language such as that attributed to her in paragraph 8 of her affidavit, such language obviously being the language of the affidavit's draft person. The assertions that the applicant `was informed by both my former Solicitors and the Social Worker' that the Victims Compensation Tribunal had lost the whole file relating to my claim as a secondary victim do not make them fact. I would have thought that it was a comparatively simple matter if such an application has been lodged to furnish the copy application and all relevant correspondence to and from the Tribunal in relation thereto from the applicant's former solicitors. Having been a Solicitor myself, I can say that in the normal course Solicitors would retain their files for such a period.
 
I would also comment that much of the material tendered in support of Mrs. Consuela Torrealba's application for leave is not directly referable to her status as a secondary victim. A secondary victim under the Victims Compensation Act is entitled to be compensation for suffering injury `as a result of witnessing or otherwise become aware of' the child's injury, not as a result of witnessing or otherwise becoming aware of the distressing event itself, and much of the material tendered seems to be in support of this latter aspect. Having regard to the length of time which has elapsed and having regard to the patently false material presented in paragraph 8 of the applicant mother's affidavit sworn 28/5/93, I do not propose to grant her leave to present an application as a secondary victim at this stage." 
On 1 September 1993, the Claimant's then solicitors, wrote to the Registrar a letter which, so far is relevant,was as follows: - "
 ..........
 
CONSUELO TORREALBA 
We refer to the determination in the above matter. 
We note the Tribunal rejected our client's application for leave to lodge an application as a secondary victim. We point out that in Jones v. Victims Compensation Tribunal his Honour Judge Kirkham, sitting in the Newcastle District Court on 20 August 1993, held that the Tribunal has no statutory authority to require the submission of a separate form seeking leave to lodge an application out of time, and therefore has no statutory authority to refuse an application for leave.
 
Accordingly we request that our client's application is determined." 
That letter appears to have been referred to the Chairman of the Tribunal, following which on 6 September 1993, the Registrar wrote to the Claimant's solicitors, a letter which was in the following terms: - "

RE. Application for Victims' Compensation by 
Consuelo TORREALBA 
This matter was considered by the Chairman in Chambers on 6 September 1993. The following comments were made: `Reference is made to the applicant's solicitor's letter of 1 September 1993. In the first place, applying Valentine v. Eid [(1992) 27 NSWLR 615 (NSW] Supreme Court, Grove J), the Tribunal is not bound by His Honour Kirkham J's decision in JONES, since the Tribunal is an inferior Tribunal and the District Court is an inferior court operating within the overall hierarchy of courts. The Tribunal and for that matter, the District Court, are only bound by decisions of superior courts such as the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal. Kirkham J's remarks on the Tribunal's leave procedure requirement would in any event appear to be obiter.
 
Secondly, the decision itself would appear to be in conflict with a long line of District Court decisions from Judge Barbour's decision in Beck in which the leave procedure has been sanctioned. The issue which has arisen recently in some cases is whether there is the right of appear (sic) from a decision of the Tribunal granting leave.
 
Thirdly, it is noted that His Honour Kirkham J did not distinguish between the role of the Registrar and the role of the Tribunal in s.17(2)(d). The Registrar has no discretion to accept an application for an extension of time outside the 2 year period. The Tribunal has a discretion to allow a longer period `in a particular case'. There must inevitably be some mechanism for getting the application from the Registrar to the Tribunal, whether it be called an application for leave or otherwise. At this stage, the Tribunal is not even considering the question of determining the application under ss 18 and 19. It is considering whether it should allow the lodgement of the application outside the statutory period of 2 years specified in s17(2)(d). In the present case, absolutely no evidence was given to the Tribunal to enable it to exercise its discretion under s17(2)(d) in this `particular case'. Such information as was given was show (sic) to be false in material respect (sic), and nothing further has been placed before the Tribunal in answer to the comments made on 1 July 1993. In particular, no attempt has been made to obtain the contents of the former solicitor's file. Accordingly, I can see no reason to vary my earlier decision of 1 July 1993, and for the purpose of any appeal which may be mounted from that or this decision, and any costs orders which may be considered appropriate thereupon, I simply note that none of the matters referred to in the reasons I then gave have been canvassed. Instead, the Tribunal has simply been met with a peremptory request to determine an application which the evidence discloses was made approximately a decade after the original acts of violence were perpetrated, and about 9 years after the child was first seen by a sexual assault professional.'" 
It is, I believe, clear from the terms of the Chairman's comments that, if further material had been put before him, he was prepared to reconsider the question whether an extension of time within which to bring any claim for compensation ought to be granted.

Eventually, but not until 9 February 1994, there was filed in the District
Court on behalf of the Claimant, what was described as a "Notice of Appeal (To
Commence Proceedings)", in which "Notice of Appeal" there were sought the following orders: "That leave be granted to the appellant to institute this appeal; that the decision of the respondent (sic) of 20 August 1993 (sic) be set aside; that the appellant be awarded an amount of compensation deemed appropriate by this Court; such further other (sic) orders as the Court thinks fit; and costs." (Apart from the procedural irregularity involved in filing a Notice of Appeal without first having obtained leave to do so, it is to be observed that the relief sought in paragraph (b) of the orders which I have set out above, were hardly appropriate as the respondent was, not the Tribunal, but, "Victims Compensation Corporation Fund" (sic) - the District Court Rules require that the Victims Compensation Fund Corporation ("the Corporation") be joined as a respondent - and, further, that the decision in respect of which it was sought to appeal was made by the Tribunal on 1 July 1993 rather than on 20 August 1993.) 
The "appeal" came on for hearing on 6 February 1995 before McDevitt DCJ. So far as one can judge it from the transcript of the hearing of the "appeal", the hearing would have been comparatively brief. So far as one can judge it, the only evidence which was tendered on behalf of the Claimant was the
Tribunal's file in relation to the purported applications on behalf of the daughter and of the Claimant herself, an affidavit of the Claimant's present solicitor which dealt with the history of the applications, and a report by
Associate Professor Susan Hayes, a clinical psychologist, and head of the
Department of Behavioural Sciences in Medicine within the University of
Sydney, in which report Professor Hayes expressed the opinion that the
Claimant "(had) suffered psychological injury as a result of becoming aware of the sexual abuse of her child and the long term injury to her child", that report being tendered and read without objection.

The transcript does not record counsel's submissions. However, it would appear that, notwithstanding that, in his comments as recorded in the letter of 6
September 1993 from the Registrar of the Tribunal to the Claimant's then solicitors, the Chairman had recorded (inter alia) that an issue which had recently arisen was whether there was a right of appeal to the District Court, no point appears to have been taken on behalf of the Corporation, that there was no right of appeal to the District Court from a decision of the Tribunal declining to extend the time within which an application might be brought.

At the conclusion of Counsel's submissions - during which he indicated that he would "grant leave" - McDevitt DCJ reserved his Judgment, which Judgment was delivered on 14 February 1995. So far is relevant, his Honour's Judgment, which was very brief, was as follows; - "This is an appeal by Mrs. Consuelo Torrealba against the refusal of the Victim's Compensation Tribunal to grant her compensation. She alleges that she was a secondary victim of a series of sexual assaults on her daughter by her husband.
 ..........
 
It follows from the definition of `secondary victim' that the appellant must show, on the balance of probabilities that she suffered injury as a result of becoming aware of injury sustained by her daughter, the primary victim, as a result of the sexual assault on the primary victim by the appellant's husband. In order to qualify for compensation as a secondary victim, it must be shown that becoming aware of injury to her daughter caused injury to the appellant herself.
 
Becoming aware that the husband had sexually assaulted the primary victim does not entitle the appellant to compensation, even if that knowledge caused injury to the appellant.
 
The respondent, through its counsel Ms. Norton submitted that the appellant had not shown that she was a secondary victim of the act of violence, and I agree. The appellant gave no evidence in support of her appeal, even though she was in Court. She was content to rely on the tendering of material of material in the Victims Compensation Tribunal file and on a clinical psychological assessment of her by Associate Professor Hayes (Exhibit A).
 
I could not be persuaded that the appellant suffered any injury if she gave no evidence of it. In any event I think that her credibility would be very seriously in doubt if she had. In the original application to the Tribunal the applicant swore an affidavit dated 28th May, 1993 which the Chairman of the Tribunal found to be false. Before me, it was conceded that no application for compensation was made by the appellant until 28th May, 1993, some nine years after the event, contrary to what she had sworn in her affidavit.
 
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed." 
After hearing submissions on behalf of the Claimant and the Corporation, McDevitt DCJ ordered that the Claimant pay the Corporation's costs of "the appeal" assessed in the sum of $2,700.00.

Thereafter, but not until mid-June 1995, there was filed in this Court a
Summons in which there was sought relief prerogative in nature, directed toward quashing the orders which had been made by McDevitt DCJ on 14 February .

When, shortly prior to the appeal coming on for hearing, I had an opportunity to consider the material contained in the Court file, it appeared to me that, in the circumstances, the Claimant may have had no right of appeal to the
District Court, and that, whatever might otherwise have been the merits of the case which the Claimant wished to make in these proceedings, the relief which was sought ought not to be granted. Accordingly, counsel were advised that they ought consider that question before the proceedings came on for hearing.

When the proceedings came on for hearing, Ms. J. Manuell appeared for the
Claimant while Ms. S. Norton appeared for the Corporation.

Ms. Manuell's submissions, as reflected in her additional written submissions and her original written submissions, on behalf of the Claimant, proceeded along the following lines: - as the Act does not prescribe a separate procedure for obtaining leave to bring an application out of time, the Tribunal must first consider an application for compensation before it refuses to grant leave to extend the time, it following, that, if leave is not granted, the application is to be treated as having been considered and determined for the purposes of s.19(1), so that an unsuccessful applicant then has a right of appeal pursuant to s.29; the orders made by McDevitt DCJ ought to be quashed for one or other of three reasons: jurisdictional error; procedural unfairness; error on the face of the record.
McDevitt DCJ had been guilty of jurisdictional error when he said that he could not be satisfied that the Claimant had established injury when she did not give oral evidence of it on her appeal, first, since he failed to have regard to the material which was tendered, and, second, since he failed to appreciate that the Claimant had no entitlement to give oral evidence on her appeal and would have had to seek leave to give oral evidence; there had been a denial of procedural fairness since, despite the fact that the Claimant had not been called for cross-examination on her affidavit, and despite the fact that, in his Judgment, McDevitt DCJ was to observe that, even if the Claimant had given oral evidence, her credibility would be seriously in doubt, no question as to the Claimant's credibility was raised during the course of the hearing; that the "record" included McDevitt DCJ's Reasons for Judgment, which
Reasons revealed his Honour's error when he said that "(he) could not be persuaded that the Appellant suffered any injury if she gave no evidence of it." 
It is in this context that I turn to consider the questions to which I referred at the commencement of this Judgment.

A RIGHT OF APPEAL TO THE DISTRICT COURT 
I must say that I found the submissions advanced on behalf of the Claimant in this respect to be very difficult to follow. However, as best as I could follow those submissions, they appeared to be one or other of the following: - that, despite the provisions of s. 17(2) of the Act, the Tribunal has no power to require an intending applicant to file an application for leave and - by some process of reasoning which I am completely unable to follow - no power to refuse to extend the time within which an application for compensation might be filed, it following that, if an application which was out of time were filed, it must be considered on its merits, and, if no extension of time were thought appropriate, it must be dismissed (such an approach seems to be based upon the decision of Kirkham DCJ in Jones v. Victims Compensation
Tribunal 7); alternatively, even if the Tribunal has power to require an intending applicant who is out of time to file an application for leave, the refusal of an extension of time upon the basis that no case for such an extension has been made out necessarily means that the Tribunal has decided not to entertain an application for compensation so that its determination in that respect is akin to an order for dismissal (an approach which appears to be based upon the provisions of s.39 of the Act); in either of which cases the application has been finally dealt with and, thus, "determined".

If this be the burden of the submissions made on behalf of the Claimant, then
I am unable to accept them as being correct.

So far as the first of these two approaches is concerned, it seems to me clear that the provisions of s.17(2) of the Act confer on the Tribunal a power to extend the time within which an application for compensation might be made competently, which power might be exercised or not at the discretion of the
Tribunal (see [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) [s.9(1)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s9.html)
The fact that such rules as have been made do not provide for the making of an application for leave, and that such regulations as have been made do not prescribe a form of application for leave, does not, in my view, mean that the
Tribunal had and has no power itself to prescribe that when an intending applicant is out of time, he or she shall apply for an extension of time using a particular form. On the contrary, it is well established that the powers conferred by an enabling statute include not only such as are expressly granted but also, by implication, all such powers which are reasonably necessary for the accomplishment of the object intended to be secured. This being so, it seems to me implicit in the grant of power to extend time that, in the absence of rules and regulations prescribed pursuant to the provisions of ss.75, 76 of the Act, the Tribunal is to have power to prescribe the manner in which the exercise of its power to extend time is to be invoked. It follows in my view, that Kirkham DCJ erred when, in his Judgment in Jones v. The
Victims Compensation Tribunal 8, he expressed the views which I have earlier recorded.

So far as the second of these approaches is concerned, it seems to me that, not only does a refusal to extend time, as a matter of principle, not constitute the determination of an application for compensation - for such a refusal is interlocutory in nature - but that the refusal of Dr. Elms, in the present case, was clearly not a determination of a claim for compensation. As will be clear from the passages from Dr. Elms' Reasons of 1 July 1993 and of 6
September 1993, Dr. Elms left it open to the Claimant to present further material in support of her application for leave, which further material he was prepared - as indeed he did on 6 September 1993 - to consider.

In my view, the Claimant had no right of appeal to the District Court and the purported appeal should have been dismissed as incompetent.

PREROGATIVE RELIEF 
Assuming, however, that the appeal was not incompetent is in my view clear that, insofar as the Claimant has sought to demonstrate jurisdictional error on the part of McDevitt DCJ, or that there is an error on the face of the record, she has wholly failed in her endeavour. 
So far as the former question is concerned, it is sufficient to observe that the ordinary jurisdiction of a court of law encompasses authority to decide questions of law, as well as questions of fact, involved in matters which it has jurisdiction to determine, so that, while, if an appeal is available, an error or law may be corrected by an appellate court, such an error does not ordinarily constitute jurisdictional error (see, for example, Craig v. State of South Australia 9). In the present case, even if one accepts that
McDevitt DCJ's Judgment indicates that he misdirected himself as to the evidence which was available before him and as the approach which he should have taken to it, his error was one within jurisdiction.

Notwithstanding the more expansive view of "the record" of an inferior court which was, for a time, taken by this Court (see, for example, G.J. Coles & Co. Limited v. Retail Trade Industrial Tribunal 10; Commissioner of
Motor Transport v. Kirkpatrick 11) the decision of the High Court in Craig v. State of South Australia 12, which decision has since been applied by this Court in Kriticos v. State of New South Wales 13 and Yisrael v.
District Court of New South Wales 14 dictate that, in this case, the Reasons for Judgment given by McDevitt DCJ upon which the Claimant has sought to rely in order to establish error do not form part of the record.

The question of procedural unfairness is, however, another matter. It is to be recalled first, that, as I have earlier recorded, an appeal involves a hearing de novo and not a rehearing, and, second, that not only was none of the material tendered - which material included the affidavit which had been sworn by the Claimant - objected to, but that -although it is accepted that, in the circumstances, counsel would have been entitled to call the Claimant for cross-examination - the Claimant was not cross-examined. The rule in Browne v. Dunn 15 which provides (inter alia) that, if a witness is not cross- examined on a point, opposing counsel may be taken to accept it and may not be permitted to address in a fashion which asks the court not to accept it, is one based on notions of fairness (see Browne v. Dunn 16; Bulstrode v.
Tremble 17; Allied Pastoral Holdings Pty. Limited v. Commissioner of
Taxation 18). This being so, it seems to me that, if, in a case where a witness's evidence in chief is not incredible, or is not contradicted by other evidence which appears worthy of credence, that witness has not been cross- examined, a judgment based on the rejection of the evidence of that witness could, in appropriate circumstances, be set aside as the product of an unfair trial (see, for example, Holt v. Protective Commissioner 19). The Claimant not having been cross-examined, and McDevitt DCJ apparently not having raised with counsel during the course of submissions any questions affecting the credibility of the Claimant - particularly any question affecting the general credibility of the Claimant - it seems to me that if the appeal had been competent, the hearing miscarried so that the order made by McDevitt DCJ dismissing the appeal ought to have been set aside. However, as, in my view, the appeal was incompetent, and as the grant of prerogative relief is discretionary, there would, in my view, be no purpose to be served by setting aside that order and remitting the matter to the District Court for rehearing.

CONCLUSION 
It will be apparent from what I have earlier recorded that it is my view that these proceedings should be dismissed. However, as the matter which has led me to that view appears not to have been raised before the District Court, I would make no order as to the costs of these proceedings and would leave each party to pay and bear her, or its, own costs.

COLE JA: The claimant, Consuelo Torrealba, by summons seeks an order in the nature of certiorari to remove into this Court the record of proceedings in the District Court heard on 6 February 1995 before McDevitt DCJ with judgment being delivered on 14 February 1995, and for the quashing of that judgment. Those proceedings were an appeal by the appellant pursuant to s.29 of the Victim's Compensation Act 1987 from a refusal by the second opponent, the Victim's Compensation Corporation Fund, to award the appellant damages under the Act as a secondary victim. The appellant seeks that this Court award compensation.
 
RELEVANT FACTUAL CIRCUMSTANCES 
Resolution of the appellant's claim for compensation has been greatly delayed. It is unnecessary to recount details of the regrettable manner in which the Victim's Compensation Corporation Fund have dealt with this application. For present purposes it is sufficient to note the following:
On 20 August 1993 the Victims Compensation Tribunal advised the appellant that a claim for compensation as a primary victim lodged by her daughter on 3
October 1985 had been granted. The Tribunal was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that her daughter had been subjected to sexual abuse by the applicant's stepfather between 1980 and 1984. That determination notified on August 1993 had been made by the Chairman on 1 July 1993.
By the same notification, the Tribunal advised that it did not propose to grant the appellant leave to present an application as a secondary victim "at this stage".[20] An application for compensation as a secondary victim, and for leave to bring the application out of time, had been lodged on 31 May 1993 in circumstances where there was dispute regarding whether a prior application had been lodged.
An appeal from the Tribunal's decision was brought in the District Court pursuant to s.29 Victim's Compensation Act 1987. It was that appeal which came before Mc Devitt DCJ on 6 February 1995.
McDevitt DCJ granted leave to bring the claim out of time. It was then agreed by the parties that the substance of the appeal would be heard. In dismissing the appeal His Honour said: "Becoming aware that the husband had sexually assaulted the primary victim does not entitle the appellant to compensation, even if that knowledge caused injury to the appellant.

The respondent, through its counsel Miss Norton submitted that the appellant had not shown that she was a secondary victim of the act of violence, and I agree. The appellant gave no evidence in support of her appeal, even though she was in Court. She was content to rely on the tendering of material in the
Victims Compensation Tribunal file and on a clinical psychological assessment of her by Associate Professor Hayes (Exhibit A).

I could not be persuaded that the appellant suffered any injury if she gave no evidence of it. In any event I think that her credibility would be very seriously in doubt if she had. In the original application to the tribunal the applicant swore an affidavit dated 28th May 1993 which the Chairman of the tribunal found to be false. Before me, it was conceded that no application for compensation was made by the appellant until 28th may, 1993, some nine years after the event, contrary to what she had sworn in her affidavit."[21] 
STATUS OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MCDEVITT DCJ 
A question arose on this appeal regarding the status of the proceedings before
McDevitt DCJ. It arose in the following circumstances. The Tribunal, in a document entitled "Reasons for the Determination (Section 19(4))" declined to grant the appellant "leave to present an application as a secondary victim at this stage". Section 17(2) provides that an application "shall be lodged with ... the Registrar ... within two years (or within such longer period as the
Tribunal may, in a particular case, allow) after the relevant act of violence or injury sustained in the course of law enforcement occurred". The appellant's application was not lodged within two years. The Chairman in the reasons for determination to which I have referred declined to extend the time for presenting the application. The question arose whether, absent such an extension, there was a valid application which had been determined by the
Tribunal in the manner required by the Act. Section 29(1) confers a right of appeal to the District Court "from any determination of the Tribunal in respect of the application".

Section 39 provides that: "The Tribunal may dismiss proceedings before it if, before or during a hearing under this Part if it is satisfied: that , for any other reason, the proceedings should not be entertained." 
If an application is lodged with the Registrar as contemplated by s.17(2), but out of time, or not in the prescribed form or not accompanied by prescribed documentary evidence, the Tribunal has power pursuant to s.39 to decline to entertain the proceedings. However if proceedings are entertained then s.18 requires the Tribunal to consider "each application made to it". By s.19(1) it may either make an award of compensation or dismiss the application.

In the present instance the Tribunal did not decline to entertain the application. The Tribunal considered whether it should extend the time for lodging the application beyond two years and determined that it would not grant that extension. The fact that the application was thus lodged beyond the statutorily permitted time did not result in the application ceasing to be a valid application. It was simply an application lodged out of time. In considering the application, as required by s.18, and determining the application as required by s.19, the tribunal implicitly dismissed the application on two bases. First, that it was lodged out of time and no extension of time was granted, and second, because the Chairman was of the view that the appellant had filed a "patently false" affidavit. The Chairman thus concluded the "Reasons for Determination (s.19(4))" by stating: "Having regard to the length of time which has elapsed and having regard to the patently false material presented in paragraph of 8 of the applicant mother's affidavit sworn 28/5/93, I do not propose to grant her leave to present an application as a secondary victim at this stage." 
In my opinion that was a dismissal of the application grounding a right of appeal. It effectively denied the appellant compensation.

In my opinion s.29 is not to be narrowly construed. The Victim's Compensation
Act 1987 was remedial legislation designed to give those injured in certain circumstances compensation. The provisions of the Act are thus to be construed beneficially.[22] "Any determination" where used in s.29(1) is to read as including a determination that an application will be rejected because it is lodged outside the two year period during which leave to bring the application is not required. That expansive interpretation is assisted by the provisions of s.29(3) which confers upon the District Court the power and obligation to "hear and determine the appeal" . Further it confers a power on the court to "make such orders as it thinks appropriate in the light of its decision".
Those words are sufficiently wide to include a power to extend time to lodge the application with the Registrar beyond the two year period, that being merely an administrative act.

It follows, in my view, that the District Court had jurisdiction to entertain the application, to grant an extension of time to lodge the application with the Registrar, and to hear the substance of the appeal.

GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
Three grounds of appeal were argued. First, that McDevitt DCJ fell into jurisdictional error; second, that he denied the appellant procedural fairness, and third that there was error on the face of the record.

In my opinion the first and third grounds argued on appeal fail.

It is well established that the District Court of NSW is a court of inferior jurisdiction[23] to which an order in the nature of certiorari may be directed.[24] However, as the High Court recently emphasised in Craig versus State of South Australia[25]: "It is not an appellate procedure enabling either a general review of the order or decision of the inferior court or tribunal or a substitution of the order or decision which the superior court thinks should have been made. Where the writ runs, it merely enables the quashing of the impugned order or decision upon one or more of a number of distinct established grounds, most importantly, jurisdictional error, failure to observe some applicable requirement of procedural fairness, fraud and "error of law on the face of the record". Where the writ is sought on the ground of jurisdictional error, breach of procedural fairness or fraud, the superior court entertaining an application for certiorari can, subject to applicable procedural and evidentiary rules, take account of any relevant material placed before it. In contrast, where relief is sought on the ground of error of law on the face of the record, the superior court is restricted to the "record" of the inferior court or tribunal and the writ will enable the quashing of the impugned order or decision only on the ground that it is affected by some error of law which is disclosed by that record."[26] 
In considering jurisdictional error, the High Court has drawn a distinction between inferior courts which are amenable to certiorari on the one hand, and other tribunals exercising governmental powers similarly amenable. Relevantly to the District Court the High Court in Craig said: "In contrast, the ordinary jurisdiction of a court of law encompasses authority to decide questions of law, as well as questions of fact, involved in matters which it has jurisdiction to determine. The identification of relevant issues, the formulation of relevant questions and the determination of what is and what is not relevant evidence are all routine steps in the discharge of that ordinary jurisdiction. Demonstrable mistake in the identification of such issues or the formulation of such questions will commonly involve error of law which may, if an appeal is available and is pursued, be corrected by an appellate court and, depending on the circumstances, found an order setting aside the order or decision of the inferior court. Such a mistake on the part of an inferior court entrusted with authority to identify, formulate and determine such issues and questions will not, however, ordinarily constitute jurisdictional error. Similarly, a failure by an inferior court to take into account some matter which it was, as a matter of law, required to take into account in determining a question within jurisdiction or reliance by such a court upon some irrelevant matter upon which it was, as a matter of law, not entitled to rely in determining such a question will not ordinarily involve jurisdictional error." 
This Court has held in Goldsmith versus Victim's Compensation Tribunal &
Anor[27] that an appeal to the District Court pursuant to s.29 Victim's
Compensation Act is a hearing de novo and, accordingly, additional evidence may be received. Subsequent to that decision Part 6, Division 7, commencing at
Rule 48, was inserted in the District Court Rules. Rule 56 provides: "Evidence .(1) This rule applies subject to any order of the Court.

Material which was considered by the Tribunal in reaching the determination appealed from is admissible as evidence on the appeal, unless notice of objection to that admissibility (on which objection the Court shall rule) is given by a party to the other party, and to the Registrar, within 28 days after the institution of the appeal.

Evidence which is available through the operation of subrule (2) shall not be adduced otherwise than through that operation.

Subject to this rule, evidence on an appeal shall be given by affidavit.

Medical evidence on the appeal shall be given by report of a medical practitioner.

A party may require the attendance for cross-examination of the deponent to an affidavit, the maker of a report, or a person who gave evidence in the proceedings before the Tribunal, but only if the party- in the case of an affidavit or a report tendered, or of a person who gave evidence, in the proceedings, before the Tribunal- within 28 days after the institution of the appeal; or in any other case - as soon as practicable, but in any event not later than 14 days before the hearing of the appeal, gives to the other party and to the registrar written notice of the requirement for attendance.

Where a person required to attend for cross-examination is cross-examined by a party, the other party may re-examine the person." 
Thus on the appeal before McDevitt DCJ, subject to contrary order of the court, the appellant would require leave to give oral evidence. Further, whether the material considered by the tribunal, which material is made admissible by Rule 56(2), contains any oral evidence by the applicant, depends upon the decision of the Tribunal regarding whether it desires to hold an oral hearing.[28] Here the applicant had sought a determination without a hearing, and none had been held, in part, no doubt, because the Tribunal declined to grant leave to bring the application out of time.

Thus it was contended by the appellant that the comments of McDevitt DCJ in his reasons for judgment that she "gave no evidence in support of her appeal, even though she was in court" misunderstood the scope and nature of the rules relating to the receipt of evidence, and further that his Honour's finding that he "could not be persuaded that the appellants suffered any injury if she gave no evidence of it" indicated a clear disregard of the unchallenged evidence of Professor Hayes tendered by the appellant which established that: "It is my opinion that Consuelo Torrealba has suffered psychological injury as a result of becoming aware of the sexual abuse of her child and the long term injury to her child."[29] 
That evidence was admissible and required to be acted upon in accordance with
Part 6 Rule 56(6). Thus it was said there was jurisdictional error.

In my opinion, although there was clear error disclosed in the reasons for judgment given by McDevitt DCJ, the demonstrable mistakes do not constitute jurisdictional error. The mistake was to disregard the evidence of Professor
Hayes, and to conclude that absent oral evidence before him from the appellant she must fail. Those errors are errors in the function entrusted to the inferior court as part of its normal function, it having recognised and accepted its jurisdiction. The errors fall within questions of law which it is within the ordinary jurisdiction of the District Court hearing such an appeal to decide.

The errors which I have identified also do not form errors on the face of the record. The High Court has made clear in Craig that a narrow approach is to be taken in determining what constitutes the record for the purposes of orders in the nature of certiorari. In Scott, the Court adopted the passage from the judgment of Wilson J in Hockey versus Yelland[30] that: "Ordinarily, in the absence of statutory prescription, the record will comprise no more than the documentation which initiates the proceedings and thereby grounds the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, the pleadings (if any) and the adjudication."[31] 
It does not include the reasons for judgment unless they are incorporated by reference in the formal order.

So far as the documents before this Court show, no formal order was taken out.
The order should be taken to be that in the final paragraph of McDevitt DCJ's reasons namely,: "In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed." 
That does not disclose any error on its face.

The remaining ground of appeal asserted denial of procedural fairness. In respect of this ground, as the High Court made clear in Craig, this Court may take account of "any relevant material placed before it". That includes the reasons for judgment. In those reasons McDevitt DCJ said: "(In) any event I think that her credibility would be very seriously in doubt if she had (given evidence). In the original application to the Tribunal the applicant swore an affidavit dated 28 May 1993 which the Chairman of the
Tribunal found to be false. Before me, it was conceded that no application for compensation was made by the appellant until 28 May 1993, some nine years after the event, contrary to what she had sworn in her affidavit." 
In my opinion it is clear that this passage demonstrates a denial of procedural fairness. First, the claimant was not required to attend court for cross-examination as permitted by Part 6, Rule 56(6)(a). If the claimant's credibility was to be called in question, her asserted absence of truthfulness on a matter unrelated to whether she suffered injury and was entitled to compensation, should have been put to her by the second respondent. It was not. Second, it was inappropriate for the judge hearing the appeal adversely to reflect upon her credit without giving the applicant the opportunity to explain any asserted deficiency in her truthfulness. So far as the documents before this Court extend, no submission of absence of truthfulness was put to the Judge on behalf of the Tribunal. This was accepted by Counsel for the respondent. Third, McDevitt DCJ disregarded the evidence of Professor Hayes who expressed the uncontradicted view that the appellant had suffered relevant injury. He also disregarded the affidavit of the appellant which deposed to relevant injury. We were informed by Counsel for the Fund , who appeared before Mc Devitt DCJ, that she informed his Honour that if he accepted
Professor Hayes' view, which she did not challenge, there was evidence before the court sufficient to establish that the appellant was a secondary victim who had suffered relevant injury. In those circumstances, it denied the appellant procedural fairness to make a contrary finding.

In those circumstances the appeal should be upheld and an order in the nature of certiorari to quash the District Court decision should be made.

This court has no jurisdiction, in proceedings in the nature of certiorari, to determine the appropriate quantum of compensation.

ORDERS 
I would propose the following orders:
That the record of proceedings before the District Court of NSW heard on 6
February 1995 and the judgment delivered on 14 February 1995 with respect to the appeal by Conseulo Torrealba pursuant to the Victim's Compensation Act be removed to this Court.
That the judgment delivered 14 February 1995 be quashed.
That the matter be referred back to the District Court of NSW to be dealt with in accordance with law.
The second opponent is to pay the claimant's costs of this appeal.
  <case>; [(1994-1995) 184 CLR 163], -178, 179-180; <case>; [69
ALJR 873], -877, 878-879; <case>; [131 ALR 595], -601, 602-603 [(1986) 7 NSWLR 503] [(1988) 13 NSWLR 368] supra Court of Appeal 2 February 1996 (as yet unreported) Court of Appeal 18 July 1996 (as yet unreported) (1893) 6 R 67 supra 70, 71 per Lord Herschell LC, 76, 77 per Lord Halsbury  <case>; [[1970] VR 840]; [[1983] 1 NSWLR 1] [(1993) 31 NSWLR 227], 236 per Kirby P (as he then was) [20] Appeal Book, p.109.
 [21] Appeal Book, p.118-119.
 <case>; [(1913) 17 CLR 370] at 384; The Commonwealth of Australia versus Ford [(1986) 65 ALR ];
Cole versus Director General of Department of Youth and Community Services [(1987) 7 NSWLR 541] and 543.
 [23] ss8 and 9 [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/); Palmer v Clarke [(1989) 19 NSWLR 158] at 167 per Kirby P; R versus Longshaw [(1990) 20 NSWLR 554] at 564 per Gleeson CJ; R versus Mosely (1992) 28 NSWLR 725 at 739 per Gleeson CJ.
 [24] Section 69 [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).
 <case>; <case>; [69
ALJR 873] at 876.
 [27] [(1993) 30 NSWLR 410.] [28] See [ss.17(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s17.html),
Victim's Compensation Act 1987.
 [29] Appeal Book, p.44.
 <case>; [(1985) 69 ALJR 873] at 880.
 * * * 
