

Stokely-Van Camp, Inc versus New Generation Beverages Pty Ltd Matter No 2952/98 [1998] NSWSC 420 (31 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
STOKELY-VAN CAMP, INC versus NEW GENERATION BEVERAGES PTY LTD /98 August 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff seeks to enforce the restrictions imposed on a former licensed manufacturer and distributor of its product pursuant to a written agreement. 
The plaintiff owns all the rights in respect of a soft drink called Gatorade.
It is referred to in the evidence as a "sports drink" which appears to be a term for a non-carbonated flavoured water including abundant sugar, abundant salt and some other ingredients. Another description, preferred by the parties, is an isotonic beverage in which electrolytes are added as important functional ingredients.

Gatorade is a successful product in the United States of America. On 11 June , the plaintiff made an agreement with the defendants who trade as Pepsi-
Cola Bottlers Australia (PCBA). That agreement was terminated by, at the latest, 8 May 1998. Clause 7.6.3, which is as follows, survived the termination. This provides that, upon termination, PCBA shall ...
 "7.6.3 Not, for a full selling season of September to March after the date of termination or expiration, process, manufacture, distribute, market, promote or sell a 
Directly Competitive product in the Territory unless 
Stokely and Pepsi after good faith discussions agree otherwise. Termination of this Agreement shall not affect the continued enforceability of sections." 
The plaintiff seeks to restrain the defendants from processing, manufacturing, distributing, marketing, promoting or selling in Australia and New Zealand any beverage or beverage mix product which is: marketed as a sports drink or isotonic beverage in which electrolytes are added as important functional ingredients; or advertised, promoted or offered for sale as a beverage for the replacement of fluids and/or electrolytes lost during physical activity including, without limitation, a beverage known as "Allsport" up until 31 March 1999.

Various alternative orders were also sought.

There is no doubt at all that, unless restrained, PCBA will market a competing sports drink to be called "All Sport" which is a local version of a drink marketed under that name by the Pepsi-Cola Company in the United States of
America. The proposed Australian product will not be identical to the American product, in particular the flavours have been Australianised. Ultimate water melon and strawberry kiwi, which are evidently very popular in the United
States of America, have given way to green kiwi fruit and other more locally known flavours. There appears to have been other modifications to make sure that local pure foods laws are observed. Basically, however, the product is the same.

The plaintiff says that this is a very straightforward case. The licensing agreement gave PCBA full access to information about Gatorade and the agreement very properly restricted use of information by imposing the ban in clause 7.6.3. The plaintiff says that the agreement means what it says, that there is no restraint of trade involved that would be against public interest, that the parties were of equal bargaining strength, and that the agreement should be enforced.

The defendants say that the agreement is in restraint of trade, that it is invalid because of the Trade Practices Act and that in any event, it is void for uncertainty.

There is a discrete question as to just what clause 7.6.3 actually means. It is clear that this sort of drink sells better in the spring to early autumn seasons so that the parties wish to deal with the prime selling season.
However, what is the "season of September to March"? Is it (a) 1 September to March; (b) 30 September to 31 March; (c) 1 September to 1 March; (d) 30
September to 1 March; (e) 1 September to 28 February; (f) 30 September to 28
February; or (g) some other, and if so, what period? Another problem that arises is whether the defendants are to be restrained from any activity prior to the commencement of the selling season on the basis that any preparatory work would only be in accordance with a sales plan for that selling season.

Strangely these matters were not very strongly debated, probably because a few days here or there made very little difference so long as the main selling season was covered. Mr Hutley, SC who appeared with Mr Peter Brereton for the plaintiff, naturally enough put that the period was 1 September to 31 March.
He said that the natural reading of the words was that it was a period with named months, it was clear that September was included, why should not March also be included? The view I initially took was that the whole of September was included because there was no word such as "from" governing September but that the word "to" ordinarily connoted "to the beginning of" not "to and including". I have not found any assistance in the cases or in the submissions either to reinforce what Mr Hutley, SC submits or to confirm what I initially considered. After full consideration, my view is that in a commercial document of this nature the parties probably meant one period and that the period would be a season which commenced somewhere in September and ended somewhere in
March, depending on the weather conditions etc and it would be taking an artificial view to read the word "to" as meaning "up to". Accordingly, the expression covered the whole of September and the whole of March. I believe it also follows that the clause prevents preliminary ancillary work for the selling season so that if an injunction is to be given before 1 September, then it should operate from the date of grant of the injunction.

I now turn to the substantive matters in dispute.

Mr Hutley, SC and Mr Brereton have provided extensive written submissions as to why they must succeed. However, it seems to me that despite their energies
I should merely deal with the attacks which are made on the plaintiff's case by Mr Douglas, QC and Ms Bowne.

The first of these is the submission that the restraint is against public policy as an impermissible restraint of trade.

Mr Douglas, QC commenced his submissions by pointing out that depending upon when termination took place, the period of restriction would vary markedly.
Thus, if there was a termination on say 1 September 1997, then the restriction would operate until 31 March 1999, a period of about 18 months. On the other hand, if the termination took place on 30 August 1997, then the restriction would only go through to 31 March 1998, a period of six months, with different permutations and combinations producing other results. Even, as things have happened, a restriction from 8 May 1998 to 31 March 1999 is too long. He refers to Reck versus Gilham [[1995] 1 Qd R 302], where a restriction on a sub-franchisee from selling soft drinks for 18 months after termination of the sub-franchise within the sub-franchised area or one kilometre outside was held to be too great.

However, as Demack, J said at pp 307-308 of that report, "Each case must be dealt with on its own facts, and I do not think it is helpful to spend much time distinguishing ... cases on their facts." There seems to me to be a tremendous difference between a small soft drinks delivery man in Airlie Beach and the mega operation in sports drinks being considered in the instant case.

The present case is also unusual in that the demand for the relevant product is seasonal. There would not be any commercial sense in providing for a six months' restriction because that might include the whole or a great part of the winter season when sales were small. Accordingly, when looking for a reasonable time in which a restriction would operate, a whole summer selling period would appear to be reasonable and this is affirmed by the fact that both parties freely and at arm's length adopted that view. In a multi-million dollar national enterprise, the courts tend to be a little more tolerant of longer restraints than they are in connection with a worker who is deprived of the ability to earn his or her living during the time of the restraint.

Accordingly, I can see nothing in the length of time of the restraint which of itself would be an unreasonable restraint of trade.

Mr Douglas, QC then says that there was no commercial interest to protect after termination and relies heavily on the decision of Adam, J in Mobil Oil
Australia Ltd versus McKenzie <case>; [[1972] VR 315.] 
In that case, a petroleum company entered into an agreement whereby the defendants were appointed its sales representatives on the Mornington
Peninsular in Victoria. The agreement contained a clause that for nine months after termination, the defendants would not handle or sell petroleum products other than Mobil products and would not canvass or solicit any customer who had dealt with them during the term of the agreement. At p 318, his Honour said that the critical question was whether the restriction was reasonably necessary to protect the legitimate interests of the plaintiff.
He then said, "To be legitimate interests in the sense of warranting their protection by restraint against competition, I consider that the interests must be in the nature of proprietary rights, and that a commercial interest, as distinct from one involving some right of property, would not, unless the legal principles already applied should be extended, be sufficient." His
Honour declined to enforce the covenant by injunction.

As far as the researches of counsel and my own researches have discovered, there is only one case in the last 25 years where the Mobil Oil case has been discussed. That is another decision of the Supreme Court of Victoria, a decision of Southwell, J in W R Carpenter Aust Ltd versus Kleisterlee (1988) 10
ATPR [40-913]. That was a case where a manufacturer of packing materials sought to enforce a restriction after termination of a distribution agreement with the defendant. At pp 49,802-3, Southwell, J held that even if there was a legitimate interest to protect, the covenant was too wide. He thus set out the passage from Adam, J to which I have referred and merely commented that "It will not be necessary for me to consider whether that statement remains wholly correct." I thought that those words were deliberately chosen and showed some doubt as to the proposition being advanced. That, however, is a mere impression.

Both the Victorian cases distinguished the decision of the Court of Appeal in
NSW in Pyle versus Sharpe Bros Pty Ltd [[1968] 2 NSWR 511.] That was also a case involving a soft drink manufacturer. Its method of doing business was to have individuals go door to door selling soft drinks branded with the company's name in a truck bearing the company's lettering and to customers to a great extent canvassed by the company's marketing staff. The restriction was that for two years after termination of the agreement the door-to-door sales person would not be involved in the business of manufacturing or selling cordials. The NSW Court of Appeal (Walsh and Holmes, JJA, Wallace, P dissenting) upheld the restriction. Walsh, JA at p 514 said, "I think the critical question is whether it can be said that a covenant protecting the respondent from competition in relation to its own customers was all that could reasonably be required for its protection." He then agreed with Holmes,
JA that the company should succeed. Adam, J distinguished Pyle's case in the Mobil Oil case on the basis that the business was the business of the company rather than that of Mr Pyle. Southwell, J distinguished it in
Kleisterlee's case on the basis that it was only applicable on the facts to a case where there was a distributor operating in part of a metropolitan area of a large city.

As far as I can see, the only other judicial consideration of the case is
American Express International Inc versus D Thomas Associates Pty Ltd [(1990) IPR 574.] In that case the defendant, with the plaintiff's permission, established the "American Express Wine Society" to market wines by direct mail to holders of the American Express card. There was a covenant that the defendant would not at any time after the termination of the agreement use any information it might acquire to solicit any card member of American Express.
The agreement was terminated on 30 September 1990. American Express commenced proceedings to restrain the defendant from offering to sell wine to American
Express card holders. Powell, J refused the injunction. At p 611, his Honour said that the obligation in relation to non-disclosure "in so far as that obligation related to information of a confidential nature provided by the plaintiff as to its cardmembers or its methods of business, it related to legitimate interests of the plaintiff which the plaintiff was entitled to protect." His Honour cited Pyle's case as authority for that proposition.
However, in so far as the covenant prevented the defendant maintaining its business, it did not relate to any legitimate interest of the plaintiff which the plaintiff was entitled to protect.

In Heydon, The Restraint of Trade Doctrine (Butterworths, London, 1971) p , the learned author discusses what is a "legitimate interest" capable of being protected by a covenant in restraint of trade. Mr Heydon, QC supplied counsel with a draft of the forthcoming new edition of that work in which, after footnote 6 on p 259 of the current edition, the following appears, "The courts have also recognized such `interests' as a petrol company's `interest' in a stable system of outlets to the public, and the health of the petrol, football and other sporting industries and of the retail chemist trade. There has even been recognition that a covenantee has an interest meriting protection in securing and retaining customers by sole supply contracts."
Footnote 10, which appears after the words "retail chemist trade" in part says as follows, "In Mobil Oil ... at 318-9 it was suggested that legitimate interest can only be `proprietary', not `commercial': this has been overtaken by events." 
Mr Douglas, QC submits that no authority has ever overruled the Mobil Oil case and I should follow it. I do not think I should do this. First, it seems to me that the judgment unduly restricts what the Court of Appeal said in Pyle's case. Secondly, I respectfully agree with the views expressed by
Mr Heydon, QC in the forthcoming edition of his book that even if what Adam, J had said was a valid distinction to be made in 1972, the complexities of commerce and the decisions of the courts have moved on from there so that the distinction is now meaningless. Thirdly, as I said in Twenty-First Australia
Inc versus Shade 31 July 1998, unreported, the word "property" is used in this area of the law in a particular sense, and fourthly, that even outside the strict boundaries of confidential information there is an equity to prevent breach of confidence. As Jackman says in The Varieties of Restitution (Federation Press, Sydney, 1998) p 124, in another connection, "Courts have often expressed the institutional aspect by referring figuratively to information as property. But if the relevant facilitative institution is the relationship of confidentiality itself, then there is no need to supplement it by reference to other facilitative institutions, such as private property, which operate quite differently, especially against third parties." The learned author then quotes O W Holmes, J in E I Du Pont De Nemours Powder Co v Masland <case>; [244 US 100], 102 .

In my view, when a large corporation with a popular product provides all its information to a local manufacturer and distributor, there is at the very least a fiduciary relationship between them that the information will not be used for a purpose other than the implementation of the agreement.
Uninstructed by authority, I would have thought that the temptation to breach that agreement which, if it occurred, would cause irreparable damage to the person supplying the information, would be sufficient to ground a restrictive covenant preventing trade for a period. As has been said many times in recent years, because of the intricacies of the law and the propensity of business people to avoid what they have promised to do by taking advantage of all types of technicality, the law now looks more benignly on complete restraints of trade for a set period rather than attempts to prevent certain nebulous activities such as solicitation.

Apart from what I have already examined, what are the authorities that affect this point? 
Mr Hutley, SC says that a good guide is given by the decision of the Supreme
Court of Pennsylvania in Piercing Pagoda Inc versus Hoffner [351 A (2d) ]
. That case involved an ear piercing business which operated through franchises. There was a covenant that after termination the franchisee would not own, operate or participate in any ear piercing business for three years within 30 miles of an existing Piercing Pagoda franchise. The covenant was upheld as protecting a legitimate interest.

The same result was reached by Whitford, J in Prontaprint plc versus Landon Litho
Ltd [[1987] FSR 315.] That case involved a photocopying and printing franchise. The restriction was that within three years of termination of the agreement the franchisee was not to be concerned or interested directly or indirectly in the provision of a similar service within a half mile radius from the premises or within a radius of three miles from any similar premises operated by the franchisor or a licensee.

After the franchise had terminated, the defendant continued to operate a printing business under a different name with a notice in the window "Same team, new name". Thus, a person seeing the yellow pages and the name
Prontaprint would get the defendant's telephone number. The notice on the window might give customers the impression that they were still dealing with the same business. An interlocutory injunction was given after a full examination of the authorities, and it is clear that the Judge thought that there was at least an arguable case that the plaintiff had an interest that should be protected by injunction.

Accordingly, the impression I have is reinforced by the authorities. I do not consider I should follow the Mobil Oil case and I hold that there is a sufficient interest for the court to protect.

Mr Douglas, QC then says that in reality the covenant is objectively, and even subjectively, a mere restraint on competition. The plaintiff has chosen to justify the means by the end, but the means shows the real purpose is to stifle competition.

I should refer to the evidence that was given by Mr O'Neill who, between 1992 and 1996 was Vice-President/Division Counsel for the Worldwide Beverages
Division of Quaker Oats. Stokely-Van Camp is a wholly owned subsidiary of
Quaker Oats. Mr O'Neill gave his evidence from New York by video link and was cross examined by Mr Douglas, QC. In answer to a suggestion from Mr Douglas,
QC that Mr O'Neill was conscious that on termination of the agreement the distribution system could be used to distribute a competitive sports drink if not restrained, Mr O'Neill said he was conscious of that, but that was not the issue that drove clause 7.6.3. Mr Douglas, QC then put (T57): "Q. But, it was certainly one of the issues which drove it, wasn't it? 
A. No.

Q. Not at all? 
A. I was conscious of it, correct. The reason for this provision, which was unique, we did not do another provision like this that I recall, was to protect our marketing information.

The reason for the September to March proposition is because the cycle is so different from the United States that there was no way that were this product to be terminated, you wouldn't know our marketing and positioning programme for the next year. In my view, this was there to protect our marketing programme, not to protect what could have been distributed by any company.

Anybody can distribute a sports drink, in my opinion, but not anybody can distribute Gatorade having the consumer bases that we believe are necessary to make the product successful. I know that sounds arrogant, but that's what we believe.

Q. On that assumption, it was there to protect your marketing of your product by preventing PCBA from competing with your product? 
A. No, preventing them from using our confidential information which, inevitably they would not only know, but in terms of pricing, marketing, they would inevitably have to use." 
I can see no reason to reject that evidence and in fact I accept it.

Indeed, what the plaintiff feared actually happened. The agreement was terminated in May 1998 after some earlier litigation of which I know very little. However, there was clear warning for some time prior to May that the agreement would be shortly coming to an end. PCBA had access to Protocols as to the preparation of Gatorade so as to ensure that it was a clear drink not contaminated by bacteria etc in the water.

In order to clear the bacteria it is necessary to pasteurise the product.
Traditionally this has been done by putting the product into the bottle cold and then pasteurising it. This is known as "the cold fill process". Gatorade is produced by a hot fill process which involves filling the bottle with heated product which, as I understand it, instantly kills all bacteria that might be in the water. The Pepsi-Cola group of companies only have one other hot fill plant in the world and that is in Puerto Rico. There was no hot fill plant in Australia prior to Gatorade. The Protocols include specification as to the temperature at which the bottle is to be filled and the cap applied and the amount of time for which the product must be maintained at this temperature in order to kill bacteria plus other useful biological information.

The Protocols developed by the plaintiff for Gatorade were supplied to PCBA in connection with its work of producing the drink under the agreement with the plaintiff. When it appeared that the agreement was to come to an end and the defendants would have to modify the American drink All Sport for the
Australian market, the evidence clearly shows that the Gatorade Protocols were utilised by the defendants for the development of All Sport. In particular a copy of the Protocols appear to have been in the possession of a Ms Diane
Hebden. Mr Tetro, the Marketing Director for the defendants was overseeing the preparations for the launch of All Sport in Australia. In March 1998, he submitted to the Pepsi-Cola International Asia Pacific Unit in Hong Kong, where Ms Hebden worked, a proposal to launch All Sport in Australia to replace discontinued Gatorade. In due course Ms Hebden made available the Protocols.
Evidence was given by Mr Dack, the defendants' Production Manager, that he did not realise that the Protocols were confidential documents even though he admitted that he could read on them the words "Confidential Not to be Copied".
I regret to say that I cannot accept Mr Dack's evidence in this matter.

Accordingly, in my view, not only was it reasonable looking at the date of the agreement to impose a general restraint to prevent the use of the springboard of the plaintiff's confidential information to launch a new product, but the subsequent events show just how necessary it was to do so.

Accordingly, unless there is some substance in the Trade Practices Act point raised by Mr Douglas, QC with which I am about to deal, the plaintiff should succeed.

The defence says that the plaintiff runs foul of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s45.html) of the [Trade Practices Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) which prohibits a corporation from making a contract or arrangement or arriving at an understanding if the same contains an exclusionary provision. "Exclusionary provision" is defined in <case> of the Act as an understanding etc arrived at between persons any two or more of whom are competitive with each other where the provision has the purpose of preventing, restricting or limiting the supply of goods and services. Section 4D(2) says that a person is only competitive with another if, but for that understanding, it would likely to be in competition in relation to the supply or acquisition of any of the relevant goods and services.

Mr Douglas, QC says that prior to 11 June 1993, Gatorade was in fact imported into Australia. PCBA was at that time, and still is, in the soft drink trade.
The plaintiff traded elsewhere with its own plants for producing sports drink.
It then supplied concentrate to Australia so that Gatorade could be made in
Australia. Gatorade Australia Pty Ltd was formed for marketing purposes and the manufacturing and distribution agreement was instituted so that the concentrate could be made up into sports drink in Australia. Mr Douglas, QC puts that it is "likely" that the plaintiff would have come into Australia, at least in the non-alcoholic beverage market. Therefore, the defendants and the plaintiff were in competition or likely to be in competition under <case>. The agreement between the defendants and the plaintiff contained an exclusionary provision and was thus void.

Mr Hutley, SC says there was no exclusionary provision. He says the court must determine three things; (i) whether the plaintiff and the defendants were competitive with each other in the relevant sense; (ii) whether clause 7.6.3 has the purpose of preventing, restricting or limiting the supply of goods by the defendants to particular persons or classes of persons; and (iii) whether this is a matter to be dealt with under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s47.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) rather than [s 45.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s45.html) 
As to (i), Mr Hutley, SC puts that <case> requires that the parties are competitive in the sense described at the date of entering into the licensing agreement: Dowling versus Dalgety Australia Ltd [(1992) 34 FCR 109], 134. As at June 1993 there was no actual competition between the parties because the licensing agreement provided for the contrary. Thus the relevant question is whether, as at that date, but for clause 7.6.3, the parties were likely to be in competition in relation to the supply of sports drinks in Australia upon termination of the agreement.

At the relevant date, while there was a small amount of Gatorade entering
Australia by the action of people unconnected with either of the parties, there had been no importation of any Gatorade by the plaintiff, nor did it intend to so so.

Although at that date there was undoubtedly a possibility that on termination the defendants would become involved in the manufacture, distribution and/or sale of a sports drink that competed with Gatorade, what is required under the
Act is for that to have been been "likely". The only evidence is that at that time the defendants had no interest in marketing All Sport in Australia and that the most likely scenario in the parties' mind at the time was that at the termination of the agreement there would be a fresh licensing agreement.

I would agree with those submissions. Indeed, the evidence does show that although there was in the Pepsi-Cola camp the All Sport drink in 1993, a conscious decision was made to market Gatorade as the preferred product. The
United States figures tended to show that Gatorade was far more likely to gain the majority market share of sports drinks in Australia as it had in the
United States. It was only when irreconcilable differences arose between the parties that the defendants took their next best alternative of developing All
Sport for the Australian market so that they could ensure that the space in their refrigerators licensed out to sports clubs, cafes etc was stocked with their product rather than that of a competitor.

I must examine whether in 1993 the parties would be likely to be in competition. The word "likely" used in <case> of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) was considered by Deane, J in Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Ltd versus Australasian Meat
Industry Employees' Union <case>; [(1979) 42 FLR 331], 346-8. His Honour came to the view that "The preferable view is that the word `likely' is not synonymous with `more likely than not' and that if relevant conduct is engaged in for the purpose of causing loss or damage to the business of the relevant corporation, it will suffice, for the purposes of the subsection, if that conduct is, in the circumstances, such that there is a real chance or possibility that it will, if pursued, cause such loss or damage. Whether or not such conduct is likely (in that sense) to have that effect is a question to be determined by reference to well- established standards of what could reasonably be expected to be the consequence of the relevant conduct in the circumstances." The same approach to the word "likely" was taken with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) in
Global Sportsman Pty Ltd versus Mirror Newspapers Pty Ltd <case>; [(1984) 2 FCR 82], 87, and in News Limited versus Australian Rugby Football League
Ltd <case>; [(1996) 64 FCR 410], 565, the Full Federal Court took the same view of the phrase "would be likely to be" in <case>.

Accordingly, I must ask myself whether, on the facts of this case as at 1993 there was a real chance or possibility of competition in relation to the supply of sports drinks between the parties.

Mr Douglas, QC reminds me of the width of the phrase "in relation to" as expounded by Giles, J in Law Society of NSW versus Bruce [(1996) 40 NSWLR ], .

In view of the fact that All Sport was available for the defendants to produce and they had decided against it and that in 1993 both parties were happy for the defendants to manufacture and distribute Gatorade under licence, I could not be satisfied that there was a real chance or possibility that there would be competition between them.

Is there then the proscribed purpose? I have already dealt with Mr O'Neill's evidence, which I accepted, that his purpose and the plaintiff's purpose in clause 7.6.3 was not to prevent or limit the supply of goods, but rather to protect the plaintiff's property in the confidential information. Mr Hutley,
SC correctly submits that in general the proscribed purpose must be a purpose common to both parties; vide Carlton and United Breweries Pty Ltd v
Bond Brewing NSW Ltd [(1987) 16 FCR 351], 356. There may be cases where one party has a special place of power in the negotiations where this rule does not apply, but that is not this case. Accordingly, I cannot find any proscribed purpose.

My conclusions on these matters mean that it is unnecessary to consider the relationship between [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s45.html) and [47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s47.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).

It follows that the plaintiff is entitled to relief.

I make order 1 in the summons deleting the word "hereof" and substituting the words "of this order". I order the defendants to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings. The exhibits may be returned on the basis that should there be an appeal they will forthwith be returned to the court.
 * * * 
