

Tracey Lee Davies V Donna Maree Castles [1997] NSWSC 85 (20 March 1997) 
Tracey Lee DAVIES V Donna Maree CASTLES /93 
Thursday 20 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In the early morning of 25 October 1992, the plaintiff was driving her vehicle in the area of Marsden Park when it was involved in an accident with a vehicle owned and driven by the defendant. The plaintiff was injured as a result and liability is not in issue.

She was admitted to Westmead Hospital where her treating surgeon, Dr P J
McGrath, assessed her injuries as follows:
An open comminuted supracondylar fracture of the right femur extending into the knee joint.
A penetrating wound to the left knee.
An open comminuted T-shaped fracture of the lower right humerus.
A comminuted fracture of the head and neck of the right humerus.
Fracture of the right clavicle.
Fracture of the upper right ribs.
Undisplaced fracture of the right lateral malleolus.
Laceration of the right forehead.
Fracture of the left superior and inferior pubic rami.
Fracture of the right temporal bone with left temporal lobe contusion complicated by conductive hearing loss in the left ear.

Over the ensuing weeks she underwent a number of surgical procedures and was discharged in a wheelchair on 20 November 1992.

She returned to the home where she lived with her then husband and remained in a wheelchair for two months. She was unable to sleep in a normal bed, and for her meals, dressing and personal hygiene she was assisted by her husband, his mother, or a close female friend. It is common ground that her injuries were serious, but the extent of her continuing disability is very much in dispute.

The plaintiff was born on 15 September 1965 and is now 31 years old. She left school at the age of 17 and was employed over a period of years thereafter, for the most part with towing companies as a clerk or radio operator. She married in April 1990 and was not employed until April 1992, when she obtained a position as a coding clerk with a firm known as Discount Freight Express.
Around the middle of August of that year she had to take time off because of what is popularly known as an RSI condition, and the motor vehicle accident occurred just before she was due to resume work. In assessing the effect of the accident on her ability to work, this RSI condition is a matter of some importance to which I shall return.

The plaintiff gave evidence that prior to the accident her marriage was happy, she and her husband had an enjoyable social life and she was actively involved in a variety of sports. This was confirmed in the evidence of her husband,
Glen Davies, her mother-in-law, Judith Davies, and her close friend, Joanne
Bleasdale, all of whom described her as having been friendly and outgoing. Ms
Janelle Phillips, Administrative Manager of Discount Freight Express, described the plaintiff as a very satisfactory employee whose attendance, apart from the absence necessitated by her RSI condition, was excellent.

It is the plaintiff's case that she has suffered continuing disabilities arising from the injuries to her right shoulder, arm and leg. She is right handed. Her leg had been in plaster, which was removed late in 1992. She said that during the first half of 1993 she experienced pain most of the time in the shoulder, arm and leg. She could not walk very far and needed a walking stick. Movement of her right leg and arm was significantly restricted. She was unable to do the housework. She could attend to most of her personal needs, but still needed help with activities requiring her to raise her right arm, such as washing her hair. Over the twelve months from June 1993 she said there was some improvement. She did most of the housework, but was still unable to do the heavier work such as vacuuming or washing. She was not in as much pain, which was more intermittent.

As to her emotional state during that period, she said that she was angry and frustrated at her inability to do the things she used to be able to do, and was frequently in tears. Her disabilities and emotional state placed a strain on the marriage, as did the scarring which resulted from the injuries and the surgical treatment, and which embarrassed her husband. There is scarring on her right shoulder and upper arm, over her right elbow, on both knees, on her right calf, above her right ankle and on her left hip - all of which I examined in court and which are depicted in the photographs, Exhibit C. Not all of those scars would readily be concealed by clothing, particularly light clothing appropriate for warm weather.

She and her husband separated in June 1994 and she moved to the Central Coast.
She took up residence in a house occupied by a lady friend. Subsequently her friend moved out and the house was leased to Mr Robert Gilbert, who moved in with his adult foster son while she continued to live there. She and Mr
Gilbert shared a commitment to a spiritual organisation in which they were both actively involved. After a time their relationship became intimate, but she said that later that relationship soured. Mr Gilbert became involved with another lady, Ms Bridget Scotland. Notwithstanding this, Mr Gilbert continues to live at the home occupied by the plaintiff and both he and Ms Scotland gave evidence in her case. To that evidence I shall refer shortly.

She said that after the move to the Central Coast she would go for walks, but after a little while it would hurt her right leg and her back. She continued to have intermittent pain in those areas, as well as in the right shoulder and elbow. Emotionally, her anger and frustration from her condition continued and she was upset about the breakdown of her marriage. She felt that she was a different person who had lost her independence and she took to excessive drinking and smoking. She would try to control her feelings of anger by walking to a place away from the home where she could sit quietly, or to a secluded area where she could scream without anyone hearing her. She found some emotional solace in the spiritual organisation to which I have referred.
In the context of that assembly she adopted a new name, which she saw as symbolic of the start of a new life. She felt that this helped her cope with emotional stress, although it did not relieve her physical pain.

As to her continuing disabilities, the plaintiff's evidence was that she experiences stiffness and pain in her right arm and leg upon getting up of a morning and that, initially, she is unable to walk without her stick. After a long, hot shower her mobility improves and she enjoys a morning walk. However, she walks more slowly than she used to and her gait is uneven due to some shortening of her right leg. Eventually walking causes pain in her lower back, her right knee and, sometimes, her right ankle. Her limp becomes more pronounced as she gets tired. She said that walking is assisted by wearing sandshoes with heel insertions, which she wears most of the time. She tries to use her walking stick as little as possible.

Prolonged sitting causes pain in her back and prolonged standing hurts both her back and her right leg. She continues to have pain and reduced strength in her right elbow, which she cannot straighten. Likewise, she experiences continuing pain and restriction of movement in her right shoulder. Generally her mobility is best in the morning after her shower, but after a couple of hours she starts to stiffen up again. She needs to rest of an afternoon. Cold weather exacerbates her condition.

She previously had a manual car, without power steering, but can no longer drive such a vehicle. She now drives an automatic car with power steering and with a spinner knob attached to the steering wheel so that she can steer with her left hand. She has to have a car as she has difficulty getting on and off buses and with access to railway stations.

She said that while she does some lighter housework, she remains unable to do the heavier tasks, such as cleaning the bathroom and kitchen, vacuuming, changing the bed, washing clothes, or cleaning her car. This work is done by
Mr Gilbert, assisted sometimes by his foster son.

She was accomplished at sewing and, before the accident, used to make most of her own clothes. After the accident she found that she was very much slower at sewing. She undertook a one year Technical College course in clothing assembly and says that her competence has generally improved, but it still takes her much longer to complete a garment than it used to.

For a period before she separated from her husband, she did some typing for a few hours a day at the home of her parents-in-law, who conducted a business.
She was able to manage this only because she was under no pressure to complete the work and could take a break as often as she wished. She has a computer which she uses to write letters, but she said that she could not use it for more than about half an hour at a time because of pain in her elbow and shoulder. Generally, pain affects her ability to concentrate on any task.

For about three months in 1995, she did voluntary work one day a week at a local school, helping with the remedial reading program. She said that she enjoyed it, but that she had problems with her leg and back sitting on the short chairs designed for young children. She could manage by regularly getting up and moving around but eventually, partly because of the physical difficulty and partly because of the challenging nature of the work, she gave it up.

She continues to have difficulty coping emotionally with her pain and disabilities, although she believes that she is starting to accept things as they are. Whereas she once thrived on stress, she can no longer cope with it at all. She still cries sometimes and continues to seek relief by withdrawing to a secluded area. She meditates daily. While she is regaining some self esteem, she is not as outgoing as she used to be and does not like meeting new people.

Broadly speaking, the plaintiff's account of the effect of her injuries, both physical and emotional, was corroborated by the observations of witnesses who had contact with her through the years after the accident: her husband, her mother-in-law, Ms Bleasdale, Mr Gilbert and Ms Scotland.

Before moving to the Central Coast she was having physiotherapy and occasionally visited her local doctor. She did not like to take tablets for the pain. Since moving to the Central Coast, she has had massage and acupuncture from Mr David Legge of the Woy Woy Osteopathic Centre. She now sees him once a week and finds that his treatment gives her short term relief.
She has occasionally visited a general practitioner, Dr Sooy, when she has been in a particularly bad state, either physically or emotionally.

The Medical Evidence.
 
The plaintiff's account of her progress since the accident and her current physical and emotional state find support, to a greater or lesser extent, in the opinions of the medical practitioners relied upon in her case. Dr McGrath reported, in March 1993, that there would "almost certainly be moderate restriction of movement of the right shoulder, quite a marked restriction of movement of the right elbow, and moderate restriction of function of the right knee." 
In April 1994 he wrote: "I do believe her general condition will slowly improve, although she may not regain any further movement in either the right shoulder or right elbow." 
Significantly, in July 1995, his opinion was: "She continues to experience discomfort and some residual disability, particularly from the right leg and right elbow. Further deterioration could occur, and the chance of degenerative arthritis in the right knee." 
The reports of Dr Douglass Seaton, orthopaedic specialist, are entirely pessimistic as to her prognosis. In a report of 27 September 1994 he described her outlook as "hopeless". Among his conclusions were the following observations: "The fracture of the lower end of the right humerus is in a hopeless situation because of its comminution and will deteriorate with time because of the bone fragmentation leading to post-traumatic osteo-arthritis. .... Xrays of the right femur ... showed that the knee joint had been involved with a supra- condylar fracture and this too will lead in the long term to osteo-arthritic changes in the right knee. ...

This woman's main problem is in the right arm as described and the right leg as described. The gross shortening in her right leg, of course, is going to cause future back problem, the extent of which will depend on her activities." 
A later report, after a consultation in July 1995, is equally gloomy, observing that because of her efforts to occupy herself, her condition had deteriorated.

Dr Sooy, the general practitioner, wrote in a report of August 1994: "In my opinion, the best that this woman can hope for with her joint injuries is that they remain static. Unfortunately, this is unlikely, particularly for injuries involving the joints. Injured joints tend to develop quite early in life, post traumatic osteoarthritis." 
In a consultation in July 1995 he observed some slight improvement of her condition but, in a report of December 1995, he wrote: ".... she is unable to carry out ordinary mundane tasks without risk of further injury. In my opinion her future capacity in this regard will not improve. In all probability as she grows older her disabilities will increase." 
Finally, in a report of February 1996, he concluded: "She has a number of joint injuries as mentioned in previous reports and at present their functions remain static. In the future these injured joints will tend to age at a more rapid rate than the rest of her body and she will develop, early in life, post traumatic osteoarthritis." 
Dr Jill Middleton, a specialist in rehabilitation medicine, saw the plaintiff in December 1995 and, in respect of the injuries to her shoulder, elbow and knee, reported: "...these problems would prevent her returning to activities of a demanding nature in terms of lifting or manual handling through her right arm or while in stance or carrying while walking. She would also be limited in her capacity for standing and walking activities to short duration exercise without any heavy lifting or carrying, and with avoidance of rough or uneven or dangerous terrain, and avoidance, particularly of a lot of slopes or stairs. In addition, she would be limited in her capacity for prolonged repetitive simple movements (even of a physically light nature) or prolonged unrelieved static posturing of her right upper and lower limbs, and these restrictions would be permanent." 
The doctor went on: "With her painful back disorder, she would be likely to continue with significant limitations in her capacity to tolerate prolonged sitting into the foreseeable future and, as a result, would in my opinion be restricted to activities (whether of a work, leisure or domestic nature) that were light, physically varied, but basically sedentary." 
The plaintiff's case also received some support from expert evidence tendered by the defendant. Dr James Guest, in a report of July 1993, wrote: "... she has considerable restriction of movement of the right shoulder and right elbow which limits many activities with the right arm, she has moderate restriction of movement and considerable pain associated with the fracture of the right femur which extended into the knee joint ...

In all, she has made a very good recovery but there will be a considerable amount of permanent impairment ...

Social and recreational activities will be considerably curtailed by pain and restriction of movement in her right shoulder, right elbow and right knee ...

Her ability to lead a normal life has been considerably impaired as a result of injuries received in this accident." 
Dr Guest gave evidence which was to the same effect. In cross examination he generally agreed that the continuing symptoms of which the plaintiff complains are consistent with the history she gave him and his examination of her. His view might best be summarised in an answer he gave in cross examination: "... As I have said already, she has had extremely severe injuries, multiple injuries, and I think that she was doing well to have survived and got to the stage that she is at at the present time. So in that sense I think she has made a good recovery. She hasn't got rid of all her symptoms and she will never get back to normal, looking at it in the broad picture." 
He also predicted the onset of osteoarthritis.

Dr Colin Moore, who saw the plaintiff in October 1994, reported that she had restricted movement in her right shoulder and elbow which he considered unlikely to improve. In evidence, he accepted Dr Guest's opinion that she would be permanently impaired, although he thought to a lesser extent. He believed that there had been improvement over the period between Dr Guest's consultation with the plaintiff and his. He observed her to walk with a limp, because of the shortness of her right leg, and accepted that she may well experience backache as a result. Dr Garry Scarf, who examined her upper limbs only, gave evidence that she is left with significant problems in her right elbow and shoulder and expected that she would have difficulty carrying out heavier household work on a routine basis. Dr Ian Bryan, who gave evidence, saw the plaintiff in December 1995 and, in a report noted: "She has restricted movement of the right shoulder and right elbow and continuing problems with the right leg ...

Her complaints are acceptable and likely to continue. The injuries are sufficient to interfere with her daily activities ... " 
He considered her condition to be "reasonably stationary".

The plaintiff's account of her varying mobility during the day, and the effect of cold weather, found support in the opinions of Dr Middleton, Dr Guest, Dr
Scarf and Dr Bryan. All the experts referred to also expressed their opinions about her capacity for work, but that is a significant matter in this case with which I shall deal later in this judgment. I shall also deal separately with her need for domestic assistance.

In a report of Dr Thomas Furber, plastic surgeon, who examined the plaintiff in August 1994 at the request of her solicitors, her scarring is detailed with greater precision than my own summary in this judgment. The report concludes: "It is now considered that a high degree of disability exists in relation to the scars due to the reduction in function and also to the need to protect the areas from heat and sun exposure.

It is considered that the scarring generally is severely disfiguring and this would be permanent as revisionary surgery could not reduce it to any reasonable extent." 
Dr Victor Zielinski, retained by the defendant's solicitors, was also of the view that not much could be done to improve the scars. His report concludes: "As far as the degree of scarring goes, she has quite a number of scars, all down the right side of her body. Most of them can be hidden by clothes, but nevertheless, they are permanent and disfiguring. Her degree of disfigurement is moderate and would no doubt have some affect (sic) on her, in terms of being embarrassed about wearing certain types of clothing." 
The plaintiff's solicitors retained a psychiatrist, Dr Phillip Greenberg, who saw her in November 1994 and October 1995. After the first consultation Dr
Greenberg reported: "Intermittently she has suffered from a Reactive Depressive State secondarily to the pain, discomfort and disability and her impaired self-esteem consequent on her physical injuries and her rejection by her husband and subsequent separation. Mrs Davies, at interview, impressed with having made valiant efforts to overcome these emotional problems but the prognosis must be guarded in view of the intractable nature of her physical disabilities. The prognosis would be improved if she were able to find some regular employment within her physical capacity." 
His opinion remained unchanged after the later consultation.

In evidence Dr Greenberg said that the pain suffered by the plaintiff, and the depression resulting from it, would affect her concentration. I have already referred to the breakdown of the plaintiff's relationship with Mr Gilbert, which appears to have occurred towards the end of 1994 or early in 1995, and the development of his liaison with Ms Scotland. There was also evidence that
Mr Gilbert's foster son was mentally disturbed and caused difficulties in the household. Dr Greenberg said that she had not mentioned these matters to him and agreed that they might also make her depressed. Nevertheless, he saw her condition as consistent with the history she gave him, together with the medical reports he had examined, whilst acknowledging that her depression might be exacerbated from time to time by new circumstances.

The Video.
 
As earlier observed, it is the extent of the plaintiff's continuing disability which is the real contest in this trial. It is the defendant's case that the plaintiff has exaggerated her current symptoms and, in fact, suffers nothing like the degree of pain and restriction of movement which she alleges.
Great reliance is placed upon a video of the plaintiff taken on 20 January by a private investigator engaged on behalf of the defendant. The video tape displays the times of the events depicted.

At 10.53 am the plaintiff is seen to walk through a covered parking area to what appears to be a shopping complex. At 11.17 am she is seen to return to her vehicle in the parking area. She is carrying some plastic shopping bags in her left hand and a soft drink can in her right. She places the can on the roof of the car, opens the front driver's side door with her right hand, leans into the car and places the shopping bags on the front passenger's seat with her left hand. She then takes the soft drink can from the roof of the car in her left hand and gets into the driver's seat. She closes the driver's door, apparently with her right hand. She grasps her lap sash seatbelt with her right hand and fastens it. She winds the driver's window down, apparently with her right hand. She then reverses the car from its parking spot, manipulating the spinner knob on the steering wheel with her left hand whilst holding the can in her right hand. It is now 11.19 am. During this segment of the video a view of the plaintiff is sometimes obscured by vehicles or people passing between her and the cameraman.

At 11.22 am the plaintiff is seen to park the vehicle in a street and alight from it. She pushes the driver's door open with both hands, then closes it with her left. She steps onto the footpath, at the same time transferring the soft drink can from her right hand to her left and depositing it in a rubbish bin. She enters what appears to be either a shop or an office, mounting a step as she does so. At 11.23 am she emerges from those premises, returns to the car and gets into it. On this occasion she uses both hands to open the door, but pulls it closed with her right.

At all times she appears to walk at a normal pace, although with a slight limp. She does not use a walking stick. Notwithstanding her evidence that she normally wears sandshoes with inserts, on this occasion she is wearing thongs (footwear which counsel for the defendant delighted in describing as "shoes that flip-flop").

Cross examined about the video, the plaintiff said that she had good days and bad days in terms of her mobility. Certainly, the video was taken on what appears to be a sunny day in mid summer at a time of day when, on the plaintiff's evidence, the movement of her joints would be at its best. She had already given evidence that she did not use her walking stick all the time, and she said that on this occasion her stick was in the car. She said that she did not always wear the sandshoes to which she had referred and that at times she found thongs comfortable. As to the use of her right hand, particularly for taking hold of her seatbelt, she explained that she is right handed and that she had never thought of using her left arm for that purpose. On the video she is seen to reach behind her to seize the belt, in an action which does not appear to involve raising her arm significantly. She said that it is the raising of the arm with which she has difficulty, not moving it backwards or across her body.

Mr Gilbert gave evidence of his observation of the plaintiff's mobility in the course of a day, which was consistent with her own account. He was shown the video and seemed to be able to accommodate it with his evidence, saying that she was most active in the period before lunchtime. Ms Scotland was not shown the video, but said that the plaintiff was less flexible in her movements towards the end of the day and generally moved more freely in warmer weather.
Ms Bleasdale continued to see the plaintiff at infrequent intervals after she moved to the Central Coast, and also spoke of the effect of the weather on her. She also was not shown the video. These three witnesses knew of the video before they were called to give evidence, but how much they knew of what it depicted is unclear.

The plaintiff's mother-in-law, Mrs Davies, was unable to comment on the matter as she had seen her very infrequently since the move to the Central Coast. The plaintiff's husband had continued to see her about every two months since the separation. In chief he said that she always walked with a limp and used her stick. Shown the video in cross examination, he said that he could observe a slight limp and added that the plaintiff would grow progressively weaker during the course of a day. There is nothing to suggest that he had any knowledge of the video prior to giving evidence.

Of the medical witnesses, only Dr Middleton and Dr Bryan were shown the video.
Nothing in it caused Dr Middleton to alter her opinion. The plaintiff's ability to walk short distances reasonably freely and to use her right arm as she did was consistent with Dr Middleton's observations. Dr Bryan considered that on the video the plaintiff was moving with much greater freedom and less limp, and using her right arm to a greater extent, than he had observed. An opinion was also sought from Mr Vincent de Giovanni, a vocational psychologist to whose evidence I shall refer later. I am unable to give his view any significant weight. He had not seen the plaintiff since September 1993, his expertise is not medical and, as will be seen, much of his reports is based upon the opinions of other experts with whom he collaborated and who did not, themselves, give evidence. Three experts called by the defendant, Dr Guest, Dr
Moore and Dr Scarf, were interposed in the course of the plaintiff's examination in chief before she was confronted with the video in cross examination. No doubt for tactical reasons, those witnesses were not shown the video and I do not have the benefit of their opinions about it.

I found Dr Middleton a helpful and informative witness and, while meaning no disrespect to Dr Bryan, I prefer her evidence to his on this aspect and, indeed, generally. Counsel for the defendant submitted that I would find that
Mr Gilbert, Ms Scotland, Ms Bleasdale, and possibly Mr Davies had colluded to give evidence about the video favourable to the plaintiff, and that I should reject their evidence accordingly. While the recollection of each of them might be flawed in certain respects, none of them struck me as deliberately untruthful. More importantly, I found the plaintiff to be a frank and forthright witness whose evidence I substantially accept. That view is unshaken by a video tape of her movements on one morning for periods so brief as to aggregate a matter of minutes only.

Employment.
 
Early in this judgment I outlined the plaintiff's employment prior to the accident. She gave evidence that her previous employment as a radio operator involved listening to radios, answering telephones, and using the radio to call people to give them jobs. In terms of physical movement, it involved a lot of writing and reaching for telephones and the radio. She had worked in a small area where she could move around from time to time. However, she said that that type of work is now computer operated and she would be required to sit at her work station without leaving it for perhaps six hours a day. The work is constant involving, as she put it, "incredible pressure".

She said that she would not be able to write for long enough to enable her to undertake clerical work. I have already referred to her evidence of difficulty in using a computer, in sitting for long periods, and in maintaining concentration when experiencing pain. She did not feel that she could work under pressure (whatever the occupation).

I have also referred earlier to her skill as a dressmaker. She said that, whereas she might complete a garment in four hours before the accident, it now takes her two days. She estimated that, working at a pace she could manage, she might earn about $100 a month from dressmaking. But for the accident, she had planned to remain in employment until the normal retirement age.

There was a variety of expert opinion about the plaintiff's capacity to re- enter the work force. Dr Seaton did not consider that any rehabilitation would help her to get back to work, and saw it as useful only to give her some interest in life so as to prevent her from succumbing to boredom. Dr Sooy considered that she could not maintain even a part-time job as a computer operator, and expressed the view that generally "she is effectively 100 percent disabled in regard to gainful employment and will remain so." On the other hand, Dr McGrath considered that it was desirable for her to retrain for a sedentary occupation. In a report of April 1994, he did not see her as fit for fulltime employment as a coding clerk, but thought she might be able to cope with up to three or four hours per day in that position.

None of these doctors gave evidence, but Dr Middleton, who did, had this to say in her report of December 1995: "Vocationally, Ms Davies would be restricted to light, physically varied, but basically sedentary types of work activities such as some forms of middle to higher level clerical/administrative work. She would not be fit for work of a prolonged repetitive nature in terms of right arm activities, nor of any manually demanding requirements, nor for work requiring prolonged sitting in one work station. She needed to be in a situation where she was working at several work stations in several positions and freely able to move and vary her positions, postures and movements and work activities through the working day and the working week. Should any return to work be planned, then it should be undertaken on a trial basis initially on part time hours, and then a gradual upgrading programme developed subject to there being no problems with exacerbations of her symptoms. In addition, she would have some difficulties physically accessing work sites and would, in practical terms, need to travel by car to and from most work sites and be able to park her car close to her personal work station area, or alternatively, work from her own home base.
 .... She may certainly be able to do some part time dress making or seamstress work, particularly from her own home base, provided pressure to achieve to time limits was not a factor.

Overall, as a result of considerations such as these, I felt that it was likely that this woman would have great difficulty re-entering the open labour market in the foreseeable future, particularly on any prolonged sustained basis in full time employment." 
Dr Middleton gave evidence to the same effect, emphasising that the plaintiff could work only in conditions which were flexible, which enabled her to take regular breaks and to move around and where she was not under pressure to meet deadlines. She concluded: ".... she is much less likely to get a job because she has got very significant physical injuries and disabilities which inevitably are going to make her an unattractive employee, and they are very real disabilities that are going to have a very real impact on her capacity to perform her job requirements, so that employers are going to be able to make a good argument that she is not going to have a good capacity or ability to do the job requirement, not that she had been denied the position because she has general disability." 
Dr Guest, in his report of July 1993, considered that the plaintiff was ready to start a period of retraining for employment and, in evidence, he said that clerical work would be within her capacity. He said also that she could manage work as a radio operator, although he did not claim to know much about the demands of that work. He acknowledged the adverse effect of pain on concentration. Dr Moore, in his report of October 1994, considered that she was fit enough to resume her pre-injury duties as a coding clerk and for secretarial work, although initially she would need to work shorter hours. In evidence he said that she should not experience pain using a computer at an ergonomically designed work station. In his report, Dr Scarf wrote that she would be unlikely to be able to resume her pre-accident employment because of her RSI condition, a matter to which I shall turn in a moment, but that she could manage a variety of other jobs such as pharmacy assistant, bank clerk, or a radio despatcher.

Dr Bryan, in reports of December 1995, expressed the view that the plaintiff would be fit to do light or moderate work, but added, "the continuing problems are sufficient to interfere significantly with her daily activities and her ability to work." In evidence, after being shown the video, he expressed more confidence in her working capacity. In a report of January 1996 he expressed the view that she was fit to work as a radio operator for a tow truck company or a taxi company, although he acknowledged that the latter would be more exacting and would require some rehabilitative training. He added that, also with some rehabilitative training, she could manage public service clerical positions. He adhered to these views in evidence, explaining that a position as radio operator for a taxi company would be more exacting because of the volume of work.

On behalf of the defendant, the plaintiff was examined also by Dr Helen
Mackie, a specialist in rehabilitation medicine, Ms Margi MacMaster, occupational therapist, and Mr Vincent de Giovanni, a vocational psychologist.
These three consultants worked as a team and the report of Mr de Giovanni was based, to a significant extent, on the opinions of Dr Mackie and Ms MacMaster.
Reports from all three were before me, but only Mr de Giovanni gave evidence.

Dr Mackie saw the plaintiff on three occasions between September 1993 and
March 1995. In a report of May 1995, Dr Mackie concluded that the plaintiff: "... appears therefore to have the intellectual capacity to run a small business and she has the sustained interest in dressmaking without the full range of skills required. She also appears to have significant physical incapacity which would make open employment difficult and home based work more feasible in terms of personalised setup and pacing." 
Also before me was a report of Ms Fiona Doran, rehabilitation counsellor with the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service, following an assessment carried out in January 1995. Ms Doran also concluded that the plaintiff would be unsuitable to return to "fulltime open employment" and saw self employment as a dressmaker as her more viable employment option. Ms MacMaster interviewed the plaintiff and carried out functional testing of her capabilities. She concluded that she has the capacity for sedentary work involving manual dexterity skills, provided she worked at table height with allowance for "pause stretch breaks and postural adjustments." 
Mr de Giovanni assessed the plaintiff in September 1993 and, in his report, concluded that she could find suitable employment without retraining. He wrote: "She would be capable of returning to work as a radio operator for a tow truck company. She would be capable of undertaking general clerical work in a small office. She could seek employment as a clerical assistant within the public service." 
He considered that her employment history was not commensurate with her intellectual capacity and that, with suitable training, other avenues of employment might be open to her.

In evidence, Mr de Giovanni did not agree with Dr Mackie's 1995 assessment that the plaintiff would have difficulty with open employment, although he acknowledged that he had not seen the plaintiff since 1993. It is clear that his assessment of her physical capacity for various types of work was based on the objective testing of Ms MacMaster which, he conceded, did not take account of her level of pain or her ability to handle stress.

As mentioned earlier in this judgment, the plaintiff contracted an RSI condition before the accident whilst working at Discount Freight Express. In
August 1992, she felt pain in her right wrist and elbow and could not hold a pen. She took about two weeks off and consulted Dr Daryl Li, a general practitioner at Rooty Hill. She returned to work, but lasted only half a day before the problem recurred. She was then treated by Dr Gordon Norris of
Blacktown, and she said that her condition eventually improved to the point where she had no problem with her arm. As observed, it was at the time she was due to return to work that the accident occurred.

Before me were reports of Dr Li and Dr Norris, but neither gave evidence. Dr
Li diagnosed tendonitis and sent the plaintiff for a course of physiotherapy.
According to his report, she improved to a point where she had only minor pain on 21 August and he considered that she could resume work. However, given that the pain returned when she did so, he concluded that she would not be fit to return to work of that kind. He saw her condition as the result of the repetitive use of her forearm working with a calculator. He thought that she would be fit for other types of work not involving the use of her forearm in that way. He concluded by expressing confidence that she would recover completely in time.

Dr Norris treated the plaintiff with a program of physiotherapy, home exercises, heat treatment and a topical gel. He wrote that she gradually improved and that he had cleared her to return to work on 26 October, initially for reduced hours. He concluded in his report that, but for the accident, she "would have been capable of her full duties, for normal hours, within a further one to two weeks after her initial reduced hours week ... ".

The matter was explored in the evidence of Dr Guest, who described the condition as right lateral epicondylitis. He said that it is amenable to treatment and that, if the symptoms disappear, the patient could normally return to the same type of occupation. However, given the plaintiff's history of returning to work on one occasion and finding that the symptoms recurred, he thought it likely that they would again return if she undertook the same tasks. Dr Scarf, who described the condition as medial epicondylitis with flexor tendonitis, reported that it is recalcitrant and "can recur on exposure to the same type of activity". Dr Moore was content to use the broad term,
RSI, and said that, although it manifests itself physically, its aetiology is psychological. According to him, one could not say that the condition would necessarily respond to treatment because the "underlying factors in the individual suffering from RSI" may not be "altered by psychiatric treatment".

I have earlier referred to the favourable evidence of Ms Phillips, the
Administrative Manager at Discount Freight Express. Ms Phillips said that, if the plaintiff had returned to work as planned, she would have been permitted to work for shorter hours and a further medical review would have been undertaken. If that review were satisfactory, she would have continued in her position as a Coding Clerk. If it were not, every attempt would have been made to employ her in an area suitable to her physical capabilities at the same remuneration. She said that there were other suitable tasks within the organisation, such as switchboard operation or customer enquiry service.

Domestic Assistance.
 
The plaintiff's husband gave evidence that initially he was spending about hours a week attending to domestic chores, but those hours gradually reduced. During 1993 it was about 30 hours per week. For the period of roughly months from June 1993 until their separation, he said that he spent about hours per week attending to the plaintiff. Mr Gilbert gave evidence that, since moving in with the plaintiff, he and his foster son shared most of the housework. His son moved out at the end of 1995. He said that he, personally, has spent 15 hours per week on the housework and between 11 and 12 hours per week attending to the personal needs of the plaintiff.

Dr McGrath, after reviewing the plaintiff in July 1995, reported that she would need domestic help for about ten hours per week. Dr Seaton, who also reviewed her in July 1995, estimated that she would need at least 20 hours per week of domestic help, and predicted that that need would increase. Dr
Middleton, who saw her in December 1995, considered that she would need six to eight hours per week of domestic assistance, and the help of a handyman for one to two hours per week. Dr Guest saw the plaintiff in July 1993, but expressed no view as to her need for domestic assistance. Dr Moore saw her in
October 1994, and was of the opinion that she was not, then, in need of any assistance. Further, having reviewed the report of Dr Guest, Dr Moore concluded that she was sufficiently recovered in July 1993 not to have required assistance then. He allowed that, prior to July 1993, she might have been "sufficiently disadvantaged by her injuries" to have required household assistance for up to four hours per week. Dr Mackie, in a report of June 1995, considered that she then required no more than one to two hours fortnightly.

Conclusions.
 
I shall deal now with the various heads of damage upon which the plaintiff's claim was based. As to economic loss, domestic assistance and medical treatment (past and future), the defendant disputed that they were fairly referable to the accident, but did not argue with the figures upon which they were based.
Non-Economic Loss: 
I have earlier expressed the view that the plaintiff was a credible witness and I do not think that she has exaggerated her condition. There is no doubt that the accident visited upon her very serious injuries. I accept that the injuries to her right shoulder, arm and leg cause her significant continuing disabilities and, from the medical evidence, it seems likely that her condition will deteriorate as osteoarthritis sets in. She is a young woman.
Her scarring is by no means insubstantial. I am satisfied that the breakdown of her marriage was the result of the effects of her injuries, both physical and psychological. Their emotional impact upon her has been grave, and her lifestyle has been altered irrevocably.

In my view, her economic loss should be assessed at 60 percent of the maximum amount determined under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). That maximum is currently $247,000, so that the plaintiff's entitlement is $148,200.
Out of Pocket Expenses: 
Out of Pocket expenses were agreed at $16,875.83, of which the defendant's insurer has paid $12,738.83.
Past Economic Loss: 
The plaintiff claims loss of wages from 26 October 1992 to date at varying weekly amounts which are set out in a schedule provided to me. For the financial year 1993/94 a small amount earned by the plaintiff, also set out in that schedule, must be deducted. The defendant challenges the proposition that the plaintiff's lack of employment is wholly attributable to the accident.

After careful consideration of all the evidence touching upon this matter, I am satisfied that the injuries sustained in the accident brought the plaintiff's employment in the open labour market to an end. It may be that she could have performed some of the tasks involved in her previous positions with regular breaks, but she could not have done so without pain. It was as to this matter in particular that I was impressed by the practical and humane approach of Dr Middleton. Relevant extracts from her report and oral evidence are set out above. I agree with Dr Middleton that the plaintiff's disabilities have made her a most unattractive employee.

However, there is a question to what extent her continued employment might have been affected by the RSI condition. Dr Norris, who was treating her for that condition at the time of the accident, was apparently optimistic about her capacity to resume her normal duties. Against that, one must have regard to the body of medical opinion, to which I have earlier referred, that her condition would be likely to recur. On the other hand, the evidence of Ms
Phillips that the company would have tried to find her other duties if it did, whilst less than an iron-clad guarantee of continued employment, is significant.

Allowance must be made for the RSI condition, but to quantify it is no easy task. Doing the best I can, I have determined that it should be recognised by a 30 percent reduction of the amount claimed for loss of wages. Past economic loss should be assessed accordingly.
Future Economic Loss: 
The plaintiff claims loss of wages on the basis of a current weekly figure for a comparable employee, which is set out in the schedule, for a residual working life of 34-1/2 years. The schedule also sets out amounts arrived at on the basis of lesser weekly figures, assuming I find some residual working capacity. Again, the defendant contests the claim on the basis that the plaintiff's future working capacity is complicated, not by the injuries resulting from the accident, but by the pre-existing RSI condition.

For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that, as a result of the accident, the plaintiff will not re-enter the open labour market. I have earlier referred to the reports of Dr Mackie and Ms Doran on this aspect, and I accept that her only realistic option is home based work which she could undertake at her own pace. Even with this type of work, I am mindful of my finding that her condition generally will deteriorate over time. I do not consider the plaintiff's estimate of about $25 per week from sewing as a reliable foundation for the calculation of her residual earning capacity. I think it preferable, to give effect to this factor, to arrive at a deduction from the claim for future loss of wages expressed as a percentage which I assess at 20 percent.

Her RSI condition should be recognised in the deduction for vicissitudes. In lieu of the normal 15 percent, this should be 30 percent. It will be seen that
I have placed less significance on her RSI condition in assessing the future wage loss than I did in respect of the past wage loss. In my view it is likely that she will come to accommodate her income earning activity to that condition.

In the result, the amount allowed for future economic loss should be based on the weekly figure for a comparable employee, to which I have referred, but should be reduced by 50 percent.
Domestic Assistance: 
The plaintiff's claim for domestic assistance, past and future, is based upon the need for assistance for ten hours per week, after deducting six hours per week in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). The claim for future domestic assistance is based upon a life expectancy of a little over 51 years and, again, both claims have been formulated on the basis of figures supplied in the schedule. The defendant's case is that such domestic assistance as the plaintiff might have required in the past, or might require in the future, would not exceed six hours per week, so that no amount should be awarded under this head.

I find the estimates of the time spent in care of the plaintiff by her husband and, more particularly, by Mr Gilbert, over-generous. The doctors who considered the matter, and to whose evidence I have referred, supplied a bewildering variety of estimates. I have earlier summarised the evidence of the plaintiff in relation to the matter, which was to the effect that from about mid 1993 she has been able to do the lighter housework, but the heavier tasks have been beyond her. In this regard, also, it must be borne in mind that her condition will deteriorate.

Again, I find most assistance in the report of Dr Middleton, which appears consistent with the plaintiff's own evidence of her capabilities. Dr
Middleton's estimate was six to eight hours per week of domestic assistance and, in addition, handyman help of one or two hours per week. Looking at the matter in a broad, common sense way, my conclusion is that the appropriate figure is ten hours per week, both for the past and the future. Consistently with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the Act, the plaintiff's claim commences from a date six months after the accident and, after deducting the initial six hours in accordance with the section, the weekly figure becomes four hours. Using the weekly wage figures set out in the schedule, domestic assistance should be assessed accordingly, with the usual 15 percent deduction from the amount for future assistance.
Future Medical Treatment.
 
Given the likelihood of her deterioration, I consider that the plaintiff is entitled to provision for the services of a general practitioner, an osteopath, and an orthopaedic surgeon, for the rest of her life. Calculations have been made in the schedule, based upon a certain frequency of visits at a given consultation fee over a 50 year period. The amount allowed under this head should be assessed accordingly.
Car.
 
I have referred earlier to the evidence that the plaintiff now drives a car with certain modifications to cater for her disabilities. She cannot now drive a car with a manual transmission, and she needs power steering. Exhibit E is a document from the NRMA setting out the relative capital cost, depreciation and running expenses of a sedan commonly used in Australia, the Mitsubishi Magna, depending upon whether the transmission is automatic or manual. The document also sets out the current cost of the modifications required by the plaintiff and assumes that a new car would be required every six years. I consider that the plaintiff is entitled only to the cost of the modifications on the basis that she would require a new car every six years: eight over the period of her life expectancy. The amount under this head should be calculated accordingly.
Interest.
 
The plaintiff is entitled to interest in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s73.html) of the Act. Whether I should make any order in the light of the requirements of the [Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/haosa1995370/), is a matter upon which I shall hear argument if the parties are unable to reach agreement.

I request the parties to bring in short minutes to give effect to my conclusions.
 * * * 
