

Daniel Michael Jordon versus Chin [1996] NSWSC 386 (30 August 1996) 
DANIEL MICHAEL JORDAN versus CHIN /94 
FRIDAY 30 AUGUST 1996 
REVISED THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This action is before the Court for assessment of damages pursuant to the Motor Accidents Act. The plaintiff is a young man born in Ireland on 21 May 1964. After education to about the age of sixteen years he followed now irrelevant employment, until commencing an apprenticeship as a plasterer, which he completed. As will later appear, he developed very special skills, particularly in refined work upon decorated ceilings and the construction and restoration of high quality buildings. 
He came to Australia in about 1988. For a brief period he went to New Zealand.
Whilst in Australia in what I might call the early years he performed relatively routine work as an employed tradesman plasterer. He married; his wife is employed as a dental nurse and they have one small child. It is his stated intention to permanently remain in Australia. The plaintiff and his wife have a home in the suburb of Randwick in New South Wales.

On 13 December 1993 the plaintiff was riding a motor cycle when it was struck by a car emerging into an intersection without the driver obeying the requirement to yield in accordance with a stop sign facing that vehicle. As I have already indicated, the matter is before the Court for assessment of damages only.

The plaintiff was in general good health prior to the accident. The qualification to this is that he had an emerging herniation which was in fact repaired by surgery during the time immediately subsequent to the accident. I do not regard the existence of this hernia as of any great significance, and if the accident had not intervened it would have been the subject of the minor surgical repair which was in fact undertaken. In the light of the issues which have arisen in this case, the matter can be relegated into the realm of the trivial.

In the accident the plaintiff sustained a number of injuries. He was taken to hospital and admitted for a couple of days, but this by no means is a measure of the seriousness of consequences.

By far the most significant injury was to the plaintiff's left hand. He is right handed. The injuries to the left hand included fractures and dislocations following two lines across the anterior surface. The technical details are available in the medical reports and no point is served by the recitation of what can conveniently be read there. The injury to the hand was severe and the consequences are likely in the future to be significant. It should be observed that although the plaintiff is still only thirty-two years of age, radiological views are already showing the emergence of post traumatic arthritic changes.

In the accident the plaintiff also sustained a sprain to the left anterior talar fibular ligament. This injury to the left ankle does not seem to have been of great continuing adverse effect.

He injured both his knees. The right knee developed a lump. He has had continuing difficulty with the knee, and as recently as earlier this year, arthroscopy was undertaken. Again, the results of that can be read in the medical reports.

The plaintiff also reported some symptoms in his right shoulder. In the early days following the accident he had some physiotherapy. The injuries to the left knee and right shoulder are somewhat more non-specific than those which have been detected to the left hand and right knee. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the plaintiff is encountering the symptoms of which he has spoken.

Ordinarily one would expect that an assessment such as this would give rise to no particular difficulty, but the matter has been complicated by events to which I will in due course turn. These events make the estimate of a claim advanced by the plaintiff for future economic incapacity unusually difficult.

As already stated, the plaintiff was a specially skilled plasterer. He was relatively new to this country and I am prepared to infer was therefore unknown in the building industry. What has occurred since the accident is that the plaintiff's special skills have apparently been recognised, and this has led to an extraordinary change in his financial situation so far as earnings are concerned. In the year preceding the accident, and I am referring to the income years between July and June, his nett profit was just under $11,000. In the year ending June 1994, which of course includes the immediate post- accident period, his nett profit from trade activity had risen to just over $13,500. In the following year ended June 1995 it rose to just over $49,000, and a statement by his accountants estimates that for the year just concluded in June 1996 his nett profit will exceed $77,500.

Looked at purely from the point of view of an accountant or an economist, it might therefore be said that economic incapacity consequent upon his accident is imperceptible. As a matter of judgment, however, it is my view that this is not so, and the future will lead to some alteration in the situation.

It is necessary, however, to make some reference to the circumstances in which this rapid climb of income occurred. The plaintiff gave evidence that he was identified by a Mr Swan, who was in the business of texture coating, and Mr
Swan in effect gave him an introduction into high-rise building work in this
State. Indirectly, it led to a contract for the plaster work in a residence and pavilion being erected for an apparently very wealthy man on an island near Bodalla. The contract price for doing this eventually involved payment to the plaintiff of a gross sum of about $190,000. Apparently he works accompanied by a labourer.

It is appropriate, however, to focus upon the particular activity to which I have just made reference. The plaintiff gave evidence that in order to fulfil the requirements of either the owner or the head contractor or both, he worked on this project for about ten or eleven hours a day for six days a week and sometimes seven days a week. No medical examiner has been given precise detail of the extent of this activity, but the ordinary application of common experience by a tribunal of fact would lead to the conclusion that if one were working at that intensity with an underlying source of pain and difficulty, then working at that rate would be unlikely to improve matters. It might also be concluded that in any extended term no tradesman would anticipate being able to continue working over those periods of time on a persistent basis.

To an extent, then, the rapid acceleration and climb in the plaintiff's income is a reflection of special circumstances, and circumstances which are unlikely to be projected indefinitely. Nevertheless, it should not be ignored that recognition of the plaintiff's talents might well lead to a capacity on his part to charge at a higher rate for his skills, and it must also be noted that the whole of the significant improvement in the plaintiff's income was not consequent upon that single task. I have evidence from a builder, Mr Drakos, who happens to have been the builder for the Horse Island project, that he is anxious to continue to use the plaintiff's services.

As against this rosy picture of the plaintiff's present financial condition are the gloomy prognostications of the medical profession. Some practitioners go to the extent of suggesting that he should entirely retrain from the plastering profession. In this regard it is apt to record that there is evidence that the defendant arranged for extensive investigation of vocational assessment of the plaintiff, but chose not to place any evidence consequent upon those investigations before the Court.

The other matter is the progress of the plaintiff's left hand. The probability is that the condition will deteriorate. As I have said, the plaintiff is dominantly right handed and it appears that the detailed and skilled work that he does is mainly performed by his right hand, but his agility in using scaffolding is handicapped by the knee injury, and the method of applying the plaster involves holding the mixture on an implement called a hawk in the plaintiff's left hand.

It is in those respects that the plaintiff has encountered most of his difficulty. It is in those respects that the medical profession predict deterioration.

Overall, I am unpersuaded by a view of the whole of the medical evidence, in the context of the plaintiff's own evidence, that he will in the future abandon the plastering trade. His skills will not leave him, but it may be that he will not be able to continue to work as comfortably or as quickly as he might have done if uninjured. This handicap in turn may lead to the loss of particular contracts, and economic loss accordingly. The one matter that I regard as certain is that in the span of his working life the plaintiff will, as a result of injury, earn less than he would have had he remained uninjured.

To turn such a loss into precise figures, as against evidence of the sort which is to be extracted from the chronicle of income improvement since the accident, is not easy. It is predicted on the gloomiest of estimates that five years hence the plaintiff may have to leave the plastering trade altogether. I do not find that proposition sustained. The probability is that the plaintiff will continue in his trade but, as I say, he will from time to time be unable to undertake tasks where the requirement of speed is of the essence, and by reason of the rate at which he works, the return to him is likely to be less than it would otherwise have been.

The second matter which I regard as certain, added to the one which I earlier mentioned, that there would be some loss, is that whatever arithmetical formula is applied to determine that loss, it will not represent the actuality of what occurs in future. This is a case which very particularly requires an exercise of predictive judgment, bearing in mind always the overall guidance given so often to juries as tribunals of fact, that in the end one should reach a figure which is neither niggardly towards the plaintiff, nor over- generous at the expense of the defendant.

I propose to turn to the ingredients of damage and make some observations further to those already made, as I deal with them individually. The first item will be the out-of-pocket expenses, which are agreed in the sum of $10,280. There is a dispute between the parties noted concerning the cost of the operation for the hernia, but in the event, counsel for the plaintiff did not press for the inclusion of the amount of $2,321 referable to it.

Claims are made for some future treatment. There is an estimate of the cost of the right knee joint replacement of $16,000. I regard the likelihood of the plaintiff requiring or undertaking such surgery as quite remote. It is a possibility, and I would include an amount of approximately $3,000 to cover the chance.

There is an estimate of cost of $6,000 for fusion of the metacarpal joints, in particular the joint which is showing early arthritic change. The estimate is $6,000. It is not suggested that this surgery will be undertaken in the near future, but I regard the potential of its occurrence as being considerably higher than that of the knee joint. In order to allow for the deferral, I would include another approximately $3,000 for the chance of this operation occurring.

Calculations have been submitted on behalf of the plaintiff asserting that there is a tort-induced need for two visits to a general practitioner and one visit to a specialist per year over the balance of his life. The sum involved in the plaintiff's claim is about $3,000. I regard the extent of tort-induced need as about one-third of that claim, and accordingly I will include $1,000 on that account.

This brings me to the final item of future expenditure, and these are pharmaceutical expenses. Before turning to the figures I should remark that the plaintiff has complained of stomach symptoms. This has been investigated by suitably qualified medical practitioners and it has been determined that the likely cause of his symptoms is the over-ingestion of pain-killers. Thus we have a circle in which the plaintiff has pain for which he takes medication, and the medication itself is productive of a different kind of pain. That equation would be simple enough except that it would be unfair to the defendant in my view not to include in the equation the fact that the precipitation of symptoms is likely to have been magnified considerably by the plaintiff's election to work at the intensity that I have indicated, giving himself practically no rest during significant and extended periods.
Nevertheless I am persuaded that there is a need for future pharmaceutical applications which ought be paid for by the defendant. Again I select a figure of approximately $3,000 to cover reasonable expenditure in this regard.

The total of the items for future expenses which I have indicated comes to $10,000. It is no accident that this round figure emerges and it seems to me that that is a fair figure between the parties to cover any future expenses of any of the sorts that I have indicated.

I turn then to the next element of the economic loss. As is conventional, I will deal with this in two parts, first to the present time and second, as to the future.

It is convenient to approach the matter by observing the formulation of claims advanced on the part of the plaintiff. These claims have been included in helpful written submissions which I have received from counsel. The first element for past claim involves the eleven weeks immediately following 13
December 1993. The claim is made based upon the average earnings demonstrated by the plaintiff at that time, and for eleven weeks a sum of just under $4,400 can be calculated. It has to be observed that included in the period is the
Christmas/New Year break, during which common knowledge would suggest very little activity occurs in the building industry in Australia. Nevertheless, I have no doubt that the plaintiff was during that period totally incapacitated for any productive work. It is true that during this period the plaintiff took the opportunity to have his hernia repaired, but as I have indicated, I regard any matter relative to that as trivial in the context of this case.

The next claim is during the period extending between March and June 1994 when it is said that the plaintiff was engaged in what was described as light work.
I do not think it is necessary to go into this matter in detail. It is true that the work done was light, but I am unpersuaded that the plaintiff was likely to have been engaged in any heavier work during that period. What he did was work that was offered and which was available, and I am unpersuaded that this is a matter that should be reflected in a specifically calculated element of damage.

The third and final period during which a precise claim is advanced is for the period between 18 January and 15 February this year when the plaintiff was not working for a period of four weeks when the arthroscopy was undertaken.
Clearly he was incapacitated for work at that time. Of course, by reason of the matters to which I have already referred, his income average at that time was considerable, and a claim is made for something in the order of $1,100 per week nett for these four weeks. The probability is that the plaintiff would have continued to work at this rate during that particular period, and I am persuaded that there should be a significant award to reflect economic loss for the period. Having regard to the nature of the plaintiff's work, it seems to me that an overall award of $9,000 for economic loss to date would appropriately fit the circumstances.

I turn to the question of future economic loss. Clearly it can be detected from the collision in submissions on the part of counsel that here lies the issue dividing the parties at its widest. It is convenient to paraphrase the respective submissions received from counsel.

Counsel for the defendant suggested that an appropriate approach would be to assess a continuing loss deferred for ten years of either $100 or $150 per week.

Mathematically that would produce an undiscounted element of damage of somewhere between $37,000 and $57,000. That would not seem to me to reflect the reality of the loss which I have earlier said I am confident the plaintiff will sustain.

The plaintiff submitted that I should look at the income-earning capacity of the plaintiff as demonstrated by recent activity, which is in the order of more than $1,000 per week nett. Counsel submitted that I should assume that there would be likely to be a residual continuing capacity of something in the order of $300 per week nett after either the loss of his trade or the gross reduction of his ability to pursue it. It was submitted that the probability is that this situation would be reached five years hence; thus it was calculated that I should award $700 per week, deferred for five years, at the appropriate factor to be extracted from the 5 per cent tables.

It should be noted that plaintiff's counsel also built in what I take to be a discount of 15 per cent for adverse vicissitudes. I might also observe that the factor in his submission related to thirty-three years, but if one were to defer for five years there would only be twenty-eight years left during which the loss would be sustained, and to that extent the calculation contains an in-built arithmetical error. Nevertheless, even if correct, there would be a significant sum approaching a claim by the plaintiff which is in the order of $400,000. I am unpersuaded that the plaintiff's loss is to be reflected in a sum of that order.

I have come to the conclusion that it would do justice between the parties to approach this element of damage by looking at a deferred sum. In my view the commencement of the loss should be ten years hence. Contrary to the submission of the defendant, however, I consider that having regard to the earning capacity of the plaintiff and the high probability of deterioration in his left hand, that as a guide a figure of $300 per week would be more appropriate. Over the twenty-three years, taking the plaintiff to his sixty- fifth birthday, commencing ten years hence, the 5 per cent tables would produce a capital sum of $132,863.

Having regard to the issues involved and to the circumstances in which this calculation is made purely as a guide, I do not think it appropriate to discount that figure for any presumed excess of adverse over favourable vicissitudes.

I turn next to the question of non-economic loss. I have several times referred to the permanent injury to the plaintiff's left hand. The other injuries should not, for this or any other purpose, be entirely ignored. I record that I am fortified in my opinion as to the seriousness of the plaintiff's left hand injury by the circumstance that the defendant arranged examination by Prof Bruce Conolly, a well-known expert in hand surgery, yet no report from Prof Conolly was sought to be tendered.

As is trite to observe, my task pursuant to the statute is not to estimate what I think would be fair and reasonable general damages in the Common Law sense, but I am constrained by the statute to estimate in the plaintiff's case what his injuries represent as proportioned to a most extreme case. This is an exercise which is necessarily a matter of impression.

The plaintiff is a young man; on the other hand, he has demonstrated that with determination and by election on his own part, the effects of injury can be very significantly overcome. Allowing for his young years at the time of injury, I have come to the conclusion that the plaintiff's non-economic loss should be represented by 35 per cent of a most extreme case. On the current table that would involve inclusion in the damages of $82,250.

The ingredients of damage which I have assessed then, therefore, are as follows: 
Out-of-pocket expenses $ 10,280 
Future expenses, as specified 10,000 
Non-economic loss 82,250 
Past economic loss 9,000 
Future economic loss 132,863 
The arithmetical total of those figures is $244,393. As I have sought to emphasise, I have been conscious throughout that this particular case involves more than usually the application of judgment rather than arithmetical exercise.

Using the figures which I have indicated as a guide, I have concluded it will do justice between the parties if I direct judgment for the plaintiff for $250,000, and I direct judgment accordingly.

The defendant is ordered to pay the plaintiff's costs of the action.
 * * * 
