

Regina versus Chant; Regina versus Madden Matter Nos Cca 60608/97; Cca 60609/97 [1998] NSWSC 249 (12 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 August 1998 
REGINA versus STUART ARTHUR CHANT 
REGINA versus RONALD JOSEPH MADDEN /97 /97 June 1998 
Powell JA, Wood CJ at CL, Newman J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from GIBSON DCJ 
FILE NO/S: 60608 of 97; 60609 of 97 
HEARING DATE/S: 21 April 1998 
DELIVERED: 12 JUNE 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Stuart Arthur CHANT; REGINA versus Ronald Joseph MADDEN 
JUDGMENT OF: POWELL JA, WOOD CJ at CL, NEWMAN J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - ROSSER QC with M M HOBART 
RESPONDENT - W DAWE QC 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Mark Hodges 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Appeal of each appellant dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: 
Criminal law and procedure - Appeal against conviction - Sexual intercourse without consent (Crimes Act s61 I) - Indecent assault (Crimes Act s61 L) -- Directions in relation to complainant's motive to lie: HELD: appropriate to give the direction given, absence of the reminder suggested in Regina v
Uhrig not raised at trial - leave to appeal under R4 [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) refused -
Restriction of cross-examination of witness as to prior sexual relationship with complainant -- HELD: No basis for appeal --Directions concerning effect of alcohol and drugs on issue of complainant's consent. - HELD: appropriate to give a direction in the general terms of that given; no objection taken to shorthand terms in which direction given at one point in the summing up - leave to appeal under R4 [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) refused.

No. of pages: 24 
Regina versus Stuart Arthur CHANT 
Regina versus Ronald Joseph MADDEN 
The appellant Chant was found guilty of one count of sexual intercourse without consent (Crimes Act s61 I). The appellant Madden was found guilty of one count of sexual intercourse without consent and one count of indecent assault (Crimes Act s61 L). Each appealed against conviction. There was evidence that the complainant was affected by drugs and alcohol at the time of the offences which occurred at the premises of a motorcycle club. Defence counsel suggested to the jury that the complainant had a motive to lie arising out of concern that consensual sexual intercourse with the appellants might adversely affect her relationship with a witness at the trial.

In directing the jury concerning their assessment of the credibility of witnesses, the trial judge outlined the matters which might be taken into account, including whether or not the complainant had a motive to lie. He further directed them as to the effects of alcohol and drugs on the issue of the complainant's consent. Defence Counsel made no objection to these directions.

HELD: The issue whether a principal Crown witness has a motive to lie must be treated with care and not left to the jury so as to invite speculation that the absence of any apparent motive to lie lends credence to the complainant's account. As motive had been raised by the appellants it was entirely proper for the Judge to have included in his general directions to the jury, a reference to motive along with a reminder that there was no onus on the accused to prove their innocence. It may have been desirable to include a direction to the jury that even if they rejected the suggestion of the accused that the complainant had a motive to lie, this did not mean that the witness was necessarily telling the truth. However, the appellants had been represented by experienced Counsel who had had no concern at trial that the summing up invited any inappropriate speculation by the jury in this respect.
Accordingly leave to appeal on this ground refused.

Considered: 
R versus F [(1995) 83 A Crim R 502] 
R versus E [(1996) 39 NSWLR 450] 
R versus Uhrig NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, 24 October 1996, unreported 
Palmer versus The Queen, <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 254]; [(1998) 151 ALR 16.] 
HELD: The trial Judge had rightly rejected any questioning of the witness going to the complainant's past sexual history pursuant to the Crimes Act s409B, although he made it clear that questions going to the complainant's motive were not prohibited.

HELD: It had been appropriate and in favour of the accused Chant, for the
Judge to have given a direction in relation to the effects of drugs and alcohol upon the complainant. Without such a direction the jury may have been misled into believing that consent, which the complainant might not have given if sober and unaffected by drugs, but which she may have given whilst in a state of disinhibition due to the effects of these substances, was not real consent. Disinhibition was to be differentiated from the situation where the effect of those substances was such as to exclude voluntary and conscious consent.

In giving the direction the trial Judge had correctly explained consent in terms of a consent "voluntarily and consciously" given. The shorthand reference to a consent "rationally given", used later in the summing up, would have been inappropriate if taken out of the context of the summing up as a whole. There was no appreciable risk of injustice. Accordingly, in the face of
Counsel's silence at trial, leave to appeal refused.

Applied 
Regina versus Tripodina & Ors [(1988) 35 A Crim R 183] 
JUDGMENT 
POWELL JA: I agree with Wood CJ at CL. 
WOOD, CJ at CL: The appellants were convicted, after trial in the District Court, of various offences relating to the sexual assault of a female JMM, which were alleged to have occurred on the night of 14/15 July 1995, at Dubbo. In the case of the appellant Chant, he was convicted on one count of sexual intercourse without consent, (S61 I of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)). In the case of the appellant Madden, he was similarly convicted on one count of sexual intercourse without consent, and also on one count of indecent assault [(S61](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61.html) L [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)). Each brings an appeal against conviction. 
Crown Case 
It was the Crown case that the complainant JMM attended the clubhouse of the
Rebels motorcycle club on the outskirts of Dubbo, with a female friend JW. She was at the time nineteen years of age. She consumed six stubbies of beer, played pool and danced for a while with the appellant Chant. She then went out the back of the clubhouse with him to some cabin rooms. There she smoked four or five cones of marijuana through a bong. She became drowsy, and in her words "sort of like out, in and out of it". She said that she and Chant went to the house on the property. Chant took her into a bedroom and walked out. She removed her jeans and got into bed with the intention of having a sleep.

The next thing she remembered was a person (Chant) getting into bed with her.
She felt him on top of her. He had his penis in her vagina and was hurting her. She said "no, go away" and waved her hands at him. He did not stop. After
Chant ceased having intercourse with her he left the room. Immediately afterwards, a second person (Madden) came into the room. He got on top of her and placed his penis in her vagina. She said "No, leave me alone". After he stopped having sexual intercourse with her he left the room.

Chant then returned and asked her to perform fellatio upon him. She refused.
She dressed, went to a public telephone and asked a friend KL to come and get her. She tried to start her car, unsuccessfully. Madden came out, removed the keys from the ignition, and told her to come back into the clubhouse and sit by the fire. She followed him in. While they were standing in front of the fire, he put his hands up her shirt and played with her breasts. She told him to stop, and returned to her car, which on this occasion she was able to start. She drove to her home where she informed the persons there what had occurred. The person KL, whom she had earlier telephoned, and who had gone to collect her, arrived back. The complainant said to her that she had been raped.

KL supported the complainant's evidence as to the telephone call and the attendance at her home. She confirmed that the complainant had sounded upset and worried over the `phone, and was crying and hysterical when she was seen at home. The evidence of complaint and distress was also supported by two of the persons present at her home that night, including Alex H.

The complainant identified the appellants from photographs shown to her by police. They were both later spoken to and consented to give a sample of blood. Each declined to participate in a line-up. Neither participated in an electronically recorded interview, but each gave evidence at the trial.

Physical examination of the complainant at Dubbo Base Hospital showed that the she had suffered a recent graze to the posterior portion of her vagina. Semen detected on vaginal smears was found, on DNA testing, to be capable of having originated from the appellant Chant. DNA consistent with that of Madden was not found.

Case for appellant Chant 
It was the case of Chant that he and the complainant had engaged in consensual sexual intercourse on the evening of 14 July. He gave evidence that he had met the complainant and her friend JW on the preceding day as he was leaving the tattoo parlour where he worked. He was informed that they were going to the clubhouse on the following night. He attended the club that night, played pool with the two girls and another man, and danced with the complainant. At some stage, the complainant's friend JW was sitting on his lap. The complainant allegedly said to her "get off his lap you slut, he is mine tonight". They then went to one of the bungalow huts, where she smoked marijuana. Later she indicated that she wanted a sleep. She grabbed Chant by the ear and said "come with me". They went into a bedroom in the house, where she undressed and went to bed. He went back to the bar to fetch some drinks. Upon his return, he got into bed with her and they had sexual intercourse. He believed that she was consenting. She did not tell him to stop, nor did she wave her arms around.
After intercourse she said "What am I going to tell Alex?" She repeated this several times. Alex, was one of the persons present at her house, with whom she had been friendly for some little time, and who is referred to earlier in these reasons as Alex H..

After about fifteen minutes Chant said that he returned to the bar, which was being minded by Madden. He agreed to look after it while Madden went to the toilet. Soon after, Madden came back and reported that the complainant was vomiting all over the bedroom. Chant and Madden went to the bedroom and cleaned it up. After taking the sheets out, he returned to the bedroom, where he asked the complainant to perform fellatio upon him. She said no. He undressed, got into bed with her, where he stayed for a time. He did not remember her leaving the bed, but he did see her car driving away after it had woken him up.

Case for the appellant Madden 
The appellant Madden said that he had been working behind the bar most of the evening. He agreed that Chant had been drinking and dancing with the complainant earlier in the evening. At about 11 o'clock he went over to the house to use the toilet. He heard someone being sick in one of the bedrooms.
He went into that room and saw that it was the complainant. With Chant, he cleaned up the room. The complainant was left lying on a bare mattress with a blanket placed over her. He denied having sexual intercourse with her.

He next saw her early the following morning when he was outside emptying the rubbish bins. She had flooded the engine and was having difficulty starting her car. He advised her to leave it to drain and invited her to come back inside the clubhouse. He removed the ignition keys and placed them on the counter of the bar. He offered her a drink. She put her arms on top of his shoulders and he put his arms up to her side at chest height. He did not put his hands under her shirt. He then continued cleaning up the bar area.

The complainant made a telephone call and said that a friend would pick her up. She walked out of the bar, and a little while later her heard a car start and drive away. A short time afterwards, a girl and another person arrived looking for her. He denied that any form of sexual assault occurred on his part.

Ground 1 - Directions in relation to motive 
Early in the summing up the trial Judge gave a direction to the jury concerning the assessment of the witnesses who had given evidence. He began by emphasising that the Crown case rested on the evidence of the complainant, so that unless the jury were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that she was "reliable, truthful and accurate", they could not convict either accused. His
Honour then introduced the exercise upon which he proposed to embark by observing: "So, may I, in relation to this assessment that you have got to do concerning the various witnesses, and not just .... The complainant, the other witnesses as well, refer you to some of the matters that you can take into consideration in forming that assessment." 
Thereafter followed, in some little detail, a reference to seven matters including demeanour, bias, motive to lie, accuracy and reliability, opportunity to hear or see the event recounted, reason to remember that event, and consistency of account. In the course of this exercise, some reference was also made to the way that hearsay evidence concerning matters reported by the complainant to other witnesses, should be approached.

As his Honour had foreshadowed, the explanation was, in its terms, of general application, although from time to time, some observations were made concerning the manner in which the relevant point may have affected the complainant's evidence. Additionally, his Honour emphasised, in relation to the impact that the directions had for the evidence of the appellants, that they did not bear any onus to prove their version.

It is in that context that the complaint now made needs to be understood. The direction in question was in the following terms: "Has the witness a motive to lie. In relation to the complainant it is suggested to you that her motive for lying was that she suddenly started to worry about what she would tell her boyfriend, that is my understanding what was put to her. You heard the evidence of the accused Chant concerning that, what he said took place when she was in bed. She said that is not so, and it was put to her that she had manufactured this story to have some excuse for being where she was on this night, as I understand it, but that is a matter for you, that is the motive that is put forward by the accused in relation to this matter." 
No objection was made by trial Counsel to the direction, nor was any re- direction sought. The appellants accordingly require leave, under R4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), to rely upon this ground.

In advancing a submission that this direction was inappropriate, Mr. Rosser QC for the appellants, relied upon the observations of Hunt CJ at CL in Regina v
Uhrig Court of Criminal Appeal, New South Wales, 24 October 1996 unreported.
That was a case where, in summarising the Crown case, the trial Judge had noted its submission that there was no reason for the witness in question to have lied, and that no suggestion had been put to her, by the defence, to that effect. It was contended on appeal that this did not differ from the rhetorical question "why would the witness lie", which had been criticised in
Regina versus F [(1995) 83 A Crim R 502] at -512, and Regina versus E [(1996) 39 NSWLR 450.] 
In E, there had been no basis for asserting that the witness, about whom the rhetorical question was asked, had in fact any motive to lie. The vice in the direction given was held to lie in the invitation for a jury to reason along the lines that, absent any reason to lie, the witness must be telling the truth. In such a case it was held that the rhetorical question should not have been raised.

In F, a motive to conceal a false allegation had been suggested. The vice in the direction given lay in the description of the question, whether the complainant had lied or not, as "the central theme" of the case, a description which was considered likely to have diverted the jury's attention from the
Crown's essential obligation to prove, beyond reasonable doubt, the alleged conduct of the accused. The problem was compounded by an admonition not to draw an adverse inference against the accused, which served only to confuse the jury.

In Uhrig, Hunt CJ at CL observed that "a motive to lie where it does exist is a very relevant factor in judging a witness's credit". The passage which followed, and upon which the appellants rely, was an explanation of the effect of the decisions in E and F, and in particular a rejection of the proposition that arguments concerning a motive to lie are to be excluded in every case. His Honour observed, in that regard, at pp 16/17: "... in many cases where the evidence of that witness is vital to the Crown case it would be appropriate for the judge to direct the jury that, even if they reject the motive to lie put forward by the accused, that does not mean that the witness is necessarily telling the truth and to emphasise that the
Crown must still satisfy them that the witness is telling the truth." 
This proposition was cited with apparent approval in Palmer versus The Queen [72
ALJR 258], per
Brennan CJ and Gaudron and Gummow JJ at 258, and per Kirby J at 275. The Court was there concerned with a situation in which the accused, having somewhat faintly suggested in cross examination of the complainant a possible motive for her to lie, was cross examined himself as to the existence of some such motive. He was driven to the point where he agreed that he was at a loss to offer any reason for her doing so. The question which fell for decision concerned the permissibility of cross examination of an accused to show that he could not advance any ground for imputing a motive to lie to the complainant.

Brennan CJ, Gaudron and Gummow JJ, said, in their joint judgment at p 257, on this point: "A complainant knows whether he or she has a motive to lie and as a motive to lie is a fact that may be proved to impeach the complainant's credit, the complainant may be asked about it. And evidence may be given by other witnesses of events from which such a motive may be inferred. But the fact that an accused has no knowledge of any fact from which a motive of the kind imputed to a complainant in cross-examination might be inferred is generally irrelevant. In general, an accused's lack of knowledge simply means that his evidence cannot assist in determining whether the complainant has a motive to lie, but if the facts from which an inference of motive might be drawn are facts that the accused would know if they existed, his lack of knowledge could be elicited to disprove those facts.

If it were permissible generally to cross-examine an accused to show that he has no knowledge of any fact from which to infer that the complainant has a motive to lie, the cross-examination would focus the jury's attention on irrelevancies, especially when the case is "oath against". In such a case, to ask an accused the question: "Why would the complainant lie?" is to invite the jury to accept the complainant's evidence unless some positive answer to that question is given by the accused." 
Kirby P was of the view (at p278) that it was inconsistent with the reasoning of the court in Robinson versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 180 CLR 531] "to permit questions to be asked or suggestions to be made that the accused's evidence is weakened, or the complainant's strengthened, by the inability of the accused to explain why the complainant would lie." His
Honour observed, at p 278: "The principle in Robinson has since been re-affirmed by this Court in
Stafford versus The Queen. In this appeal it was not suggested that the principle was wrong. Whilst it does not, as a matter of legal authority, determine the present case, any rule which permitted questioning of the accused about the accuser's motivations, or which encouraged elaboration of that issue by a prosecutor or judge where it had not been initiated by the accused, would be difficult to reconcile with it." 
The present is not a case in which the point examined in Palmer arose for consideration. Neither accused was asked a single question in cross examination concerning the possible motive of the complainant to lie.

The complaint made was confined to the question whether any direction at all should have been given in relation to motive; and if so, whether this was a case where the jury should have been additionally advised that if the motive suggested was not made out, then it did not follow that the complainant was necessarily telling the truth.

In considering whether there was any deficiency in the direction given, it is important to consider it not only in its context, but also by reference to the use which was made of the evidence concerning motive. In this regard it was the appellants who raised the question of motive, and who invited the jury to disbelieve the complainant. It was their suggestion that she was concerned that her friend Alex H would be upset with her, if he learned that she had been at the club house voluntarily having sexual intercourse with the appellants. This was not a case where the absence of any suggested motive was raised by the Crown in its address, or where it was repeated in the summing up, in a way which might have been seen to aid the veracity of the complainant. The only other mention of motive, in the summing up, arose in the summary by his Honour of the case for the accused. This comprised a brief reference to the argument of Counsel for the appellants that the complainant's concern in relation to Alex "may be a motive". This was, however, followed immediately by the reminder that the accused "do not have to prove anything".

It is important that the topic of motive of a principal Crown witness to tell the truth or otherwise be treated with care, and that , on the state of current authority, it not be left upon a basis which might invite speculation that the absence of any apparent motive to lie lends credence to the complainant's account. The accused bears no onus, and there may be reasons unknown to, or unprovable by him which might affect the veracity of that witness.

The true position is that the absence of a motive to lie is neutral. It does not add to the veracity of the complainant nor does it enhance the Crown case.

In this instance, his Honour carefully identified seven matters which the jury could properly take into account in assessing the credibility of the complainant, along with the other witnesses. As motive had been raised by the appellants, it was entirely proper that he include in those general directions, and also in the summary of the defence case, a reference to motive.

While it may have been desirable to add the caution suggested by Hunt CJ at CL in Uhrig, the absence of that reminder needs to be considered in the climate of the trial. The appellants were represented by experienced Counsel who entertained no concern that the summing up invited inappropriate speculation by the jury, or left the matter upon any basis other than that if motive were not made out, then the position was neutral: see Palmer at 258, per Brennan
CJ, Gaudron and Gummow JJ.

Moreover, his Honour repeated, on several occasions, the need for the Crown to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, and the absence of any obligation on the part of the appellants to prove anything.

Finally, it should be observed that the point was not laboured, or accompanied by any suggestion that the Crown relied upon the absence of motive as supporting its case. Put another way, there was nothing to encourage the jury to the view that the appellants were required to point to a motive for fabrication of the complaint, or that their failure to establish such a motive meant that the complainant should be believed.

As this Court has observed, more than once, the practice of scouring through a summing up post conviction, for matters of limited significance that were missed by trial Counsel, needs to be discouraged. The atmosphere of the trial, and the impression a summing up conveys to the jury are matters better capable of assessment by trial Counsel. The position is otherwise where there is a clear error of the kind involving a real chance of the jury having convicted the appellants by a chain of forbidden reasoning, leading to a miscarriage of justice: BRS versus The Queen <case>; [(1997) 148 ALR 101.] The present is not such a case. Leave to argue this ground should not be granted.

Ground 2 - Restriction of cross examination of witness Alex H 
The witness Alex H was called by the Crown in relation to the complaint and distress of the complainant. In chief and again in cross examination, he said that she was a person whom he had known for a few months. In cross examination questions were put to him to the effect that he had stayed overnight at her flat from time to time during the period he had known her. His Honour rejected the questions pursuant to S 409B [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), which excluded evidence directed to the disclosure of prior sexual experience on the part of the complainant, save in certain circumstances, for which no relevant basis was suggested in this case. His Honour, in ruling on this point, made it clear that questions going to motive were permissible, but not those prohibited under S 409B.

It is fair to say that his Honour indicated, at this point, a fairly strong intention to stop any prohibited questioning. Counsel for the accused did not pursue the matter, and left the position upon the basis that it had been established that the complainant and Alex H had known each other for some months. In favour of the appellants when dealing with motive in the summing up, his Honour referred to Alex H as the complainant's boyfriend.

Mr. Rosser conceded that the question asked and rejected was inadmissible. In the absence of Counsel persisting and asking a question which was admissible, and which may have supported the proposition sought to be advanced, namely that the complainant needed an explanation for her prolonged presence at the club house, to satisfy Alex H, there is no basis in this ground of appeal.

Ground 3 - directions concerning consent 
This is another matter in respect of which leave under [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) is required since no objection was taken to the direction given at the trial.

His Honour gave a conventional direction that consent involved a conscious and voluntary permission to engage in sexual intercourse; that it can be given verbally, by a look or by a willingness expressed by actions or acquiescence; and that the absence of physical resistance does not necessarily signify consent.

His Honour then properly directed the jury that if they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of lack of consent, the Crown next had to prove that the accused knew that she was not consenting.

There could be no objection in relation to the directions given so far. They were followed by a brief summary of the cases for the Crown and each accused in relation to consent and knowledge of consent or lack of it. The matter complained of related to the manner in which his Honour dealt with the effects of alcohol and cannabis upon the complainant, so far as consent was concerned.
His Honour said, in this regard: "...the fact that a person is affected by alcohol or drugs is a factor to be taken into consideration in this case on the question of consent or lack of it in this way. You have the evidence of Dr. Gaffney that both alcohol and Indian
Hemp, pot, marijuana, call it what you will, are drugs that affect the central nervous system and that they both have an initial affect of inducing euphoria and a feeling of well being that could result in a lowering of inhibitions.

This lowering of inhibitions you may think may lead to a person doing things that he or she might not otherwise have done or engaged in conduct that might otherwise be foreign to them. Their perceptions and the perceptions of people with them might be entirely different as to what was taking place.

Further imbibing in the drugs and/or alcohol and the mixing of them ultimately may lead to a position that because of the state of intoxication, the person is unable to voluntarily and consciously consent. They are so drunk that they cannot understand what is going on. Nevertheless that does not mean that a person in a state of euphoria or well being or intoxication induced by drugs or alcohol cannot consent to an act or acts of intercourse. They obviously can.

Whether they do so is a question of fact and the fact that a person is intoxicated does not necessarily mean that they cannot. It may depend on the question as to whether they were so intoxicated that they could not consciously and voluntarily give such a consent. That is a matter for you on the evidence and of course, a person asleep cannot give such a consent." 
His Honour then appropriately reminded the jury that the accused did not have any duty to ensure that the complainant remained sober or did not smoke cannabis, before continuing: "However, it is equally clear that if the Accused is aware that the complainant is in no condition to rationally give consent, because of her condition as to intoxication and you will remember the evidence concerning that, she says that she was drunk but when she left the room where she had been smoking the marijuana she was "Going in and out of it", was one of the descriptions she used and he says that on a scale of 1 to 10 she was about 5 to 6.

Well that is the evidence but as I say, if it is equally clear that if he is aware that the complainant is in no condition to rationally give a consent because of her condition in relation to intoxication then he cannot be heard to say that she consented." 
The complaint made is twofold. The first is that the Crown had not opened a case based upon lack of consent dependent upon the complainant being so affected by alcohol or cannabis, or a combination of them, that she was not in a position to voluntarily and consciously consent to intercourse and that the accused knew that to be the case. The second complaint is that by using the expression "rationally" twice in the direction, in place of the expression "voluntarily and consciously," which had been used earlier, his Honour may have confused the jury into believing that there was some intermediate position that would suffice for the Crown to prove its case.

In relation to the first of these objections it was, in my view, appropriate, and in favour of the accused, for his Honour to give some direction in relation to the effects of cannabis and alcohol on the complainant. Absent some such direction, the jury may have been misled into believing that consent, which the complainant might not have given if unaffected by cannabis and alcohol, but might have given in a state of disinhibition due to the effects of those substances, was not consent. Left in a state of uncertainty in that regard, the appellants could well have complained of an inadequacy in the summing up.

Having given such a direction, however, it was necessary to identify the point at which disinhibition gave way to lack of real consent. In relation to Chant, there was the added feature that, upon the evidence of the complainant, she was asleep when penetrated and by definition could not have consented, at least when the act of intercourse began, although the position as to the continuation of intercourse once she awoke depended on different considerations. In relation to Madden, no issue of consent arose, since on his case there was no act of sexual intercourse to which he was a party.

So understood, I do not consider that it was wrong to give the direction. It was correct in law, and it was proper for the jury to have a full understanding of what was involved in the concept of consent. These directions did not have the effect, upon my reading of the summing up in its entirety, of involving any shift in the case for the prosecution.

In relation to the second point, I would accept that had the direction as to consent been given initially in terms of the complainant being in a "condition to rationally give" consent, then it would have been erroneous. Such a direction would have raised the possibility that there would be a lack of consent if the complainant had not been reasoning with her full faculties as to whether to consent to sexual intercourse or not, or had not been behaving sensibly.

However, reading the direction in its context, I am satisfied that his Honour used the expression "rationally" as synonymous with "voluntarily and consciously". The fact that experienced trial Counsel saw no reason to seek a re-direction reinforces my view in this respect.

Again, it is important that a summing up be understood and read in the full context of the trial, and in the way it was likely to be understood by those who were listening to it. The task of a trial Judge in assembling and presenting the competing cases to a jury in the light of the applicable law, the evidence and the issues thrown up, and with very little by way of time for preparation, is difficult enough. Absolute precision in expression of the kind which can be achieved in a considered judgment is not possible. The fine tooth comb approach of counsel searching for grounds of appeal post conviction, needs to be discouraged in the light of this reality.

In the light of the issues that arose and a reading of the summing up in context, I am not satisfied that the matters complained of gave rise to any appreciable risk of injustice. In the face of silence of Counsel at the trial,
I do not consider that leave should be given to argue this point on appeal:
Regina versus Tripodina & Ors [(1988) 35 A CrimR 183.] 
Accordingly, I am of the view that the appeal of each appellant should be dismissed.

NEWMAN J I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of Wood CJ at CL and I agree with his reasons in both cases and the orders he proposes. * * * 
