

Francis Ivor Kelly Comptroller-General of Customs versus Jct Wong and Anor
Matter No 12178/89 [1998] NSWSC 710 (9 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
FRANCIS IVOR KELLY COMPTROLLER-GENERAL OF CUSTOMS versus JCT WONG & ANOR /89 July 1998 
Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (on costs.) 
HIS HONOUR: With regard to the question of costs, I have not earlier referred to the fact that on 24 June 1998, the Australian Government Solicitor under the hand of Mr Zipser wrote to my Associate enclosing a copy of the document (the Authority to Prosecute Rizoli) forwarded to the defendants' solicitors on 4 June 1998. I have no doubt that a copy of that letter was sent to the solicitors for the defendants. 
Paragraph five of that letter to my Associate reads: "An issue arises as to whether the prosecution of the first defendant, John
Wong, is lawful. The defendants request that the proceedings be relisted before Carruthers AJ. The Plaintiff does not oppose this request." 
The letter went on to say that the parties had agreed that if the proceedings were to be relisted, the issue which arises could be dealt with in half a day with written submissions to address matters which were not addressed in oral submissions.

It seems to me that that letter reflected a concern that the proceedings against Mr Wong could be unlawful. Any concern in that regard has, in my view, been resolved by the informed and helpful debate before me yesterday and today.

What has transpired here is, to say the least, a most unusual case, and as Mr
Roberts said in argument, it may well be that the Australian Government
Solicitor would have been better advised not to have sent a copy of the document to the solicitors for the defendants because upon a proper understanding of the law, it had no relevance to the subject proceedings.

Be that as it may, the document was sent. It seems to have associated with it some suggestion of misgiving, if that is the correct word, about the lawfulness or otherwise of the proceedings against Mr Wong.

Although the plaintiff has been wholly successful in this notice of motion, it is well established in cases such as Morosi's case [1977] 2NSWLR 749. 809 that there can in special circumstances be a variation of the principle that costs should follow the event.

Although it is something of a razor's edge decision, I feel that this is a case where special circumstances do exist, and I order each party to pay their own costs of the notice of motion.
 * * * 
