

Regina versus Hines Matter No Cca 60533/97 [1998] NSWSC 251 (25 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 August 1998 
REGINA versus COLIN CON HINES 
CCA 60533/97 May 1998 
Studdert J, Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against severity of sentence 
FILE NO/S: CCA60533/97 
DELIVERED: 25 May 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 25 May 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Colin Con HINES 
JUDGMENT OF: STUDDERT J; CARRUTHERS AJ 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: J C Nicholson QC 
Crown: D M Carmody 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: T A Murphy 
Crown: S E O'Connor 
RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 10 
REGINA versus Colin Con HINES 
JUDGMENT 
CARRUTHERS AJ: Colin Con Hines applies for an extension of time and for leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence imposed upon him by Judge Kirkham presiding over the Queanbeyan District Court on 4 September 1997. 
On that day the applicant pleaded guilty to one count in the following terms: "For that he on 13 March 1997 at Cooma in the State of New South Wales being armed with an offensive weapon namely a knife did rob Arthur Frederick Bird of $50, one shirt, one cigarette lighter and a quantity of cigarettes the property of Arthur Frederick Bird." 
This charge was laid under s.97(1) of the Crimes Act and carries a maximum term of twenty years penal servitude. His Honour sentenced the applicant to a minimum term of four years eight months commencing on 16 May 1997 and expiring on 15 November 2001. His Honour imposed an additional term of two years four months to commence 16 November 2001 and expire 15 March 2004.

The applicant is a single man aged thirty-nine years at the date of sentence having been born on 14 May 1958. He has spent most of his life in the country districts of New South Wales and accumulated unfortunately a very bad criminal record.

His Honour had the benefit of a helpful pre-sentence report from a probation and parole officer of the Cooma District Office of the Probation and Parole
Service. That report recorded that the applicant's first contact with the
Service was in 1976 when he was subject to a three years recognisance. Since that time he has had several occasions of supervision by the Service both as a probationer and a parolee. His response has been mostly satisfactory although unfortunately he is prone to binge-drinking. At times there were what could almost be described as encouraging indications of the possibility of rehabilitation. However, he continually reverted to bouts of excessive drinking.

When interviewed whilst in custody in relation to the present matter, he reported to the probation officer that he was, to use his words, "a chronic alcoholic and drug addict" and would use, "whatever I could get my hands on." 
Both counsel have referred and relied upon the subject report to support their respective cases and it is appropriate if I refer to some of the passages in this report. Firstly I note: "Mr Hines drinking usually takes the form of `a binge' at the end of which he usually comes under notice for abnormal behaviour. On at least three occasions in the recent past he was found asleep under a running shower in the caravan park in which he was residing.

Whilst under supervision the offender was directed to alcohol counselling however following only one session he never continued. He was regarded as being unmotivated to change and prior to the offence was procrastinating over the suggestion that he enter a detoxification or rehabilitation centre. The offender has taken part in alcohol programs in the past. He began the
Karralika program twice in 1991, however left shortly after commencement. He later spent a period at Mancare which was productive.

Since his lodgement at the Goulburn Correctional Centre Mr Hines has entered into the methadone program and is currently on a dosage of 12 mg." 
As to the `Summary and Sentencing Options', I notice the report states: "Mr Hines is an affable man who unfortunately has a severe addiction to alcohol. His efforts to abstain in the recent past have been short-lived and regrettably unacceptable and sometimes criminal behaviour has flowed following episodes of binge drinking. Although presently stating that part of his future includes a rehabilitation centre placement, given his past performance, his resolve may not be as strong if he were to be at liberty to do so." 
The report concludes: "This Service is unable to recommend to the Court any conditional liberty programmes as an alternative to a fulltime custodial sentence. However, following a period of custody Mr Hines would benefit from the support of this
Service in re-establishing himself as a responsible member of the community whilst assisting him to address any drug and alcohol issues that remain. A case plan in his supervision would include referral to appropriate counselling or a rehabilitation programme." 
Mr Hines' criminal record extends back to 1974 and includes many serious crimes and frequent periods of incarceration. It includes references to physical violence, breaking entering and stealing and robbery.

On 9 October 1996 he was granted a recognisance by the Cooma Local Court for one offence of break, enter and steal which was for a period of eighteen months and therefore could only have been on-foot for some five months at the time he committed the current offence.

I would have thought, when one looks at his record, (albeit the details of the various offences are not recorded), that he has had a certain measure of leniency over the years which, if I am correct, records a sympathetic response by the judicial system to what was referred to in the Probation and Parole report as "abnormal behaviour induced by binge-drinking rather than true base criminality." 
That takes me to the facts of the instant offence which can be shortly stated.
About 1am on the morning of 13 March 1997 the applicant broke into a flat in
Cooma occupied by a single gentleman aged sixty-seven years who was asleep in bed. The applicant gained entry to the premises by pushing through a flyscreen to an open glass window. He entered the kitchen of the premises where he disguised himself with a disposable white shopping bag pulled over his head upon which was a bicycle helmet. He took a paring knife from the kitchen and donned a shirt of the victim which also happened to be in the kitchen.

The applicant entered the victim's bedroom and placed the paring knife against the victim's neck and when the victim awoke, the applicant demanded money. The victim got out of bed and removed $50 from his wallet and gave it to the applicant.

The applicant then tied the victim's hands behind his back and also tied his ankles together using a dressing gown cord and a telephone cord respectively.
The victim was threatened that if he rang the police the applicant would return and kill him. The applicant also threatened to cut off the victim's ear.

When he left the premises, the applicant took with him $50, a packet of cigarettes, the shirt and the cigarette lighter that have been referred to in the charge which I have set out above.

Police officers to whom the offence had been reported suspected the applicant and on the day of the offence executed a search warrant on the premises occupied by the applicant. Certain items consistent with what had been removed from the victim's premises were located at the applicant's residence.

Three days later the applicant voluntarily surrendered himself to Cooma Police and participated in a record of interview. During the course of that interview he indicated that he had no real recollection of having committed the offence although he never denied his involvement in it. He pleaded guilty before the magistrate and maintained that plea, as I have indicated, before the sentencing District Court judge.

After referring to the seriousness of the crime, the need for deterrent sentences with regard to this particular offence and the applicant's appalling record, his Honour sentenced the applicant to a minimum term of four years and eight months as I have indicated with an additional term of two years and four months.

Senior counsel for the applicant in the course a helpful address, relied upon two basic grounds of appeal. First, that the sentence was manifestly excessive and secondly, that his Honour erred in making the additional term too short.

As to the first ground, we have been supplied with graphs from the Judicial
Commission covering pleas of guilty to robbery being armed or in company, for the period December 1994 to October 1997 with only one count. Those charts demonstrate, inter alia, that a full-term of seven years for a single count of armed robbery where a plea of guilty has been entered places that sentence in the top ten per cent of prison sentences imposed. Further, a minimum term of four years eight months which must be read for the purposes of the graph as five years, places that minimum term in the top seven per cent of minimum terms imposed.

Senior counsel for the applicant has forcefully argued that this is not a case which calls for a sentence in the upper echelons of sentences for armed robbery as reflected by those graphs for a number of reasons. He submitted that the applicant had not gone to the premises armed; the proceeds of the robbery were not great and although physically incommoded the victim was not physically harmed and the offence was committed whilst the applicant was affected by alcohol.

Dealing briefly with these matters, one is constrained to mention as to the seriousness of the offences, that the applicant broke into the home of a single man referred to as being elderly whilst that person was asleep. He armed himself with a knife after visiting the victim's kitchen. It is true that he did not take the knife with him but he could reasonably have anticipated that he would have found a knife in the kitchen of the premises.

It was perhaps no fault of the applicant that the proceeds of the robbery were not great and although there was no evidence before the sentencing judge that the victim was physically harmed, one would have little doubt in inferring that he would have suffered from a psychological reaction to what happened to him on this night and indeed he has expressed fear that the applicant would return to his home. To have been tied up and therefore rendered defenceless in these circumstances would naturally be a terrifying experience for the victim.

Counsel for the applicant has also referred, from a subjective point of view to the fact that the applicant surrendered himself to the police and cooperated with them. He had at all times pleaded guilty and despite his extensive record he only had one prior robbery in company conviction which was in 1981. He has managed to stay out of gaol since 1989 although he had since then committed some relatively minor offences. He seems to have shown improvement over the years in relation to his addiction to illicit drugs and was enjoying apparently a good rapport with the Probation & Parole Service at Cooma.

Whether his relationship with that Service could be categorised as being a "good rapport" is perhaps open to some disputation. However, there is no doubt that that passage of the report to which I have referred earlier indicates that in the Service's view, upon release the applicant would benefit from the support of the Service in re-establishing himself as a responsible member of the community whilst assisting him to address any drug and alcohol issues that remain.

As to the second ground of the application, it is clear that his Honour must have found special circumstances by imposing an additional term of two years and four months. However, it was submitted on behalf of the applicant that given his age, the depth of the applicant's addiction to alcohol and his patchy rehabilitation if such it could be called to the age of 39 and the willingness of the Service to help the applicant re-establish himself, his
Honour should have set a longer additional term. Reference may conveniently be made here to Regulation 10A of the Sentencing (General) Regulation 1996.

The Crown has in response relied heavily on the objective factors which I have referred to above. The Crown has contended that his Honour took into account the various subjective matters.

It seems to me that devoid of the issue of alcohol no challenge could be made to the sentence albeit that it is in the upper range for this type of offence upon a plea of guilty. However, his Honour clearly applied his mind to the problem of alcohol and said: "It is clear from his record and the material that has been put before me from the Probation & Parole Service that the prisoner has had significant difficulties with drug and alcohol over the years. Many attempts have been made to rehabilitate him, few have been what one might describe as even moderately successful and then only for a period of time." 
Of course, it is well accepted that drug and alcohol addiction is not an excuse for criminal behaviour. It sometimes helps to explain, however, why people behave in the way that they do in a criminal fashion. It seems that his particular problem now is alcohol related rather than drug related according to the report from the Probation and Parole Service.

Clearly then in sentencing the applicant his Honour had at the forefront of his mind the applicant's problem with alcohol and drugs over the years and the fact that he was unquestionably addicted, to some degree, to alcohol at the time of the subject offence.

In Regina versus James Brian Henderson, (unreported, Court of Criminal
Appeal, 5 November 1997), this Court was concerned with a case relating to the alleged severity of sentencing for maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent to cause grievous bodily harm. The applicant had, in that case, been certainly affected by alcohol at the time of the assault. In that regard,
McInerney J, who gave the leading judgment of the Court, said: "This is certainly not a case, in my view, where his Honour was entitled to take into account the fact that the applicant was intoxicated at the time and reduce the sentence in any substantial way. Although it is conceded he is entitled to some mitigation, in my view this must be minimal. Whilst he had refrained from drinking alcohol for a period, he had committed a number of previous offences whilst affected by alcohol and it cannot be said that his drinking alcohol and his reactions were out of character. The Crown submits, and I agree, that his Honour gave it appropriate consideration. He gave very careful consideration to all the subjective circumstances." 
Those observations, if I may respectfully say so, apply in all respects to the instant case. Sympathetic as one must necessarily be to the inability of the applicant to control his craving for alcohol, a major aspect of the philosophy of sentencing is that the public must be protected from perpetual breaches of the law by persons who undermine their self-control by excessive ingestion of alcohol.

It is true that the subject sentences amounting to an overall term of seven years are high and in the upper echelons of sentences for this particular crime. However, when one considers the objective circumstances and the subjective circumstances and the care which the sentencing judge applied to the imposition of the sentences, I am not persuaded that he exceeded the sentencing discretion available to him.

I am of the view that taking into account the subjective circumstances which appealed to his Honour and which his Honour thought appropriate that the additional term was adequate and that the relationship between the minimum term and the additional term was well within the sentencing discretion available to his Honour.

Accordingly, I would propose that application for extension of time for leave to appeal be granted; that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

STUDDERT J: I agree. The orders of the Court, therefore, will be those proposed by Carruthers J. * * * 
