

Elders Rural Finance Ltd versus Smith and Ors Nos. Ca 40766/94; Ed 1117/93
Practice and procedure [1996] NSWSC 80 (29 April 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P, PRIESTLEY AND CLARKE JJA
Motion for expedition of the hearing of an appeal from the Equity Division of the Supreme Court (Bryson J)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 12 December 1995 #DATE 22:12:1995 #ADD 29:4:1996 
Counsel for the Claimant     R L Hamilton 
Solicitors for the Claimant   Corrs Chambers Westgarth 
Counsel for the
Opponent     C J Leggat 
Solicitors for the Opponent   Andrew P Quigley and Co
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P, PRIESTLEY
AND CLARKE JJA This application for the expedition of the hearing of an appeal from orders of the Equity Division of the Supreme
Court (Bryson J) was directed by Clarke JA to be argued before the Court as now constituted. The purpose of the direction was to offer, so far as might be appropriate, guidance on the general approach which will be followed by the
Court in the provision of expedition of the hearing of an appeal.
The Court directed that the Registrar draw to the notice of the parties the recent decision of the English Court of Appeal in Unilever Plc versus Chefaro
Properties Ltd [(1995) 1 WLR 243 (CA)] in which Sir Thomas Bingham MR (for a
Court including also Mann and Saville L JJ) explained the considerations relevant in that Court to the grant of expedition and the procedures by which it should be sought. The present application provides an occasion for the consideration of the applicability of those guidelines, and the of others deemed pertinent, in this jurisdiction.
 
Nature of the appeal
It is unnecessary to detail the matters of fact and law which will be debated in the appeal. It suffices to say (as appears from the reasons of
Bryson J) that the appeal arises out of the financial difficulties which have befallen members of the Smith family represented by the respondents. Through four or five generations they have owned and conducted a farming and grazing business on "Roseleigh" at Moorilda near Newbridge. They conducted a "Pastoral
House Account" with a company for which Elders Rural Finance Ltd (the appellant) is liable. The family partnership bought another property "Nuneham
Park" which, in the primary judge's description amounted to "an investment disaster". In July 1988 it was sold in part, resulting in a payment of nearly $450,000 to the appellant.
The balance of the property was sold in August , producing nearly $300,000. But by October 1994, the last date with which the evidence before Bryson J deals, the respondents' Rural Term Loan Account with the appellant was in debit to the extent of $749,970.59.
This was notwithstanding the sale of "Nuneham Park" and the above payments.
The respondents sought relief from this indebtedness under the [Contracts
Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). They relied, in part, upon the advice and inducements which they said were given by the appellant and associated persons. They claimed that these had caused them to make the decision to buy "Nuneham Park" and to borrow the money required for that purpose. The other aspect of the respondents' case related to the appraisals made before the loan was advanced by the appellant. These concerned the respondents' capacity to make the necessary repayments to finance the purchase of "Nuneham Park".
Bryson J examined in detail the process adopted by the appellant in considering the respondent's loan application. He incorporated in his reasons the Income and Expense Statement used by the appellant in this connection. He examined the way in which the appellant had scrutinised the application and made its decision. He detailed the cash flow projection. He then derived his own conclusions on the respondents' chances, viewed objectively at their time of the application, of achieving the projection ascribed to them by the appellant. He reflected upon the commercial setting of the dealings between the respondents and the appellant. He described the contrast between the positions of
Elders Rural Finance and the Smiths in the commercial setting of the transaction as "gross". He noted that officers of the appellant had perceived the risk to the respondents but had "... comforted themselves with the value of the security and other advantages and embarked on a transaction which, even now after a history of disasters, would probably see Elders more or less safely out of all contractual entitlements if the securities were realised On the other hand the Smiths, far out of their depth in an investment which they had no capacity to appraise, incurred risks, which enforcement of the loan agreement would bring to maturity, of losing their property and means of livelihood without any real understanding of what they were doing".
After examination of the judgments of this Court in West versus AGC Advances
Limited [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610 (CA)] 278; Nguyen versus Taylor [(1992) 27 NSWLR (CA)] at 9, Bryson J determined that, as against the appellant, the respondents were entitled to relief under the Act: "In my judgment, viewing the contract in its commercial setting, it was unjust that the contract of loan was ever made, or that
Elders ever entered into the transaction and advanced money to the Smiths for the purchase of "Nuneham Park" and an adjustment of the parties' positions under the legislation is required. The consequences and effects are unjust..."
Following a further hearing, on 1 August 1995, Bryson J concluded declarations and orders which became those of the Court. These declared that the contract between the parties was unjust; that upon adjustment of the accounts between them, the appellant was indebted to the respondents in the sum of $415,724.61. An order was made that the appellant pay to the respondents, on account of the judgment debt, a sum of $360,000.
There were other orders not presently material.
The appellant then appealed to this Court contesting Bryson J's finding that the contract was unjust, challenging various rulings on evidence and findings made by his Honour and the orders made by him. Motion for expedition
On 4 October 1995, the appellant moved for expedition of the hearing of the appeal. The respondent promptly filed a notice of non- objection to the making of such an order. In accordance with this Court's practice, the file was considered in chambers by Clarke JA as Expeditions Judge. Accompanying the notice of motion was an affidavit of the solicitor for the appellant.
This referred to the state of the various accounts of the respondents with the appellant. After allowing for credits, the total indebtedness of the respondents to the appellant was given, as of 31 July 1995, at $1,466,142.73.
The solicitor annexed a valuation of the respondents' properties. He pointed out that the hearing before Bryson J had itself been expedited because of "concern that the respondents' equity in the properties which are the subject of the appellant's security would be extinguished if the trial was delayed".
It was upon this footing that the appellant principally urged: "... the appellant will suffer substantial prejudice by virtue of the addition of substantial interest to the judgment debt while the matter is awaiting hearing. If the matter is heard promptly there is a possibility that the appellant's debt will be satisfied and the respondents may have some equity remaining in the property after it is sold."
To these assertions was added a statement which, if made good, was relevant to expedition: "The appellant is one of the Elders Limited group of companies and is involved in the provision of finance to farmers and other rural enterprises. I am informed by ... the Rural Finance
Lending Manager of Elders Limited that his group of companies and other rural financiers are concerned about the effect of the judgment under appeal on the approval process for the application for finance by a primary producer. I am informed ... that rural lenders, including the companies within his group, are considering requiring some borrowers to provide additional security and additional independent certification of their capacity to service loan requirements. This will increase the cost of funds to borrowers."
When the motion came before the Court, it requested up to date material on the accumulation of interest owing to the appellant and material about the perceptions of other financial institutions. An affidavit was duly filed, after the decision was reserved. In it the solicitor for the appellant itemised the interest which would be owing by the respondents to the appellant if the appeal succeeded and they were deprived of relief under the Act. The interest payments are shown at successive rests upon the assumption that the hearing of the appeal is given a varying measure of expedition from what would be its ordinary assignment to a hearing date in about two-three years time.
The claimed debt to the appellant as at 1 December 1995 was stated as $1,542,420.26. With the accumulation of interest, the amount alleged to be due (without relief under the Act) is stated as: 
Period   1/2 Interest 1/2 Interest Net Int   Amount
Due
Ending   Debit $    Credit $   $      $
May 1996  116,046.63  4,137.60   111,909.03  1,654,329.29
Nov 1996  122,606.09  4,247.41   118,358.68  1,772,687.97
May 1997  129,629.63  4,360.13   125,269.50  1,897,957.47
Nov 1997  137,150.09  4,475.84   132,674.25  2,030,631.72
May 1998  145,202.62  4,594.62   140,608.00  2,171,239.72
Nov 1998  153,824.86  4,716.56   149,108.30  2,320,348.02 ,459.92  26,532.16   777,927.76 .
The calculations assume no movement in interest rates during the 36 month period analysed.
So far as the concern of lending institutions, the solicitor quotes statements which, although in hearsay form, appear to be reliable enough reports of the opinions recorded. The Lending Services Manager for the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia states (as reported): "We have maintained a particular interest in the Elders case because the Bank believes the judgment has a number of implications for the way we assess loans to primary producers.
We are keen to have the issues raised by that case dealt with on appeal as soon as possible." .
The solicitor for the State Bank of New South Wales is reported as saying: "In our view it (the case) affects all lending decisions.
I have at least one case in which the plaintiffs are seeking relief on the basis of what was contained in Mr Justice Bryson's judgment."
To like effect is the reported opinion of the credit controller of the
National Australia Bank: "We are very interested in the outcome of the Appeal and regard it as extremely important for it to be dealt with quickly. We find that a lot of farmers are excellent at managing the agricultural side of their business, but are not particularly good at financial management. The importance of this decision is in cases where the individual farmers are not particularly adept at financial management and where we have to assist them with credit applications."
Other similar opinions are recorded.
It is the result of the interest calculations proffered in the foregoing affidavit that if the appeal were heard and determined by May , the additional net interest, absent relief under the Act, would be $111,909.03. If the appeal could not be heard, in the ordinary course, until say November , the accumulated interest payable by the respondents would be $777,926.76.
 
Delay and procedures for expedition
The problem of delay is as old as the law. A limited number of decision makers, a large number of disputes, the need to check and find accurately the facts, contests about the applicable principles of law, limitations in the facilities of the decision makers and their own availability combine, in ancient and privative societies as well as in our own, produce the law's delay.
In this State, recent years have seen a marked increase in the workload of the Court of Appeal with only a limited increase in the number of the judges and supporting resources. Despite the fact that the caseload of the
Court of Appeal has increased nearly three-fold since its creation in 1966, the Court's permanent establishment was not increased until the appointment of
Cole JA from
August 1994. As successive Annual Reviews of the Supreme Court demonstrate, the Court of Appeal has markedly increased the disposal of appeals and other proceedings, particularly in recent years. It has adopted new listing and hearing procedures to that end. However, the backlog of appeals awaiting hearing continues to accumulate.
Various expedients may be, and have been, adopted by the
Court to reduce this backlog. Practice Notes require the provision of written submissions in a form suitable for facilitating ex tempore judgments. See Practice Note 65 para and 74 Para (5). The possibility of constituting the Court in certain cases by two
Judges of Appeal has proved useful and may need to be extended.
(See [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) [s 46A.)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s46a.html) Further changes are under contemplation, in consultation with representatives of the legal profession and others. But still the backlog remains endemic. According to indications from the Court's
Registry an appeal, the date of which is not expedited, will ordinarily not come on for hearing for about two and a half years unless it falls within a class which is assigned to a such special list occasioning a measure of expedition. Such lists include cases involving appeals against judgments for damages in personal injury claims; appeals from the Compensation Court; appeals under the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) and the De Facto
Relationships Act 1984; and short appeals or appeals arising out of summonses involving the application of public law.
In the present case, therefore, the appeal hearing, unless expedited, would not come before the Court until about mid-1998. It is likely that the decision would then be reserved. Accordingly, in the ordinary course, the judgment of this Court would not be given until late 1998. Clearly, this is unsatisfactory to the parties as it is unacceptable to the Court.
Yet the Court must face the fact that, if it expedites the hearing of this appeal, it necessarily displaces other appeals waiting their turn in the
General List. An inevitable consequence of the long delays in the Court have been numerous applications for expedition.
It has always been a feature of this Court that urgent cases will be expedited. The Court has always adopted flexible procedures.
Because, however, the grant of expedition displaces cases in the General List and may add to the already unacceptable delay the Court has raised the threshold which a party must cross before its application will be granted. That must be recognised. While the Court would like to be more liberal in the grant of expedition its present circumstances require the maintenance of the high threshold.
Nonetheless, the Court will provide a measure of expedition if a case which satisfies the threshold is made out.
Until now, the Court has adopted three levels of expedition:
Category A - to be heard immediately or within a day or so, if necessary by displacing other cases listed;
Category B - to be heard within one-two months; and
Category C - to be heard within three-four months.
Those categories are not sufficiently flexible to enable expedited cases to be satisfactorily accommodated within the list. For this reason they will no longer apply. Instead, the Court will, when granting expedition in cases of great urgency, fix a date for the hearing of the appeal. In other instances when expedition is granted the Court will place the appeal in a list of expedited appeals and will take account of the urgency of the appeal and the urgency of other appeals in that list in fixing a hearing date.
It is now useful to consider the guidelines which should be followed in providing expedition and to revise the procedures which have been adopted to date.
 
Guidelines in the English Court of Appeal
In Unilever (above) the English Court of Appeal, with a view to making known the broad principles governing that Court's practice, considered four cases before it for expedition. The Court emphasised that: "Every case has unique features and no statement could cover the novel and unexpected or exceptional circumstances that arise from time to time. The practice had to retain a 'measure of flexibility'. No attempt to describe it could be exhaustive.
These preliminary comments are really self evident."
The English Court of Appeal then went on to describe its practice (at f): "Some appeals are so urgent that justice can only be done if the appeal is heard either immediately or within days. In this category we put: appeals against committal orders, particularly if the adverse finding is challenged or the sentence is short; cases in which the children are likely to suffer extraordinary prejudice (that is, prejudice beyond that almost inevitably consequent on involvement in proceedings) if a decision is delayed; cases under the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (Cmnd. 8281); asylum appeals concerning return to third countries, where the right to return may be jeopardised by delay; cases in which the execution of a possession order is imminent and which appear to have some merit; cases in which a decision is about to be taken or implemented which will be irrevocable or confer rights on third parties; cases in which publication of allegedly unlawful material is imminent; appeals against judicial decisions made in the course of continuing proceedings.

In all these cases, not least (5), the court will expect the parties involved to approach it as soon as they learn of the order which it is sought to challenge. When the approach is left until the eleventh hour or the necessary materials are not provided, it may well prove impracticable to arrange a hearing.
 
The court recognises the need to try and arrange expedited hearings where it appears that, without such expedition, a party may lose its livelihood, business or home or suffer irreparable loss or extraordinary hardship; the appeal will become futile; the resolution of numerous cases, turning on the outcome of a case under appeal, will be unreasonably delayed, or the orderly management of class or multi-party litigation in a lower court will be disrupted; widespread divergences of practice are likely to continue, with the prospect of multiple appeals until the correct practice is laid down; there would be serious detriment to good public administration or to the interests of members of the public not concerned in the instant appeal.

Where these criteria are not satisfied, the court will not ordinarily grant an expedited hearing of appeals on preliminary issues, or substantial interlocutary appeals (even when this means loss of a trial date), or appeals concerning the construction of a standard document." 
The appeal should be expedited
With the necessary adaptation for the differing laws and practices in this jurisdiction, we consider that the foregoing guidelines are generally applicable in this State. They do not purport to lay down inflexible rules to limit the broad discretion enjoyed by the Court in the particular case. They may not do so. See Norbis versus Norbis <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 513], 520. But they are useful reminders to the judicial mind, and indications to litigants and their advisers of the considerations which will probably influence the Court's decisions. To the cases in which appeals will often be heard immediately or within days we would add: 
Cases of judicial review involving challenge to the lawfulness or justice of the conduct of public officials and in particular where such conduct has implications for others or for the due administration of the law; and 
Cases involving public law remedies or references to the Court of Appeal in bail applications which are made to the Supreme Court where the claimant is in custody and bail has earlier been refused.
To the cases where the Court would endeavour to give some measure of expedition we would add: 
Cases involving the resolution of a short point which will have large significance for the appeal or for other cases awaiting hearing; 
Cases involving a question under the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) Act of the State, a high public office-holder or otherwise such that, in the public interest, it should be dealt with quickly; 
Cases involving alleged departures from basic civil rights or due process of law; and 
Cases involving the Court in case management, particularly cases arising out of lengthy appeals requiring substantial hearing time for oral argument.
With these additions and modifications, the Court will apply the relevant guidelines stated by the English Court in Unilever. It is also the intention of the Court to set aside regular weeks throughout the Court's year for the hearing of expedited appeals although extremely urgent appeals may have to be allocated dates outside the dates of these lists. It is hoped that this allocation will introduce a further measure of flexibility for the avoidance of the injustice which can, as the Court recognises, attend undue delay in the resolution of appeals.
By the application of the foregoing guidelines to the present case the appeal clearly warrants expedition. The accumulation of interest is substantial. If the appeal were to succeed, that would clearly affect the business and economic livelihood of the respondents. To some extent, the delay, by eroding the equity of the respondents in the subject property, could render the appeal futile. According to the evidence now before the Court the resolution of the case may also have some significance to other cases and to the practice of financial institutions generally. It is in the interests of the public that, to the extent that the decision has (or is thought to have or treated as having) consequences for lending practice generally, it should be heard as quickly as the Court's list permits. We will, therefore, grant expedition of the appeal but it should not be regarded as falling into the urgent category.
The collection of guidelines contained in these reasons does not relieve the Court of the duty to explore more fundamental reforms which will attack the endemic delays in the hearing and determination of appeals. Unless a completely new approach is taken, either to the availability of judges, to the constitution of the Court, or to the procedures of hearing and decision making, the facility of expedition will amount to little more than a palliative. It will remedy only the worst cases of injustice, leaving unrepaired much residual injustice to those cases left in the General List.
The Court is conscious of this fact. It has already set in train the steps necessary for the adoption of more fundamental reforms, including some which will require the concurrence of Parliament and others which will require the support of the Executive Government in the provision of resources.
 
Orders 
The Court orders: 
That the hearing of the appeal herein be expedited to the intent that the appeal will be heard on a date to be fixed by the Registrar, after consultation with the parties; 
Dispense with the Rules of Court relating to the filing of appeal books to the intent that the appellant will file a compilation of all relevant documents, with an Index, and serve the same upon the respondents within one month of this date; 
Order full written submissions and the preparation by the appellant of a narrative statement of facts in accordance with the Practice Note; and 
Order that the costs of the motion for expedition be costs in the appeal.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/80.html  
