

Kinjella P/L versus Jay [1996] NSWSC 368 (26 August 1996) 
KINJELLA PTY LTD versus JAY /96 
THURSDAY 25 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a company in receivership to prevent an auction which is to take place in Wagga Wagga tomorrow afternoon. I thought initially the application had little chance of success because the plaintiff has known about this auction for some time and has had the brochure which it complains is false and misleading in trade and commerce in its hands for about ten days. However, the more I have heard the case the more I am fairly sure on the evidence before me at the moment that the receiver has breached his statutory duty under <case> of the Corporations Law and has issued a brochure which is false and misleading in trade and commerce, and that there is a very real risk that unless something happens the property will be sold for less than its true value. Of course, I am only acting on the facts as I have them in a hastily put together application, but that is as things appear at this stage. It may well be when all the material is in that the judge who finally hears this suit will come to some other view.

The principal problem is that although the receiver, who appears to be a chartered accountant, has had all the figures he issued a brochure which any reasonable person reading it would think contained the income figures that were earned by the motel in question for twelve months. In fact, as is acknowledged, they are for nine months. Two valuations have been put in evidence by the receiver. These are subject to confidentiality orders and so I will not mention their result, but the two valuers each take a different set of comparable sales, sales which really are not comparable because they refer to motels in Dubbo, Albury and Parkes and the occupancy of motels in Wagga
Wagga is, it would appear, far greater than the occupancy in those towns.
Accordingly, both valuers are really thrown back on capitalisation of profits.
They have assumed different capitalisation rates without any explanation and they have used different figures on which to base their capitalisation.

There is no explanation as to whether the receiver ever queried this rather bizarre result. In fact, it would appear that he has just accepted them and has based his reserve price accordingly.

A person who is going to buy a motel is most interested in occupancy rates and in the income generated by the motel. He or she would normally have an accountant do projections on those figures and there would have to be some mature consideration of those figures before making a bid at the auction.

In this particular case the receiver is going to tell people who turn up at the auction tomorrow about the changed figures, but it does not seem to me that that would give many possible buyers the opportunity of redoing their figures before they have to bid. Furthermore, there may be other people who decide not to bid because the returns would be too low, who might be attracted if the proper figures had been furnished to them at the proper time.

I note to date there has been no explanation at all as to how the false and misleading figures were put before the public.

The receiver says that the solicitors instructed by the directors to sue him in the name of the company have not been properly retained. However, the authorities are against this proposition. The directors, even after a receiver is appointed, have some residuary power. Peter Gibson J in Watts versus Midland
Bank PLC [[1986] BCLC 15] took the view that this was a matter within the director's competence even after a receiver was appointed and, indeed, the High Court in
Bunbury Foods Pty Ltd versus National Bank of Australasia Ltd <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 491] did not seem to think such an action was at all remarkable.

The solicitor for the receiver put that this was really a question of damages, if there were any breach of the receiver's duty under <case> of the
Corporations Law, or a breach of the Trade Practices Act or a breach of a mortgagee's duty.

In one sense that is right, but two matters tell against leaving the plaintiff to damages. The first is that although the damages are not impossible of calculation, it is extremely difficult to calculate what the effect is on the price of the statement. In Australia it seems to me that it is a significant matter to take into the mix of circumstances that there is that great difficulty.

The second thing is that people are attached to their property and particularly in the case of the plaintiffs, who wish to continue to operate this motel in the retirement of their controllers and most modern equity judges have taken the view that if there is an arguable case for retention of the property then subject to an undertaking as to damages being given, damages are not an adequate remedy.

There are, of course, some technical matters in many mortgagor/mortgagee cases, which are dealt with in Fisher and Lightwood on Mortgages Australian
Edition [20.30], but these do not apply with as much force to actions under the Trades Practices Act or for breach of statutory duty under <case> of the Corporations Law. In any event, even if this were a mortgagor/mortgagee case false advertising is often a reason for intervening; see Fisher and
Lightwood [20.23].

I take into account that once an auction has been advertised and aborted there are always some people who get frustrated and do not come back for the second auction. I also take into account that there has been probably the incurring of considerable expense in arranging the auction. I also take into account that this is a property which on any view is worth more than $1 million and so the costs of the auction, compared with the subject matter of the suit, are probably not as great as they are in the case of the average domestic property.

It seems to me that the plaintiff has a prima facie case that damages are not an adequate remedy, and having considered the facts as I have mentioned the balance of convenience lies with granting an injunction.

There is an undertaking proffered by a solvent collateral company of the plaintiff, Carindale Homes Pty Ltd, to meet the costs of the aborted auction if the plaintiff is unsuccessful in the final disposition of these proceedings and that undertaking is noted and taken into account.

Accordingly, the Court makes order 1 in the summons up to and including 26
August 1996. I stand the matter into the registrar's list on 26 August 1996 at .30am. Ex PX01 may be returned to the plaintiff and Ex DX02 should be returned to the defendant. Costs are to be costs in the cause.
 * * * 
