

Regina versus Stephen Thomas [1996] NSWSC 163 (28 May 1996) 
REGINA versus STEPHEN THOMAS /95 
TUESDAY 28 MAY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
COLE JA, BADGERY-PARKER J, SPERLING J 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: I will ask Sperling J to give the first judgment.

SPERLING J: 
This is an appeal against conviction.

On 1 December 1995, the appellant was convicted on one count of supplying a prohibited drug, contrary to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) .
The trial took place in the District Court before his Honour Coleman DCJ and a jury.

On 1 December 1995, the appellant was sentenced to a minimum term of imprisonment of twelve months commencing on 19 October 1995 and an additional term of twelve months.
 [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the Act provides that a person who supplies a prohibited drug is guilty of an offence. [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s3.html) defines "supply" as including, in the case of a prohibited drug, having that drug in possession for supply. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) deems possession to be possession for supply in certain circumstances. It provides that a person who has possession of an amount of a prohibited drug which is not less than the traffickable quantity shall be deemed to have the drug in his or her possession for supply unless (relevantly) the person proves that he or she had the prohibited drug in his or her possession otherwise than for supply.

It was common ground at the trial that the appellant had not less than the traffickable quantity of heroin in his possession and, accordingly, that he was guilty of an offence under [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) unless he discharged the burden of proving, on the balance of probabilities, that he had the drug in his possession otherwise than for supply. The purpose for which the appellant asserted he had the drug in his possession was that the drug was for his own use.

It is insufficient if an accused person establishes only that part of the substance was for his own use: Hughes & Curtis [(1983) 10 A Crim R .] 
When apprehended by the police on 17 January 1995, the appellant had, hidden in his clothing, a resealable plastic bag which contained 6.6 grams of heroin, .28 grams of cocaine and three hypodermic syringes. The charge related to the heroin. It was common ground that the quantity of heroin was not less than the traffickable quantity.

His Honour correctly described as "the pivotal or central issue in the case" whether the appellant had proved to the jury's satisfaction that it was more probable than not that he had possession of the heroin for his own use and if they were not so satisfied, they should convict.

The Crown evidence included an electronically-recorded interview, in the course of which the appellant said he had obtained the drugs at Kings Cross, that he paid $2,200 for the heroin and that it was for his own use. He said that his use of cocaine was casual, not every day. On the other hand, he said he used heroin daily and that seven grams would last him about a week. He said he was receiving social security payments of $330 a fortnight. He was not asked how he came by sufficient money to support a heroin habit that was costing him $2,200 a week or thereabouts.

The appellant gave sworn evidence at the trial. He said he had been using drugs since he was fifteen years of age and had been on four Methadone reduction programmes. At the time of the trial the appellant was thirty-one years of age.

He confirmed that he was addicted to heroin at the time of the alleged offence and used cocaine casually. He showed the jury "track" marks from injections on his body. As at January 1995, he said he was using heroin daily. The appellant said he had been living in Cairns until 9 December 1994. Asked how much money he had as at 9 December, the appellant said about $10,000. Asked where he had obtained so much money, he said he had worked in Port Macquarie for two years and in Cairns for eight months. He said he was a roof carpenter by trade. He had been on sickness benefits, however, since about August 1994. So far as the employment was concerned, he said he had been building factories with his father for two years, presumably in Port Macquarie, and had worked in Cairns for six months for a boss. He said he had left Cairns on 9 December. He had purchased heroin in Sydney on 10 December. He remained in Sydney, he said, until 22 December, spending about $3000 on heroin during those twelve days.
During that period he said he used all the heroin that he had bought with the $3000. (That would conform with his evidence that he used about $2,200 worth of heroin per week). He confirmed that seven grams of heroin lasted him about a week.

The appellant went on to say that between 22 December 1994 and 17 January , (which is when he was apprehended) he was living at Port Macquarie and travelled to Sydney to purchase heroin. He had made two trips to Sydney for this purpose. He was on a third trip on 17 January 1995 when he was apprehended. He said that on each of the three trips he purchased seven grams of heroin, taking $2,500 with him on each occasion. That had exhausted the balance of his $10,000. He had only $400 or $500 left.

The evidence concerning the source of funds for the purchase of heroin was additional to what the appellant had said in the police interview. It was regarded by his counsel as important evidence to introduce in furtherance of the appellant's case. It must have been obvious to counsel, as indeed it is to me, that the appellant had a serious problem about the source of funds. He was in receipt of sickness benefits. Unless it was established that he had some other source of funds for the purchase of heroin in such quantity as that found when apprehended, it was virtually inevitable that a verdict would go against him.

Under cross-examination the appellant was tested on his account of where he had got the money from. He said that he had not put the $10,000 in the bank but had kept it in cash. He now said that part of the $10,000 came from the sale of motor cars in May 1994, before going to Cairns to work for his father.
He said that his father paid him in a lump sum at the end of two years. There was no documentation relating to the payment. During the two years he said he had drawn the dole. Meanwhile, he said, his father had bought him the cars.
Then the appellant said, "a car". He said he had sold the car in May 1994 for $3000. The car was in his girlfriend's name and he did not have the documentation relating to its sale.

The appellant had an explanation as to why he had kept the money in cash rather than bank it and as towhy the car had been put in his girlfriend's name; he said that he was being pursued for maintenance payments. He also had an explanation as to why his father had not paid him while he was working for his father; he said that his father knew of his drug habit and, accordingly, paid him in kind rather than in cash, so far as the car or cars at least were concerned.

Part of the $10,000, he said, had come from the sale of furniture which had also been in his girlfriend's name (with the same explanation as in relation to the car). She had the documentation relating to that, he said. He had split up with his girlfriend and he had divided the proceeds of the furniture sale with her.

There was then some evidence about whether he had been living in a factory or in a house with his girlfriend.

He said he did not know how much money had been received for the furniture.
His girlfriend told him she had got $3000 for the car. She gave him the $3000 and half the money for the furniture. He received about $2000 for his share of the furniture. He said that he then worked for wages for about six months at about $400 a week. He had no documentation relating to that because his boss paid him in cash. He kept the $6000 that he had brought from Cairns in his room. He had flown from Cairns to Port Macquarie carrying $10,000 in cash. He said he was no longer in contact with his father.

He denied that it was his intention to sell even part of the 6.6 grams of heroin which was in his possession when he was apprehended on 17 January 1995.
He denied that he had been using heroin while he was in Cairns or while he was working in Port Macquarie. He denied that his only source of income in Cairns and Port Macquarie had been dealing in drugs.

There are three grounds of appeal:
His Honour was wrong to direct the jury that they had to decide whether to accept, on the balance of probabilities, that the accused was truthful when he told them that he had $10,000 which he had accumulated from the sale of assets and employment.
In the circumstances, his Honour was wrong not to have given the jury the usual directions on lies.
The jury's verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

As to ground 1, what his Honour in fact said in the passage specified for criticism was as follows: "I have already covered many of the points raised by the Crown Prosecutor in his address. However, I reminded you that you would have to use your judgment in deciding whether to accept on the balance of probabilities that the accused was truthful when he says that he had $10,000 which he had accumulated from the sale of the car and the furniture and from doing the work in Cairns." 
The trial judge then referred to the Crown Prosecutor's submission that the jury would not accept the accused as a witness of truth and would come to the conclusion that the accused's version of events accounting for the possession and accumulation of the $10,000 was fabricated, that the evidence of working at his father's factory for two years without pay was improbable and should be rejected, similarly the account given of the sale of a car in his girlfriend's name.

This ground of appeal, I have to say, is mistaken. The trial judge did not, in the passage identified, direct the jury that they were obliged to decide whether they accepted that the accused was truthful about the accumulation of the $10,000. The gist of the ground of appeal is that the trial judge directed the jury that the outcome of the case turned on whether the jury accepted the accused's evidence concerning the accumulation of that money. But the trial judge did not say that (although, for myself, I think he would have been entitled to say that, having regard to the way the case had been run). All the judge said was that the jury would have to use their judgment in deciding an issue of fact proferred by the accused, namely, whether the accused had accumulated $10,000 in the way he said he had.

The ultimate question was, of course, whether the jury was satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the appellant had the heroin in his possession otherwise than for supply. His Honour stated that ultimate question, in terms which are not criticised, in an earlier passage in his summing-up: "Although you are the judges of the facts, there appears to be no doubt that the heroin in his possession weighed 6.6 grams and if you are so satisfied you would then, because of the deeming provision, find him guilty, unless, after considering all of the evidence you are also satisfied that it is more probable than not that his possession was not for supply and I will read to you again, ladies and gentlemen, the provisions of the Act of Parliament which says, 'A person who has in his or her possession an amount of a prohibited drug which is not less than the traffickable quantity of the prohibited drug shall be deemed to have the prohibited drug in his or her possession for supply unless (a) the person proves that he or she had the prohibited drug in his or her possession otherwise than for supply.' 
That is the pivotal or central issue in the case and the accused has the obligation to prove that the compressed white powder containing heroin was in his possession for a purpose other than supply. If he does prove to your satisfaction that it is more probably true than not, that it was for his own use, then the deeming provision will not apply and you should acquit him. If he does not satisfy you that it is more probably true than not that the white powder containing heroin was in his possession, for his own use, then the deeming provision will operate and being satisfied of his possession and the other matters you should then convict him." 
The case advanced by the appellant was self-administration. In view of the appellant's apparent lack of any legitimate source of funds, his case required, as a matter of common sense, proof of a source of the funds necessary to purchase such a quantity of heroin other than from drug-dealing.

The appellant's counsel recognised that there was little prospect of satisfying the jury that the heroin was exclusively for the appellant's own use unless it could be established to the satisfaction of the jury that there was such a legitimate source of funds. That is why the evidence as to the source of funds was led. As a practical matter, it was the accumulation of funds from employment and the sale of assets upon which the appellant depended for an acquittal.

That is the way the appellant's case was run, although the trial judge refrained from going so far as to say so explicitly in the passage which is criticised. In that passage, his Honour did no more than to refer to the issue of fact on which the case had been fought; that is, whether there was a legitimate source of funds, which would make the possession of the heroin otherwise than for supply a plausible situation. As to that issue of fact, his
Honour said no more, in the passage which is impugned, than that the jury would have to use their judgment in deciding the issue of fact concerning the alleged accumulation of funds from legitimate sources. That direction was, in my opinion, unexceptionable.

No objection was taken to the direction at the trial. No further direction was sought. The reasons for this are obvious in view of what I have said.
Accordingly, r 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules 1986 should apply, in my view. I do not think leave should be given to raise the ground of appeal. I would refuse leave to appeal on this ground of appeal.

Coming then to Ground 2, it is to be observed that, in the passage in his
Honour's summing-up to which I have referred, his Honour reminded the jury of submissions made by the Crown Prosecutor that the appellant's account of how he came to accumulate the sum of $10,000 was fabricated and the reasons given by the Crown Prosecutor for that submission. These reasons included reference not only to the way in which the money was said to have been accumulated, but also to the accused's evidence on other matters, such as whether he had been living in a factory or with his girlfriend at Port Macquarie.

Under this ground of appeal, it is asserted that the trial judge ought to have directed the jury that lying about what had occurred could only be used if probative of a consciousness of guilt. That is to misstate the principle that, if lies are relied upon by the Crown as evidence of a consciousness of guilt, they may only be used for that purpose if that is the only reasonable explanation for the lies.

There is nothing to suggest that the Crown, in this case, relied upon alleged lies by the appellant as evidence of a consciousness of guilt. The Crown's submission appears to have gone no further than that the appellant's evidence of how he obtained the funds to buy the heroin should be rejected because it was not credible and because the appellant's credit was affected by other evidence he had given which was, in the Crown's submission, not credible. Nor did the judge's summing-up go further than that.

In these circumstances, no direction was required along the lines suggested by the second ground of appeal.

Again, leave to appeal is required pursuant to rule 4, no such direction having been sought at the trial. Again, I have to say that, in my view, this ground of appeal is without merit and that explains why the point was not taken. I see no reason why leave should be granted, and I would refuse leave to appeal this ground also.

I come then to Ground 3. It is not necessary to decide definitively for the purposes of this appeal how the present ground of appeal should be formulated in a case where the appellant accepts that the outcome of the trial turned on an issue under which the appellant bore the onus of proof. For the purposes of the present appeal, it may be assumed that, as the appellant contends, the question becomes whether the jury, acting reasonably, was required to be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, as to the matter in question.

It will be an extremely rare case, in which a jury must be found to have acted unreasonably, in failing to be affirmatively satisfied of a matter as to which the party seeking that finding bears the burden of proof. Where the question turns on the credibility of a witness or witnesses, making good such a criticism of the jury seems to me to be a virtually impossible task.

The position is analogous to a situation that arises in civil litigation, where a party bearing the onus of proof (usually a plaintiff) might contemplate moving for a verdict by direction in his or her favour. This situation was referred to in the decision of the Court of Appeal in Stewart v
Sydney County Council; Government Insurance Office of New South Wales (Third
Party) [(1973) 1 NSWLR 444.] Hutley JA said this (at 456): "The occasions on which a party upon whom the burden of proof lies will be entitled to a verdict by direction are rare, but that such occasions exist is established by the judgment of Dixon J in Shepherd versus Felt and Textiles of
Australia Ltd <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 359], at 379, 380 where his Honour said: 'But sometimes the facts from which a legal conclusion arises in favour of the party who has the onus of proof appear in a manner which entitles or requires the Court to notice and act upon them. This may be because facts are admitted or undisputed, or because the question turns upon the interpretation or effect of documents.'" 
There are passages to the same effect in the other two judgments. The passage demonstrates the extremely rare circumstances in which a party bearing the onus of proof may be entitled to say that a determination in his favour was necessary or that a determination against him would be or was unreasonable.
The situation, it is suggested by this decision, must be so exceptional as to turn on such matters as admitted or undisputed facts or the legal interpretation of the effect of documents.

In the present case, the jury was entitled to reject the appellant's account of how he came to have the funds to buy the heroin. That left them with an accused who had spent, on his own admission, $2,200 on heroin on this occasion and had in recent weeks, again on his own admission, been purchasing heroin regularly in such quantities. If the jury rejected the appellant's account of how he had come by the funds, there was no explanation as to how the appellant had come by those funds. That the appellant was purchasing heroin at least in part for re-sale, and that this was the situation in relation to the heroin in his possession when apprehended, would then become a plausible, if not an overwhelmingly likely explanation for the appellant's possession of the drug when he was apprehended.

For myself, having read the evidence, I am not persuaded, on the balance of probabilities that the heroin was not in the appellant's possession otherwise than for supply. Were I to have any sense of unease about the jury's verdict - which I have not - that feeling of unease would be dispelled by the recognition that a jury could readily have come to the conclusion it did with the advantage of seeing and hearing the witnesses, in particular, the appellant: M [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] 
This ground of appeal also is without merit.

Rule 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules (1986) operates in relation to a particular ground of appeal. Accordingly, the orders which in my opinion should be made are as follows: 
As to the first and second grounds of appeal, leave to appeal refused.

Secondly, appeal otherwise dismissed.

COLE JA: I agree with the reasons and orders proposed by Sperling J. For the reasons that his Honour has given, it is unnecessary in this appeal to determine whether, in relation to a criminal trial, this Court could hold on an appeal by a convicted person who bore a statutory onus to obtain a chance of acquittal, that a conviction could ever be regarded as unsafe or unsatisfactory because a jury should have been satisfied that the onus lying on the accused had been discharged. The view that it could so hold must be seriously doubted and I reserve my opinion on that issue. Otherwise, I agree with the orders proposed by Sperling J. 
BADGERY-PARKER J: I agree that the appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Sperling J and I agree entirely with the additional remarks made by Cole JA.

COLE JA: In those circumstances, the orders in relation to the conviction will be as proposed by Sperling J.
 (The applicant made submissions in relation to his application for leave to appeal against sentence.) 
We have heard what you have had to say, Mr Thomas, but the Court is not disposed to grant leave to appeal in relation to sentence. Leave is refused.
 * * * 
