

Dries versus McWhirter and Anor Matter No 10336/97 [1997] NSWSC 283 (1 August )

Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Dries versus McWhirter & Anor /97 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Dries versus McWhirter & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: This is yet another application for leave pursuant to section 151D(2) of the Workers' Compensation Act, 1987 (the Act). It was brought by Summons filed on 6 February 1997. The supporting affidavit was sworn on 12 November 1996 by the solicitor for the plaintiff (Mr Rees). There is no affidavit from the plaintiff himself. 
The matter has now been before the Court on six prior occasions. On 4 July , the Court was assured that the application was ready for hearing. On the basis of the assurances given, the application was specially fixed for hearing on 1 August 1997.

I may add that it should have been blindingly obvious to the plaintiff's legal advisers that the application was doomed to failure because of gaping evidentiary deficiencies.

Although the supporting affidavit is sworn by the plaintiff's solicitor, principally it purports to depose to certain of the instructions given to him by the plaintiff. It is substantially unhelpful as to his part in the conduct of the plaintiff's claim (inter alia, there is no mention whatsoever of the limitation period). Such a deficiency makes it near impossible for an application like this to succeed.

It is difficult to see how it can be thought that an application has any real prospects of success when it is hampered by the failure of legal advisers to explain their role in the conduct of the client's claim (particularly when the legal advisers have been instructed over a period of many years).

I shall refer to just a few of the matters that did emerge during the hearing.
The plaintiff suffered injury on 1 February 1989 in the course of his employment as a labourer/farm hand. In October 1992, it was suggested that he see a solicitor. The affidavit fails to disclose when the plaintiff did come to see Mr Rees. By inference from annexed documentation, it would seem that he was acting by at least October 1992. By the end of 1994, he had been given instructions to commence proceedings on behalf of the plaintiff. At some later stage, he entered into some correspondence with the solicitors for the defendants. At a later stage in his affidavit, it is said by Mr Rees that the plaintiff has now given him instructions that he wishes to proceed with the claim for damages against his employer.

The plaintiff has received workers' compensation since the date of his injury.
In June 1994, he did commence proceedings in the Compensation Court. These proceedings were resolved by way of compromise in July 1995.

The Court has a discretionary power to grant leave to commence proceedings.
The plaintiff needs the leave of the Court in which the proceedings are to be taken. In most cases involving the Act, this will be the District Court.

The discretion is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The onus of demonstrating an entitlement to leave rests with the plaintiff.

In the circumstances of this case, the plaintiff falls well short of discharging that onus.

The delay is gross. The limitation period expired in March 1994. The explanation for the delay is woefully inadequate. Whilst there is no evidence of actual prejudice, there is presumptive prejudice (see Brisbane South
Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] and BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 March 1997)).

The inadequacy of the material does not enable the Court to form any view on the question of the viability of the plaintiff's cause of action. The granting of relief would deprive the defendants of the benefit of a limitation defence.
The purpose of such a defence is to protect defendants from having to defend stale claims. This is certainly a stale claim.

I should also mention that such material, as has been placed before the Court, could be taken as suggesting that this may be another one of those cases in which the solicitor for the plaintiff has a conflict of interest (Judd v
Morrison & Anor (17 May 1995)). The material does reveal that the plaintiff's solicitor was acting well prior to the expiry of the limitation period.

I dismiss the Summons. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
