

Regina versus D D T Lucre [2004] NSWSC 1310 (2 January 2004) 
REGINA v. Desmond Darrell Trevor LUCRE /96 
Wednesday, 6 November 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
BEAZLEY JA, SMART J, JAMES J 
CATCHWORDS: REDETERMINING SENTENCE - CONSTRUCTION OF S.4442B OF CRIMES ACT - WHAT CONSTITUTES ASSISTANCE - CORRECT APPROACH TO ASSESSING ASSISTANCE - UNDUE DISPARITY.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Sentence varied 
HEADNOTE 
The appellant was sentenced to life imprisonment for murder. The sentence was re-determined and the appellant received a minimum term of 161/2 years and an additional term of 51/2 years. The murder which was planned and callous involved recruiting another man to assist and potential rewards from the niece who instigated the murder of her husband by prevailing upon the appellant to kill him.

At the trial of the niece the appellant gave cogent evidence incriminating her, having earlier supplied details of what she had done to the police. The appellant's evidence transformed a problematic Crown case into an overwhelming one. Many years later the appellant gave valuable assistance in other matters.
The appellant's behaviour in gaol has been good and he has made much progress.

The sentences imposed on the co-offenders were much less. A question of undue disparity arose as to the niece's sentence.

HELD: . The gravity of the offence was paramount;
The information provided by the appellant to the police in 1984 and the evidence which he gave at the niece's trial in 1985 constituted assistance within s.442B(1) of the Crimes Act. The judge appeared to have made no allowance for this assistance;
The correct approach was to make an overall assessment of the assistance given, that is, the 1984/1985 assistance and the later assistance;
The sentences did not adequately reflect the discounts which should be given for all the assistance given and there was an element of undue disparity in the sentences.

ORDERS 
Appeal allowed.
In lieu of the sentences imposed the appellant is sentenced to a minimum term of 15 years penal servitude commencing on 3 January 1984 and expiring on January 1999 and an additional term of 5 years penal servitude commencing on January 1999 and expiring on 2 January 2004.
 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Smart J.

SMART J: Desmond Darrell Trevor Lucre received a sentence of life imprisonment for the murder of Francis Anthony Galluzzo. He has been in prison since his arrest on 3 January 1984, the offence having taken place on the night of 2/3 January 1984.

On 5 February 1996 a judge of this Court re-sentenced the appellant to a minimum term of 161/2 years and an additional term of 51/2 years pursuant to [s.13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). The appellant says that the sentence was too severe. It was disproportionately higher than the sentence of his co-offenders and it was not adequately adjusted to reflect the assistance which he provided to the Crown.

The appellant was released on parole from a Western Australian gaol in October and came to reside with his sister-in-law at Casula. From that time he and Kerrie Galluzzo, his 23 year old niece and the wife of the deceased, were in regular contact. There is material suggesting that his niece informed him that her husband would not supply her with the money which she required for household expenses and that he was ill treating her physically. According to the appellant it was arranged between he and his niece that he would murder her husband for payment which was to include a Falcon motor vehicle belonging to her husband and some insurance money. There is substantial support for this version. There were a number of meetings and telephone discussions between the appellant and his niece about the arrangements. She participated in the selection of two occasions on which her husband might be killed. The appellant attended on these occasions but he did not proceed because there were too many people around.

The appellant enlisted the help of the third co-offender, Phillip Henry Cramer who was to receive $2000. The appellant and Cramer spent the afternoon of 2
January 1994 planning the murder. They arrived at the deceased's home about .30 pm. The appellant had a bag containing a loaded .22 sawn off rifle which he intended to use to kill the deceased. Kerrie Galluzzo had contributed to the purchase price of the rifle.

The appellant decided not to use the rifle for fear of attracting the attention of an employee of the deceased in a nearby residence who was up. The appellant took an axe from the garage of the Galluzzo residence and followed by Cramer entered the house through a back door which had been left unlocked by Kerrie Galluzzo. The appellant entered the main bedroom and struck the sleeping husband several times on the head with the blunt end of the axe.
During the attack Kerrie Galluzzo awoke and left the room at the appellant's direction. The appellant called Cramer into the room. They rolled the body in a sheet carried it from the house and, after dropping it on the path, placed it in the boot of the deceased's Toyota car. Kerrie Galluzzo made the car keys available. The appellant, Cramer and Kerrie Galluzzo spent the next few hours in inept attempts at cleaning up. A footprint which appeared to be that of
Kerrie Galluzzo was found in the area where the body had been dropped. She then helped to make some coffee.

The appellant accompanied by Cramer drove the vehicle to an isolated area of bushland at Holsworthy where it was doused with petrol. At the appellant's direction Cramer removed the bag containing the rifle and they began walking towards the main road. The appellant threw the axe into nearby bushland and set the vehicle alight. Two police officers noticed the burning car and then approached the appellant and Cramer as they walked along Heathcote Road. After some discussion the appellant pointed the rifle at one of the officers. The other police officer drew his revolver and, after some hesitation, the appellant dropped the rifle.

Later that day the appellant signed his record of interview in which he admitted his part in the murder and outlined the parts played by Cramer and
Kerrie Galluzzo. He elaborated on her part in a later record of interview on March 1984. Although he pleaded not guilty at the trial he did not seek to resile from his confession.

Some documents penned by the appellant suggested that he had hopes of a future relationship of a romantic or matrimonial nature with Kerrie Galluzzo.

The appellant and Cramer were tried together and convicted on 20 March 1985.
In his remarks on sentence on 29 March 1985 Roden J stated: "Whatever the prime motivation, this was a callous calculated killing." 
The appellant had a lengthy record of criminal offences. There were some 30 entries. They included stealing, larceny of a motor vehicle and break, enter and steal. There were 2 offences of robbery in company for which he received substantial sentences. At one stage he escaped from prison and had to be extradited from interstate (Queensland to Western Australia) to complete his sentence.

The report of the Serious Offenders Review Board reveals that the appellant has never been a problem to prison authorities although he took some time to settle down. He has shown a positive attitude and worked hard on developing his skills. He has the motivation to use his employment skills. His behaviour has been good and he has received many favourable references. The Board thought that the appellant needed to develop greater emotional maturity and stability especially in his relationships with ladies. His matrimonial ventures have proved unsuccessful.

The Supplementary Report of the Serious Offenders Review Council of 1
September 1995 helpfully sets out relevant extracts from the reports of various officers over the period from 1985 onwards. There was much progress on his part. In addition to equipping himself with a number of employment skills he was teaching them to other inmates. He has been described by one gaol governor as very hard working and no problem.

The report concludes by describing him as "a very good prisoner." It was anticipated that a program would be devised to prepare him to return to the community as a law abiding citizen.

Dr Bruce Westmore, a psychiatrist, saw the appellant on 24 September 1994 and wrote: "His previous offending history, apart from the conviction for murder, appear to be for generally non-violent offences. The murder charge appears to have arisen out of a specific set of circumstances and because of the peculiar nature of the circumstances surrounding that offence, a repetition is unlikely. Having said this it would be unwise to say that such offending is not possible again, but looking at his past behavioural history and his current mental state, it would be unlikely.

I certainly believe his rehabilitation attempts have been wholehearted and completely sincere. He has made, I think, a concerted effort to improve himself and develop good working relationships with other people. On mental state examination he also presented in a genuine and sincere fashion and his expressions of remorse regarding his actions were very real ones.

The critical issue for this man will be, I think, the nature and level of support and assistance he receives on his release. This support should also include some psychological assistance as a process of community readjustment is never easy for people who have spent long periods in prison and who as a consequence become socially isolated." and "His long term prognosis, certainly on a current cross-sectional mental state profile, is quite good. He has developed and maintains quite good insight into the aberrant and most serious nature of his offending behaviour, he has insight into the psychological pressures he experienced leading up to the offending behaviour and he certainly has good insight into the impact that his aberrant behaviour has had on his life. Psychological assistance should commence before his final release from detention and could possibly be based at a local community health centre." 
The appellant tendered and relied on many favourable references.

In his evidence before the judge the appellant said that he believed from what his niece said about her husband's treatment of her that the marriage was over. He claimed that she kept pressing him to proceed with the murder. He said that he hoped to live with her in a family situation. The appellant said that he killed the deceased because of his cruelty to his niece and the threats which he had made to him. He said that he was sorry for all that had happened.

The appellant agreed that in a letter, shortly after the murder, he had described Kerrie Galluzzo as "that bitch". He said that after the murder he realised that he had been used.

The judge rejected the suggestion that the appellant was truly contrite when he wrote to members of the family shortly after the murder expressing his sorrow. The judge thought that the letters represented an externalisation of responsibility with a vehement attribution of blame to Kerrie Galluzzo and a glossing over of the appellant's contribution.

The judge found: "The applicant testified to his desire to achieve rehabilitation and to lead a law abiding life in the future. The sincerity which he sought to convey was diminished in my view by the somewhat chilling detachment with which he was able to refer to the horrific crime which he had perpetrated. His expressions re-echoed the unemotional descriptions to the police during his interview after arrest when he spoke of agreeing to "knock" Frank Galluzzo." 
The appellant [applicant] did not describe the details of the crime in his evidence in chief. There is about one page of cross examination on the details of the offence. He responded by answering the questions briefly and directly but fully. There was only one answer which went for a few lines. In some answers he simply assented to the proposition in the question of the cross examiner.

The judge adopted the earlier observations of Roden J as to the murder and continued: "If there was a spark of passion for Kerrie Anne Galluzzo in the applicant's motivation it was clearly extinguished by the time he wrote to the deceased's family shortly after his arrest. I am satisfied that the financial benefit held out to the applicant was a most prominent factor and the killing has sufficient of that element to place it in the category of a professionally undertaken homicide. It was contended on behalf of the Crown that the professional assassination of a sleeping victim placed the circumstances close to a worst case." and: "I do not overlook that the submission refers to "close to" as distinguished from worst case but, on any view, the objective seriousness of this crime must attract a substantial sentence. Mitigation is derived from the subjective matters to which I referred earlier in these remarks." 
The matters to which the judge had referred were the favourable reports and certificates to which reference has already been made, some assistance to the authorities in 1994 and harsher prison conditions.

The judge incorporated into his reasons in the present case the remarks which he had made when determining the sentences of Cramer and Galluzzo.

On 21 October 1993 the judge re-determined the sentence of Phillip Henry
Cramer by imposing a minimum term of ten years and an additional term of five years. It was common ground both before Roden J and the judge that Cramer played a lesser part. He was not a party to the original planning. He struck none of the blows and it was never intended that he would. The judge found that he had "a substantially good if not quite unblemished prior record." The judge accepted that Cramer did not know that the appellant had a sawn off rifle until he pointed it at the police officer. It was not suggested that there should be any parity between the sentence of Cramer and that of the appellant.

On 20 December 1994 the judge re-determined the sentence of Kerrie Anne
Galluzzo by imposing a minimum term of 111/2 years and an additional term of /2 years. The judge had presided at her trial. the judge found that she had inspired the murder and had participated in it. He rejected her evidence that she spent the night sleeping in her daughter's room and awoke only when the police knocked on her door. He regarded this version as quite preposterous.
The judge accepted the evidence of the appellant given at her trial (which implicated her fully) as generally consistent with the objective circumstances and the evidence of the police officers.

She did not give evidence before the judge. At the trial she claimed that she had never discussed any ill-treatment by her husband with the appellant.

The judge noted that the Offenders Review Board reported that she appeared to be a good prisoner and had remained close to her children. The judge wrote: "The killing was planned and callous and unmitigated by any suggestion of provocation or misconduct on the part of the deceased. The applicant gives no indication of contrition and maintains a protestation of innocence in the face of overwhelming evidence of her guilt. She appears to have determined to serve her sentence in what impresses as an almost detached quietude." and "I conclude that she had rehabilitated in the sense that the likelihood of recidivism is remote but I am also of opinion that the element of recognition of wrongdoing which should lie at the commencement of any truly rehabilitative process is manifestly absent in this case. Her future plans are vague and such knowledge as I have must be gleaned from the hearsay recountings of histories reproduced in some of the tendered documents." 
The judge correctly regarded her criminality as greater than that of Cramer.
There were significant mitigating subjective circumstances. She was 23 and had no prior record. She had two children who were aged 12 and 14 in late 1994.
The judge regarded the likelihood of recidivism as remote.

The primary attack made on the judge's determination was that he had failed to allow any discount for the evidence given by the appellant against his niece at her trial. The parties before us were agreed, based on the notes of the solicitor for the Crown, that during the course of the address of counsel for the appellant on 10 November 1995 it was submitted that the appellant was entitled to significant and recognisable discounts for the assistance he had given and that the judge had remarked (referring to the trial of Kerrie
Galluzzo) that the appellant had given evidence of great weight and of great importance.

A study of the materials reveals that the evidence of the appellant transformed the Crown case from one with some problems into an overwhelming
Crown case. It showed the high criminality of Kerri Galluzzo.

In his reasons of 5 February 1996 the judge made reference to the assistance which the appellant gave the authorities in 1994 but not to the evidence which he gave, albeit compulsorily, at Galluzzo's trial. As the judge's comments during the hearing revealed he was well aware that the appellant had given the significant evidence mentioned. He pointed out that the appellant had protested about having to do so at her trial. The protest was relatively mild.
He said that he had been sentenced so why should he speak out against other people. He was told that he was there to give evidence. He continued to give evidence. The evidence given by him appears to have been full. He did not resort to answers such as that he was not sure or could not remember. He did not clam up as often happens.

The judge may have regarded evidence compulsorily given by the appellant against a co-accused as not amounting to assistance or possibly as assistance for which no significant credit should be given. A court is not required to look at each piece of assistance and put a separate discount on each. The assistance is looked at on an overall basis and bearing in mind that the discount given must not result in a disproportionate sentence.

Initially, the Crown submitted that when a co-offender discharged his or her duty to give evidence pursuant to compulsion that could not amount to assistance for which a discount could or should be given. The Crown pointed out that every witness called to give evidence is bound to tell the truth. The
Crown was concerned that every witness who gave significant evidence as to the commission of a crime by another if charged with an unrelated offence years later, may seek to call in aid the assistance he had earlier given.

After some discussion in Court, Counsel for the Crown submitted that it may be that the giving of evidence by a co-accused under compulsion, may fall within s.442B of the Crimes Act but that little discount should be given.

Section 442B(1) and (2) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides: "(1) In determining the sentence to be passed on a person convicted of an offence, a court may reduce the sentence it would otherwise impose, having regard to the degree to which the person has assisted, or undertaken to assist, law enforcement authorities in the prevention, detection or investigation of, or in proceedings relating to, the offence or other offences.

A court must not reduce a sentence so that the sentence becomes unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and circumstances of the offence." 
Subsection (3) contains a list of matters which must be considered by a court in deciding whether to reduce a sentence and the extent of any reduction.
Among the considerations are the significance and usefulness of the assistance.

The question in the present case is whether the appellant assisted the law enforcement authorities in the investigation of the murder and in proceedings relating to that murder against Galluzzo, and if so, the degree of that assistance. While the first record of interview and the statement of 9 January indicate involvement on the part of Galluzzo it is the second record of interview of 13 March 1984 which really spelt it out. It is apparent that shortly before this interview the appellant told the police that he wanted to give them more information about the involvement of Kerri Galluzzo's in her husband's death. The appellant then supplied useful and important information.
After this second interview the authorities knew that if the appellant gave evidence to the effect of the information he had supplied the Crown had a strong case against the niece for murder. The information was supplied at a reasonably early stage. It would have enabled the Crown to look for other supporting evidence. Apart from this, what was needed was for the appellant to give evidence. When compelled to attend he did so. The questions which he asked were understandable. Once he was told that he had no alternative but to give evidence he did so.

The assistance given comprising particularly the material supplied to the police in March 1984 and the evidence given at the trial is assistance given to law enforcement authorities within s.442B(1). There is no warrant for reading down the wide words of the statute. The court has a wide discretion.
It may reduce the sentence having regard to the degree of assistance given but the sentence must not become unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and circumstances of the offence.

As to the assistance given in 1984 and 1985 consideration has been given to all of the factors mentioned in s.442B(3) but only a few will be mentioned.
The effect of the offence on the deceased's two young children was very serious. They have been deprived of a father while growing up. There would also have been the effect of the deceased's parents and siblings. The assistance was significant and useful and the information supplied and evidence given were substantially correct, complete and reliable. The assistance was reasonably timely.

Similarly, as to the 1994 assistance consideration has been given to all the factors mentioned in s.442B(3). I will not list them. The appellant has suffered and will suffer harsher custodial conditions.

The correct approach was to make an overall assessment of the assistance given.

There was a high degree of criminality in the murder even allowing for the appellant being prevailed upon and used by his niece and it warranted a heavy sentence. Such a sentence was imposed. The judge expressly took into account part of the assistance given, namely, that in 1994. The sentence requires adjustment to take into account all the assistance given.

The second attack on the sentence was that while the appellant merited a sterner sentence than Kerrie Galluzzo the extent of the difference between the two sentences was too great, even allowing for the roles each played and her far superior subjective circumstances. The judge addressed the question of undue disparity directly. He said, "the matters for discrimination...are many and major. I set out some of the contrasts." The judge continued: "The applicant was at the time a man of forty years; his niece was twenty three. She had no prior convictions. His record demonstrated continuing offending which included other instances of violence. He commenced planning this crime within weeks of release on parole. The decision to kill the victim in a particularly brutal fashion with the axe was taken by the applicant while he was in the garage and in the absence of Kerrie Anne Galluzzo. If there be truth in the complaint of mistreatment which the applicant says was conveyed to him - and there is it should be emphasized no evidence that the deceased in fact mistreated his wife - the gravity of her offence might be mitigated but the same consideration would not attach to him. The whole of the circumstances bespeak an aggravated responsibility of the actual perpetrator as compared with the conspirator who sought to bring about a death. I am speaking in terms of relativity only. I certainly do not suggest that Kerrie Anne Galluzzo's culpability was minor." 
The criminality of Mrs Kerrie Galluzzo was high. Without her importuning there would have been no murder. She was very calculating. She left the door to the house open to facilitate the entry of the murderer. She slept with her husband so that circumstances would appear normal. It is an unusual lady who can contemplate being in bed alongside her husband while he is murdered and not only allow such an arrangement to proceed but help to organise it. There is a difference in the sentences of 6 years (22 to 16) and a difference of 5 years in the minimum terms (161/2 to 111/2). These differences seem too much, especially as to the minimum terms.

The sentences do not adequately reflect the discounts which should be given for the assistance given to the law enforcement authorities and there is an element of undue disparity in the sentences. It is necessary to keep at the forefront of sentencing the appellant the gravity of his offence.

The sentences imposed should be varied and the following orders made.
Appeal allowed.
In lieu of the sentences imposed the appellant is sentenced to a minimum term of 15 years penal servitude commencing on 3 January 1984 and expiring on January 1999 and an additional term of 5 years penal servitude commencing on January 1999 and expiring on 2 January 2004.
 
JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of Smart J.
 * * * 
