

Regina versus Newman Matter Nos 60775/96 [1997] NSWSC 467 (9 October 1997) 
Regina versus Matthew John Newman /96 60313/97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Studdert J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 60313/97 REGINA versus Matthew John NEWMAN 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: We have before us three matters. There is an application for leave to appeal against conviction out of time, an appeal against conviction filed in anticipation of success of the application to which I have earlier referred, and we also have a Crown appeal against what is said to be the leniency of the sentence imposed upon Mr Newman, whom I shall call the appellant. 
The circumstances in which these matters come before us are somewhat confused.
What follows is a presently sufficient, although not complete, statement of those circumstances.

The appellant is a young Aboriginal man. As a result of a pub brawl he was arrested by police and charged with a number of offences. For present purposes it is necessary to refer to only one of those charges. It was a charge of robbery with striking. The charge was that on 24 January 1996 at Lismore the appellant robbed a man named Mark McClure of a knapsack containing a wallet, an amount of $210 in cash and a shirt and that immediately before the robbery he struck McClure.

The Crown case against the appellant - to put it very briefly - was that, after an argument developed in a hotel where the men had been drinking, the appellant and another man viciously assaulted McClure, and the appellant seized a knapsack belonging to McClure, carried it out of the hotel, walked onto a bridge near the hotel and threw the knapsack into a river.

At all material times the appellant has maintained, first, that he was not the aggressor in the violence that occurred at the hotel, and second, that although he did handle and discard McClure's knapsack, he did not do that with an intention that would constitute robbery. To put it briefly, he has always maintained that in a state of annoyance at the conduct of McClure he took hold of McClure's knapsack and simply threw it out of the door of the hotel. It is unnecessary to go into the facts of the case in further detail.

It is common ground that the version of the facts given by the police, if accepted by a jury at least to the level of a possibility, would require acquittal on the charge of robbery with striking.

In relation to certain other charges, the appellant asked for them to be taken into account on a schedule. They are not presently material.

When the matter came before Magistrate Linden, the magistrate - as appears from the transcript of the proceedings of 11 March 1996 - treated the matter as a paper committal, noted that it was being defended by the appellant, considered the relevant provisions of the legislation dealing with committals for trial and committed the appellant to trial to the District Court at
Lismore on a date to be fixed by the criminal listing director. According to the transcript, Magistrate Linden said: "The defendant has elected to call and give no evidence. That is his statutory right. The prosecution evidence is therefore the evidence in the matter. Based on that evidence, I'm not of the view that a jury will not be likely to convict this defendant of this indictable offence. He is committed for trial to the District Court at Lismore on a date to be fixed by the criminal listing director, or such other Court to be held at such other time and place as the Attorney-General may appoint by law." 
It is at that point or shortly thereafter that the matter went off the rails.
For a reason that does not appear in the evidence, there issued from the Local
Court at Lismore a document appropriate to proceedings of a substantially different nature. The document, which was signed by the Clerk of the Local
Court, was headed "Certificate of Committal on Plea of Guilty". It referred to s51A of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/). It erroneously recorded that the appellant had pleaded guilty and that he was committed for sentence to the District Court. A copy of that document, it appears, went to the Legal Aid authorities and the document also went to the District Court at
Lismore.

The evidence shows that the officers of the Legal Aid Commission, who thereafter dealt with the matter, as a result of the document, assumed that the appellant had pleaded guilty before the Magistrate and had been committed to the District Court for sentence. However, the evidence also shows that they were somewhat perplexed at the attitude that the appellant was taking.
According to the evidence, they had very little time to interview him, but they noted that the account of the relevant events which he was giving them was apparently inconsistent with his guilt of the charge of robbery with striking.

The matter came before Herron DCJ in the District Court of Lismore. Herron DCJ again assumed - no doubt on the basis of the document to which I have referred - that the appellant had pleaded guilty and intended to adhere to that plea.
However, the transcript of the proceedings before Herron, DCJ which included evidence by the appellant as to what happened on the occasion in question, indicates that the learned judge was himself puzzled and perplexed at the plea of guilty in the light of the account of the events which the appellant was giving.

Having regard to the evidence of the circumstances in which the appellant met with officers of the Legal Aid Commission and discussed the matter with them and to the age and background of the appellant, I am not prepared to infer that this is a case in which a person, informed as to his legal rights, and understanding the significance of what he was doing, made and adhered to a plea of guilty even though his account of the relevant facts was inconsistent with guilt. On the contrary, I infer that this was a case in which what prevailed was general confusion.

Herron DCJ dealt with the matter on the basis that there was a plea of guilty.
His remarks on sentence begin with the statement: "In this matter the defendant pleaded guilty before a magistrate to a charge that on 24 January 1996 at Lismore he did rob Mark McClure of one knapsack containing one wallet, $210 in cash and one shirt and that immediately before the robbery he struck McClure." 
Although there is no specific reference to this in the remarks on sentence, Ex , which has been tendered in these proceedings, shows that Herron DCJ formally convicted, or purported to convict the appellant. The learned judge then, for reasons that he gave, proceeded to pass sentence on the appellant.
The course that he took was to defer sentence upon the appellant entering into a recognisance himself in the sum of $1,000 to be of good behaviour for a period of three years.

The Crown appeal against leniency on sentence is based upon what is said to be the manifest inadequacy of that as a penalty for the offence of which the appellant was convicted.

It is better that I should not express any view one way or the other as to the adequacy of the penalty which Herron DCJ imposed, because if this matter should go back for a new trial the question of the appropriate penalty will be an open question to be considered afresh, if the appellant is convicted.

The inescapable fact is that the statement that the defendant pleaded guilty before a magistrate was simply incorrect. The defendant did not plead guilty before a magistrate. Nor, for that matter, did the appellant plead guilty before Herron DCJ. Indeed, the proceedings before Herron DCJ were conducted upon an assumption, shared by the judge and the lawyers in the case, that it was unnecessary for the appellant to plead guilty because he had already pleaded guilty before a magistrate. In those circumstances the conviction of the appellant was based upon an error of fact as to the appellant's plea.

It is unnecessary, in my view, to address technical questions as to whether the conviction was without jurisdiction. The fundamental problem with the conviction is that it was based upon an erroneous assumption that the appellant had pleaded guilty when he had not pleaded guilty, when he was maintaining a version of the facts which, if accepted, was inconsistent with guilt.

In those circumstances I consider that the proper course for this Court is to quash the conviction.

I propose that the appellant should have the extension of time sought to appeal against the conviction, that the appeal against the conviction should be allowed, that the conviction and sentence should be quashed, that the matter should be remitted to the District Court for a trial of the appellant and that the Crown appeal against leniency of sentence - the merits of which have not been argued - should be dismissed.
 
STUDDERT J: I agree.
 
BARR J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court are as I have indicated.

REGINA versus Matthew John NEWMAN 
CRIMINAL LAW - appellant convicted and sentenced by District Court judge on erroneous assumption that he had pleaded guilty before a magistrate - appellant's account of the relevant facts inconsistent with guilt - confusion and error on the part of appellant's legal representatives - HELD - conviction quashed and new trial ordered. 
O R D E R S Time for appeal extended.  Appeal allowed.
 Conviction and sentence quashed; matter remitted for trial to District
Court.
 Crown appeal against sentence dismissed.
 * * * 
