

Wood and Ors versus Attallah Matter No 10708/98 [1998] NSWSC 768 (4 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
RUSSELL BRUCE WOOD & ORS versus JOSEPH ATTALLAH /98 June 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Application has been made this morning by counsel for the defendant. He also appears for the person Michelle Wise. He seeks that she be added as second defendant and I have made that order. 
Both defendant now apply by motion to set aside judgment. The affidavits of
Michelle Wise and Joseph Attallah, the second and first defendants respectively, have been filed in court.

Execution on the default judgment for possession of land obtained by the plaintiff had, on 3 June, by me been stayed until further order. Counsel for the plaintiffs sought that that execution proceed and the stay be dissolved prior to hearing the application to set aside judgment. That priority request was refused by me. The defendants indicate they are, if necessary, prepared to go on immediately to seek to set aside the judgment.

The plaintiffs' counsel indicates that they would need about a fortnight in order to have affidavits on and to meet that application. It has been indicated from the bar table that there is a possibility that the mortgage might be re-financed within three weeks and upon testing it would appear that with sufficient pressure the re-financing might occur earlier.

It is clear that there is an issue as to whether the second defendant was or was not served with a notice to vacate and as to whether her lease is such and her possession such as to affect with notice the plaintiff's on their entry into the mortgage with the first defendant.

There are asserted, issues between the plaintiff and the first defendant including an assertion that the mortgage should be rectified so that its term should be expressed as 10 years and that additional payments to those reserved by the mortgage during the term have been made such as might give rise, for instance, to questions of waiver of the right to take possession or whether the mortgage has in fact been "rolled over".

I am informed by counsel for the plaintiff that there is no allegation of any default during the term, nor is it asserted that there has been any failure to abide by the covenants of the mortgage except for any covenants requiring the delivering up of possession or the repayment of capital at the expiration of the year's term of the mortgage, and that the plaintiffs want their capital.

It is accepted as a practical proposition that it is highly unlikely, even were a sale to proceed in the very near future, the actual capital would make it to the hands of the plaintiffs in any time shorter than the two weeks that would be required for the plaintiffs to put on their affidavits or re-finance and further, of course, questions would arise as to whether any sale would or would not be subject to the tenancy of the second defendant.

In the circumstances I am of the view that the application for adjournment should be granted. I direct that all the evidence of the defendants in support of the application be by way of affidavit and that the affidavits on which the defendants rely be served on or before 4.00 pm, Tuesday 9 June, that the affidavits on which the plaintiffs rely be filed and served on or before 4.00 pm, Thursday18 June. I stand the matter over to Monday 22 June.
 * * * 
