

The University of Newcastle versus Gio General Limited Matter No 50113/95 [1998] NSWSC 185 (11 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
THE UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE versus GIO GENERAL LIMITED /95 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: THE UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE versus GIO GENERAL LIMITED 
Proceedings: 50113/1995 
Date of Hearing: 24 April 1998 
Date of Judgment: 11 May 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr G T W Miller QC/Mr D T Miller 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Leacock & Massey 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr B W Rayment QC 
Solicitors for Defendant: Abbott Tout 
Application to trial Judge to set aside answers given to various separate questions, ordered to be heard as such pursuant to Part 31 rule 2, on the basis of more recent High Court authority.

Application made pursuant to Part 40 rule 9 notwithstanding that there was no final determination of the facts and the applicant had neither sought nor intended to seek leave to appeal.

Application refused.

Autodesk & Anor versus Dyason (No 2) <case>; [(1992-1993 176 CLR 300] referred to.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Present Application 2 
The Principles Governing Such An Application 4 
A Consideration Of Those Principles In The Light 
Of The Present Case 7 
Conclusions 9 
Order 9 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
On 18 August 1995 Giles CJCommD ordered, pursuant to Part 31 rule 2, that there be determined separately and prior to any other question in these proceedings certain issues, which were incorporated in a document entitled "Agreed Statement of Issues For Separate Determination". They came on for hearing before me on 18 and 19 September 1995 and, on 28 September 1995, I delivered judgment. In doing so I referred to all the difficulties which, in my opinion, arose from the way in which the issues had been presented by the parties for determination and, in particular, what I thought was a lack of sufficient precision in the formulation of the facts upon the basis of which they were to be decided. I referred also to the difficulties and, to some extent, the impracticability, of answering questions of law when there was no agreement on all the facts; when the parties did not agree for all purposes of the proceedings to be bound by such facts upon which they had agreed; and when the Court was asked to determine the issues based on certain "assumptions", which the parties recognised may not, in due course, be made good. I do not propose to re-state the various problems, which I considered might arise.

However, it is necessary to note certain further events, which are or may be relevant to a consideration of the matter. On 8 August 1997 Giles CJCommD made orders, pursuant to Part 72 rule 2(1), referring the whole of these proceedings and proceedings 55081 of 1994 to Mr G.R. Easton, who has expertise in the construction and building industries, for inquiry and report. In proceedings 55081 of 1994 Doran Constructions Pty Limited (in liquidation), ("Doran"), sued a number of parties including the plaintiff and the defendant in these proceedings. In early 1998, the Court was informed that Doran had been placed in liquidation, and that its liquidator did not propose to pursue its claim or defend any cross-claims brought against it in either of the proceedings.

The Present Application 
The defendant has now sought an order, pursuant to Part 40 rule 9(1) or rule (3), to set aside or vary the judgment or orders made on 28 September 1995.
It is not in issue that no judgment or order has been entered pursuant to the answers I furnished. The basis for this application is that the decision of the High Court in CIC Insurance Limited versus Bankstown Football Club Limited (1995-1997) 187 CLR 384 reversed the decision of the Court of Appeal in that case, upon which I placed reliance in answering at least one question, and, at least, threw doubt on the decisions in Government Insurance Office of NSW v
Atkinson-Leighton Joint Venture (1981) 146 CLR; Smith versus Colonial Mutual
Fire Insurance Co Limited [(1880) 6 VLR 200]; and
Lumley General Insurance Limited versus Vintix Pty Limited [(1991) 24 NSWLR ]
upon which I also placed reliance. The plaintiff opposed the application.

It is not in issue, as I understood the submissions, that I have power to recall my reasons prior to the passing and entry of a judgment. The question is whether, in the circumstances of any particular case, the power, which I consider to be essentially discretionary, should be exercised. A consideration of whether the discretion should be exercised in the present case requires, in my opinion, that several further matters be kept in mind.

Firstly, the High Court had granted special leave to appeal in CIC
Insurance prior to the argument before me taking place. I was not asked to stay my decision pending a determination of that appeal, nor was the present application made in a timely fashion after judgment on the appeal was given on August 1997. Secondly, the defendant did not seek leave from the Court of
Appeal to appeal against my decision and, in its written and oral submissions, it stated that if I was not minded to accede to the present application it did not intend to seek an extension of time within which to make such an application, nor in any other way to seek leave to appeal. Thirdly, the defendant conceded that the task of the Referee on the hearing of the reference, which is to commence in about June 1998, will be neither decreased nor increased by my acceding to its application. One matter I would find compelling in exercising my discretion favourably to the defendant would be that by doing so the Referee would be absolved from determining matters, which he would otherwise, by reason of my answers, be required to determine; or would be required to determine matters, which, but for my answers, he would otherwise not have to decide. The parties did not suggest that either of these circumstances obtained.

The Principles Governing Such An Application 
In Autodesk Inc & Anor versus Dyason & Ors (No 2) <case>; [(1992-1993) 176 CLR 300] the principles governing an application of this type were considered. By "an application of this type" I mean one in which the application to set aside the orders made or, in this case, the answers given, also involves the necessity for re-argument to determine whether that course should be followed. I say that because there was no concession that the decision in CIC Insurance, without more, demanded that I should give any different answers. This matter is emphasised by the absence of any relevantly binding facts or factual findings. Mason CJ, who was in the minority, said, at pp.30-302:- "The exercise of the jurisdiction to re-open a judgment and to grant a re-hearing is not confined to circumstances in which the applicant can show that, by accident and without fault on the applicant's part, he or she has not been heard. It is true that the jurisdiction is to be exercised with great caution having regard to the importance of the public interest in the finality of litigation. It is equally true, as this Court said in Wentworth versus Woollahra Municipal Council, that `(g)enerally speaking, it will not be exercised unless the applicant can show that by accident without fault on his part he has not been heard'.

But these statements do not exclude the exercise of jurisdiction to re-open a judgment which has apparently miscarried for other reasons, at least when the orders pronounced have not been perfected by the taking out of formal orders. So much was acknowledged by Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ in Smith versus NSW Bar Association when their Honours said: `if reasons for judgment have been given, the power is only exercised if there is some matter calling for review'. It is sufficient to give three examples. In Re Harrison's Share under a Settlement, orders were set aside following a decision in the House of Lords which over-ruled authorities on the basis of which the orders had been made. In New South Wales Bar Association versus Smith, the New South Wales Court of Appeal reconsidered orders previously made in view of an argument that the Court had mistakenly assumed that particular evidence had not been given at earlier hearings. And, in Pittalis versus Sherefettin, a Judge recalled orders the day after they were made upon determining that he had `erred in a material matter in his approach to the case'.

These examples indicate that the public interest in the finality of litigation will not preclude the exceptional step of reviewing or re-hearing an issue when a court has good reason to consider that, in its earlier judgment, it has proceeded on a misapprehension as to the facts or the law." 
At p.303 his Honour said:- "However, it must be emphasised that the jurisdiction is not to be exercised for the purpose of re-agitating arguments already considered by the court; nor is to be exercised simply because the party seeking a re-hearing has failed to present the argument in all its aspects or as well as it might have been put. What must emerge, in order to enliven the exercise of the jurisdiction, is that the court has apparently proceeded according to some misapprehension of the facts or the relevant law and that this misapprehension cannot be attributed solely to the neglect or default of the party seeking the re-hearing. The purpose of the jurisdiction is not to provide a back door method by which unsuccessful litigants can seek to re-argue their cases." 
At p.308 Brennan J stated that the jurisdiction was to be exercised "sparingly" because of the importance of finality in litigation. His Honour, at p.309, said that he found no jurisdiction to set aside the judgment "merely because it is submitted by the unsuccessful party that, on further argument, the Court would be satisfied that it had reached the wrong conclusion in law".
At p.310 he continued:- "To entertain an application to re-open an appeal after judgment in order to consider further argument on an issue already decided would be to subvert the finality of litigation and to invite interminable arguments about the importance of the legal questions to be re-canvassed and the correctness of the answers to those questions already given." 
Deane J, who agreed with Mason CJ, said, at p.314:- "It" (the argument) "has, however, persuaded me that I may have reached that conclusion without a complete consideration of the argument against it. In the result, I consider that the judgment should be vacated so that the case can be approached anew in the light of the argument which the respondents wish to present." 
Dawson J was of the view that the applicants had had sufficient opportunity to present their case. In those circumstances he refused the application.

At p.328 Gaudron J, although in the end rejecting the application, said:- "As earlier indicated, it is my view that, quite apart from the question whether the respondents were given an opportunity to be heard on the issues involved in the judgment in Autodesk No 1, they are entitled to have the judgment vacated if the interests of justice so require. Having regard to the significance which currently attaches to computer technology and having regard to this Court's status as Australia's final court of appeal, it seems to me that the interests of justice would require that course if it were fairly arguable that the judgment involved a misunderstanding of the facts or misapplication of the law in relation to one or more of the issues on which the respondents now wish to put further argument." 
A Consideration Of Those Principles In The Light Of The Present Case 
As I pointed out in my reasons, and as the parties have accepted on subsequent directions hearings and on the hearing of this application, the factual bases for the conclusions to which I came have not been established in any satisfactory way. The parties have not agreed to be bound by such facts as were agreed, and, in so far as assumptions were invoked for the purpose of answering the questions, they have not agreed that the assumptions have any ultimate validity unless supported by underlying proved facts. These circumstances alone indicate the limited usefulness or appropriateness to the final result of anything I decided. Secondly, in the absence of definitive factual findings the correct construction of the policy and the impact thereon of the High Court's decision in CIC Insurance is difficult, if not impossible, to determine. In my view the correct approach is to have the relevant facts found and then to have a decision on how the policy should be construed in the light of those factual findings. Thirdly, the plaintiff has such advantage as it may seek to maintain from the answers I gave. It may be that those answers were incorrect, but, in my opinion, the proper approach, at least in most cases, is for a party aggrieved by a decision at first instance to exercise its appellate rights. In my respectful opinion this was an important point the High Court was making in Autodesk. Their Honours there pointed out that the only remedy, having regard to the High Court's being the final Court of Appeal in this country, was by the High Court's itself re- considering the matter. In the present case the defendant had the opportunity of testing my decision by seeking leave to appeal. It has not only not done so, but it had stated unequivocally that it will not do so.

In my opinion, it would require a very clear case indeed for a Judge at first instance to set aside a judgment given after full argument and on the bases of facts and law brought forward by the parties. To adopt that course would do nothing to promote the finality of litigation. Certainly, if a Judge has overlooked an authority, which means, for example, that part or whole of the decision must be overturned on appeal, it is not unusual for the Court of
Appeal to require the appellant to have approached the trial Judge in the first instance to amend the judgment conformably with the law, before that
Court will consider the matter. However, those types of case are, in my opinion, clear examples. The present case does not fall within that category and it is bedevilled by the difficulty of not knowing what the facts will be.

Conclusions 
I am not persuaded as the matter presently stands that there is any justification for me to vacate or vary the answers I gave to the separate questions on 28 September 1995. In coming to this conclusion I am making no assumptions as to the ultimate effect of those answers, or as to the part that they may play in the final resolution of the proceedings. I am simply concluding that, as a matter of discretion, the defendant has failed to satisfy me that I should interfere with the answers I gave some two and a half years ago. What consequences flow from them will have to be determined in due course. Whatever risk the defendant has or will take by having failed to seek leave to appeal or by failing to seek to extend the time within which leave to appeal may be granted is a matter for its own consideration.

Order 
I order that the application be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
