

Charlton versus Dr Appleberg and Ors Matter No 20220/94 [1997] NSWSC 550 (10
November 1997) 
Charlton by her tutor Ferguson versus Dr Appleberg & Ors /94 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /94 - Charlton by her tutor Ferguson versus Dr Appleberg & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced in 1994. The plaintiff is claiming damages for professional negligence. The third defendant is a hospital. The relevant allegations may be found in the Statement of Claim and the DCM documents. 
On 4 April 1997, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. It was returnable on April 1997. It sought relief against, inter alia, the third defendant concerning the matter of interrogatories.

On 21 April 1997, the application first came before the Prothonotary. There were deficiencies in the manner in which the claim for relief was framed.
There were deficiencies in the supporting evidence. Because of these matters, it was necessary to adjourn the application. The Prothonotary was of the view that the costs of 21 April 1997, were thrown away by reason of the actions of the solicitor for the plaintiff. He later ordered that the costs be paid by the plaintiff's solicitor personally, and that the third defendant be at liberty to proceed to recover those costs forthwith.

The Prothonotary also dismissed the Notice of Motion. It seems that these orders were made on the 27 May 1997.

On 2 September 1997, Master Harrison made an order extending the time for bringing an application to review the decisions of the Prothonotary. The review was fixed for hearing on 10 November 1997.

The extension of time was granted on an application by the plaintiff. It is the solicitor (who is not a party to the proceedings) who is the person at least primarily interested in disturbing the decision made as to costs. Any review sought by her is now long out of time. In any event, her challenge to the Prothonotary's decision seems, on what I have seen so far, to be devoid of merit. I might also observe that there seems to be at least a potential conflict of interest in the present circumstances.

An adjournment of this part of the review was sought. It was unclear as to who was actually seeking the adjournment (the plaintiff or her solicitor). The application was refused and the challenge to the costs decision was dismissed.

The plaintiff herself is concerned with the decision made concerning the interrogatories. The review proceeded in respect of this part of the application. The plaintiff seeks leave to administer more than 30 interrogatories (117 in fact).

The Court is under some handicap in dealing with this aspect of the review.
The Prothonotary has been on sick leave for some time. The Court is left to do its best on the draft of the reasons for the decision made.

The draft contains some of the history of the steps taken in relation to the matter of interrogatories. The draft of the decision was supplemented by, inter alia, a chronology and by the material placed before the Prothonotary.
The evidence in support of the application was sparse.

This material reveals considerable delay and non-compliance with certain orders and/or directions. Leave to administer no more than 30 interrogatories was given on 29 September 1995.

The Prothonotary appears to have had regard to a number of matters in reaching his decision. Informal discovery has been had between the plaintiff and the third defendant. No doubt, the Prothonotary took into account the significant delay and the lack of satisfactory explanation for delay. He took the view that it was not demonstrated that it was necessary to make the orders sought.
He had the proposed interrogatories before him and gave consideration to about half of them. He made observations as to certain of the interrogatories (including that some were not relevant and that some were oppressive).

I have reviewed the decision. I am not satisfied that there is any basis demonstrated for disturbing it.

The plaintiff bears the onus of satisfying the Court that the order sought should be made. She must first satisfy the threshold requirement (that the order is necessary in the sense required by the rules). The Court then has a discretion to make an order.

In my view, the threshold requirement has not been satisfied. Even if a different view had been taken on this question, I consider that the application would have still failed for discretionary reasons (including questions of futility of giving leave to administer at least a significant portion of the proposed 117 interrogatories, delay and failure to satisfactorily explain delay).

I dismiss the Notice of Motion filed on 2 September 1997 (which is the
Application For Review). There is a consensus between the parties that the part of the review devoted to the costs decision does not merit any special costs order. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion.

I order that the plaintiff have leave to administer 30 interrogatories. Such interrogatories are to be administered on or before 4pm on 21 November 1997.

I reserve leave to the parties to make any application for costs that they are so advised to make. I give leave to the parties to file in the registry any consent order dealing with the matter of the remitting of the proceedings to the District Court. The question of the leave concerning the matter of costs can be exercised by application to a registrar if the matter remains in this
Court.
 * * * 
