

Atsas versus Gertsch Matter No 2962/97 [1998] NSWSC 522 (28 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 25 November 1998 
ATSAS versus GERTSCH /97 July 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
FILE NO: 2962 of 1997 
DELIVERED: 28 July 1998 (Reserved) 
HEARING DATE: 14 July 1998 
PARTIES: Atsas versus Gertsch 
JUDGMENT OF: Hodgson CJ in Eq 
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff: Mr R Lovas 
Defendant: Mr J C Thompson 
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff: Hennikers, Oak Flats 
Defendant: Corporations Group Counsel, North Sydney 
CATCHWORDS: 
Estoppel - Res Judicata - Anshun Estoppel 
Evidence - Uncorroborated Claims Against Estates 
Limitation of Actions 
Plaintiff works as housemaid for deceased - After death, probate obtained of forged will which gives $40,000.00 to plaintiff, and executor pays $40,000.00 to plaintiff - Subsequently, probate revoked and administration granted on basis of intestacy - Administrator sues plaintiff for $40,000.00 and obtains default judgment - Plaintiff subsequently and more than six years after death claims $200,000.00 from estate on basis of contract or estoppel - Held that plaintiff's claim, at least up to $40,000.00, arose at earliest on revocation of probate and was not statute-barred; that although her claim could have based a defence by way of equitable set-off to the administrator's action, there was no estoppel or Anshun estoppel by reason of the default judgment; but that the plaintiff's claim was uncorroborated and not proved on the balance of probabilities.

Wills Probate & Administration Act, ss.40D, 81 
Supreme Court Rules Pt.8 r.16 
Grundel versus Registrar-General [(1990) 5 BPR 97,340] 
Thomson versus Lord Clanmoris [(1900) 1 Ch. 718] at 728-9 
Gertsch versus Roberts [(1993) 35 NSWLR 631] 
Hawkins versus Clayton (1998) 164 CLR 539 
Chan Kit San versus Ho Fung Hang [(1902) AC 257] 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Ludwig Gertsch died on or about 19th October 1990, and on 26th September 1995 letters of administration of his estate were granted to his brother Henry Victor Gertsch. In these proceedings, commenced on 25th June 1997, the plaintiff Aspasia Atsas claims $200,000.00 from the estate, on the basis of promises and representations allegedly made to her by Ludwig Gertsch during his lifetime. 
OUTLINE OF FACTS 
I will begin with a brief outline of the facts. This is substantially taken from the plaintiff's evidence: I see no reason to question the substance of this evidence, except in relation to certain conversations, to which I will return later in this judgment.

The plaintiff was born in Greece in 1945. She came to Australia in 1966. She attended school in Greece, leaving at the age of 15. She is fluent in Greek, but not in English; although she has a fair understanding of English. She gave evidence through an interpreter.

In about 1979 or 1980, she commenced working as a housemaid for Roger
Teyssedre at his house at 7 Sutherland Street, Paddington. Her duties comprised all duties around the house apart from cooking. Prior to that time, the plaintiff had not been in paid employment: she had been fully engaged in bringing up three children.

The plaintiff's evidence is that initially she worked five days a week, for about five hours each day, and was paid $50.00 to $60.00 per week in cash. The plaintiff gave evidence to the effect that Mr. Teyssedre said that if she worked for small wages, at the end he would pay her a large sum.

In about 1983, Ludwig Gertsch commenced living with Mr. Teyssedre; and he continued living there until Mr. Teyssedre died on 16th April 1990, and he remained on until he disappeared on 19th October 1990.

In 1984, Mr. Teyssedre's mother, who lived in an adjoining house, became ill.
The plaintiff commenced to look after her, spending one and a half to two hours per day on this, and also working on weekends. She continued to receive the same remuneration. According to the plaintiff, Mr. Teyssedre said words to the effect that he would "please you very much in my will". Mr. Teyssedre's mother died in 1987.

In 1985, Mr. Teyssedre became ill, and the plaintiff's duties became heavier.
According to the plaintiff, she continued to receive the same payment, but further representations and/or promises were made. Mr. Teyssedre's health declined in 1987, and according to the plaintiff there were more representations and/or promises in 1988 and/or 1989. The plaintiff also gave evidence of a further representation or promise, in the presence of Mr.
Gertsch, a day or so before Mr. Teyssedre died.

Mr. Teyssedre died on 16th April 1990. The probate of his will is not in evidence. I have no evidence of his assets, except evidence of the plaintiff that his house was luxuriously appointed, and that he lived a lavish lifestyle. I have no evidence about the contents of his will, apart from evidence of statements by Ludwig Gertsch to the effect that the house became his after Mr. Teyssedre died, and evidence concerning $2,000.00, to which I will come.

Mr. Ludwig Gertsch continued to live in the house, and the plaintiff continued with the household duties there. According to the plaintiff there were promises and/or representations by Ludwig Gertsch. She continued to receive the same payments, or perhaps received payments up to $70.00 per week, until
September 1990.

After Mr. Teyssedre's death, a solicitor Brian Roberts was a very frequent visitor, calling every day, sometimes twice a day.

In about July 1990, Mr. Roberts gave the plaintiff a cheque for $2,000.00, and advised that this was what Mr. Teyssedre had left her in his will. The plaintiff became very upset, claiming that she had been promised much more.
According to the plaintiff's evidence, Ludwig Gertsch then made further representations and promises to her.

On 1st September 1990, the plaintiff's name day, Ludwig Gertsch gave her $200.00 and a dryer; and it appears that from that time on he began paying her $200.00 per week.

Ludwig Gertsch disappeared on 19th October 1990, and apparently died on or about that date. It appears that on 11th January 1991, Brian Roberts obtained probate of a purported will of Ludwig Gertsch, which appointed him executor, and among other gifts made a gift of $40,000.00 to the plaintiff. That will is not in evidence. $40,000.00 was paid to the plaintiff by Mr. Roberts on 22nd
January 1991.

There were enquiries by the police into the death of Ludwig Gertsch, and also into the alleged forgery of the will by Mr. Roberts. The plaintiff was interviewed by the police, apparently in connection with the suspected murder of Mr. Gertsch, on 25th September 1992, 16th December 1992, 7th January 1993, and 16th July 1993. Statements signed by her on those dates are in evidence.

In 1993, the defendant in these proceedings commenced proceedings for revocation of the probate granted to Mr. Roberts. An order was made revoking probate on 16th December 1994, this order being then stayed until 3rd March .

On 19th December 1994, solicitors acting for the defendant wrote to the plaintiff a letter in the following terms: 
We act on behalf of Henry V. Gertsch, a brother of the late Ludwig Gertsch.

We note that you are a named beneficiary in the purported Will of the deceased dated 7 September 1990.

By order of Mr. Justice Hodgson, in the Supreme Court on Friday 16 December 1994, it was found that the said Will was a forgery and that the grant of Probate in respect of the alleged Will be revoked and that Brian Roberts, the Executor named therein, deposit the said grant of Probate in the Registry.

Administration of the Estate of the late Ludwig Gertsch was granted to our client Henry V. Gertsch.

The Court imposed a stay on the preceding orders up to and including 3 March 1995.

We have been instructed by the Court to inform you of the abovementioned orders and also to advise you that unless you apply to participate in the abovementioned proceedings, a revocation of the Probate of the purported Will of 7 September 1990 will take effect after 3 March 1995; and that, if you wish to produce any evidence or make any submissions to the Court opposing that occurrence, then you must bring an application which is returnable in the Probate List no later than 3 March 1995. If you do not do this, then the revocation of Probate will take effect, and you may be under a liability to repay to our client and/or the Estate the amounts which you have received from the Estate. 
We enclose herewith for your information a copy of the judgments delivered by Mr. Justice Hodgson in the Probate Division of the Supreme Court of NSW on Friday 9 December and Friday 16 December 1994.

If you are unsure of your rights in this matter, we recommend that you consult a solicitor for advice. In this regard, you should take to your solicitor a copy of this letter and the documents enclosed herewith.

No application was made by the plaintiff prior to 3rd March 1995, and on 22nd
March 1996, solicitors acting for the defendant wrote to the plaintiff demanding repayment of $40,000.00.

There was no response from the plaintiff; and on 8th May 1996, proceedings were commenced in this court by the defendant seeking repayment of $40,000.00 by the plaintiff and repayment of other amounts by other purported beneficiaries. The Statement of Claim in those proceedings was served on the plaintiff in these proceedings on 11th May1996.

On 28th August 1996, solicitors acting for the defendant in these proceedings wrote to the plaintiff, noting that she had not filed a defence, and advising that they proposed to apply for judgment.

On 4th September 1996, the plaintiff telephoned Mr. Grimes, solicitor, who had signed the letter of 28th August. Mr. Grimes kept a note of that conversation, which was as follows: . Wanted tel.no. of HVG - I said I would get instructions . Roger said he would give me a few dollars in due course(?) . Ludwig also said he would pay me . Neither my husband nor I work.

According to the plaintiff, this is not what she said. According to the plaintiff, she said words to the effect that the money she received was proceeds of her work and was her money; that she was a mother of three children, and had toiled for years in expectation of that money; that he should see previous wills and see what was promised; that she had spent everything already and had no money to give back; and that Ludwig wanted to fix her place, but he was gone.

Mr. Grimes wrote again to the plaintiff on 18th September 1996, advising that they had been instructed by their client not to divulge his address or telephone number; and that he did require her to repay the $40,000.00 without further delay. A letter dated 22nd November 1996 from Mr. Grimes to solicitors acting for the plaintiff advised rejection of an offer made by them, noted that no appearance had been filed on behalf of the plaintiff, and advising that a Notice of Motion seeking default judgment was to be heard on 25th
November.

On 25th November 1996, the matter came before Master Macready; and in the absence of any appearance or defence from the plaintiff in these proceedings,
Master Macready found that the defendant in these proceedings was entitled to judgment against the plaintiff in these proceedings in the sum of $40,000.00.
On 12th December 1996, judgment was entered for $40,000.00 plus $28,849.83 interest, and for costs. That judgment was served on the plaintiff on 28th
January 1997. The plaintiff has never made any application to set aside that judgment, but she commenced these proceedings on 25th June 1997.

ISSUES 
Three issues have been contested in this matter.

First, there is the issue whether the plaintiff has made out a case of a contract or estoppel binding the estate of Ludwig Gertsch to pay her $200,000.00 or some other sum.

Second, there are defences raised of laches, and of estoppel or Anshun estoppel arising out of the earlier proceedings.

Third, there is a defence raised under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/).

It is convenient to deal with these issues in reverse order.
 [LIMITATION ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) 
Submissions 
The parties have provided written submissions, which I will leave with the papers.

Mr. Thompson for the defendant submitted that the plaintiff's cause of action was in contract or quasi-contract or for equitable relief analogous to contract; and that therefore [ss.14(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s14.html) and [23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s23.html) of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) were the applicable sections: (1) An action on any of the following causes of action is not maintainable if brought after the expiration of a limitation period of six years running from the date on which the case of action first accrues to the plaintiff or to a person through whom he claims - a cause of action founded on contract (including quasi contract) not being a cause of action founded on a deed; a cause of action founded on tort, including a cause of action for damages for breach of statutory duty; a cause of action to enforce a recognizance; a cause of action to recover money recoverable by virtue of an enactment, other than a penalty or forfeiture or sum by way of penalty or forfeiture.
 . [Sections 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s14.html), [16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s16.html), [17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s17.html), [20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s20.html) and [21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s21.html) of this Act do not apply, except so far as they may be applied by analogy, to a cause of action for specific performance of a contract or for an injunction or for other equitable relief.

Apart from the question of whether there was an available defendant, the cause of action arose at the latest upon the death of Mr. Gertsch on 19th October .

Mr. Thompson then submitted that there was a defendant immediately available on death, namely The Public Trustee. In any event, the plaintiff could immediately have sought an order under Pt.8 r.16 appointing someone to represent the estate, or could have sought a grant of administration under
Division 5 of the Probate Rules. Alternatively, there was a defendant available on 11th January 1991, when probate was granted to Mr. Roberts. This grant was valid until revoked: Ex Parte Keegan <case>; [(1907) 7 SR 565] was incorrectly decided, but in any event, was displaced by ss.40D and 81 of the Wills Probate & Administration Act: 
D (1) If a grant of probate or administration is revoked, the provisions of this section shall have effect.

The executor or administrator under the revoked grant shall be bound duly to account and to pay and transfer all money and property received by or vested in the executor or administrator and then remaining in the executor's or administrators hands as the Court may direct, but shall not be liable for any money or property paid or transferred by the executor or administrator in good faith under the probate or administration before the revocation. 
Nothing in this subsection shall affect any commission protection indemnity reimbursement or right to which the executor or administrator is entitled under any other provision of this Act.

The revocation shall not invalidate any payment or transfer lawfully made by or to the executor or administrator in the course of administration before the revocation, but nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any person to follow assets into the hands of the persons or any of the among whom the same may have been distributed, or who may have received the same.

No action shall lie against the Registrar-General for loss, damage or deprivation suffered in consequence of the registration of a transfer or other dealing with land under the provisions of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), lawfully made by the executor or administrator before the revocation. 
In any case where a grant of probate or administration is revoked under section 40C the person, or if the person has died since the date of the grant, the executor or administrator to whom a grant of probate or administration is made consequent on the revocation, shall be entitled to receive from the Consolidated Revenue Fund the amount of death duty paid thereto in respect of the revoked grant.

The Court may make such vesting order as it deems proper.

The provisions of this section, with the exception of subsection (4), shall extend to a case where the grant of probate or administration was made before, as well as to a case where the grant is made after the commencement of the Wills Probate & Administration (Amendment) Act 1932.
 (1) Where any proceedings at law or in equity have been commenced by or against any executor or administrator lawfully acting as such, and the grant of probate or administration is, pending such proceedings revoked or rescinded, the court in which such proceedings are pending may order that a suggestion be made upon the records of - the revocation or rescission of such probate or administration; and the grant or restoration of probate or administration which has been made consequent thereon.

Thereupon the proceedings shall be continued in the name of the executor or administrator authorised to act as such by such grant or restoration of probate or administration as if the proceedings had been originally commenced by or against such lastmentioned executor or administrator, but subject to such conditions and variations (if any) as such court may direct.

If the grant of probate or administration is revoked under the provisions of section 40C the court in which the proceedings are pending may in lieu of the suggestion referred to in subsection one of this section, order that such suggestion be made as it deems proper, and thereupon the proceedings shall be continued in the name of such person as the court directions as if the proceedings had been originally commenced by or against that person, but subject to such conditions and variations, fi any, as the court directs, or the court may stay the proceedings on such terms in respect of costs or otherwise as it thinks just.

In any event, Mr. Roberts could have been sued as an executor de son tort:
McGee v. Yeomans [(1977) 1 NSWLR 273] at 281. In so far as Hawkins v. Clayton (1998) 164 CLR 539 suggested that there was no cause of action until an executor had assumed office, this applied only where the action was for the estate, not where it was against it: cf. Gertsch v.
Roberts [(1993) 35 NSWLR 631.] 
Mr. Lovas for the plaintiff submitted that time did not commence to run until there was a defendant capable of being sued: Thomson v. Lord Clanmorris [(1900) 1 Ch. 718] at 728-9; Hawkins v. Clayton at 561-2; De Dominicis v.
Spano, Hodgson, CJ in Eq., 25th May 1998 at pp.27-8.

In particular, Mr. Lovas submitted that, time did not commence to run either against or for an administrator before appointment. The retrospective vesting of the estate pursuant to s.44(1) of the Wills Probate & Administration
Act was immaterial. This was unaffected by the position of The Public Trustee under s.61 of the Wills Probate & Administration Act as a repository of the estate: Re Deans [(1954) 1 AllER 496] at 498;
Andrews v. Hogan <case>; [(1952) 86 CLR 223]; Perpetual Trustee Co. v. Public Trustee [(1956) 56 SR ]; Re Hart [(1964) 80 WN 1120] at ; Laybutt v. Amoco Australia <case>; [(1974) 132 CLR 57] at 77; Re Cameron [(1982) WAR 55]; Hart-Roach v.
Public Trustee, Murray, J., Supreme Court of Western Australia, 11th February
Time did not commence to run upon an earlier appointment of an executor pursuant to a forged will, which appointment was subsequently revoked.
Although such an order was valid until set aside (see Brennan v. Brennan <case>; [(1953) 89 CLR 129)], this just meant that action taken in reliance on it was lawful. Once the order was set aside, it provided no justification for further action; and whether what had been done under the order could be undone depended upon the remedies available: Wilde v. Australian Trade Equipment
Co. [(1981) 145 CLR 490] at 603. In any event, the assumption of the office of executor was an effect of the order, not something done in reliance on the order. Section 40D of the Wills Probate & Administration Act was a statutory enactment of what was decided in Hewson v. Shelley [(1914) 2 Ch.
]; and that section and s.81 did no more than provide specific remedies. Section (1) of the Act related the administrator's title back to the date of death, and showed that the administrator was in no sense a successor in title to the wrongful executor.

Decision 
It is clear that a limitation period only starts when a cause of action accrues to a plaintiff or a person through whom the plaintiff claims; and decisions such as Thompson v. Lord Clanmorris indicate there must also be a party liable to be sued. It is convenient to look separately at actions on behalf of an estate, and actions against an estate. Generally, in both cases, if time has begun to run before death, it continues to run in the period between death and the appointment of a legal personal representative. The more doubtful question, which arises in this case, concerns the position where there is no cause of action before the death.

Looking first at the position concerning actions in favour of an estate, it seems clear that, where there is no executor who obtains a grant, an action cannot be commenced by an administrator until the actual appointment of the administrator (see Gertsch v. Roberts [(1993) 35 NSWLR 631] and cases cited at p.645); and it follows that, in relation to causes of action arising on or after death, time does not begin to run against the administrator until then. Where there is an executor appointed by the deceased's will, who obtains a grant, there are decisions to the effect that the same situation obtains:
Marshall v. D.G. Sundon & Co. [(1989) 16 NSWLR 463];
Darrington v. Caldbeck [(1990) 20 NSWLR 212.] This matter was left open by Powell, J. in Gertsch v. Roberts. However, the decision of the High Court in Hawkins v. Clayton was to the effect that time began to run against the executor in that case once the executor had taken control of the estate and was committed to taking probate: that would seem to suggest that proceedings commenced by an executor in those circumstances, where that executor subsequently obtains a grant, would be well commenced.

Turning to the situation where there is a grant of probate, but that probate is subsequently revoked because of a finding that the relevant will was forged, the Privy Council decision of Chan Kit San v. Ho Fung Hang [(1902)
AC 257] was to the effect that time did not run from that grant of probate, but from the subsequent grant of administration. It is not clear whether that decision would now have any application: ss.40D and 81 seem to have taken away the stated basis of the decision, namely that the grant based on a forged will was void ab initio. It could be argued that, because the title of a subsequently appointed administrator related back to the date of death, the executor to whom probate was granted of a forged will cannot be regarded as a person through whom the administrator claims, for the purposes of [s.14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s14.html) of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/).
However, it would seem that the same argument would apply where a probate is revoked for some cause occurring subsequent to grant, such as proved incapacity; and the very circumstance that the subsequently appointed administrator could, under s.81, take over the conduct of proceedings commenced by the executor appointed pursuant to the forged will, suggests that in substance such an executor is a person through whom the administrator claims.

Turning to the position in relation to actions against the estate, based upon causes of action arising upon or after the death of the deceased, I accept Mr.
Lovas' submission that the effect of the cases cited by him is that The Public
Trustee does not represent the estate for the purposes of proceedings brought against the estate: it is true that Andrews v. Hogan and Perpetual Trustee
Co. v. Public Trustee established that a Notice to Quit could be served on
The Public Trustee, but that concerned providing a landlord with a remedy in rem to recover possession of land subject to a tenancy held by the deceased.
The defendant also relied on Pt.8 r.16 of the Supreme Court Rules, which is in the following terms: .16(1) Where in any proceedings it appears to the Court that a deceased person was interested, or that the estate of a deceased person is interested, in any matter in question in the proceedings and that he has no personal representative, the Court may, on the application of any party - order that the proceedings continue in the absence of a person representing the estate of the deceased person; or by order (with the consent of the person appointed) appoint a person to represent that estate for the purposes of the proceedings.

An order under subrule (1), and any judgment or order subsequently entered or made in the proceedings, shall bind the estate of the deceased person to the same extent as the estate would have been bound had a personal representative of the deceased person been a party to the proceedings.

Before making an order under this rule, the Court may require notice of the application for the order to be given to such (if any) of the persons having an interest in the estate as it thinks fit.

That rule contemplates that there are already proceedings on foot, and that it appears that a deceased person or the estate of a deceased person is interested in some matter in question in those proceedings; and it provides that, if the Court makes an order under the rule, the estate will be bound. I have not been referred to any authority which suggests that the rule can be used where there is no defendant to proceedings unless and until an order is made under the rule; and in particular where it is sought to make a claim for money against the estate, as sole defendant, and to execute against the estate if the proceedings are successful. I think it is doubtful whether that rule would justify that kind of order in such a situation; and I do not think the existence of that rule means that a cause of action accrues against the estate of a deceased person prior to the appointment of a legal personal representative. Similarly, the ability of a creditor to seek the appointment of an administrator under the Wills Probate & Administration Act does not, in my opinion, mean that a cause of action is complete prior to any such appointment being made. I would cite as one exception to this proposition the special position which exists under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/), and the Wills
Probate & Administration Act s.41A: see Leue v. Reynolds [(1986) 4 NSWLR .] 
It would appear that proceedings can be brought against an executor de son tort prior to grant, although any judgment against such an executor would be limited to assets actually controlled by that executor: see Sunnucks Williams and Mortimer on Executors, Administrators and Probate, pp.46-7, 1013-4.
Presumably, if such an executor subsequently obtained a grant of probate, the action commenced against that executor as an executor de son tort could be continued against the same person as executor with a grant. Subject to that, it seems to me that, in general terms, there is no person to be sued on behalf of an estate until an actual grant of probate or letters of administration; so that, in general terms, time will not run in relation to a cause of action against an estate, which did not arise during the lifetime of the deceased, until the actual appointment of a legal personal representative.

In my opinion, it is clear that that position would not be altered if the grant of letters of administration or probate is subsequently revoked on a ground occurring after the grant. The difficult question is, what is the position where a grant is made, and then revoked on a ground which would mean that there was no basis for the original order; for example, on the ground that the purported deceased person was still alive, or (as in this case) that a grant of probate was made on the basis of a forged will. Clearly, proceedings could have been brought against the estate by action against the legal personal representative, until such time as the grant was revoked; and such proceedings could be kept alive after revocation of the grant pursuant to s.81 of the Wills Probate & Administration Act. In those circumstances, it seems to me that the better view is that time would be begin to run from the time of the original grant, even if that grant is later set aside on a ground which showed there was no basis for the original grant.

Under the will of which probate was granted to Mr. Roberts, the plaintiff was entitled to $40,000.00. Accordingly, the only claim which she could have made against the estate at that time was a claim for something to which she was entitled in excess of $40,000.00. On the analysis I have presented, the plaintiff could possibly be barred from pursuing any claim in contract, for a benefit from the estate in excess of $40,000.00, six years from the original grant to Mr. Roberts. But no cause of action for a benefit of up to $40,000.00, on this analysis, arose prior to 16th December 1994, when I made the order revoking probate. Accordingly, the plaintiff's cause of action, at least so far as it concerns a claim for up to $40,000.00, is not statute- barred. It could be contended that the plaintiff has just one cause of action in contract, and that, if it is not statute-barred up to a limit of $40,000.00, then it is not statute-barred at all. However, on balance I think the better view is that the claim in contract, for any benefit in excess of $40,000.00, is statute-barred.

I have discussed the matter on the basis that the plaintiff's claim is in contract, and therefore subject to the limit provided by s.14. In so far as the plaintiff's is based on equitable estoppel or some other equitable relief analogous to contract, in my opinion, s.14 should be applied by analogy; so that the same considerations apply.

LACHES, ESTOPPEL, ANSHUN 
I have held that the plaintiff's claim, in so far as it exceeds $40,000.00, is statute-barred. In so far as the plaintiff's claim does not exceed $40,000.00, it arose at the earliest on 16th December 1994, and in my opinion there could be no laches in relation to that claim. In any event, as Mr. Lovas pointed out, the plaintiff's claim in contract would not be subject to a defence of laches.

Turning to the question of whether the plaintiff is precluded by the judgment in the earlier proceedings, that was a default judgment; and it seems clear that a default judgment gives rise to res judicata and issue estoppel only as regards matters necessarily determined by that judgment. Even in contested proceedings, the entry of judgment in respect of a claim does not resolve issues arising on a cross-claim: see Supreme Court Rules Pt.6 r.8.

In relation to matters which may be raised not just by way of cross-claim, but also by way of defence, the situation is not quite so clear. It appears that, if the proceedings are fully litigated, then matters which could be the subject of a cross-claim but which also could be raised as a defence, even if only pursuant to a claim of equitable set off, are determined by the proceedings, if not by way of res judicata or issue estoppel, then at least by way of the Anshun principle: see Bryant v. Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(1995) 57 FCR 287]; 490093BC v. Bank of Montreal [(1995) 128 DLR 4th 488.]
However, in my opinion, this would not apply in the case of a default judgment.

Certainly, it does not apply where money has been paid and accepted in relation to a claim, without judgment being entered: see Davis v. Hedges [(1871) 6 QB 687]; Hoppe v. Tittman [(1996) 1 WLR 841.] I have already referred to the narrow effect given to default judgments as regards res judicata and issue estoppel. The reliance on a cross-claim as giving rise to an equitable set-off, and thus to a defence, seems to be a matter at the option of a defendant; so that apart from the Anshun principle, there does not seem to be justification for treating the default judgment on the claim as determining a possible cross-claim, even where that cross-claim could have been relied on as a defence by way of equitable set-off.

Furthermore, in so far as the Anshun principle is based on abuse of process, it does not seem to me it could be said that it is an abuse of process for a person, against whom a default judgment has been entered, to rely on a matter that could have been a cross-claim in those proceedings by instituting separate proceedings. A person against whom a default judgment has been entered may apply in the same proceedings to set that judgment aside; and there is no suggestion that that kind of application involves an abuse of process. Where what is sought to be raised is a cross-claim, not a defence as such, it seems to me a fortiori that it cannot be an abuse of process to seek to litigate the cross-claim in separate proceedings.

CONTRACT OR ESTOPPEL 
Evidence 
The evidence relied on by the plaintiff to make out the promises and/or representations relied on included the affidavit verifying her Statement of
Claim, and her oral evidence in the proceedings.

The relevant paragraphs of the Statement of Claim are paragraphs 9-20, which are in the following terms: . During 1985 Mr. Teyssedre further represented to the plaintiff that: he had made a Will in which he had left a legacy in the sum of $50,000.00 to the Plaintiff; and if the Plaintiff continued working for him he would put money into a bank account for the Plaintiff and her family.
 . Further Mr. Teyssedre represented to the Plaintiff soon after the conversation referred to in the proceeding (sic) paragraph: if the Plaintiff continued to work for him she would receive what he had promised to her but if she stopped working for him she would get nothing; he would put money into the bank for the Plaintiff so that she would have money with which to educate her children.
 . Julie Baranger died in 1987 after which the Plaintiff provided domestic services for Mr. Teyssedre's household 7 days per week.
 . Mr. Teyssedre's health declined after 1987 and at home on or about 1988 or 1989 in the presence of Ludwig Gertsch Mr. Teyssedre represented to the Plaintiff that he: had left her an amount of $50,000.00 in his Will; would put $150,000.00 into a bank account for her.
 . On Friday 13 April 1990 Mr. Teyssedre represented in the presence of Ludwig Gertsch to the Plaintiff that he would deposit the sum of $150,000.00 into an account in the Plaintiff's name with a bank.
 . In reliance upon the representations in paragraphs 7, 9, 10 and 12 the Plaintiff remained in Mr. Teyssedre's employment notwithstanding that she could have obtained better wages with another employer.
 . On 16 April 1990 Roger Teyssedre died.
 . After the death of Roger Teyssedre Ludwig Gertsch requested the Plaintiff to continue to work for him on the same basis as she had worked for Mr. Teyssedre and he further represented to the Plaintiff that he would ensure that Mr. Teyssedre's promises were carried out.
 . Relying upon this representation the Plaintiff continued working for Ludwig Gertsch at 7 Sutherland Street, Paddington for $50.00 per week.
 . In about July 1990 Mr. Roberts solicitor delivered a cheque in the sum of $2,000.00 to the Plaintiff saying words to the effect "This is your legacy from Teyssedre's estate".
 . At the time that the said cheque was delivered Ludwig Gertsch was present and represented to the Plaintiff that he would ensure that the Plaintiff would receive the monies promises by Mr. Teyssedre.
 . Relying upon this promise the Plaintiff continued to work for Ludwig Gertsch at a modest weekly wage notwithstanding that she could have obtained better wages from another employer.

The relevant passages of the plaintiff's oral evidence are the following: 
Q. After Mr. Teyssedre became ill did he make, say certain things to you concerning his will? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did he say to you? 
A. He said to me words to the effect that, "Cia, you have been the last person that cared for us, I will include you in my will and I will leave there money enough to help you buy a place to live" and then I responded that, "But this is, a place to live is very expensive nowadays" and he replied to me, "You leave that to me and I will leave the money enough not only to buy it but to have some enough for you left over." 
Q. Did he say anything about a specific sum? 
A. At that stage I said to him that my niece had bought a flat for $160,000 and I thought that would be the amount to purchase this thing and he said, "I give you bit more, I can go up even to $200,000." ....

Q. Did Mr. Teyssedra make any promises to you in the presence of Mr. Gertsch? 
A. Yes.

Q. When was that? 
A. It was approximately one or two months before his death and actually he promised that to me three times and the day before the last one he died.

Q. What was it that Mr. Teyssedre said to you in the presence of Mr. Gertsch? 
A. He said, "Cia, I am going to leave enough money for you to help you with your life in the same manner as you have helped us over the last past years." 
Q. Did he mention the quantum of money? 
A. Yes, he was saying 150 to $200,000.

Q. When he mentioned that quantum of money who else was present apart from you and Mr. Teyssedre? 
A. Us three, we were at the bedroom, also other people knew that.

Q. That conversation in the bedroom, can you put a date on that conversation in the bedroom? 
A. I think it was ten to fifteen days before Roger died but he also mentioned it the day, second day before he died.

Q. On the second occasion that you have just mentioned, two or three days before he died, was Mr. Gertsch present? 
A. Yes.

Q. When he mentioned the money, did he tell you what form, in what form you would get it or how you will receive it? 
A. He said to me that he would include me in his will and another extra amount he would deposit in my bank account and Mr. Gertsch also agreed to that.

Q. What did Mr. Gertsch say? What words did he use? 
A. He embraced me and he said to me, "Cia, don't worry this money are definitely yours, it is not just a matter of will it is your work and we have to pay you." ....

Q. The conversation that took place on the day of Mr. Teyssedre's death, could you tell us what it is that Mr. Gertsch said to you? 
A. In Greek do you mean? 
Q. Did you speak in Greek or English? 
A. He speak to me of course because he speak English, slow, you know, and he told me, "Cia, no worry you stay with me, you work for me and no worries I look after you because you look after me very good. I feel for you like my sister because I have no sister and I have only three brothers but no I am not very close, not close to my family and thank you very much for what you give, what you do for me and I look after you. Don't worry, even Roger puts you in his will. I give you more than him, what he give you I give you too.

Q. Did he say to you anything about the subject of your continuing to work for him in the future? 
A. Yes.

Q. When was that? 
A. He did ask me actually before the death on the same day he asked me again, he told me again.

Q. The same day, you mean the day of the death? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did he ask you to do in terms of your duties into the future? 
A. He asked me, "Will you continue to help us, help me in the same manner as you did help both of us, Roger and I previously, will you continue doing the same things for me?" And I said to him, "Yes".
 ....

Q. Before Mr. Gertsch's death how many times did Mr. Roberts give you a cheque? 
A. Two.

Q. Can you put a date on the first occasion or how long after Mr. Teyssedre's death? 
A. Three months.

Q. Where was it? 
A. In the kitchen.

Q. Who was present? 
A. At that moment exactly nobody but then Ludwig was upstairs, came down after I called.

Q. Before Ludwig Gertsch came down there was just you and Mr. Roberts in the kitchen? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did he say to you? 
A. "Cia this is from Roger's will." 
Q. What was it? 
A. $2,000.

Q. What did you do with it? 
A. I said to him, "No, this is not the amount of money that he left to me in his will" and I threw the cheque upon his fact and I said, "I know what is the exact amount he should have left me." 
Q. What happened after that? 
A. He said to me, "This is the amount he left" and he looked upon me with ironic look and then I started crying out and at that moment he came down.

Q. Mr. Gertsch came down? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did he say anything or did you say anything to him? 
A. He asked me, "Cia, why are your crying out?", and then I said to him, "Look is this the amount of money that he should have left upon me?", and he said, "No, no I know this is, should have been a much higher amount", and he embraced me and he asked me, "Cia, don't worry, I will leave to you a higher amount in my will." 
Q. He spoke to you in English? 
A. Yes.

Q. Can you relate in English words that he told you on the occasion when you received the two thousand cheque, the words that he used to you exactly? 
A. Ludwig? 
Q. Yes? 
A. He said to me, "Yes, I know how you are feeling, but don't worry, I will correct everything, for what has happened. You will be near me. I will look after you and you are going to be looking after me, and I will correct all the wrongs Roger did." 
Q. Did he say in what way he would correct what happened? 
A. I said to him, "Yes, you know very well what Roger had promised to me that he would buy the flat for me." 
Q. What did he say to that? 
A. And then I added that, "You tell me that you consider me as your sister and because of that I trust you and I expect you to meet your promise and I will be looking after you." 
Q. What was the promise? 
A. You know, the promise given to me previously about 150 to $200,000 and he said to me, "Yes, I will give you that money, $200,000." 
Q. Did he say how or when he would give it to you? 
A. He said to me, "Yes, I will include you in my will", and because his solicitor was presenting things rather different to him and strange he said to me, "If I can not put the whole amount in my will for you I will deposit the balance in your account in your bank." 
Q. What did you say to him in answer to that promise? 
A. I said to him "I trust you" and having the experience of some gifts they have given me in the past, I forgot to say that before, "I have trust in you" and then he said to me, "I promise to God that I will do that for you." 
Q. Did you make any proposition to him in answer to his promise? 
A. No. I said, "Because I see your feelings towards me I will be with you up to your last moments." 
Other material bearing on the alleged promises and/or representations is contained in the four signed statements given to the police.

The statement dated 25th September 1992 contained the following: . I was first employed by Roger Teyssedre in August 1980 or 1981 and worked for him until his death. I then worked for Ludwig Gertsch until two and a half months after his death. I told Brian Roberts, Ludwig's solicitor, that I would work at the house until the Will was made public. I was going to make the decision as to when to stop working because Roger and Ludwig treated me as part of there (sic) family and I felt that I had more right to be there than anyone else. My duties were doing Roger's and Ludwig's washing, cleaning the house and looking after the cats. I did everything except the cooking.
 . I first met Ludwig in January 1984 when he moved into the house with Roger in 7 Sutherland Street, Paddington. He was there until Roger's death on the 16thApril 1990. I found that Roger's death was very sudden. We expected him to die but not for another two weeks, as he was still walking up and down the stairs of the house. I was aware that Roger had A.I.D.S. Roger died very early in the morning. I did not find out that he had died until quarter to eleven when I arrived for work which was my usual starting time and his body had already been removed. When I saw Ludwig, he appeared to be upset and was acting in a very agitated manner.
 . I continued to work for Ludwig after Roger had died doing the same duties. After Roger's death, Ludwig told me that Roger had said to give me two hundred dollars and for me to leave. I did not believe this and continued to work at the house. During the time I worked for Ludwig, our relationship was good.
 ....
 . On the Friday Ludwig disappeared, about 1.30pm, he was in the backyard of his house, when he received a phone call. When Ludwig came back into the house he was shaking and was very upset. I asked what was wrong and he said, "Another bloody phone call". I asked him who it was from, however he just waved me away. I then spoke to Ludwig for about an hour after this. During this conversation he talk (sic) about the renovations to my house and he also talked about the threatening calls. He said to me "I don't think I'll be alive at the end of next week and I'm sorry I won't be able to finish off your house. But do not worry I will make better arrangement (sic) than the one's (sic) I have made for you". I took this to mean that Ludwig would leave something in his Will for me. He never said who these threats or phone calls were from and I often pressed him to tell me there (sic) names. Ludwig told me that there was nothing he could do about the threats and that he did not think he would be able to go on the holiday in November.
 ....
 . Ludwig had told me that he drawn up two Wills and was going to do a third one. He brought this up about two weeks before his disappearance and then again one week before his disappearance. I never saw these wills but Ludwig had promised to show me his will on the Monday after he disappeared. As a result of Ludwig's death I received forty thousand dollars. I use (sic) to keep my jewellery in his safe and when Ludwig went away he would give me the key to the safe so I could get my jewellery out if I needed it. About three weeks before he disappeared Ludwig told me to take my jewellery out of the safe as he thought someone would rob him and the house. I took the jewellery about two weeks before he disappeared.

The statement dated 16th December 1992 contained the following: . In my earlier statement I said that Ludwig promised to show me his will on the following Monday. He told me this on Friday 19 October 1990. He was going to show it to me because he told me he was going to leave me something in his will. He had told me that he had changed his will a couple of times and that he would probably change it again but that he would leave one that was similar to Roger's and leave things to his friends.

The statement made on 9th January 1993 contained the following: . About July, 1990 I was at 7 Sutherland Street with Ludwig and the solicitor Brian Roberts when Ludwig handed to me a piece of paper which had written on it that I was to get $2000 from Roger's will. I did not believe this and I started to scream and cry. I said, "This is rubbish, this is sick. I don't believe that. He was giving me much more money". Brian Roberts said, "That's what you were left in the will". I then pushed the piece of paper back to Brian Roberts and I said "This is not for me. I don't believe that, something crooked has occurred". Brian Roberts and Ludwig said, "No, no. Roger left this to you. In his last days he was angry with everyone and had a change of heart and changed his mind". A few days later I was handed a cheque for $2000 but I don't remember who gave it to me. I obtained a photocopy of this cheque.
 . Maybe the same day or a few days later Brian Roberts came to Sutherland Street and showed me a piece of paper and he said, "This is Roger's will, see look that's his signature". I looked at the signature but I was not familiar with it and I said "I don't believe anything. I don't know if that's his signature". I did not believe this because when Roger was alive he had told me on several occasions that he was going to leave me enough money so that I would not need to rely on my husband or my children during my life. I can recall one time when I spoke with the solicitor that Roger had before he had Brian Roberts. This solicitor said to me "You will be a very lucky lady, you are being left a lot of money by Roger".

I note that no evidence was called on behalf of the plaintiff from the solicitor who acted for Mr. Teyssedre before Brian Roberts. No evidence was called from Brian Roberts, but I draw no inference adverse to the plaintiff from that, having regard to the circumstance that Brian Roberts apparently forged the purported will of Ludwig Gertsch.

The statement made on 16th July 1993 contained the following: . The day before his death, Roger was visited by Anne Charlier firstly, then about 2pm my sister Kikky arrived. She left about 3pm. Roger mentioned that he intended to go to Katoomba on the following day (17.4.90) if he's feeling alright, to see his old lover Eduardo Alderighi. Ludwig attempted to dissuade Roger from taking this trip. Roger intended to go anyway. During that day Roger used the stairwell to the top floor bedrooms about 4 to 5 times. Later that day I attended to changing his bed sheets and after making his bed I called out to him that his bed was ready and as he was about to retire to bed he said to me, "After Wednesday, you'll be rich".
 . A few days before this, Roger indicated that he intended to deposit a lot of money into my account to look after me for the rest of my life. I said to him "I know how much you are going to give me, I have seen other wills with $50,000 for me". (In fact Francois who lived in the small house at the back had told me and he has since passed away.) Told me not to leave as he had been told by Roger that he, Roger, was going to take care of me financially. Roger told me he would increase the amount that appears in the will, to enable her to buy a small unit to live in for the rest of her life.
 . The next morning about 11am I arrived at the home to commence work and I was told that Roger had passed away. Ludwig said to me, "Cia, he (Teyssedre) left plenty of money. All this is mine". About this time, I saw Eva Green, Roger's neighbour and I said to her, "Roger's going to take me to the bank on Wednesday" and she replied, "Yes, I know".
 . In late July 1990, I receive a letter from Brian Roberts stating that I was to only receive $2,000 from the estate of Roger Teyssedre. I was shocked. About ten days later I received a cheque for this amount, accompanied with a letter from Brian Roberts. (I produce those letters). I confronted Ludwig about this and he explained, "The last few days, Roger changed his will, he was upset with his friends:. I said, "You are sure, $2,000. You were there when Roger told me he was going to take me to bank and look after me". Ludwig said nothing but just walked away.
 . Today I have had read to me five page statement I gave to solicitor, Bizannes. The contents are correct. I produce that statement. 
None of Mr. Teyssedre's wills was put into evidence, nor was the statement given to Mr. Bizannes.

Submissions 
Mr. Lovas for the plaintiff submitted that, while the plaintiff did not rely in these proceedings on agreements made by Mr. Teyssedre, those agreements did provide the context in which promises were made by Ludwig Gertsch; and there was consistency between those two sets of promises. As regards the police statements, Mr. Lovas submitted that they dealt with a different subject matter, namely the disappearance of Mr. Gertsch. In any event, they were not inconsistent with the account now given by the plaintiff. The promise made by
Mr. Teyssedre and continued by Mr. Gertsch had two elements: first, a gift of $50,000.00 by way of legacy in a will; and second, a further sum related to the purchase or re-building of a house. This was linked with the conversation to the effect that the plaintiff's daughter had purchased a unit for $160,000.00, and this was the explanation for the promise of a total of $200,000.00. The second element to the promise could have been fulfilled by some form of inter vivos transaction, involving a bank. Mr. Gertsch undertook to honour those promises; and having visited the plaintiff's house and observed it needed renovation, he suggested renovation of the plaintiff's house as an alternative way of fulfilling the promise. The evidence showed a promise by Ludwig Gertsch to do the same as Mr. Teyssedre had promised, provided the plaintiff went on looking after him as she had looked after Mr.
Teyssedre. The plaintiff fulfilled her part of the deal, and so was entitled to the promised benefit. Alternatively, in reliance on the promises and/or representations made by Mr. Gertsch, the plaintiff acted to her detriment in accepting wages far less than those she could have earned elsewhere, giving rise to an estoppel.

Mr. Thompson for the defendant referred me to the cases of Grundel v.
Registrar-General (1990) 5 BPR 97340 and Dimura v. Public Trustee, Bryson,
J., 15th July 1996; and submitted that those cases demonstrated that, on the authorities, a court hearing a claim such as the present should look for clear and satisfactory evidence, and have regard to the presence or absence of corroboration. The plaintiff's evidence in this case was insufficient to establish an agreement or an estoppel.

Decision 
The following passage from McLelland, J.'s judgment in Grundel v. Registrar-
General (1990) 5 BPR 97340 at 11,219, is applicable to this case: 
There is no corroboration of the plaintiff's evidence of oral representations made to her by the deceased ..... Accordingly on its first basis, the plaintiff's claim is essentially one against the estate of a deceased person based on alleged conversations between the plaintiff and the deceased of which the only evidence is that of the plaintiff. Generally speaking, in cases of that kind, by reason of the danger of estates of deceased persons being subjected to false or exaggerated claims in respect of matters of which the deceased has no opportunity to give his own account, the court will treat such evidence with considerable caution, if not suspicion, will scrutinise it with great care, and act on it only if convinced of its truth: see, for example, Plunkett v. Bull <case>; [(1915) 19 CLR 544] at 351.

The requirement for clear and satisfactory evidence in this kind of case, established by authorities such as Birmingham v. Renfrew, means that the plaintiff should be diligent in calling available evidence; and also that, although Re Hodgson shows there is no requirement in law that there must be corroboration, it is appropriate for the Court to consider whether there is or could be evidence corroborating that of the plaintiff: see Dimura v. Public
Trustee, Bryson, J., 15th July 1996. Nevertheless, the standard of proof is simply the balance of probabilities: cf. Neat Holdings v. Karajan Holdings <case>; [(1992) 67 ALJR 170.] 
It is necessary to say something concerning the credibility of the plaintiff's evidence. As I will be discussing in detail, it seems to me that there are conflicts between her oral evidence before me and her statements to the police. Mr. Lovas submitted that there was no real conflict, particularly as the statements were directed at different matters; and the plaintiff herself said she got confused and forgot to state facts in the statements. It appears that she had the assistance of interpreters in making the statements to the police, as she did in giving evidence.

In my opinion, the statements are a more reliable guide to what happened than the plaintiff's oral evidence, because they were made about five years ago, and only about two years or so after the event; and because they were made in the absence of any motive to re-construct matters in a way favourable to the plaintiff. I do have regard to Mr. Lovas' submissions, and I do not rely on any aspect of the plaintiff's demeanour in questioning her evidence; but where there is a real conflict between the statements and the plaintiff's oral evidence, I prefer the statements.

The first matter I consider is what, if any, promises were made by Mr.
Teyssedre during his lifetime. According to the statement dated 9th January , Mr. Teyssedre had told the plaintiff on several occasions that he was going to leave her enough money so that she would not need to rely on her husband or children during her life; and the solicitor acting for Mr.
Teyssedre before Brian Roberts had told her she was being left a lot of money by Mr. Teyssedre. According to the statement dated 16th July 1993, Mr.
Teyssedre told the plaintiff a few days before he died that he intended to deposit enough money into her account to look after her for the rest of her life; to which the plaintiff said she knew how much, she had seen other wills with $50,000.00 for her; and Mr. Teyssedre told her he would increase the amount in the will to enable her to buy a small unit. According to this same statement, on the day before he died, Mr. Teyssedre said to the plaintiff words to the effect that "after Wednesday, you will be rich".

In my opinion, this evidence strongly points against the accuracy of the plaintiff's present evidence that Mr. Teyssedre promised to pay her $200,000.00, or $150,000.00 to $200,000.00. Furthermore, while I would draw no adverse inference from the plaintiff not calling Mr. Roberts, I do note that there is no explanation why there was not tendered in evidence Mr. Teyssedre's last will, or why his previous wills were not subpoenaed to be put in evidence, or why there was no evidence from the solicitor who acted for Mr.
Teyssedre before Mr. Roberts. There is reference in the statement of 16th July to a five page statement which had been given to a solicitor, Mr.
Bizannes. That statement has not been produced.

In these circumstances, I accept that Mr. Teyssedre did make statements to the effect that he would give the plaintiff a substantial amount of money, or leave her a substantial amount of money. But I cannot be satisfied as to precisely what statements were made, when such statements were made, or that any amount was specified in them; except possibly in relation to a statement made a few days before he died, which may have referred to $50,000.00 or the purchase of a small unit.

In order to prove a contract enforceable against Mr. Teyssedre's estate, the plaintiff would need to show a promise, made so as to manifest an intention to create binding legal relations, to give the plaintiff a specified benefit in return for specified conduct by the plaintiff. Leaving aside the statement made a few days before his death, the uncertainty as to what was said by Mr.
Teyssedre makes it impossible for me to find such a contract. As regards the statement a few days before his death, I am doubtful if the evidence justifies a finding that Mr. Teyssedre promised either at least $50,000.00, or enough to buy a small unit; but even if he did, I could not be satisfied that this was promised in return for specified future conduct by the plaintiff. Similar considerations would apply to estoppel. The earlier statements are too uncertain to support an estoppel, the later one too late: the plaintiff does not allege or prove a material change of position following the statement a few days prior to death.

Next, I consider what, if any, promises were made by Mr. Gertsch. According to the statement dated 25th September 1992, after Mr. Teyssedre's death Mr.
Gertsch told the plaintiff that Mr. Teyssedre had said to give the plaintiff $200.00 and for her to leave. According to the statement dated 16th July 1993, after receiving the $2,000.00, the plaintiff confronted Mr. Gertsch and said to him "You were there when Roger told me he was going to take me to bank and look after me"; and Mr. Gertsch said nothing but just walked away. According to the statement dated 25th September 1992, on the Friday Mr. Gertsch disappeared, Mr. Gertsch talked about renovations to the plaintiff's house, said he was sorry he would not be able to finish off her house, and said "Do not worry, I will make better arrangement than the ones I have made for you".
According to the statement dated 16th December 1992, on the day Mr. Gertsch disappeared, he promised to show her his will the following Monday, because he told her he was going to leave her something in his will.

In my opinion, these statements weigh very heavily against the accuracy of the plaintiff's present evidence that, upon Mr. Teyssedre's death, indeed on the day of his death, Mr. Gertsch made a promise to carry out Mr. Teyssedre's promises; and that Mr. Gertsch made a similar promise on the occasion of the plaintiff being paid $2,000.00.

I accept that, shortly before his death, Mr. Gertsch did tell the plaintiff he would renovate her house, and that he told the plaintiff he would benefit her in his will. But I am not satisfied as to what exactly Mr. Gertsch knew about
Mr. Teyssedre's statements, much less that Mr. Gertsch gave specific promises to do what Mr. Teyssedre had promised on either of the occasions identified by the plaintiff in her oral evidence; and in those circumstances, I cannot be satisfied that he did so on any other occasion.

In order to prove a contract enforceable against Mr. Gertsch's estate, the plaintiff would need to show a promise, made so as to manifest an intention to create binding legal relations, to give the plaintiff a specified benefit in return for specified conduct by the plaintiff. I am not satisfied that Mr.
Gertsch promised to carry out identified promises of Mr. Teyssedre; and I am not satisfied that statements made shortly before his death were made as promises of a specified benefit to be given in return for specified future conduct by the plaintiff. Nor am I satisfied that the plaintiff changed her position in reliance on those statements; and so she cannot succeed on the basis of estoppel.

CONCLUSION 
The plaintiff has not made out an affirmative case for relief against Mr.
Gertsch's estate. I accept that Mr. Teyssedre promised her a substantial benefit, that Mr. Gertsch also said he would leave her something, and that she believed she was fully entitled to the $40,000.00 which she received. The plaintiff says she has spent that money. These circumstances may have provided her with a defence to the estate's claim against her for the return of the $40,000.00; but she did not defend those proceedings, nor apparently has she applied to set aside the judgment made in her absence in that case. I cannot in these proceedings consider or give effect to a possible defence she may have had to the other proceedings.

In the circumstances, I must dismiss the plaintiff's claim. It seems to me that the ordinary result as to costs must follow.
 * * * 
