

J El Abed versus Gio Australia Ltd [1996] NSWSC 234 (27 June 1996) 
Jamil EL ABED versus GIO AUSTRALIA LIMITED /94; DC8307/86 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, HANDLEY JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - no question of principle.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: The appellant has contended that Judge Bell was in error in finding him guilty of contributory negligence to the extent of fifty per cent. He was involved in an accident at about 9pm on 26 July 1985 when his motor vehicle collided with a motor vehicle driven by Miss Dambruscus.

Miss Dambruscus was travelling in a westerly direction along Liverpool Road,
Ashfield. She made a turn to her right into Elizabeth Street. The trial Judge found that as she was approaching the intersection with Elizabeth Street the traffic lights changed from green to amber. She observed two vehicles travelling in an easterly direction in Liverpool Street approaching the intersection of Elizabeth Street. Those vehicles were slowing and the Judge accepted her evidence that they came to a stop at the traffic lights.
Accordingly she commenced her turn to the right into Elizabeth Street, reaching a point approximately two thirds of the way across the mouth of the street. The near-side front portion of her car struck the motor vehicle being driven by the appellant which overtook the two stationary vehicles which had been heading east in Liverpool Street. The trial Judge found Miss Dambruscus to be negligent, however, he found the appellant guilty of contributory negligence to the extent of fifty per cent.

The trial Judge found that the appellant must either have passed between the two stationary vehicles as they slowed down, passing to the near side of the vehicle in the lane adjacent to the kerb or made a third line of traffic on the off-side of the vehicle in lane number 2, in the latter two instances, swinging back towards the centre of the roadway, where the collision occurred.
The first of the three alternatives was found to be the most probable.

The appellant was unable to give evidence concerning the accident because of his injuries. The only evidence of liability was thus that of the respondent and a police officer who had taken a statement from the appellant. As the trial Judge found, he had told the policeman he was travelling at fifty kilometres per hour prior to the collision and was about ten metres from the intersection when the lights turned amber. He made no reference to any vehicle travelling east.

The errors asserted on behalf of the appellant were, first, that his Honour erred in not finding that the sedan hit the motor vehicle as it passed in front. His Honour did so find in holding that Miss Dambruscus executed a right hand turn across the plaintiff's path.

Second, that the trial Judge erred in not accepting her evidence of speed, literally, she having indicated a speed of forty kilometres per hour approaching the lights and thirty-five kilometres per hour when the collision took place. Her evidence to the Court, and to the police officer, showed no inconsistency. Any error in the trial Judge's reference to such inconsistency obviously did not affect his finding that she was negligent or his finding that the appellant was also guilty of contributory negligence. Her speed did not affect the issue of contributory negligence.

Third, it was said if she saw the two oncoming vehicles stop she should have seen the motorcycle and thus the trial Judge should have found her guilty of gross carelessness. Having found negligence, any higher degree of negligence was immaterial. Nor would it have affected the issue of whether the appellant was guilty of contributory negligence.

Fourth, it was put that the motor cycle was in fact in front of the two stationary vehicles and that was the major matter argued by Mr Evatt in oral submissions. That case was not put to the defendant by counsel appearing for the appellant at the trial. The trial Judge found, as a question of fact, that the motorcycle was in fact behind the two stationary motor vehicles which stopped before the respondent commenced or made her turn to the right. His
Honour was obviously influenced by the circumstance that it would be somewhat incredible if the defendant saw the two vehicles stop but had failed to see a motor vehicle in front of them.

In my opinion nothing has been put to disturb the trial Judge's findings or to authorise this Court to interfere with those findings. The question of contributory negligence was a matter for the trial Judge, having regard to the circumstances in my opinion there is no reason to disturb his finding that the appellant was responsible to an extent of fifty per cent. In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

CLARKE JA: I agree.

HANDLEY JA: I also agree.

The appeal will be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
