

Balasubramanian versus Sara Matter No Ca 40022/97 [1997] NSWSC 342 (28 August )

Krishnamoority Balasubramanian versus Chaiban James Sara 
CA 40022/97 August 1997 
Mason P, Priestley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal /97 KRISHNAMOORITY BALASUBRAMANIAN v CHAIBAN JAMES SARA 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: On 12 June 1997 this Court allowed the appeal and directed the parties to bring in short minutes to give effect to the basis for the calculation of damages determined by the Court of Appeal. The reasons of the Court are set out in my judgment, with which Mr Justice Priestley agreed. 
The parties have prepared minutes of order which embody agreed calculations, including an agreed calculation as to interest payable pursuant to section 83A of the District Court Act 1988 . What is at issue is whether interest is payable, having regard to section 73(4)(a)(iv) of the Motor Accidents Act . The appellant defendant contends that interest was not payable. Mr Barry who appears for the appellant accepts that the appellant bears the onus of establishing its case in accordance with subparagraph (iv).

A little bit of the history of the case needs to be told at this stage. The plaintiff's claim had been heard before an arbitrator in the first instance.
On 24 September 1993 the arbitrator gave an award for $86,645 plus costs. The defendant, as was its right, required the matter to be reheard and it came before Mahoney DCJ who, after a contested hearing, found a verdict for $15,835. That verdict was set aside by a differently constituted Court of
Appeal on 12 April 1995. The reasons which moved the Court were procedural. It was unnecessary for the Court to address a challenge to the substance of the matter, but there was such a challenge raised in that appeal.

On 13 March 1996 the new trial that had been directed by the Court of Appeal commenced before Moore DCJ. Ultimately, his Honour gave judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $295,112, this being the judgment from which the Court as presently constituted upheld the appeal. On the figures, less interest, agreed between the parties and referable to this Court's judgment the plaintiff is entitled to a verdict of $138,067.

On the first day of the trial before Mahoney DCJ, the defendant made a written offer to settle for $65,000 plus party and party costs. $65,000 is more than twenty per cent lower than the award without the addition of any interest which this Court considers to be the proper award that should be made. The matter at issue is whether the offer to settle for $65,000 was unreasonably low having regard to the information available to the defendant when the offer was made. I have expressed it in those terms and I repeat that the defendant, the appellant here, accepts that the onus of establishing that its offer was reasonable rests upon the defendant.

The argument that has been advanced is that the offer was reasonable, having regard to the arbitration award and the judgment of Mahoney DCJ. It is also said that the Court could take into account the fact that the plaintiff was willing, on the same day, that is 13 March 1996, to settle for the arbitrator's award plus party/party costs.

I think there is a very real difficulty in relying upon the judgment of
Mahoney DCJ as a yardstick of what was reasonable. The quantum of that judgment was under attack in the earlier appeal and the judgment had in fact been set aside, albeit for procedural miscarriage, before the trial commenced before Moore DCJ.

The real gravamen of the appellant's case is that to offer $65,000 was reasonably close enough to $86,645 which had been set as, in one sense, a benchmark by the arbitrator's award and corroborated in a sense by the plaintiff's willingness to accept that figure on the same day.

We have not been taken to any other information as relevant to the assessment of the reasonableness or unreasonableness of the offer. In my view, an offer that falls short by $20,000 in a range of $86,000, the latter figure said to have been the benchmark, was not reasonably close enough to attract the application of the paragraph. To put it more accurately, the defendant has not persuaded me that it made an offer of settlement at a figure that was reasonable, having regard to the information available to the defendant when that offer was made.

For those reasons I would make a judgment that would include an interest component and therefore propose that the orders be as submitted in the minutes of order.

The sum of $175,574 for which the minutes provide that judgment will be entered for the respondent includes calculated and agreed interest.

PRIESTLEY JA: Yes I agree with what has been said by the learned president. 
MASON P: The orders of the Court will be those set out in the minutes of order which I shall initial. * * * 
