

Ecc Lighting Ltd versus McGurk [1996] NSWSC 24 (9 February 1996) 
ECC Lighting Limited versus McGurk /93 
Friday, 9 February 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Following my judgment of 22 December 1995 I have heard submissions as to what orders should be made in consequence thereof, including submissions on the question of costs. On the latter question, evidence has been tendered relating to an offer of compromise, notice of which was given by the plaintiff to the defendant in October 1994, which offer was not accepted.

The parties are in agreement that the amount of interest to be included in the amount for which judgment is to be given against the defendant in accordance with the report of the referee is $14,620.22 and that, added to the amount of $55,266.10, for which it was held that the defendant was liable to the plaintiff, the amount of the judgment in total should be $69,886.32.

The defendant's solicitor has submitted on the question of costs that although it is conceded that the result is more favourable to the plaintiff than the offer made in the offer of compromise, nevertheless the Court should not give effect to the provisions of Part 52 rule 17, by virtue of the provisions of
Part 52 rule 24; in other words, that the Court should otherwise order in terms of sub-rule (4) of Part 52 rule 17. The argument is that although the present proceedings do not fall within the terms of rule 24, since they were proceedings in the Equity Division and not in the Common Law or Commercial
Divisions, nevertheless the claim for specific performance of the agreement to give a mortgage was, as it was called, "window dressing", that the real claim by the plaintiff was for the recovery of money and that the proceedings found themselves in the Equity Division fortuitously, only by reason of the inclusion of the so-called "window dressing" claim for specific performance.

Although in the result the referee reported that specific performance should as a matter of discretion be refused, I do not consider that inclusion of that claim could properly be described as "window dressing". It was a claim for security to secure the plaintiff in the repayment of the money advanced to the defendant and a significant element in the decision of the referee that the claim should not be enforced related not to the merits of the claim, but to the utility of such an order in the particular circumstances relating to the title of the property.

I do not consider, on reflection, that there is sufficient in the circumstances of this case, which was clearly a hard-fought case, to justify an order otherwise than that the ordinary costs consequences of the offer of compromise and its non-acceptance take effect and I decline to make an order otherwise.

Accordingly, the form of order for costs in the draft short minutes submitted by counsel for the plaintiff is appropriate in the circumstances. I have deleted the present paragraph 3 of those short minutes and substituted as paragraph 3 the words "The plaintiff's claim be otherwise dismissed". I have added immediately after that paragraph a paragraph 4 in these terms: "The defendant's cross-claim be dismissed." And I have renumbered the costs order .

I make orders in terms of the short minutes of order initialled by me and placed with the file.
 * * * 
