

Maguire versus State of New South Wales Matter No 10883/89 [1998] NSWSC 8 (27
February 1998) 
Last Updated: 31 March 1998 
KAYLEEN MARGARET MAGUIRE versus STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /89 February 1998 
Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings of an unusual nature. I am informed by counsel appearing before me that they know of no other application which has been made to the Court relying upon the provision under which these present proceedings have been brought. The notice of motion seeks an order that an award of an arbitrator be reinstated. The source of the Court's power to make such an order is found in [s 18(5)(c)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/s18.html) of the [Arbitration (Civil Actions) Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/s18.html) of the Act is concerned with applications and orders for a rehearing of an action which has been determined by an arbitrator in accordance with the provisions of the Act. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/s18.html) is as follows: 
Except to the extent that this section and [section 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/s17.html) otherwise provide, an award of an arbitrator made pursuant to this Act is final and conclusive and not liable to be called in question.

Except in the case of a referred action where the amount claimed, or the value of the property to which the action relates, does not exceed the amount prescribed for the purposes of this section, the court by which an action was referred to an arbitrator, or the registrar of that court, shall order a rehearing of the action if application for such an order is made by a person aggrieved by the award of the arbitrator and is so made before that award becomes enforceable as a judgment or order of the court.

Despite subsection (2), a rehearing need not be ordered under that subsection if: it appears to the court or registrar to whom the application for rehearing is made that the applicant failed to attend a hearing before an arbitrator on the referred action concerned; and the applicant fails to satisfy the court or registrar that there was good reason for the failure to attend the hearing.

Where an order is made under subsection (2): the award that gave rise to the order ceases to have effect; and subject to subsection (4), the action to which the order relates shall be heard and determined in the court as if it had never been referred to an arbitrator.

Without affecting the generality of subsection (3), a subpoena for the giving of evidence or production of documents, at a rehearing of an action, by the arbitrator to whom the action was referred, shall not be issued if the evidence relates or the documents relates to the arbitration.

The court that hears and determines an action under this section may, in addition to making an order for the payment of costs under the [Supreme
Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), section
B of the [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) or the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/), as the case may be, make a like order for the payment of costs in respect of the hearing before the arbitrator.

If, after an order is made under subsection (2) with respect to an award: the applicant for the order files a notice of discontinuance of the rehearing of the action; the applicant fails to attend the rehearing; or in accordance with the rules, the courts orders that the award be reinstated: on being satisfied that the applicant does not intend to proceed with the rehearing; or for such other reason as to the court appears sufficient, the order under subsection (2) ceases to have effect and the award shall be deemed to be a judgment or order of the court.

The facts are that the plaintiff commenced proceedings against the defendant on 16 March 1989 in respect of injuries which she alleged were sustained by her while she was at work in June 1988. The plaintiff was employed by the defendant as a cleaner at a public school. She alleged that she slipped on stairs at the school and that the defendant was liable for the condition of the stairs which caused her to fall. The defendant filed a defence on 4 April denying it was liable and alternatively asserting contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff. For various reasons which are not relevant to this application, the matter was not dealt with as expeditiously as it might have been and on 5 November 1996 the plaintiff's solicitor wrote to the defendant's solicitor seeking the defendant's view as to the matter being referred to arbitration. On 13 December 1996 the defendant's solicitor indicated that there was no objection to an arbitration and eventually the matter was listed for hearing before an arbitrator.

The hearing took place on 25 July 1997. Both parties attended and were represented by counsel. Shortly before the hearing counsel for the plaintiff approached the defendant's counsel and asked whether there was any interest shown by the defendant in settling the matter. The defendant's counsel indicated in effect that he could not obtain instructions to settle the matter and that the arbitration would have to proceed. Both counsel informed the arbitrator that all avenues of settlement had been exhausted. During the course of the arbitration hearing the plaintiff was cross-examined but no evidence was called or tendered on behalf of the defendant. At the conclusion of the evidence no submissions were made by the defendant as to liability.

The arbitrator gave his decision on the date of the hearing and made a substantial award in favour of the plaintiff. In the reasons for his determination the arbitrator indicated that, apart from a dispute ventilated in the cross-examination of the plaintiff as to the place of the accident, there was no serious contest that on the facts to which the plaintiff had deposed she would have been entitled to succeed in establishing that the defendant had breached a duty of care it owed to her. In determining the amount due for past economic loss, the arbitrator referred to the fact that the plaintiff had since the accident suffered a myocardial infarction. He found that she had made a good recovery from that illness and that there was nothing to suggest that she had been affected by it beyond a period of about 6 months. However, he also stated: "it may be that further evidence from the defendant might have reduced the past economic loss to take account of this contingency".

The right of the parties to seek a rehearing under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s18.html) had to be exercised by 26 August 1997. An application for a rehearing was filed by the defendant on that date. There was no obligation on the defendant to serve notice of that application on the plaintiff or her solicitor and none was given. Without knowledge of that application, the plaintiff and her solicitor undertook action of an administrative nature on the basis that the amount awarded by the arbitrator would be paid by the defendant. At some time after the arbitration the plaintiff told her solicitor that she was intending to purchase a property using the award money in part payment. A telephone call was made by the plaintiff to her solicitor's office on 1 September in which she informed some person (not the solicitor handling the matter) that she was interested in an auction of a property to take place on 9 September and inquiring whether her money would be available. The plaintiff's solicitor gave evidence before me that, although she was told of that telephone call, she was unaware that her client was actually going to purchase a property on that date.

From 4 September 1997 the plaintiff made frequent telephone calls to her solicitor seeking information as to the availability of the award money. As a response to these enquiries the plaintiff's solicitor contacted the Crown
Solicitor's Office (the solicitor for the defendant) on 5, 8, 9 and 10
September. The evidence does not reveal to whom the plaintiff's solicitor spoke other than that it was not the actual solicitor handling the matter as he was on leave at the time. Nor does the evidence indicate what the plaintiff's solicitor was told about the progress of the matter other than that she was not informed that there was to be a rehearing. However, the plaintiff's solicitor never asked whether there was to be a rehearing but only inquired as to the availability of her client's money. Nor did she ever make inquiry with the Supreme Court to see whether any notice for a rehearing had been filed.

On 10 September 1997 the plaintiff's solicitor received a copy of the notice for a rehearing from the Supreme Court. On 15 September the plaintiff's solicitor received a letter from the Crown Solicitor's Office dated 12
September referring to the "recent" telephone calls from the plaintiff's solicitor and confirming that an application for a rehearing had been filed.
Unfortunately, at the auction on 9 September the plaintiff entered into a contract to purchase the property in the belief that she would receive the benefit of the arbitrator's award. It appears that this belief arose not only because the plaintiff had not been advised that a notice of rehearing had been filed but also because she had received notification from the Department of
Social Security which indicated to her that the settlement of the claim was being processed. However, there appears to be little doubt that this notification was as a result of documents which had been sent to the
Department by the plaintiff or her solicitor because of an expectation that the award would be paid to her. As a result of the application for a rehearing, the plaintiff has not, of course, received the money she thought she would receive as a result of the arbitrator's award. In the absence of that money she cannot complete the contract which she entered into on 9
September and is currently being sued by the vendor.

In answer to the plaintiff's suggestion that there was a lack of bona fides on the part of the defendant in respect of the arbitration hearing, an affidavit was filed by the solicitor for the defendant, Mr Bowe, seeking to explain the conduct of the defendant during the arbitration. He states that no evidence was tendered at the arbitration because it was believed that there was no evidence which the defendant could call as to the circumstances of the accident, particularly as the set of stairs upon which the accident was said to have occurred had been demolished. Further he states that, as medical reports indicating that the plaintiff had suffered a myocardial infarction had not been served on the defendant until only three days before the hearing and there was no reference to that matter in the Amended Statement of Particulars under [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/index.html#p33), the defendant did not have sufficient opportunity to obtain material on that matter to place before the arbitrator.

Clearly the court has a wide discretion in determining whether to order the reinstatement of the arbitrator's award under [s (5)(c)(ii).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s18.html)
It is enough that it appears to the court that there is sufficient reason to make such an order. But before the power is exercised it must be borne in mind that the exercise of the power will deprive a party of the statutory right to have a rehearing. Generally [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s82.html) requires that an order be made for a rehearing where an application is made within the time prescribed. The right to have a rehearing is an important facet of the arbitration scheme. It preserves each party's right to have the matter determined by a court where they are dissatisfied with the award.
Therefore, before a court would move to reinstate the arbitrator's award, it must be satisfied that the reason put forward to justify such action is serious enough to warrant the court depriving a party of this fundamental right.

The power of the court to reinstate the award is a residual power vested in the court to ensure that the arbitration scheme does not become an instrument of oppression or abuse at the hands of one of the parties. The plaintiff submitted that the power should be exercised in this case because, although the defendant had agreed to an arbitration, it had showed such a lack of interest in reaching a settlement of the matter or in participating in the arbitration that it should be taken as having had no intention of abiding by the arbitration and was abusing the system for its own purposes. It was submitted that by its actions before, during and after the arbitration, the defendant has shown that it was never bona fide in consenting to an arbitration or in attending at the arbitration hearing.

In particular the plaintiff argued that the defendant showed such a lack of interest in the arbitration that it was as if the defendant had never attended at the arbitration at all and in those circumstances the Court should deprive it of the benefit of a rehearing. It is said that the present position is analogous to the situation with which [s (2A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s18.html) is concerned. [Section (2A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s18.html) gives the court a discretion to refuse to order a rehearing where there has been non-attendance by the party seeking the rehearing and no good reason is given for the failure of that party to attend. There seems to me to be some difficulty in applying that provision to this situation even by analogy. Under that subsection the onus is upon the applicant for the rehearing to satisfy the court that there was a good reason for failing to attend the arbitration.
But in the proceedings before me the onus is upon the plaintiff to show the court that there is sufficient reason for an order to be made reinstating the arbitrator's award. There seems to me to be a substantial difference in the approach to be adopted in considering whether the court should decline to order a rehearing under [s (2A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s18.html) from that where the court is faced with an application to reinstate an award after an order for a rehearing has been made.

But in any event it cannot be said that in this case the conduct of the defendant is such that it was as if the defendant never appeared at the hearing before the arbitrator. The plaintiff was cross-examined as to the circumstances surrounding her fall in order, so it appears, to test her as to the circumstances in which she came to fall and where it occurred. Although the defendant called no evidence at the hearing, this fact does not seem to me to be significant in this case. It appears that the defendant had no real evidence available to it as to the circumstances surrounding the fall and it had little notice of the issue of the myocardial infarction suffered by the plaintiff prior to the hearing.

There is no requirement that a party produce evidence before an arbitrator and it is not wrong for a party to withhold evidence at the arbitration hearing:
MacDougall versus Curlevski [(1996) 40 NSWLR 430] at 433.
Although there are statements in decisions of the Court of Appeal, such as
Quach versus Mustafa (CA, 15 June 1995, unreported) and MacDougall v
Curlevski, above, which indicate the importance of parties calling evidence before the arbitrator so that the arbitration scheme can operate effectively, those statements were made in the context of a consideration of the failure to call evidence on the question of costs following a determination of the proceedings after a rehearing. The assessment of the conduct of a party before an arbitrator in such a case is very different from what I am being asked by the plaintiff to do in this matter. Where the issue to be resolved is one of costs after a rehearing, the conduct of the parties before the arbitrator can be assessed in light of the conduct subsequent to the arbitration and, in particular, the conduct at the rehearing. I do not know, and cannot know, what might ultimately occur in these proceedings. It may be that the defendant will take the very same attitude at the rehearing as it took before the arbitrator.
It may even be that the defendant will ultimately settle the matter having further considered its position, particularly in light of any evidence it receives as to the effect of the plaintiff's myocardial infarction. At this stage in the proceedings I cannot make any real assessment of the defendant's conduct before the arbitrator. Certainly I could not conclude from that conduct that it was not bona fide in agreeing to an arbitration of the matter.

The plaintiff also relies upon the conduct of the defendant before the hearing. The plaintiff criticises the defendant for failing to participate in any settlement negotiations prior to the arbitration. The only evidence as to this matter is what occurred on the day of the arbitration hearing when counsel for the defendant indicated to the plaintiff's counsel that he could not obtain instructions to settle and the matter "would have to run". I was informed by the defendant's counsel from the bar table, without any objection by the plaintiff, that prior to the hearing there was a real dispute as to the place of the accident and, until this was resolved to the satisfaction of the defendant, there could be no settlement. The place of the accident was apparently the matter ventilated in the arbitration hearing by cross- examination of the plaintiff. There is nothing to contradict this assertion and it does not seem to me to have been an unreasonable attitude for the defendant to have taken.

The plaintiff relies also upon the defendant's conduct after the hearing. It was submitted that the failure of the defendant to seek a rehearing until the last day upon which it could do so, together with the failure of the defendant to notify the plaintiff's solicitor that it was intending to have a rehearing, shows that the defendant was not genuine it its participation in the attempt to resolve the litigation by arbitration. It was not suggested that the defendant by its conduct after the hearing had either intentionally or recklessly sought to prejudice the plaintiff financially. Nor could it be - the defendant was not privy to the plaintiff's intentions of purchasing a property in reliance upon the arbitrator's award. But it is suggested that, when taken into account with the defendant's conduct before and during the arbitration hearing, its conduct after the hearing shows the defendant's lack of bona fides in agreeing to an arbitration.

So far as the delay in lodging the request for a rehearing is concerned, it is said that the delay until the very last day permissible is symptomatic of the defendant's attitude to the arbitration proceedings. I would have thought that the argument of the plaintiff might have had some force if the request for a rehearing had been made immediately after the arbitrator's determination. In such a case a conclusion might have been available that the decision was made to seek a rehearing regardless of the decision of the arbitrator. But in the absence of any suggestion that the delay was intended to prejudice the plaintiff, the delay seems to me to be consistent with a considered decision based upon the award made and an assessment of the defendant's position in light of the evidence given at the hearing.

As to the complaint about the failure to disclose the fact that the defendant was contemplating or had actually sought a rehearing, the evidence does not reveal that there was any conscious decision to mislead the plaintiff's solicitor about the state of the matter. It seems clear that, whoever the plaintiff's solicitor spoke to on the various occasions that she rang the
Crown Solicitor's Office, that person was not directly involved in the matter.
The solicitor who had carriage of the matter, Mr Bowe, was on leave. I know nothing about the arrangements made for the conduct of the matter in the office of the defendant's solicitor in the period following the arbitration and during the absence of Mr Bowe. Mr Bowe was available for cross-examination but was not required to give oral evidence at the hearing before me. I am aware that the Crown Solicitor's Office is a very large legal practice and I can infer that members of the Office would not necessarily be cognisant of what was happening in any particular matter in which they were not directly concerned. The only enquiry made by the plaintiff's solicitor was whether the plaintiff's money was available. In the absence of a specific enquiry from the plaintiff's solicitor as to whether there was to be a rehearing, the failure of any person spoken to by the plaintiff's solicitor to volunteer that information does not seem to me to be either remarkable or reprehensible.

On the material before me I quite unable to find that there was any lack of bona fides on the part of the defendant in relation to the arbitration of this matter. The position of the plaintiff is most unfortunate. It is not necessary or appropriate for me to determine blame in that regard. It seems to me that her position is largely irrelevant to the decision I have to make absent any suggestion that the defendant acted either intentionally or recklessly to prejudice her. I am far from persuaded that there is sufficient reason for me to reinstate the arbitrator's award.

The notice of motion is dismissed and the plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs.
 * * * 
