

Regina versus David Marshall Eager No. 60119 of 1995 Criminal Law [1995] NSWSC (20 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ AT CL(1), ABADEE(2) AND HIDDEN(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, October 1995 #DATE 1:11:1995 #ADD 20:11:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    P R Rosser QC 
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Commonwealth DPP 
Counsel for the Respondent:   J L A Bennett 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Trevor Nyman and Co
ORDER
Appeal dismissed.
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL I agree with the order proposed by Hidden J, for the reasons which he has given.
JUDGE2
ABADEE J I agree with the order proposed by Hidden J, for the reasons which he has given.
JUDGE3
HIDDEN J On 2 May 1994 the respondent pleaded guilty before Knight DCJ to two charges of obtaining a secret commission (s4(1)(a) of the Secret Commissions
Act 1905) and four charges of accepting a bribe in his capacity as a
Commonwealth officer (s73(2) of the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/)).
On 13 February 1995 he adhered to those pleas before Downs DCJ and on the following day his Honour sentenced him as follows: 
On each of counts 1 and 2 (the secret commission charges) imprisonment for one year to be served by way of periodic detention, concurrently with each other;
On each of counts 3 to 6 (the bribery charges) imprisonment for one year to be served by way of periodic detention, concurrently with each other but cumulatively upon the sentences imposed on counts and 2.

Accordingly, the total effective sentence was periodic detention for two years. His Honour also made a pecuniary penalty order pursuant to <case> of the
Proceeds of Crimes Act 1987 in the sum of $145,930.60, noting that $69,137.60 had already been paid.
By notice dated 7 March 1995 the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions has appealed against what is said to be the inadequacy of those sentences.
 
FACTS
In June 1986 the respondent was employed by Telecom as an Engineer Class
In late 1986 he was assigned to the duties of Project Engineer at a major
Telecom building project, Resource Management Centre 202, located at St
Leonards.
There, from September 1988, he was responsible for overseeing the completion and subsequent operation of the project, including working in close contact with contractors and sub-contractors on the site. He remained at the site until December 1990 at which time he was assigned to a more senior position at Telecom Plaza, Pitt Street Sydney. He was suspended from duty in
December 1991 and resigned in April 1992.
Robert Taylor, Sreten Macic, Harold Gough and Robert Reoch were independent contractors who each worked at the
St Leonards site during the course of the respondent's tenure there. Each was a director of a company set up for his business purposes.
An arrangement was reached between the respondent and each of them to pay sums of money on a regular basis to the respondent's company,
Secure Engineering Pty Limited.
As to Count 1 (secret commission): In about December 1989 the respondent had a number of conversations with Robert Taylor, director of Electrical
Solutions Pty Limited, who was at the time engaged by Telecom to prepare specifications for the proposed maintenance program on the site. During these conversations the respondent requested Taylor to undertake certain minor jobs on the site. In the normal course these would be completed by Taylor's company, which would then invoice Telecom for the work.
Due to other commitments on the site, Taylor was not always present to complete or oversee these tasks. The respondent told Taylor that he would arrange for persons to complete the work as a sub-contractor to Taylors company. The respondent told Taylor that he would supervise these additional people and report on the work done.
Initially, Taylor believed that the work was being completed by the other sub-contractors arranged by the respondent and he received invoices from
Secure Engineering Pty Limited. From the outset he noted that these invoices were signed by the respondent as Managing Director of that company. Payments were made by
Taylor to Secure Engineering by cheque on receipt of an invoice signed by the respondent. Taylor would then invoice Telecom and be paid on that invoice.
In the latter half of 1990 Taylor believed that the respondent was increasingly ordering work on the site that was unnecessary. He then made enquiries and formed the belief that many of the tasks ordered by the respondent, and purportedly done by Secure Engineering, had not been completed or done at all. Upon discovering this, Taylor refused any further work orders to Secure Engineering.
Telecom's contracts formed a large component of Taylor's business. Taylor believed that if he refused the respondent outright he would not receive any further Telecom orders, due to the respondent's influential position in that organisation.
Taylor's company made a total of 10 payments to the respondent between January and October 1990, totalling $10,721. Taylor, in turn, invoiced
Telecom for that amount.
As to Counts 2, 3 and 4 (2 - secret commission: 3 and 4 - bribes): In late 1989 Harold Arthur
Gough, a director of Elizabeth French (George Street)
Pty Limited, was approached by the respondent who offered work on the St
Leonard's site to Mr Gough's company.
He also told Gough that the maintenance contracts for various aspects of the building would soon be awarded and suggested that he should tender for a particular 12 month contract. During the preparation of his tender, Gough was assisted by the respondent who gave him advice and information as to how the tender should proceed. In addition, the respondent provided
Gough with copies of draft specifications and his own recommended engineering specifications.
Prior to this assistance, the respondent told Gough that if he were awarded the contract, the respondent's company would invoice Gough a fee of $1,500 per month for the duration of the contract.
Gough's company was subsequently awarded the contract in the sum of about $100,000. The company then began paying the respondent about $1,500 a month on receipt of an invoice signed by the respondent for services rendered in the awarding of the contract.
In addition to the payments in relation to the contract, Gough was also referred further works on the site by the respondent. In these instances the respondent would nominate a fee to be paid to his company in exchange for advice to Gough in relation to specification preparation for each project.
These additional works and payments continued until Gough left the site in
January 1992.
In early 1991 the maintenance contract was due to expire. The respondent had some input into Gough's tender for renewal of the contract, mainly in the area of technical advice. The tender was ultimately successful. The final tender figure included a monthly consultancy fee to be paid to Secure
Engineering of about $1,000 per month.
In addition, in early 1991,
Telecom called for tenders for a contract for the installation of a voltage monitoring system. The respondent gave advice in relation to the tender, providing suggested engineering drawings to devise the best method for fulfilling the contract. The respondent asked for and was paid a fee for the provision of these services in the amount of $10,000.
In about early 1991 Gough became uneasy at the respondent's apparent conflict of interest and became concerned about possible repercussions for himself. Gough further believed that if he ceased making payments to Secure
Engineering it would jeopardise the receipt of any further work for his company. At the time of making payments, Telecom provided more than two-thirds of his company's business turnover. Between March 1990 and January Gough made 28 payments to Secure Engineering, totalling $58,416.60. Gough either invoiced Telecom for the amounts paid to the respondent or included the proposed payments in the successful tender price.
As to Count 5 (bribe): Robert Reoch was a director of Paragon Security
Electrical Pty Limited, another sub-contractor which undertook certain jobs on the site at the instigation of the respondent and another person.
In about July 1990, Reoch was approached by the respondent and had a conversation in which the respondent indicated that a loss of overtime payments resulting from a promotion had resulted in a drop in his income. The respondent stated that if Reoch wished to continue working on the site, then he should pay him money through his company. Paragon commenced paying the respondent according to a regular system of invoices and cheques. The invoices were signed by the respondent.
Another set of payments was made to the respondent by Paragon following the awarding of a contract to Paragon for a closed-circuit television system, worth approximately $68,000 a year, in early 1991.
Following the award of the contract the respondent requested and received the sum of $1,000 per month from Paragon in exchange for allowing Paragon to complete the contract without interference from the respondent. The first payment relating to the maintenance contract was made in February 1991. Reoch ceased to make payments at the beginning of 1992 when he became aware that the respondent had been suspended from duty. Between August 1990 and early 1992
Reoch's company made 18 payments to Secure Engineering totalling $23,265.
According to Reoch, he did not invoice Telecom for the amounts paid to the respondent.
As to Count 6 (bribe): Sreten Macic, a director of Ryleman Pty Limited, had known the respondent on a social basis since 1985. In about late 1989 the respondent arranged some work on the St Leonard's site for Macic's company.
Soon after the work had begun the respondent approached Macic and stated that, as he had been responsible for Macic working on the site, he should receive financial rewards. Further, the respondent stated that if Macic refused to pay he would no longer work on the site. Macic subsequently agreed to pay the respondent by cheque through the respondent's company, Secure Engineering.
Macic paid
Secure Engineering on receipt of an invoice from the company signed by the respondent.
In early 1990 the respondent invited
Macic to tender for a battery monitoring contract at St Leonards, which he was subsequently awarded. The respondent gave him some advice as to how he should frame the tender. Out of payments to his company for the contract, he subsequently paid Secure
Engineering about $15,000, on the understanding that if the monies were not paid the respondent could prevent him obtaining further work on the site.
In late 1990 Macic's company was awarded a three year high voltage maintenance contract at St Leonards to begin in February
The contract was worth about $600,000. In framing the tender the respondent (along with several other people) assisted Macic with technical advice about the site.
After the contract was awarded, the respondent approached Macic and said that, as he had helped him get the contract, he could help him keep it and keep working for Telecom. The respondent proposed that Macic should pay him $2,000 a month for the length of the contract. There was a negotiation as to the amount which Macic should pay and it was eventually agreed that the respondent would receive $1,500 per month, to be paid in the same way as before.
Macic said that he ceased making payments when he became aware, early in , that the respondent no longer worked for Telecom. Between February 1990 and December , Macic's company made 28 payments totalling $53,528.
According to Macic he did not invoice Telecom for additional monies to cover the payments to the respondent.
 
RESPONDENT'S CASE
The respondent had no previous convictions. Before his Honour was a
favourable pre-sentence report which revealed that the respondent was 37 years old, married, with two small children. Despite being reared in what was described as "an emotionally insecure and somewhat volatile family", he qualified as an engineer and had a satisfactory professional career, initially at CSR and then at Telecom. In March 1992 he obtained a scholarship to study for an industrial related doctorate which, at the time of sentence, he was pursuing at the Australian Defence Force Academy in Canberra.
The respondent gave evidence before his Honour. He said that the offences occurred after a change of his employment status at Telecom in late 1989 which effectively reduced his net income by depriving him of the entitlement to overtime, despite the fact that he worked very long hours. Feeling that he was not properly remunerated, he decided to reward himself through the system of payments to his company,
Secure Engineering. He had set that company up in
January, 1990 as he had been put on notice by Telecom that his employment would be terminated at the end of the St Leonards, project. He expressed remorse for his crimes, although he acknowledged that it was only in recent times that he had achieved a mature insight into their gravity.
He acknowledged that his behaviour had placed very great strain upon his marriage, but said that the experience had since drawn him and his wife closer and that she was very supportive of him. From late 1992, as a result of her influence, he had taken up the practice of the Christian faith and become involved with the Uniting Church in the area where he lived.
He had sold the family home and an investment unit and, from the proceeds, had already paid a little under $70,000 by way of reparation. His solicitor held a further $25,000 in trust, which was also available.
He undertook to make his superannuation entitlement from his employment at
Telecom available, if that could be done. He also said that upon the completion of his studies he hoped to obtain employment as a lecturer, in which event he would arrange for regular payments from his salary towards whatever amount might remain outstanding.
There was an impressive body of character evidence, both oral and in writing, from people who had had personal contact with the respondent, particularly in recent years through his association with the church; and from academics involved in his current studies. Several of the witnesses observed the development of his attitude to his crimes from an initial tendency to blame others for his predicament to an acceptance of full responsibility for his actions.
One of the academics, Mr Williamson, explained that his work for his doctoral thesis was of real social utility, being directed at the reduction of industrial noise. At the time of sentence he could have expected that work to have been completed in about six months. He had been spending weekdays in
Canberra and returning to his family in Sydney on weekends.
 
THE APPEAL .
In his remarks on sentence, the learned sentencing Judge characterised the offences as "a calculated and premeditated major breach of trust" which, his Honour noted, had been carried out over a period of about two years.
However, his Honour had regard to a number of matters favourable to the respondent: - He had pleaded guilty, although not at the first available opportunity.
 - While aspects of his evidence gave rise to some misgivings about the extent of his remorse, his Honour accepted that his espousal of the Christian faith was a "major act of contrition".
 - He had made substantial payments by way of reparation and was determined to continue to do so.
 - He was a man otherwise of good character, highly spoken of by people who had had contact with him in recent years.
 - He was unlikely to reoffend (or, indeed, to find himself in a position where he could do so).
 - He was involved in study for a higher degree in Canberra which he could expect to complete in the relatively near future.
In this appeal the Crown does not suggest that his Honour was not entitled to have regard to all those matters.
It is submitted, however, that the respondent's conduct was so grave and persistent as to call for a full-time custodial sentence, notwithstanding the subjective case he made out.
Reference has been made to pronouncements of appellate courts concerning the gravity of offences involving a breach of trust by persons having responsibility for public money. In R versus Nath <case>; [(1994) 74 A Crim R 115], a case involving somewhat similar offences under South Australian legislation Perry J said (at 119): "A breach by persons holding public office of the duty to act honestly in the performance of their public duties is a most serious matter which should ordinarily attract a substantial penalty."
In R versus Challoner [(1990) 49 A Crim R 370], a case involving fraud by a branch manager of the Commonwealth Bank, Kirby P said (at 375): "There is no doubt that a long line of authority in this court lays down the principle that, in offences of this kind, by persons in a position of trust involving the manipulation of public monies, a custodial sentence is normally required." 
The President, however, went on to say (also at 375) that it is equally the duty of a sentencing judge to consider whether there are special circumstances in the case warranting a non-custodial sentence. It is the same in relation to periodic detention.
The passages quoted appear in judgments dealing with offences carrying a much higher maximum sentence than those the subject of this appeal, but they remain of general application.
Perhaps curiously, these offences carry a maximum sentence of only two years. In New South Wales bribery is a common law misdemeanour, with an open ended sentencing discretion. Obtaining a secret commission carries seven years: [Crimes Act, 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) [s249B.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s249b.html)
While the maximum sentence applicable to each offence is quite low, clearly the legislature envisaged that there would be offences calling for the imposition of a full-time custodial sentence. If ever there were such a case, this must be it. A number of statements in this Court have recognised the relative leniency of a sentence of periodic detention: see R versus Hallacoglu [(1992) 63 A Crim R 287], per Hunt CJ at CL at 292-4, although this is not to deny that it is an effective and salutary penalty in many cases. However, this respondent's criminality was of a high order. As a public officer, he initiated a course of corruption and persisted in it for a lengthy period. A substantial sum of money was involved. To the extent that the scheme involved unwarranted payments by Telecom, or the inflation of tender prices by contractors, it was this nation's tax-payers who would ultimately have borne the loss. The subjective matters to which his Honour referred, even when considered together, did not justify anything less than a full-time custodial sentence.
The special place of the Crown appeal against inadequacy of sentence in our criminal jurisprudence has been recognized in many statements of appellate courts throughout the nation. They need no repetition here. They were recently reaffirmed in the High
Court in Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295.] While it is true that the respondent made out a powerful subjective case, his Honour appears to have lost sight of the objective gravity of the crimes: cf R versus Dodd [(1991) 57 A Crim R 349.]
Accordingly, I consider that the Crown has established error of principle, and the sentence of periodic detention must be characterised as manifestly inadequate.
 
DISCRETION
However, there are compelling reasons why, notwithstanding the inadequacy of the sentences imposed, this Court should exercise its discretion not to interfere in this case. Reference has already been made to matters subjective to the respondent. Of particular significance for present purposes are his payments towards reparation for his offences and the periodic detention which he has already served. Since sentence was passed he has made the enquires he undertook to make concerning his superannuation, to find that $5,500 could be made available. This he has paid. In addition, he has been paying $100 per fortnight from his current somewhat limited income. More importantly, he has now completed Stage 1 of his periodic detention which is, of course, the most onerous stage. It has involved a routine whereby he has travelled to Canberra during the week for the purposes of his study, then returned to Sydney to spend weekends in custody.
In these circumstances, I consider that it would be unjust to call upon the respondent at this stage to suffer the penalty which should have been imposed at the time of sentence.
I would propose that, in the exercise of this Court's discretion, the appeal be dismissed.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/167.html  
