

Regina versus John Spanakakis Regina versus Steven Tsolakis Nos. 60209 and 60504 of , 60213 and 60505 of 1995 Criminal Law and Procedure [1995] NSWSC 173 (18
December 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(1), GROVE(2) AND HULME(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 9
November 1995 #DATE 9:11:1995 #ADD 18:12:1995 
Counsel for the Appellants     D W Thomas 
Solicitors for the Appellants
Jordans 
Counsel for the Respondent     R N Howie QC, Crown Advocate 
Solicitor for the Respondent    S E O'Connor,
Solicitor for
Public Prosecutions
ORDER
Application granted
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL This is an application by John Spanakakis and Steven Tsolakis for leave to appeal out of time against their convictions recorded after they had each pleaded guilty in the District Court to a charge of having knowingly taken part in the manufacture of not less than the commercial quantity of a prohibited drug (methylamphetamine).
According to the material before the District Court, a laboratory set up to manufacture drugs was found by police in a home unit at 71 Warren Road
Marrickville. Records seized there by the police related to the purchase of the apparatus and the chemicals used in that manufacture. Liquid found in a plastic bucket was going through a process of conversion into methylamphetamine, which would have yielded somewhere between 460 and 490 grams. A bottle containing .5 grains of the drug was also found on the premises.
The home unit had been leased by Spanakakis in a false name. Spanakakis had driven a man named Bozatzis to premises where acid was purchased to be used in the manufacture of amphetamines, and he had thereafter returned to the home unit. He was observed by police entering and leaving the home unit on a number of occasions over the relatively short period during which the laboratory was operated. When arrested in the home unit, Spanakakis was washing a container wearing gloves, although he claimed that he was unaware of its precise nature. He was asked whether he knew the other persons arrested
Bozatzis, a man named Fadel and the applicant Tsolakis. He replied "Yeah, they're friends. You got us all." When asked whether there was anyone else involved who had not been caught at the home unit, he replied "No, that's all of us".
Tsolakis was arrested in his vehicle outside the premises. He had been observed to enter and leave the unit on a number of occasions and to return on one occasion with a plastic bucket. He admitted to having been in the unit once prior to his arrest, maintaining that it was empty and that he had no idea what was happening at the unit.
It was not suggested that either of the applicants was involved commercially in the operation. Neither had a criminal record. Each of the applicants sought a sentence indication pursuant to [Pt 12](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/index.html#p12) of the [Criminal
Procedure Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), and each gave evidence in the course of the indication hearing. Judge Moore indicated a sentence of 300 hours of community service for Spanakakis and a deferred sentence ((1) (pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes
Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/))) for Tsolakis upon him entering into a recognizance to be of good behaviour for two years. The applicants thereupon pleaded guilty and those sentences were imposed.
The Crown successfully appealed to this Court against the leniency of the sentences imposed.
This Court indicated that, unless the pleas of guilty were withdrawn, the sentences would be quashed and there would be imposed on
Spanakakis a total sentence of imprisonment for three and a half years (consisting of a minimum term of two and a half years and an additional term of one year), and on Tsolakis a total sentence of imprisonment for two years (consisting of a minimum term of one year and an additional term of one year).
((2) (25 August 1995, unreported): Cole JA, Grove J, Sperling J.) The applications for leave to appeal against their convictions followed.
The basis of the appeal which the applicants seek to bring out of time is that they wish to withdraw those pleas of guilty so that they may go to trial in relation to the charges against them. A plea of guilty may be withdrawn where it has been shown by the applicant that a miscarriage of justice has occurred. What must usually be shown is some circumstance which indicates that the plea of guilty was not really attributable to a genuine consciousness of guilt.
The authorities are collected in this Court's decision in Regina v
Boag. ((3) [(1994) 73 A Crim R 35] at 36-37).
Each of the applicants has filed an affidavit which consists of little more than the following assertions: that he had given instructions to his legal advisers that he intended to plead "not guilty" upon arraignment, that he had been advised to seek a sentence indication and that he had the right to accept or to reject the sentence indicated, that he had decided to accept the sentence indicated notwithstanding his wish still to plead "not guilty" because otherwise there would be a lengthy trial requiring legal representation for which he would have to pay, and that he did not consider that by his plea of "guilty" he was accepting that he was guilty of the Crown case to the degree of criminality as presented in the District Court.
Spanakakis appears also to make the somewhat surprising assertion that he did not consider that he was pleading guilty to the allegation that he was knowingly concerned in the manufacture of a prohibited drug. Each of the applicants says that he was "induced" to change his plea by the sentence indicated by Judge Moore. This was explained in this Court as meaning that they had been induced to plead guilty by the leniency of the sentences so indicated by the judge. Neither applicant says that he is in fact not guilty of the offence charged. The stand taken by the formula adopted by the two applicants presents a sad indictment of the whole Sentence Indication Scheme.
The Crown opposes the applications to withdraw the pleas of guilty. It says that the applicants have not established that a miscarriage of justice would result from their being held to those pleas, in that they have not demonstrated that the pleas were otherwise than attributable to a genuine consciousness of guilt. It relies, first, upon the fact that each sought a sentence indication. It is clear from the affidavits filed in support of the present applications that each contemplated that, by seeking such an indication, he would plead guilty if the sentence indicated was acceptable to him, and that each did plead guilty because the sentence indicated by Judge
Moore turned out to be acceptable to him. The Crown relies, secondly, upon the evidence given by each of the applicants before Judge Moore as demonstrating a recognition of guilt, although the Crown points out each sought in his evidence to minimise the part played by him in the manufacture of the drugs.
Spanakakis in his evidence in the District Court admitted to taking out the lease of the unit in a false name and driving
Bozatzis to premises where a chemical was purchased, although he said that he only now knew that it was hydriodic acid. He had washed the container in the sink as alleged, but he was unaware of what had been in it or what it was to be used for. He denied that any fingerprints found in the premises were his. He said that that was the limit of his "input into the venture", and he claimed that he had no knowledge of the actual process to be used in the manufacture. He said: "I deeply regret that I was any way involved with this. From when Peter (Bozatzis) first told me about what he was planning
I have felt sick, knowing it was wrong. My involvement was tentative and undefined." 
That evidence appears to me to constitute a clear admission by Spanakakis of having knowingly taken part in the manufacture of a prohibited drug. He attempted in evidence before this Court to explain away those admissions, but in my view the quite fanciful evidence which he gave was wholly unsuccessful in doing so.
Tsolakis in his evidence in the District Court admitted to having purchased a plastic bucket at the request of Bozatzis and returning with it to the home unit.
He claimed that he left the premises without taking part in anything. He said that on the subsequent day when he was arrested, he had entered the premises only for ten minutes. Although he did not say so expressly, and contrary to what he claimed to the police, he must inevitably have known from the laboratory set up in those premises that they were being used for unlawful activities and that the bucket was to be used in those activities. He said that he was embarrassed and ashamed at being charged, and that: "I know I have been stupid and will never be around anything like this again. " 
Again, that evidence - which could only have been put forward in the District
Court in order to demonstrate contrition - appears to me to constitute an admission by Tsolakis of having knowingly taken part in the manufacture of a prohibited drug.
If the usual tests were to be applied to these applications to withdraw those pleas, the applications would necessarily fail. ((4) See, for example,
Regina versus Norman Cincotta (CCA, 1 November , unreported).) However, in the first successful Crown appeal against a sentence imposed following a sentence indication hearing,
Regina versus Warfield, ((5) [(1994) 34 NSWLR 200] at 220, 222.) this Court pointed out that the unsuccessful respondent to such a Crown appeal may well be entitled to have greater weight placed upon the miscarriage of justice simply arising out of the failure of the Sentence Indication Scheme to work correctly.
That also appears to have been the approach adopted by this Court when granting leave to a similarly unsuccessful respondent to a
Crown appeal in Regina v
Paul George Miller (No 2). ((6) (25 August 1995, unreported)). In that case, however, the Court had the benefit of an affidavit from the applicant for leave setting out the considerations which were in his mind when pleading guilty following the sentence indication hearing which were somewhat more impressive than those stated here.
In my view, the whole structure of the Sentence Indication Scheme recognizes and accepts that an accused person should be entitled to withdraw his plea of guilty notwithstanding that he entered such plea in a genuine recognition of his guilt. That is made clear by Practice Note 22, ((7)
December
See now Practice Note 32, par 6(k)) published pursuant to [s 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s52.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), which permits the Chief Judge of the District
Court to publish practice notes notifying conditions upon which the scheme is to be conducted. That practice note relevantly states: "After the indicative sentence is stated, the accused will be arraigned and requested to plead. If the plea is 'guilty, the matter will be stood over for a sentence hearing before the judge who presided at the indication hearing, and any pre-sentence or other reports obtained The sentence hearing will take the usual form following a plea of guilty. If the plea is 'not guilty', the matter will be listed for trial before another judge.

The indicative sentence is intended to bind the judge who formulated it, if the facts and other relevant material adduced for the purpose of the indication hearing are not altered when the case comes up for sentence. Should these be altered on the hearing by reason of different or additional material being adduced at the hearing, the judge may decide to impose a lesser or a greater sentence. In the latter case, the accused would be advised of the new sentence. If he did not wish to accept that sentence, he would be entitled to change his plea to 'not guilty', and go to trial before another judge." 
That practice note has, by virtue of [s 52(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s52.html), statutory force going beyond that which ordinarily accompanies practice notes. ((8) Regina versus Nicolaides [(1994) 33 NSWLR 364] at 366). It is, accordingly, difficult to see why an unsuccessful respondent to a Crown appeal should not similarly be entitled to withdraw his plea of guilty, notwithstanding that the plea was entered in a genuine recognition of his guilt.
It must be said that this is hardly a satisfactory situation. As was stated in Regina versus Warfield, ((9) (at 204-205) it was originally contemplated that an accused who sought a sentence indication would not give evidence (and thereby make admissions of his guilt) until after the indication had been given and the plea of guilty had been entered. ((10) See also the remarks of
Gleeson CJ in Regina versus Ruben Gerson
Chait (CCA, 17 September 1993, unreported) at 2-3). Where evidence is given by an accused before the indication has been given but the indication has not been accepted then, subject only to relevance and the exercise of the trial judge's discretion, there is on the face of it nothing to prevent the Crown tendering his evidence so given at his subsequent trial. ((11) Regina versus Warfield (at )). We have been informed, however, that in relation to matters prosecuted by the State (as opposed to the
Commonwealth) an undertaking was given by the former Director of Public
Prosecutions that evidence so given would not be tendered at the trial, thereby rendering it "induced" evidence.
I should add that the pleas of guilty entered by the applicants in the present case were no more induced by the leniency of the sentences indicated by Judge Moore than a plea of guilty is quite properly induced by the discount given for early pleas of guilty. ((12) Regina versus Winchester [(1992) 58 A Crim R ] at 350).
It follows, therefore, that an accused who was prepared to bargain a plea of guilty for a sentence which is acceptable to him, who accepted the sentence indicated and pleaded guilty but who suffers an adverse decision on a Crown appeal against the inadequacy of that sentence is ordinarily entitled to withdraw his plea if the new sentence indicated by this Court is not acceptable to him. The Sentence Indication Scheme has been criticised as artificial, as raising significant ethical problems for those representing applicants, as having been based on questionable foundations and as an interesting experiment which has not worked. ((13) "Sentencing
Indication
Hearings in New South Wales", P Byrne, [(1995) 19 Crim LJ 209] at 215, 220-221).
The community, if it were aware of this curious situation, would no doubt agree.
There is, however, little that this Court can do about the miscarriage of justice arising out of the failure of the Sentence Indication Scheme to work properly in the in the particular case. With considerable misgivings, therefore, I propose that the following orders be made in relation to each of the applicants: 
Leave is granted to appeal out of time against conviction. 
The appeal is allowed and the conviction is quashed. 
A new trial is to be had. 
Leave is granted to withdraw the plea of guilty entered in the District
Court.
JUDGE2
GROVE J I agree with the judgment just delivered and with the orders proposed.
JUDGE3
HULME J I also agree.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/173.html  
