

McDowell versus Kelic Matter No 3893/98 [1998] NSWSC 454 (29 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 November 1998 `McDOWELL versus KELIC` `3893/98` `29 September 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a registered proprietor to have the defendant withdraw caveat 3997781 affecting her title. 
The background is unusual. The plaintiff and the defendant were former neighbours. The defendant, together with his wife Petra were the registered proprietors of number 185 Sandal Crescent, Carramar. The plaintiff put together a deal involving the owners of various properties between 181 and 191
Sandal Crescent to combine their properties, remove the houses and erect a block of home units.

The people involved in the scheme and the properties involved varied from time to time. The last relevant agreement in point of time was made on 23 February
The parties were Mr and Mrs Kelic, called "1st partners" and Peter
Kabalan and the plaintiff, described as "2nd partners". Shortly after this agreement Mr Kabalan removed himself from the project and his interest was purchased by Mrs McDowell.

A document called "Deed of Agreement" between these parties essentially provided that the first partners would vacate 185 Sandal Crescent, that the second partners would pay out their mortgage, and that they would be paid $210,000 for their land and: "They will also receive a share of fifty percentum (50%) of any profit which may be made from the sale of the said Units. After expenses have been deducted - such payments to be made when the Agreement is concluded." 
The "said Units" referred to six units which would be accommodated by number Sandal Crescent. Clause 4 of the agreement contemplated that on completion of the development and sale of the units the moneys would be paid to the first partners. Clause 5 provided that the certificates of title would be held in escrow by the second partners' legal representative and that the first partners would give all relevant consents to the development.

However, what happened in practice was that there was a transfer from Mr and
Mrs Kelic to Mrs McDowell. The same solicitor acted for all parties, though his notes suggest that he was careful about explanations. Nonetheless, Mr
Kelic has, by his cross-claim in these proceedings, asked that the deed be set aside or varied under the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).

I should digress by saying that the deed was not performed as originally contemplated. The land was actually conveyed to Mrs McDowell and instead of building six home units she has a three staged development for a block of fourteen units, then a block of ten units, which partly intrude onto 185 and then a further block which does not involve number 185. Accordingly, the project is going to take considerably longer than originally contemplated.

Notwithstanding his desire to set aside the deed, Mr Kelic placed a caveat on the title, number 3997781, alleging that he had an equitable interest as partner pursuant to the Deed of Agreement dated 23rd February 1995. As I pointed out during argument, there may be some nice questions at the final hearing involving whether the lodgment of that caveat and the argument on the instant motion that Mr Kelic has an equitable lien, have affirmed the deed so that it can now not be set aside.

The defence to the present motion is that the caveat will be removed provided that Mrs McDowell stipulate as to when Mr Kelic will receive the $210,000, less the mortgage, and when he will receive his half of the profits. The stipulation is very open ended, Mrs McDowell can nominate virtually any day she likes. However, she declined to give any time by which she would be bound, saying that delays to date had occurred because of the caveat and other activities of Mr Kelic, but she was quite sure that the whole project would be finished within two years.

Mrs McDowell said that the caveat had to be removed because (a) Mr Kelic had no caveatable interest, and (b) even if he had the caveat was vexatious and there should be a substitute security. She suggested that a new caveat might be lodged over certain of the lots to be created in the strata plan, which can be registered as soon as the caveat lodged by Mr Kelic goes. Mr Kelic indicated that this was not satisfactory to him.

The application is brought under [s
MA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74ma.html) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), as amended. This section enables a registered proprietor to apply to remove a caveat lodged against his or her title. The section does not actually define the situations in which the court should make an order under that section.
Ordinarily the caveat will either be removed unconditionally or, alternatively, on the basis that the caveator commence proceedings within a defined time. However, in cases where either of those orders are inapposite, then the court applies the same test as under [s
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74k.html) of the Act, that is, that if the caveat may have substance it should be continued or, alternatively, a substitute security ordered.

The caveat in its present form would not appear to be valid because it does not specify the interest claimed, and the deed, although referring to people as partners, is not really a deed of partnership.

Furthermore, Mr and Mrs Kelic appear always to have acted jointly. Mrs Kelic is quite happy with the present situation. The Kelics have now been separated for some years and, indeed, Mr Evatt, who appeared with Mr Rollinson for Mr
Kelic, put that Mrs Kelic is really in the plaintiff's camp. Whether this is so or not, it is a very hard road for a person to travel who claims that he has a joint interest with a person who is not a party to the litigation and who is reluctant to join in with him in prosecuting it. Mr Evatt acknowledged this and indicated in due course the proceedings will need to be amended to include Mrs Kelic as a party. I will put that matter aside as it does not really come into the present stage of the dispute.

The basal question is whether Mr Kelic has an interest in the land numbered Sandal Crescent. After some discussion, Mr Evatt put that the interest was an equitable lien, being a vendor's lien. He said that Mr Kelic had in early agreed to sell his land for $210,000 and that he expected, on his evidence, that the sale would be completed within two years. Here it was three and a half years later and he still had not seen any of his money and would probably have to wait another year or two to get it. He said that any vendor in such a situation had a lien for the unpaid purchase money.

Mr Tregenza, who appeared for the plaintiff, said that in the instant case a vendor's lien was wholly inconsistent with the deed that the parties entered into, which clearly contemplated that the plaintiff would develop the land, build the home units and only after they were all sold pay the money, and that any equitable charge would ultimately inhibit her obtaining finance for the development project.

Although the original deed must be read subject to performance within a reasonable time, it would be difficult, at least at this stage, to work out what sort of time the parties had in mind as reasonable. The evidence conflicts in that Mr Kelic says that one to two years was mentioned and Mrs
McDowell denies this.

The general rule is that when a vendor sells property and is not paid, that the vendor has an equitable interest, known as a vendor's lien, and that this is so unless "There is something in the transaction itself, or in the circumstances, leading to a clear and manifest inference that the intention of the parties is otherwise" (Davies versus Littlejohn <case>; [(1923) 34 CLR 174], 181). See also Reliance Finance Corporation Pty Ltd v
Heid [[1982] 1 NSWLR 466], 478 (affirmed by the High Court as Heid versus Reliance
Finance Corporation Pty Ltd <case>; [(1983) 154 CLR 326).] 
The cases show that it is difficult to demonstrate a clear and manifest contrary intention, though this is possible; see eg In re Brentwood Brick and Coal Co [(1876) 4 Ch D 562.] Thus in
Barclays Bank plc versus Estate & Commercial Ltd [[1997] 1 WLR 415] (see especially p 421) a joint venture situation, somewhat akin to the present, was held not to amount to manifesting a contrary intention.

In the present case, it does not seem to me that there is sufficient in the transaction to prevent the normal rule applying. However, it is clear that the vendor's lien was not to operate so as to impede Mrs McDowell from raising the necessary finance to fund the erection of the units. I do not need to go into this matter because the mortgages on the title have already got priority due to indefeasibility and, in any event, Mr Kelic does not seek to further delay the project, he merely wishes to get some certainty as to when he will get his money.

It was for these reasons that at the end of the oral hearing yesterday I made the following notes and orders:
The court notes that on the evidence before it at present Mr and Mrs Kelic are entitled in equity to a vendor's lien over the property that was once 185
Sandal Crescent, Carramar.
The court notes that any such lien was not to interfere with the sale of any of the units erected by the plaintiff pursuant to the agreement of
February 1995.
Caveat 3997781 must be removed by no later than 4pm on 29 September 1998.
The defendant is at liberty to restore the matter to the list by notice of motion seeking any order that might be appropriate in respect of the lien referred to above.
Costs of the motion to remove the caveat shall be costs in the cause.
The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
