

Kirkman versus Dr Scotton Matter No 21193/95 [1997] NSWSC 344 (28 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Kirkman versus Dr Scotton /95 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 - Kirkman versus Dr Scotton 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: In or about 1975, the plaintiff suffered back injury. He was referred to the defendant for the purposes of undergoing a myelogram. It was performed in December 1975. 
Following the myelogram, the plaintiff experienced certain problems. He was told (by Dr Cole) that they were some of the problems associated with a myelogram and that they would go away soon. He said that he believed that the problems were "fairly standard and would go away". He continued to experience problems. They didn't go away. The problems are referred to in his affidavit (they included pain, headaches, deterioration in eyesight and inability to work). He said that he "received various forms of treatment over the years".

He received workers' compensation until about 1978. When it was discontinued, he consulted solicitors and proceedings were brought against his former employer. His claim was settled in June 1979.

In 1994, he was referred to a neurologist (Dr Crimmins). Dr Crimmins has prepared three reports. A copy of each of those reports is in evidence. Dr
Crimmins made a diagnosis of mild arachnoiditis with lumbosacral canal disease with stenosis.

An affidavit sworn by the plaintiff contains the following:- "26. At that point in time I was still unaware of any connection between the failure to remove the drug used during the myelogram and the onset of arachnoiditis. I believed that the problem was caused due to an allergic reaction in my body.
Towards the end of 1994, I recall hearing in the news of cases being brought by people against their doctors arising from myelogram procedures.
Towards the end of November 1994, I saw an advertisement in a newspaper which had been placed by my Solicitors Milne Berry & Berger.
In January 1995, I contacted my Solicitors and had a conversation with them. Following that conversation I understood that the problems which I had been suffering from might well have been caused by the failure to remove the drug from my back during the myelogram. It was on that occasion that I first became aware that the myelogram may not have been performed properly and was the cause of my problems." 
In January 1995, he wrote to the defendant. He received a reply dated 3 March
In March 1995, he wrote a further letter to the defendant. He received a reply dated 24 April 1995. A copy of each of these communications is in evidence.

In September 1995, a report was obtained from another neurologist (Dr Arthur).
A copy of that report is in evidence.

On 22 November 1995, the plaintiff filed a Statement of Claim and a Notice of
Motion. The Statement of Claim propounds a cause of action claiming damages founded on negligence. The Notice of Motion seeks relief under the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), (the Act). The plaintiff looks to the provisions found in sections (2) and 60G(2). The application was heard on 28 July 1997.

An affidavit sworn by Mr Freedman (the plaintiff's solicitor) deposes to certain matters concerning the conduct of the plaintiff's case. Two further expert reports were obtained in early 1997 (from Professor Palmer and Dr
Lethlean). A copy of each report is in evidence.

The principal allegations of negligence made by the plaintiff are twofold.
There is an allegation of failure to remove the contrast medium. There is an allegation of failure to warn.

Broadly speaking, the plaintiff says that, prior to 1994, he was unaware that he was suffering from arachnoiditis and of the connection between that condition and the failure to remove the contrast medium.

In submissions, the emphasis was placed on section 60G(2) as the source of power for relief. It was presented as the easiest of the two cases to establish. I shall first look at the issues agitated under that provision.

Section 60G(2) confers the discretionary power upon the Court to make an order extending the limitation period where it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so. The power cannot be exercised until the applicant first satisfies the relevant threshold requirements set forth in section 60I(1). The threshold requirements involve questions of fact. The decision as to whether or not it is just and reasonable to make an order is no formality when the threshold conditions are satisfied (CSR versus Rendell (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 August 1996)). The onus rests with the plaintiff (see Brisbane
South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] and BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 March 1997)).

Section 60I is in the following terms:- 
Matters to be considered by court 
I. (1) A court may not make an order under section 60G or 60H unless it is satisfied that: the plaintiff: did not know that personal injury had been suffered; or was unaware of the nature or extent of personal injury suffered; or was unaware of the connection between the personal injury and the defendant's act or omission, at the expiration of the relevant limitation period or at a time before that expiration when proceedings might reasonably have been instituted; and the application is made within 3 years after the plaintiff became aware (or ought to have become aware) of all 3 matters listed in paragraph (i)-(iii).

Subsections (2), (3) and (4) of section 60E apply, with any necessary adaptations, in relation to applications for orders under this Subdivision.

Generally speaking, the evidence stands in an unsatisfactory state. There are a number of gaps in the evidence presented on behalf of the plaintiff. The evidence tells the Court very little as to what happened during, inter alia, the 1980's and prior to 1994. Also, it is relatively unhelpful as to what happened after the plaintiff consulted his solicitor in January 1995. The evidence is silent as to the plaintiff's knowledge of the existence of a limitation period.

In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that he has met the threshold requirements of section 60I(1)(b). In particular, I am not satisfied that the application was made within three years after the plaintiff ought to have become aware of all three matters listed in paragraph (a)(i)-(iii).

If I had reached a different conclusion, I would not have decided that it would have been just and reasonable to make an order and/or concluded that this was a case in which an order should be made.

The delay is gross. It has not been satisfactorily explained. It has caused prejudice.

The myelogram was performed more than 21 years ago. At an early stage, the plaintiff was aware of a connection between the myelogram and certain of his problems. Problems persisted. Between about 1976 and 1993, although he had access to advisers, it seems that little may have been done to investigate his problems. Little is offered to explain this apparent inactivity. The present application has been prosecuted in a leisurely fashion. His solicitors were instructed in January 1995. The delay since that time has not been satisfactorily explained.

Indisputably, there is presumptive prejudice. There is also at least the real possibility of significant prejudice.

In Taylor at p 873, McHugh J said:- "The general rule that actions must be commenced within the limitation period should therefore prevail once the defendant has proved the fact or the real possibility of significant prejudice." 
The defendant himself has not given evidence. The correspondence that has passed between the parties (it is annexed to an affidavit of Mr Yeldham (part of which has been admitted into evidence)) contains material that throws up the real possibility of significant prejudice. Mr Yeldham has been informed by the defendant that the correspondence comprises the only documents in his possession relating to the plaintiff.

There are aspects of the plaintiff's case in respect of which recollection may be crucial. It is reasonable to infer that the defendant may have a diminished recollection. In addition, he may no longer have records which can be used to refresh recollection.

I should add that there was some debate between the parties concerning the question of whether or not the plaintiff had available to him credible evidence to support his allegations of negligence. This case can be disposed of without resolving that question.

In my view, this is one of those cases in which the plaintiff has failed to discharge the onus borne by him.

The claim made pursuant to section 58(2) is not said to be stronger than that made under section 60G(2). Again, the threshold requirements have not been met. I am not satisfied that there was a material fact of a decisive character which was not within his means of knowledge at the relevant time. In any event, the discretionary considerations are fatal to the application. Again, the onus has not been discharged.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
