

J J Lane versus Gio of NSW [1996] NSWSC 249 (3 July 1996) 
JOHN JOSEPH LANE versus GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE OF NSW /90 
WEDNESDAY 3 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff claims damages for personal injuries allegedly suffered by him on 7 August 1984 in the following circumstances. The plaintiff was residing at 22 Piggotts Way, Ingleburn and on that day his brother in law, Peter Woodward, drove a Holden Monaro car registered number ASH392 to those premises for the purposes of the plaintiff and him changing the automatic gear box and replacing it with a manual one. 
Piggotts Way is a cul-de-sac which runs in a slight decline towards the end of the turning circle and the plaintiff's house was a short distance from the turning circle at the end of the street. The vehicle was parked on the opposite side of the street with its front pointing along the street and its rear towards the turning circle so that it was on the slight decline towards its rear. At some stage it was re-positioned in the same area so that its front wheels were on metal ramps as depicted in exhibit F, the platform of which was about 12 inches long and about 18 inches above the road level, the overall length of the ramps being about three feet. The rear wheels remained on the road surface which, as I say, was slightly lower than the surface on which the bottom of the ramps rested.

This operation was effected by driving the motor car on to the ramps. No chocks, bricks or other restraints were placed at the rear of the rear wheels or elsewhere. Subsequently, whilst the plaintiff and Mr Woodward were working under the vehicle, the vehicle rolled backwards crushing the plaintiff and causing the injuries of which he complains.

A number of not entirely consistent versions were given of how the vehicle came to be on the ramps and what it was that precipitated the roll. The plaintiff said in his statement, exhibit D, that Mr Woodward asked him to help change the gear box to which he agreed. Mr Woodward said he would get the vehicle ready and went outside, and when he came back inside the plaintiff invited him to have lunch. They then both went outside whereupon the plaintiff saw the car was up on the ramps. He didn't check for chocks and took it for granted that Mr Woodward would have put something under the rear wheels to stop it moving as, in order to remove the gear box, you have to first remove the hand brake mechanism.

He said he was under the car and Mr Woodward was pulling the tail shaft out, and this had the effect of putting the car into neutral so that there was nothing to hold it in place and it rolled in reverse off the ramps.

In his oral evidence he said he owned the ramps and they were normally kept in his garage. He denied that both of them set the car up on the ramps. He agreed he did not check whether it was chocked and said this was because he didn't put the car on the ramps, and that at the time the car rolled he was undoing the second of two bolts holding the gear box to the motor.

He said when the car rolled he was dragged to the end of the cul-de-sac and jammed at the end of it against the gutter. He denied that he assisted Mr
Woodward in setting up the ramps and denied the tail shaft had been removed before they went inside for lunch. He said this would have disengaged the gear box and caused the car to roll backwards off the ramp, although he said it would not have happened if the hand brake was still in the on position. He agreed the hand brake assembly was attached to the cross member which went under the back of the gear box, but denied it was part of his job on that day to undo the cross member.

Mrs Sharon Lane, the estranged wife of the plaintiff, said that Mr Woodward, who was her brother, arrived at about 11 am and both he and the plaintiff went outside. At about quarter to twelve she went outside and asked about lunch.
She said the car was on the street at that stage but when she later went out and told them lunch was ready the car was then on the ramps. She said before lunch she did not see them working on the car.

Mr Woodward, on the other hand, said that before lunch the car was up on the ramps and they proceeded to unassemble the gear box and were roughly half way through and were waiting for the gear box oil to run out when they went inside to have what he described as a cup of coffee but which I infer was the lunch referred to by the other witnesses.

He said by that time the starter motor would have been taken out of the car and the tail shaft would also have been removed as well as most of the bolts holding the gear box in place. The car was already on the ramps and the hand brake would have been still connected. He said that his best recollection was that he was the one who drove the car on to the ramps and he was the driver of the car that day. He seems to have actually owned the car although it was not registered in his name at that time. He said when the car rolled it only rolled about two to three feet and the plaintiff was lodged between the car and the kerb but not down at the bottom of the cul-de-sac. He agreed there was a slope in the road level.

He said they had been working on the car before the coffee break for about 45 minutes to an hour, during the whole of which time the car was on the ramps.

Although, as I say, the evidence is somewhat confused and quite inconsistent,
I am satisfied that both the plaintiff and Mr Woodward were engaged in a joint enterprise to remove and replace the gear box and this involved them both working under the car. In those circumstances I am satisfied that each owed a duty of care to the other to ensure that the car was securely held where it would not roll. I am satisfied that it was probably Mr Woodward who positioned the vehicle by driving it on to the ramps, although he may have been assisted in this operation by the plaintiff in placing the ramps or such like. The ramps were on a slight incline. Mr Woodward drove it onto the ramps and parked it there in circumstances where he knew that it was intended they should both be doing work under the car, but he nevertheless failed to chock the rear wheels. In this regard I am satisfied that he failed to exercise reasonable care and was negligent.

The plaintiff, however, was clearly guilty of contributory negligence either in assisting to put the vehicle on the ramps and/or failing to observe it was on an incline; failing to check that it was properly chocked and that the hand brake was on; and in failing to ensure that the work was done in a sequence which was safe and which would not render the vehicle liable to roll.

Just as the removal and placement of the gear box was a joint enterprise so was the carelessness of both participants for their own and each other's safety. In these circumstances I find the plaintiff 50 per cent to blame.

The incident having occurred on 7 August 1984, the proceedings are governed by the Motor Vehicle (Third Party Insurance) Act 1942 as amended by the Motor
Vehicle (Third Party Insurance) Amendment Act, No 86 of 1984. Section 14 provides that every claim for damages in respect of bodily injury to any person "caused by or arising out of the use of a motor vehicle" in the case of an identified and insured vehicle should be made against the defendant. An "insured vehicle" is one in respect of which there was in force a third party policy under the Act and <case>, which sets out the requirement of such a policy, also refers to the injury being "caused by or arising out of the use of the motor vehicle".

The certificates tendered show that the vehicle was, on the relevant date, an insured vehicle and the registered owner was one John Wilson, although the particulars of transfer indicate that it had prior to the date of the accident been acquired by Mr Woodward.

However, by paragraph 2 of the statement of claim the present defendant is sued on the basis that it was an insured vehicle and was at the relevant time being driven by Mr Woodward whose negligence it is claimed gives rise to the plaintiff's cause of action to recover against the Government Insurance Office of New South Wales. Therefore, it is necessary for the plaintiff to show that his injury was caused by or arose out of the use of an insured motor vehicle.

Mr Ryan, counsel for the defendant, has drawn attention to the fact that at the time the vehicle rolled backwards causing the plaintiff's injuries it was not operable as a motor vehicle; it had no starter motor, no hand brake, the gear box was disengaged, there was no one in the cabin at the controls and no one was driving it.

In Clement versus Clement [(1984) 1 MVR 435] Foster J reviewed earlier decisions dealing with the phrase "arising out of the use of a motor vehicle" and pointed out that "arising out of" is a wider expression than "caused by". In that case a motor vehicle had been driven into a driveway on a significant slope and a brick was placed under each of the rear wheels and the defendant then jacked up the front driver's side wheel and removed the wheel. The jack slipped and the vehicle fell striking his seven and a half year old son and inflicting serious injuries.

After reviewing a number of authorities in the High Court and the Supreme
Court of Victoria his Honour held that, although the motor vehicle was not being used as a motor vehicle at the relevant time and so the injuries were not caused by its use as such, the driving of the vehicle into the position where it was parked was a major contributing factor to the accident and was productive of the slip of the jack and the vehicle and, accordingly, that the accident arose out of the use of the motor vehicle.

I am satisfied that similar considerations apply here although the immediate cause of the accident was the work that was being done underneath the vehicle.
A major contributing factor to the accident was driving it on to, and positioning it on, the ramps in the manner that Mr Woodward did so on an incline without any chocks at the rear wheels. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the plaintiff's injuries caused by Mr Woodward's negligence arose out of the use of the motor vehicle before it was partly dismembered and, accordingly, the plaintiff can recover against the defendant.

The plaintiff was born on 23 March 1954 and is now aged 42 years. He left school in about February 1969 whilst in third form at high school when he was placed in a boys' home because of truancy. Following that, over the next fifteen years up to the accident he had a series of labouring type jobs interspersed with periods of imprisonment for various criminal offences, mainly stealing, receiving and such like. He has also had a subsequent conviction for assault occasioning actual bodily harm. On my calculations, based on the plaintiff's statement (Exhibit A), it would appear that during that fifteen year period he worked for approximately eighty months, slightly less than 43 per cent of the time, and his last pre-accident employment was with Bridgestone Steel Cap Tyre Centre in about 1982 or 1983, about two years before the accident. He has only once in his life submitted an income tax return.

As a result of the accident the plaintiff suffered a crushing injury to his right chest with multiple fractures of the right ribs, a flail chest, lung contusion with pneumonia and a slightly comminuted fracture of the body of the right scapula. He also suffered an extensive gravel rash, shock and temporary unconsciousness. He was taken to Liverpool Hospital where he remained in intensive care for eight days and was then transferred to the general ward, but the following day he signed himself out of hospital.

During the following twelve months he would appear to have had significant pain and restriction with loss of strength in his right arm and shoulder and also, for about four months, on account of his lung injury, he was bringing up blood. Following that his condition improved although he says that he has not fully recovered and he is left with restriction of movement in the right shoulder and arm. His chest wall is deflated on the right side. He still gets pain and stiffness down his right side and he has difficulty lying on his right side and in sexual relations and lifting heavy weights.

Doctors Lawson and Evans both noted continuing symptoms in the lungs related to the accident. He has not received any treatment or prescription for analgesics since 1986.

Some years prior to the accident he had fractured his left shoulder when aged and in 1983 he was diagnosed as having a growth in his lung. In about 1991 there was another car accident but none of these injuries, it seems to me, are significant in assessing the loss occasioned by his present accident.

Notwithstanding his criminal history for offences of dishonesty, he did not give me the impression that he was exaggerating his symptoms, disabilities or limitations except in relation to the hand calluses, to which I shall shortly refer, and in general his complaints of pain and restriction of movement were corroborated in material aspects by his estranged wife, and I accept the plaintiff's evidence on those issues.

I assess the plaintiff's general damages at $60,000. Having regard to <case> of the Act, no interest is allowable on any part of this amount. The out of pocket expenses have been agreed at $377.

In relation to the plaintiff's claim for economic loss past and future there are a number of difficulties: he had worked for only limited periods in the past and was not working at the time; except for one very short period he had not worked for wages since his accident, but both the plaintiff's and the defendant's doctors noticed callused hands with ingrained grease and there was some evidence that he mows lawns and does mechanical work, the latter said to be as a hobby.

I am satisfied that he has the capability for light work without heavy lifting, but his capacity to obtain employment would be restricted because a lot of employers would be reluctant to employ him on account of his criminal record, including in storeman type jobs.

On the whole of the evidence I am satisfied he is unfit for heavy work including repeated heavy lifting. If he had been employed as a process worker full time he would have earned about $230 at the time of the accident and about $350 now. Taking an average over the intervening period of about $290 less tax that arrives at a weekly figure of $260 net. To allow for the fact that he only worked about 40 per cent of the time prior to the accident I have reduced this to about $104 a week but because I am satisfied in the light of the calluses and the fact that he has not really tried to get work since the accident I think this should be further reduced because of the calluses I am satisfied he has some residual capacity.

I assess his loss at about $80 per week and I am conscious of the fact that when one gets to that kind of figure the tax is virtually nil. $80 per week for twelve years amounts to $49,920 and in respect of economic loss to date I allow this amount. I also allow interest on this amount at 7 per cent for twelve years, an amount of $41,933.

In respect of the future it seems to me appropriate to take a similar approach and, accordingly, I allow $80 per week for twenty-three years capitalised at 5 per cent per annum which comes to $57,704 less 15 per cent for vicissitudes, approximately $49,000 which amount I allow.

The various heads of damages may be summarised as follows: 
General damages $60,000 
Out of pocket expenses 377 
Loss of income to date 49,920 
Loss of interest on income to date 41,933 
Loss of future earning capacity 49,000 
These figures total: $201,230 
This must be reduced by 50 per cent on account of the plaintiff's contributory negligence and I therefore direct the entry of judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $100,615. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings. I grant a stay of proceedings of 28 days on the usual terms.
 * * * 
