

Regina versus Behar Matter No Cca 60363/98 [1998] NSWSC 567 (14 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
REGINA versus ILAN BEHAR 
CCA 60363/98 October 1998 
Spigelman CJ, McInerney J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
The respondent was convicted on a charge of importing a commercial quantity of
MDMA (Ecstasy) into Australia contrary to s233B of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) . He was sentenced to six years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 18 months, the trial judge indicating that the term of imprisonment would have been ten years with a non-parole period of 4 years, but for the assistance given to authorities. The Crown appeals against sentence, particularly the inadequacy of the non-parole period.

Held: . Errors of Trial Judge 
The trial judge erred in stating the respondent's involvement in the importation of a quantity of Ecstasy, almost two and a half times the "commercial quantity", was at the lower end of the scale of commercial quantities of that drug. Furthermore, whilst he acknowledged the importance of general deterrence, his Honour took into account, were significant, his Honour erred in treating as "paramount" the objective of rehabilitation.
 . Inappropriateness of a guideline judgment 
This is an inappropriate case in which to issue a guideline judgment. The appeal did not raise any such issue. It may be appropriate to consider a guideline judgment for this particular drug after a review of evidence as to the nature and effects, and pattern of usage, of the drug. The English Court of Appeal has issued a guideline judgment for Ecstasy in Warren and Beeley [(1996) 1 CrAppR(S) 233.]
The English and Australian case law on sentencing with respect to drug importations suggest that there may be some advantage in developing a guideline judgment or guideline judgments in this field. Possible amendment of s12 of the Criminal Appeal Act referred to.
 . Inadequacy of non-parole period 
The non-parole period of 18 months is very low for an offence of this gravity, and does not serve the interests of general deterrence appropriately.
Criminality of an offence should be reflected not only in the full term but also in the non-parole period: Power <case>; [(1973) 131 CLR 623] at 628; Drakzkiewica NSWCCA 23 November 1993.

The norm for non-parole periods is in the range of about 60 percent to 66 and two-thirds percent, although there are no fixed ratios and what is involved is not a mathematical computation: Bernier NSWCCA 19 May 1998. The commencing point of a non-parole period of six years would be the appropriate figure against a head sentence before discounts of ten years.

His Honour was entitled to give a substantial discount for the respondent's undertaking to provide assistance to authorities. Fifty percent from the non- parole period is high and may be at the top of the range, but it is not outside the permissible range: see Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220.] Applying that 50 percent to the non-parole period of six years, the appropriate figures is three years with a further deduction of six months, as applied by the trial judge.

ORDERS
Appeal allowed.
Sentence quashed.
Substitute therefor the following sentence: six years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 30 months to commence on 14 November 1997 and at the expiration of that to be released on parole.

REGINA versus Ilan BEHAR 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The respondent Ilan Behar pleaded guilty to a charge that on 14 November 1997 at Sydney he did import into Australia prohibited imports to which s233B of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) applied, namely narcotic goods consisting of a commercial quantity of the drug methlendioxymethanphetamine referred to as MDMA and, colloquially, as Ecstasy. 
The respondent was sentenced to six years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 18 months, to commence on 14 November 1997. His Honour also indicated, pursuant to [s21E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s21e.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cth), the prisoner would have been sentenced to ten years penal servitude with a non-parole period of four years, but for the assistance given. He computed the discount as 50 percent from the four year non-parole period.

The basic facts are in a narrow compass. On 14 November 1997 the prisoner arrived in Sydney on Pacific Air Flight 911 ex Nandi after a six day stay in
Fiji in company with a female companion, Maria Goycolea Silva. The respondent and Silva were booked in adjoining seats on Ansett flight 28 for a connecting flight to the Gold Coast that same day. On arrival, the respondent was identified by an Australian Customs Service drug sniffer dog. The respondent attempted to flee the Customs area and was detained by the Australian Customs
Service officers. Ms Silva passed through Customs unchecked.

The respondent is an Israeli national and, after speaking to the Israeli
Consulate and a solicitor, he agreed to participate in a taped record of interview with the Australian Federal Police at its headquarters. He also agreed, there, to be searched by police. Located on the respondent's person were nine cotton bags containing tablets. There was a gross quantity of 1.729 kilograms of MDMA consisting of 11,532 tablets. On analysis this was found to be a quantity of pure MDMA of 1.231 kilograms. The street value of such a quantity of MDMA was estimated by police to be approximately $1,000,000
Australian. The maximum penalty under s235(2)(c)(i) of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) for the offence which involves a commercial quantity of MDMA is imprisonment for life.

A "commercial quantity" of MDMA is defined as half a kilogram of the drug. The present case involves a quantity of pure drug of almost two and a half times the commercial quantity, as specified in the legislation.

According to Behar's statement to police the importation had been organised through Behar's girlfriend, Silva, by a person called Suryam. Behar, Silva and
Suryam were followers of an Indian Guru known as the Bhagwan Shree Rajneeshi.
This sect is commonly referred to as the orange people.

The Crown sought to rely on the proposition that the members of this particular sect, the Rajneeshi, appear to be involved in international trafficking of Ecstasy to a substantial degree. To support this proposition the Crown relied on a number of decisions of courts of criminal appeal in which members of the sect had been involved in this particular traffic. The submission was not based only on evidence adduced for purposes of sentencing in this case. I agree with the submission of Mr Norrish QC, who appeared for the respondent, that it is not permissible to take such matters into account other than on the basis of evidence.

Mr Sutherland, for the Crown, made reference to s144 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) but found it difficult to indicate what provision would be applicable to the proposition on which he relied. As presently advised I cannot see that the Court would be entitled to take judicial notice pursuant to s144 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), however, the matter was not fully argued before us.

At this stage I do not propose to take into account, for the purposes of the present sentence, the activities of an organisation on the basis of judgments of appellate courts.

The principles applicable to a Crown appeal against sentence are well established. They are conveniently summarised in the judgment of this Court in
Alpass (1994) 73 ACrimR 561 at 562-563.

The Crown submits that the sentence is manifestly inadequate and indicates appellable error. In this regard it focussed on the non-parole period of one year and six months and in particular the relationship between the non-parole period and the head sentence. Submissions were made that the discount for assistance that his Honour gave was too great, also that whilst the Crown did not challenge the ultimate head sentence of six years, on some of the hypotheses available as to how his Honour reached the figure, the Crown indicated that some aspects of the steps in his Honour's reasoning were inappropriate. However, the final figure of six years was not subject to any serious challenge before us. The focus of attention falls on the final period of one year and six months as a non-parole period.

The respondent was sentenced on the basis that he was a courier. There is no evidence to the contrary. The trial Judge correctly stated the principle that the particular role that a person plays in importing drugs into Australia is a matter relevant to the sentencing process. He relied on Raz NSWCCA 17
December 1990. This principle has recently been reaffirmed by Olbrich NSWCCA June 1998.

The respondent was entitled to be sentenced on the basis that he was a courier. The maximum sentence of life imprisonment is of course appropriate for the organiser of a major importation. However, that does not mean that a person who plays a comparatively less significant role in an organisation is entitled to some kind of proportionate reduction of his or her sentence. As his Honour Wells J put it in a frequently quoted passage in Le Cerf [(1975) ALR 349] at 351: "It is only because persons like him are ready, able and willing to do such a thing that the entrepreneur is able to apply his nefarious trade on a large scale. If there were no middle men and underlings there would be no top men in an organisation. If an organisation is starved of recruits it must collapse." 
His Honour went on to say: "The simple truth, that a man who participates in such an organisation at any level - I repeat at any level - must expect, and will receive, a heavy penalty. I do not, in saying that, mean to imply that no distinction at all will be drawn between the upper and lower echelon of organised crime. But I wish it clearly to be understood that, given that a particular range of penalties is considered appropriate for those in the upper echelon, there is no inevitable correlation between the standing of an offender who is in the lower echelon and the severity of the punishment that he can expect and will receive." 
The significance and applicability of this approach has been reiterated in this Court on a number of occasions, most recently by his Honour Wood CJ at CL in Smith (Trina Le Shae) NSWCCA 20 August 1998; and Budiman NSWCCA 8
September 1998.

I also agree with the comments of Campbell J in Thiagaragah [(1989) 41
ACrimR 45] at 49: "The Court has frequently said that the importance of people who perform the more menial operations, who include couriers, people who pick the goods up and people who transform the form of the goods, to the operation of organised drug trafficking, is such that the Court should not treat such persons for that reason alone with a measure of leniency which might be applied in other forms of crime to distinguish principles from persons of a lesser role." 
Furthermore, as Wood CJ at CL said recently in Budiman supra: "Couriers and others involved in a drug trade additionally have no entitlement to expect that they will be able to rely upon their prior good character for a significant discount on sentence if they happen to be arrested." 
There was ample foundation for the findings of Bellear DCJ in the present case as follows: "I am satisfied that there is no evidence, nor is there any suggestion on the evidence that the prisoner was a principal, instrumental in organising the scheme to import prohibited imports into Australia. His role was to bring the
MDMA into Australia and was to receive $18,000 for the safe delivery of the packages into Australia. In addition, he received a trip to Fiji with all expenses paid. The prisoner's role in the commission of this offence was not solely motivated by financial gain...He also contends that he became involved at the suggestion of his girlfriend Maria Silva." 
There was, however, one error in his Honour's summary of the facts on which the Crown relies in the present case. His Honour said, in words which I have omitted above, as follows: "...His involvement in the importation of a quantity of MDMA was at the lower end of the scale of 'commercial quantities' of that drug...".

As indicated above, the quantity of pure drug was almost two and a half times the "commercial quantity" specified in the legislation.

It is clear that his Honour was significantly influenced, as he was entitled to be, by the respondent's personal record. Such subjective factors are always important in the exercise of the sentencing discretion. His Honour referred to the materials tendered on the respondent's behalf as "exceptionally impressive". He has a degree from the Hebrew University. He was employed in various capacities by the State of Israel, including as a security officer of the Supreme Court for a period of some 18 months. He was also employed as an economist in the Ministry of the Treasury. He served in the Israeli Air Force and rose to the rank of captain. References were tendered from the Professor of Economics at the Hebrew University and the Professor of Economic History and a number of Israeli residents, including one from the Israeli National
Defence College. He had impressive assessments from persons who came into contact with him at the Hampton Metropolitan Remand Centre and the Silverwater
Correctional Centre. His concerned parents had come from Israel to be with their son in court, to support him. His father was a diplomat and served in the Foreign Ministry of the Government of Israel for a period of 37 years.

It is plain that the crucial change in his life occurred when he visited India and became associated with the Rajneeshi. During this period he denied his
Jewish faith and became an orange person, taking on the Bhagwan's faith.
Thereafter he travelled with the sect, the practice of which included partaking in drugs such as Ecstasy, LSD and other mind-altering drugs. He went through a ceremony which involved amongst other things changing his name to
Deva Kantu.

His evidence before Bellear DCJ, which his Honour accepted, was that he realised that his conduct was totally wrong and that he has now denied his new found faith and returned to Judaism. He expressed deep remorse for his actions.

These subjective factors were of course very significant. Nevertheless, his
Honour directed himself appropriately by stating that in drug matters general deterrence assumes a significant importance. His Honour relied on a number of authorities which established that proposition and he added the following: "The rehabilitation of the prisoner is paramount. I have had the benefit of hearing evidence from the prisoner and from his Rabbi, and I am satisfied his rehabilitation process is under way." 
The use of the word "paramount" does suggest that his Honour, although he referred to the matter of general deterrence, did not give the objective of general deterrence adequate weight.

I note one other matter to which his Honour made reference in his reasons. He referred to the status of Ecstasy as a "middle range drug". He noted that some materials had been tendered to him and the material included some reports on the nature and effects of Ecstasy. His Honour concluded as follows: "I am satisfied that the evidence to date establishes that Ecstasy is a toxic drug of dependence with serious ill-health consequences for some users and it has the potential for long term permanent brain damage. And a number of deaths in Australia and overseas have been associated with the use of Ecstasy. I am not satisfied, however, that there has been enough research carried out at this stage to alter its position on the scale and therefore I propose to continue to regard MDMA as a middle range drug for these sentencing purposes." 
This conclusion was open to his Honour. Indeed in Budiman supra Wood CJ at
CL said: "His Honour properly categorised Ecstasy as a mid range drug, which has been recognised as somewhat less harmful than heroin and cocaine, but significantly more harmful than cannabis." 
His Honour Wood CJ at CL referred to the authorities in this Court on the basis of which that classification has been made.

I note also that in the earlier case of Moore and Wiebe NSWCCA 11 August , the then Chief Justice Gleeson noted with respect to the particular facts of that case: "...this would be an inappropriate case to treat as a vehicle for a detailed examination of the range of sentences that ought to be imposed in relation to importation of the drug Ecstasy." 
I have formed the same view with respect to the present case. The Crown did not as part of its appeal raise any such issue.

In a decision handed down two days ago (Jurisic NSWCCA 12 October 1998) this
Court indicated that in future it would be prepared to issue formal guideline judgments in the form developed by the English Court of Appeal. In an appropriate case it may be desirable to consider a guideline judgment for this particular drug. This will involve a review of the kind of evidence to which his Honour made reference in the present case. Evidence as to the pattern of usage of the particular drug will also be of significance.

It may be desirable to clarify the ability of this Court to receive additional evidence in a Crown appeal with respect to a guideline judgment. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s12.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) gives the Court certain powers including the power to receive evidence. This, however, is subject to the following proviso: "Provided that in no case shall any sentence be increased by reason of, or in consideration of, any evidence that was not given at the trial." 
The English Court of Appeal receives quite extensive evidence for the purposes of formulation of guideline judgments. That Court has in fact laid down a guideline judgment for Ecstasy (see Warren and Beeley [(1996) 1 CrAppR(S) ).] This was done in a context in which Ecstasy was classified in accordance with the English system as a Class A drug. The Court of Appeal has said that drugs within the one class are to be treated similarly (Warren and
Beeley supra 237, see also Martinez [(1984) 6 CrAppR(S) 364).] 
In this country, as I have noted above, Ecstasy is regarded as of lesser significance than cocaine and heroin. The English Court of Appeal has issued a number of guideline judgments on drug importations in which context the guideline judgment with respect to Ecstasy must be placed. (See Aramah [(1982) 4 CrAppR(S) 407];
Bilinski [(1988) CrAppR(S) 360];
Aranguren [(1995) 16 CrAppR(S) 211];
Attorney-Generals References Nos 3, 4 and 5 of 1992 [(1993) 14 CrAppR(S) ]; Wijs [(1998) CrimLR 587]; Ronchetti CrimApR(S) 100.) 
Both the English experience and Australian case law on sentencing with respect to drug importations suggest that there may be some advantage in developing a guideline judgment or guideline judgments in this field. This, however, is not an appropriate case in which to do so.

I do not set out all his Honour's reasons. Save for the two references to which I have referred, his Honour's judgment is not, in my opinion, open to criticism. Those two references were his identification of the importation of the quantity of MDMA in the present case as being at the lower end of the scale of commercial quantity and also his reference to the word "paramount" with respect to the objective of rehabilitation.

Basically the Crown relies on the alleged manifest inadequacy of the ultimate result. In terms of the non-parole period of 18 months there is no doubt that the final non-parole period is very low for an offence of this gravity.
Specifically, it does not appear to me that such a penalty serves the interests of general deterrence appropriately.

The criminality of the offence should be reflected not only in the full term but also in the non-parole period. As the High Court said in Power <case>; [(1973) 131 CLR 623] at 628: "In a true sense the non-parole period is a minimum period of imprisonment to be served because the sentencing Judge considers that the crime committed calls for such detention." 
Similarly, Badgery-Parker J said in Drakzkiewica NSWCCA 23 November 1993: "There is no tariff which dictates what should be the non-parole period but it is important to remember in determining a non-parole period that it must be of sufficient length to ensure that the sentence reflects the criminality involved and does not lose the very important significant effect of general deterrence which is particularly important in relation to drug importation cases." 
This Court considered the various factors which affect the relationship between a head sentence and non-parole period in the case of Lian [(1990) ACrimR 444] in the context of a regime which once again appears to have relevance for sentencing for Commonwealth offences. I particularly refer to the principles set out at pp456 and 457 of that judgment noting that this
Court in point 3 referred to the significance of the deterrent effect and also, in point 4, the significance in terms of rehabilitation.

As is often the case, these different objectives of sentencing do not point in the same direction. Nevertheless, it is the task of the sentencing Judge and, within well recognised limits, of this Court on appeal to ensure that each of the objectives are served to the degree appropriate in the particular case.

His Honour commenced his final sentencing remarks with a reference to the necessity to make an adjustment of one third because of the absence of remissions in New South Wales under s16G of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/). The Crown has not challenged that first step or indeed the head sentence that his Honour eventually imposed.

It is not entirely clear what the steps that his Honour adopted were. The most likely steps are that he imposed a sentence of ten years and applied a s16G deduction of 40 percent, to reach a head sentence of six years. Thereafter he indicated a non-parole period of four years being an appropriate relationship of 60 and two-thirds percent between the head sentence and the non-parole period and thereafter his Honour applied a 50 percent discount for cooperation to the non-parole period and a further reduction of six months from the non- parole period for other matters to which his Honour referred.

These were, as I understand, the steps his Honour took. If he did so then it would appear that his Honour failed to give an appropriate reduction of the head sentence for the question of cooperation, having focussed on a discount of 50 percent and apparently applying it only to the non-parole period.

If this is the approach his Honour took then in my opinion it would appear that starting with a sentence of ten years was below the appropriate length for offences of this character. Although it would be within the appropriate range after a s16G discount were applied to it, perhaps at the lower end of the range, but nevertheless within the range. To that one would have to apply a discount for cooperation.

Whatever steps that his Honour in fact took to reach the head sentence I am satisfied that on a review of all of the factors and after application of all relevant discounts, a head sentence of six years is appropriate and I do not propose to disturb it, nor did the Crown make any submission that it should be disturbed. The question then becomes one of applying it to derive an appropriate non-parole period, in the circumstances of this case bearing in mind a head sentence of some six years.

With respect to the discount appropriate for the respondent's undertaking to provide assistance his Honour had said this: "I take into consideration the prisoner's endorsed undertaking to cooperate with authorities which include: 
That he give evidence to the Crown in accordance with statements signed by him.

That he participates in conferences with law enforcement agency.

And that he fully and frankly deals with his involvement in the importation of MDMA into Australia...

An assessment of value of the assistance given by the prisoner to police is set out in a statement of assistance prepared by Federal Agent Gary McMahon, who concluded the evidence of the prisoner, in combination with the corroborative evidence outlined in the statement of assistance, is of major importance in a prosecution case against Ms Silva.

Federal Agent McMahon further stated that without the assistance of the prisoner, Silva would not have been arrested and charged in relation to the importation. Federal Agent McMahon completed the statement by stating that the prisoner had been cooperative since being held in custody within the general prison population at Silverwater Remand Centre. I am satisfied that the prisoner has given valuable assistance to the authorities and that he will continue with his assistance to those in authority." 
His Honour was entitled to give a substantial discount. Fifty percent from the non-parole period is high and may be at the top of the range but I am not prepared to say that it was outside the permissible range. (See Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220.)] 
Similarly, the starting point of ten years for the total sentence is, in my view, within the range after the application of a <case> discount but it is not clear that that is what his Honour did. However, for the purposes of exercising the discretion in this Court I approach the matter on the basis that the head sentence is appropriately identified as six years for the reasons I have already identified.

In Bernier NSWCCA 19 May 1998, in a joint judgment of this Court it was recognised that the norm for non-parole periods is in the range of about 60 percent to 66 and two-thirds percent although there are no fixed ratios and what is involved is not some sort of mathematical computation.

In Budiman supra this Court rejected a severity appeal against a head sentence of eight years three months and a non-parole period of six years three months. This was a proportion of 75 percent. The ratio of 75 percent should not be taken as a starting point. It does not appear from the judgment in Budiman that there was any separate challenge to the ratio between the head sentence and the non-parole period. If at all within the range, 75 percent is at the very top of the range. (See Griffiths [(1989) 168 CLR ]
at 391; Paull [(1990) 20 NSWLR 427], 435;
Lian [(1990) 47 ACrimR 444.)] 
I am content to accept that the norm is 60 percent or so. That would yield a non-parole period, against a head sentence before discounts of ten years, of six years rather than four years. In my opinion that is the appropriate basis on which to commence. On all the facts of this case the commencing point of a non-parole period of six years would be the appropriate figure against a head sentence before discounts of ten years.

The matter obviously requires considerably flexibility in the exercise of a discretion. An appellate Court must exercise caution in the review of discretionary decisions. I am not satisfied that in all the facts in this case a figure of 50 percent for a discount is outside the permissible range.
Applying that 50 percent to the non-parole period of six years, to which I have referred, one would reach a figure of three years for a non-parole period. That would involve an 18 month discount for past cooperation, 25 percent, and a component of 18 months discount for future cooperation of 25 percent which is the figure that I specify for the purposes of [s21E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s21e.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/).

From that non-parole period the additional figure that his Honour applied of a further period of six months appears to me to be appropriate and has not been challenged.

In the context of reaching the non-parole period of six years, to which I have referred, I wish to indicate that I have taken into account the restraints on the exercise of the discretion by an appellate Court including the factor for double jeopardy, I find that is the least sentence that is proper to be imposed, subject to the further discounts to which I have referred.

Accordingly, the order I would propose is that the appeal should be allowed, the sentence below quashed and substitute therefor the following: sentenced to six years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 30 months to commence on 14
November 1997 and at the expiration of that to be released on parole.

I indicate that pursuant to [s21E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s21e.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) but for the assistance the prisoner would have been sentenced to a period of ten years penal servitude with a non-parole period of six years and the specific period for assistance to be given in the future applied to the discount was a period of 18 months.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed and the reasons advanced by the Chief Justice. 
SPERLING J: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The order of the Court is as I have indicated. * * * 
