

Green versus Green Matter No 3312/97 [1998] NSWSC 272 (24 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
GREEN versus GREEN /97 June 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings deal with the proper construction of the will of Alice Muriel Green in particular the trusts that she set up known as "the Miriam Green Bequest" by that will. 
Alice Muriel Green, who was also known as Miriam Green, died on 14 October leaving a will dated 3 April 1989 and two codicils, probate of which was granted on 8 January 1996. The plaintiffs are the trustees of the Miriam Green
Bequest set up under clause 7 of that will.

The Text of the will 
Clause 7 directs the trustees: "(a) To invest and accumulate the same until a date which is twenty one (21) years after my death hereinafter called `the vesting period' or until each grandchild or [sic] mine respectively attains the age of twenty five (25) years whichever first happens and whether such grandchild be alive at my death or born or adopted thereafter provided such birth or adoption be before the expiration of the said period of twenty one (21) years from the date of my death.

Upon each such grandchild or [sic] mine attaining the age of twenty five (25) years if such occur during `the vesting period' he or she shall be paid a one twentieth part of such fund as he or she may be then entitled to in expectancy and upon expiration of the vesting period the whole of the fund shall be distributed in equal shares as tenants in common amongst those of my grandchildren then living or if having died after attaining their majority or married then to their respective personal representatives provided however that those distributions already made shall be brought to notional account and stand to the debit of those who have received the same. The share of any minor grandchild entitled in expectancy on the expiration of the vesting period shall be held by the guardian for the time being of such beneficiary pending him or her attaining of the age of eighteen (18) years and if such share should lapse it shall fall into residue." 
Clause 9(b) of the will which deals with the powers of both the trustees of the will and the trustees of the Miriam Green Bequest, empower the trustees: "(b) In their absolute discretion to apply the whole of or any part of the income and/or capital of the share to which any child is contingently entitled to or towards the maintenance education or advancement in life or otherwise for the benefit of such child and for that purpose to pay such income and/or capital to any guardian for the time being of such child without being bound to see to the application thereof AND I 
DECLARE that for the purposes of this Clause accumulations of past years shall be available as if they were income of the current years." 
The relevant facts 
The facts are that as at the date of her death, the deceased had given birth to three children, two of whom had married and produced grandchildren, the third, a daughter, who is now 44 is unmarried and has no children. The two sons of the deceased together have produced five grandchildren, the elder son has Belinda, who is now 27, Joshua who is 23, and Rebecca who is 20. The younger son has Robin James who is 14 and Christopher who is 11. Belinda reached 25 on 5 January 1996, that is, about three months after the death of the testatrix.

The problems 
The problems of construction range round the postponement of the vesting period and the power given to the trustees to apply any part of the "share" to which a "child" is "contingently" entitled.

In addition to construction, the plaintiffs ask that clause 9(b) of the will be rectified by substituting the word "grandchild" for "child" wherever occurring. I will deal with this application for rectification first.

Rectification 
The Court is given power to rectify wills by <case> of the Wills [Probate and
Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/). Under s
A(2) an application for an order under the section is not to be made after the expiration of the period of 18 months after the death of the testator.
Thus, in this case the application would need to be made no later than 14
April 1997. The summons was in fact filed on 22 July 1997.

Section 29A(3) says that the Court may grant leave to make an application under the section after the 18 month period if "the Court is satisfied that sufficient cause is shown for the failure to make the application within that period." 
In the instant case, the arguments are that because nobody other than the persons the subject of these proceedings can be affected by an order for rectification, that the application is only three months out of time, and that no-one raises any objection, indicate that sufficient cause has been shown. I should note that there is a little evidence to suggest that at least some appreciated the problems within the 18 months, but this is very ephemeral.

The words "sufficient cause" are common in connection with statutes setting a time and allowing the court to extend it. It is not possible just to take over the learning from one statute to another because each has set a time limit for the particular purpose of the statute and the interests involved. However, the cases on the question of extending the time under the Third Party Insurance
Scheme suggests that "sufficient cause" needs to be something substantial (Whitgob versus Nominal Defendant [(1951) 69 WN 1)] and that the factors such as the length of delay and the lack of prejudice to any party are very relevant matters to take into account: Re Seymour [(1949) 23 ALJ 405.] However, as the High Court said in Sophron versus Nominal
Defendant <case>; [(1957) 96 CLR 469], 474-5, "Every case must be determined on its own facts.
Fixed formulae cannot be substituted for the wide words of the subsection...
It is a mistake to attempt to reduce the expression `sufficient cause' to a closer or more rigid definition than the legislature has chosen to provide.
The words no doubt are concerned with the justice of the case. There must be some positive reason for concluding that as between the parties it would be just to extend the period for giving notice." 
There have been no contested applications before the Court to determine what is "sufficient cause" under the present section, but the view has been taken in uncontested proceedings that it is appropriate to extend the time when the only persons who could possibly be affected are the persons before the Court and there was some carelessness shown in not presenting the application in time; see eg Trimmer versus Lax (Hodgson, J, 9 May 1997, unreported). I think it would be best to leave to another day just what factors are critical to a finding of sufficient cause and, seeing that there is no opposition, just follow cases like Trimmer on this occasion.

I thus extend the time for bringing the application under <case> until the filing of the summons in these proceedings.

It has been held that rectification under <case> is the same concept as rectification with respect to contracts; see Trimmer versus Lax supra and Re
Haygarth (Hodgson, J, 7 October 1994, unreported).

Although this is the general principle, it obviously cannot be applied in every facet of rectification. First, with rectification of a contract the
Court does not rectify if all the parties consent because they are able to perform the act of rectification themselves without the aid of equity. This principle does not apply to wills because the testator and the public interest are also involved. Secondly, with contracts, one first construes the contract to see whether it is necessary to look at the question of rectification at all; see Snell's Equity 29th ed (Sweet and Maxwell London 1990) p 627.
With a will case, the grant of probate and rectification are dealt with in the
Probate Division at an early stage and questions of construction are dealt with later in the Equity Division. It is thus difficult to say that one does not grant rectification where construction of the document may mean that rectification is unnecessary.

The cases on rectification show that there are two different scenarios, viz : where there is an obvious mistake and it is apparent what the mistake is and how it should be corrected; and (b) where there is an obvious mistake but it is not certain how it should be corrected. Only in the second case is rectification the appropriate remedy; in other cases the Court merely disregards the mistaken word. Thus, in Bache versus Proctor (1780) 1 Dougl 382; [99 ER 247], the word "not" had crept into a document by error. Buller, J in the Full King's
Bench said that, "the palpable mistake of a word should not defeat the true intention of the parties". In Re Alexander's Settlement [[1910] 2 Ch ], a marriage settlement used the words "tail male". However, Parker, J considered that it was so obvious that the word "male" had got into the settlement in error that he read it as if it were "general".

In the instant case it is said that in clause 9(b) the testatrix must have meant "grandchild" because it is only the interests of the grandchildren that are subject to the sort of conditions she mentions. If that is so, then the matter is so obvious that the question is just one of construction and there is no need for rectification. If, on the other hand, as was discussed during argument, the word "child" means grandchild who is still an infant, then perhaps the word has got some real work to do so that it is not clear that there is a mistake and again there should be no rectification.

Accordingly, in my view I should dismiss the claim for rectification of the will.

Construction 
I now turn to questions of construction.

It is appropriate to discuss these problems under the following heads:-(A)
General problems; 
Does the class of grandchildren close artificially? 
What is the vesting period? 
What does clause 7(b) mean? 
In clause 9(b) what do the words (i) "child", (ii) "contingently" and "share" mean? 
For what period does the power in clause 9(b) exist? 
What happens to the intermediate income of a grandchild's share? 
Should any adjustment be made on ultimate distribution because of advancements made, and, if so, what adjustments? 
Are the trustees entitled to invest in listed companies on the Australian 
Stock Exchange? 
I will deal with these matters in turn.

Clause 7 of the will is rather odd for a modern will. There is no way that it can be construed doing semantic justification to every word employed.
Indeed, the will has the flavour of one where the drafter has inserted a number of standard clauses without checking to see how they dovetail in to this particular will.

The best overview of the will is that what the testatrix seems to have had in mind is that it was only at a period between 21 and 46 years after her death that the capital of her estate was to be distributed. However, in the interim, under clause 7(b), as soon as a grandchild attained 25 he or she got 5% of the fund designated for that grandchild and there was a power in the trustees to pay any share to which a child was contingently entitled for the maintenance, education or advancement in life or otherwise for the benefit of such child.

The class closing rules do not, at first sight seem to be applicable because the will specifically states that grandchildren will take if born or adopted before 21 years from the date of the testatrix's death. However, problems occur no matter which way one construes the will and as the application of the rules would solve some problems, they must be considered.

The class closing rule, known as the rule in Andrews versus Partington <case>; [(1791) 3 Bro CC 401]; <case>; [(1949) 80 CLR 327], 335 per Dixon, J. If the rule applied, on Belinda attaining , the class closed so that no further grandchildren (natural born or adopted) can come into the class.

The rule is a rule of construction, but there are conflicting views in the authorities as to how freely it should be applied. The more modern approach is illustrated in the following passage from Sappideen & Butt in their
The [Perpetuities Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984172/) (Law
Book Company Sydney 1986) at 105: "The class closing rules are an attempt to strike a balance between giving effect to a testator's or settlor's desire to benefit all members of a class and to allow early distribution to an entitled beneficiary. They are rules of construction which can be excluded only by clear expression to the contrary. The class closing rules originated independently of the rule against perpetuities, although, ... in certain circumstances their application may result in saving a disposition which otherwise would infringe the rule." 
The requirement of a clear expression to the contrary derives from English cases decided in the last 50 years. In Re Bleckly [[1951] Ch 740], 751, Evershed,
MR said that as all drafters of wills would know about the class closing rules, one needed more than a mere statement that the class to take is "all or any" the children of A attaining 21 to displace the rule. In Re Wernher's
Settlement Trusts [[1961] 1 WLR 136], 140-1,
Buckley, J said of the rule, "It is a rule the operation of which will give way to a sufficient contrary intention. The mere fact that the language used indicates an intention to benefit members of the specified class, or all members of the specified class, coming into existence after the date of the document ... is not in itself enough to exclude the rule ...
 "... It is not sufficient merely to show that the testator ... has expressed an intention to benefit a class of a kind to which the rule is capable of applying and has expressed that intention in words which are emphatic as meaning that all the members of that class are to take, unless one finds that the emphasis is expressed in such a way that it is impossible to make it march in step with the application of the rule." In summing up the English cases,
Megarry, VC said in Re Clifford's Settlement Trusts [[1981] Ch 63], 67, "In determining what expressions suffice to exclude the application of the rule, I think that the standard is high. ... It is not enough to find provisions which merely point to the exclusion of the rule if they nevertheless are capable of operating in conformity with it. There must be an inescapable incapability for the operation of the rule." 
The authorities are not quite so simply digested. There are other cases which say that the rule should not be applied unless it is convenient or necessary; see for instance Knight versus Knight <case>; [(1912) 14 CLR 86] and Williamson versus Williamson [[1974] NI 92.] In particular it is said that it is not necessary or convenient to apply the rule where there is an accumulation with the capital to be distributed at the expiry of the accumulation period. This was clearly held in Watson versus Young (1885) 28 Ch
D 436, 445 and Re Stephens [[1904] 1 Ch 322] and is endorsed in dicta in Knight versus Knight (supra). See also Re Stevens;
Trustees Executors and Agency Company Ltd versus Teague <case>; [[1912] VLR 194], 202 and Re Watt's Will Trusts [[1936] 2 All ER ], 1563, in both of which cases the principle was said to be abundantly clear. Furthermore, Re Watt's Will Trusts was followed by C
McLelland, CJ in Eq in Re Hart [[1963] NSWR 627], 633.

In Williams on Wills 7th ed (Butterworths London 1995) at p 655, the learned authors, after dealing with Re Clifford's Settlement Trusts, clearly state the exceptional cases and, so far as accumulations are concerned say, "The rule is not applied where the will contains ... an effective direction to accumulate the income for a period extending beyond the time when a child attains a specified age or specifies the conditions." However, in a footnote the learned authors say that this provision may not be effective where the beneficiaries have the right to end the accumulation. They cite
Curtis versus Curtis <case>; [(1821) 6 Madd 14]; [56 ER 993] and Coventry versus Coventry (1865) 2 Dr & Sm 470; [62 ER .] I examined both these cases closely, but they appear only to be decisions on their own facts. However, I consider that the law is correctly stated by Williams that the mere fact that an accumulation is asked for by the will does not necessarily exclude the class closing rule.

However, whichever way one approaches the rule, the indications in the will tell against the testatrix intending that the class should close. I refer not only to the statement about being born or adopted before the 21 years, but also to the fact that there is to be an accumulation.

The trust is "To invest and accumulate the same until a date which is twenty one (21) years after my death hereinafter called the `vesting period' or until each grandchild or [sic] mine respectively attains the age of twenty five (25) years whichever first happens and whether such grandchild be alive at my death or born or adopted thereafter provided such birth or adoption be before the expiration of the said period of twenty one (21) years from the date of my death." 
At first blush there appears to be two alternative periods of accumulation: years; and (b) until each grandchild of mine respectively attains 25 years. This is reinforced by the words "whichever first happens". If the will stopped there one would think that the scheme was that the income was to be accumulated for 21 years but as each grandchild attained 25 that grandchild's share would cease accumulating income and become completely vested in interest.

However, the drafter realized that if the class of grandchildren was to remain open for the full 21 year period, then one could never know the maximum number of grandchildren who could take and hence the minimum share that could be distributed.

Accordingly, the drafter provided in (b) that that minimum share should be 5%.
Once the 21 years expired and one knew the total amount of grandchildren and thus the amount of shares there could be a further distribution.

This has some logic about it, though it reads out of significance the words, "respectively" and "whichever first happens." On balance, however, it seems to be the preferable approach.

The vesting period is thus 21 years after the testatrix's death, that is 14
October, 2016.

What, then, is the effect of clause 7(b)? Following on from what I said in section C, at 14 October, 2016, everyone will know how many grandchildren there are who take a share. Those grandchildren who are 25 or over, will take their shares. Those under 25 will have to wait until they attain 25, and, if they do not, then, subject to any applicable substitution provision, their share will be redivided amongst the others.

The trustees are given power under clause 9(b) of the will, inter alia, to apply the whole or any part of the income and or capital of the share to which any child is contingently entitled for certain purposes. This clause has many problems in its construction. Indeed, it has all the hallmarks of being a standard clause rather than one tailored for this particular testatrix.

The word "child' is not apposite, because the benficiaries are the grandchildren of the testatrix, not her children. One could make sense of the word by merely reading it as "grandchild". The only other way that the word "child" could have significance is if it limited the power to infancy.
However, the reference to "25" rules that out.

The word "contingently" is also not apposite. This word can simply be read as "prospectively" without damage to the text. However, there is still the surplus word "in" which must be disregarded.

The next problem is what is the "share" to which a grandchild is said to be "contingently entitled"? 
In Doe d Clift versus Birkhead <case>; [(1849) 4 Ex 110], 126; <case>; [154
ER 1145], 1151,
Pollock, CB, giving the decision of the Full Court in Exchequer said, "The word `share' has no technical meaning, and, therefore, in giving effect to the deed in which it occurs, the Court has only to ascertain in what sense it is there used." It would seem that the word "share" often has the meaning of a donee's whole interest under the will, note the argument of Mr Manning, as he then was, in Re Pulbrook <case>; [(1937) 37 SR 345],
See also Re Purves [(1898) 25 Rettie 1084] and
Re Woods [[1941] St R Qd 129], 136. As
Philp, J said at that latter page, there is no reason why, if the context so requires, that the word "share" cannot merely mean "interest".

It is, however, strange to talk about the income and/or capital of the interest. However, that is not as strange as some other possibilities which might otherwise have to be considered.

What then is the interest to which a grandchild is contingently entitled? 
It is very hard to find any such interest. The grandchild on attaining 25 has the right to one-twentieth. Under that age, the grandchild has no right in any individual asset but has a right to have the income accumulated and to take one-twentieth at 25. Between the time that each of the several grandchildren respectively attain 25, and the ultimate vesting date, the only thing that can be said is that if one makes the assumption that there will be no more grandchildren, each grandchild currently in esse will take 20% and that it may be that the grandchildren who have already attained their majority will take 1/3rd %. However, not only does the rule that equity never presumes a person to be beyond the age of child birth apply, but there is the additional complication in the instant case that adopted children can take.

Clause 9(b) is a provision which is common in wills and which does not appear to me to have been inserted in this will with any particular care. It is for this reason that one may have to read "child" as "grandchild" and "contingent" as vested in interest, but not in possession. However, I would think it would be straining language far too much to read "interest" as anything beyond a provision made for a grandchild which could be described as something to which that child was at least contingently entitled. Where the grandchild is only "entitled" to some amorphous residue, I would not have considered that clause (b) applied.

Mr Gray for the plaintiff, put that the only clause to which clause 9(b) could have any application is clause 7. He cites various authorities, though I must confess that I did not see the relevance of any of these, but the proposition is obvious enough. The real problem is which part of clause 7 is picked up by the word "interest".

In my view, the only possible bit of clause 7 which is picked up is the gaining of the 5% on attaining 25. This marries well with the restriction "towards the maintenance education or advancement in life ...". Although these words can have an expanded meaning such as they have in the Family Provision legislation, primarily the words refer to benefits received in the early years of life. I am not for a moment saying that this is how one should confine clause 9(b) because it would otherwise not extend beyond the statutory power contained in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s43.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/). However, the concept of advancement seems to me to be closely knit to the fact that it is at 25 that a person receives his or her "share".

Accordingly, in connection with clause 7, clause 9(b) means that the trustees may apply the whole or any part of the income and/or capital of the one- twentieth share of each grandchild up until the time that grandchild attains and so is able to take the capital under clause 7(b).

I realise that this construction does not quite deal with all the words in clause 9(b). A literal interpretation of clause 9(b) would suggest that no moneys could be paid to the grandchildren themselves, but only to their parents or guardians. However, I think that one must read these words as saying if a beneficiary is under the age of majority then the advancement can be made in this way, not that this is the sole method of advancement. Of course, an advancement means money that is to be paid for a particular purpose and not just to be put in the pocket of the recipient: Roper-Curzon versus Roper-
Curzon [(1871) LR 11 Eq 452], 453.

It follows from the previous discussion that the power in clause 9(b) exists up till each respective grandchild attains the age of 25 years in respect of that grandchild.

Mr Blackburn-Hart for the second defendants, put that there is no problem with intermediate income because the testatrix has already dealt with it by clause 7(a) in having it invested and accumulated until the end of the vesting period. This indeed seems to be consistent with what Cross, J said in Re
Geering [[1964] Ch 136.] 
Accordingly, it does not seem to me that it is a sensible question to pose as to whether a grandchild's separate contingent or expectant share carries the interim income during the vesting period as the grandchildren do not have separate shares, there is just one pool which is accumulating income until the vesting period, subject of course to advancements made under the authority of the will.

The next problem is what adjustments should be made when the ultimate distribution is made because of advances that may have been made under clause (b) or payments made under clause 7(b)? 
This is a problem because if only some grandchildren obtain the benefits of an advancement under 9(b) or a capital payment under 7(b), then the fund which is earning interest for everybody else will be depleted for the benefit of those grandchildren. In any event, because those grandchildren will be taking advances at different times, there will probably be a disparity up until the time that the last grandchild attains 25 and takes his or her share.

Mr Gray puts that there are three possible approaches. First, take the value of the estate at the time for distribution, add the amounts of prior advances, divide the total by the shares into which the fund is to be distributed, deduct the amount of advances from each share; this produces a set of fractions and the income is then divided amongst the beneficiaries in accordance with those fractions.

The second method is to ascertain the total income of the trust fund, add notional interest on prior advances, divide the total amongst the beneficiaries, and then deduct from their shares and income the amounts attributed to prior advances. In Re Tennant <case>; [(1942) 65 CLR 473], 490, Dixon, J said that these two modes of calculation are not alternatives but rival methods for doing the same thing. It would seem that of these two methods, method 1 is used when one knows what the shares in corpus are, and method 2 when one does not. Method 3 is to charge a notional interest rate on the advances and add it to the capital; see Re Cooke [[1916] 1 Ch 480], 488-9.

It is not really sensible in the latter part of the 20th century to deal with notional interest rates. This may have been a perfectly proper way of dealing with problems of this nature at a time when interest rates were constant. That is no longer the situation. Especially with a trust that is not to be divided until 2016, involving trustees in notional interest rates only leads to further possible conflict.

My current view is that on the basis that the whole fund is to be split in , method 1 is the appropriate method to apply. However, that is more than years away and there may be many changes of circumstance which might impact on the answer. It is not the custom of the Court to answer questions which may be so affected. My comment may be sufficient for the plaintiffs. I will reserve further consideration so that a judge of this Court may deal with the question when it is ripe.

The final question is whether the plaintiffs are authorised to invest in shares in companies listed on the Australian Stock Exchange? [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s14.html) of the [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) in the form in force since 13 March 1998, provides that a trustee may, unless expressly forbidden by the trust instrument, invest in any form of investment. There is nothing in clause 9(c) of the will which is the investment power to cut this statutory power down. Accordingly, this question should be answered "yes".

Conclusion 
I will publish these reasons and stand the matter over for short minutes to be brought in. Of course, costs on the indemnity basis should be paid out of the
Miriam Green Bequest in respect of all parties. I should just add two observations. First, I am rather concerned that the oral argument and then later written submissions and then my consideration in chambers about three weeks after the submissions came in may have meant that I have omitted to deal, or to deal adequately with, some particular submission. I would not think it at all amiss if, when short minutes are brought in, counsel wish to reargue any particular point. I would appreciate advance notice of any such request so that I can adjust my lists.

I will list the matter for short minutes to be brought in on 14 July 1998 at .30 am, but this date is able to be moved so long as my Associate is informed, at least a week beforehand.

Secondly, there used to be available in the market place insurance against the unexpected appearance of extra beneficiaries. It may be that such a strategy may be available in this case.
 * * * 
