

R versus Ethan McKellar; R versus Bevan McKellar [2014] NSWSC 1243 (5 September )
 # [![\[AustLII\]](1243.1.gif)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/) Supreme Court of
New South Wales Decisions [[Index](index.html)] [[Search](/cgi-bin/sinoform.pl)] [[Download](1243.rtf)] [[Help](/help/cases-help.html)] * * * 
R versus Ethan McKellar; R versus Bevan McKellar [2014] NSWSC 1243 (5 September 2014) 
Last Updated: 20 October 2014 
This decision has been amended. Please see the end of the decision for a list of the amendments.
 |

Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
R versus Ethan McKellar; R versus Bevan McKellar  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): May; 5 September 2014  
Decision Date: September 2014  
Before: 
R A Hulme J  
Decision: 
Ethan McKellar - Imprisonment for 24 years with a non-parole period of 18 years 
Bevan McKellar - Imprisonment for 24 years with a non-parole period of 18 years  
Catchwords: 
CRIMINAL LAW - sentence - murder - wounding with intent - armed assault with intent to rob - impaired mental functioning - general deterrence of limited significance - moderate need for specific deterrence - no statutory mitigating factors - background of social disadvantage - less than usual moral culpability  
JUDGMENT
R A HULME J: On 11 March 2014 Ethan McKellar and Bevan McKellar were arraigned along with Douglas Dennis and Luke Elwood on an indictment charging that on 1 May 2011 at Ashmont, a suburb of Wagga Wagga, they murdered John Gjedsted, wounded JG with intent to cause him grievous bodily harm, and assaulted John Gjedsted with intent to rob him whilst armed with an offensive weapon.
On 9 April 2014 the jury returned with the following verdicts: 
Ethan McKellar: Guilty of murder, wounding with intent, armed assault with intent to rob.

Bevan McKellar: Guilty of murder, wounding with intent, armed assault with intent to rob.

Douglas Dennis: Not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter, not guilty of wounding with intent and of armed assault with intent to rob.

Luke Elwood: Not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter, not guilty of wounding with intent, and guilty of armed assault with intent to rob.
I am proceeding to sentence the offenders Ethan McKellar and Bevan McKellar before I have embarked upon hearing the case on sentence concerning the other two offenders. That is for reasons which are not presently known to me but I am assured that it is not material to the present proceedings. I trust it will become clearer when I embark upon the sentencing proceedings for the other offenders.

Facts
Mr John Gjedsted was a 55 year old man who lived at xx Marshall Street Ashmont with his son JG who was aged 17 (who cannot be named because of his age). Mr John Gjedsted was a user of marijuana and sold small quantities. His son gave evidence that people would come to the front door and purchase "a stick" which was marijuana packed in foil for which they would pay $20. Bevan McKellar was a regular customer and there was evidence in the trial to the effect that a week or so prior to 1 May 2011 a dispute had arisen between Mr Gjedsted and Bevan McKellar which seems to have concerned the quantities that were being supplied. It culminated in Bevan McKellar tricking Mr Gjedsted by giving him money that was not legal tender. There was obviously ill-feeling between them as a result.
On 1 May 2011 at about 6.10pm the four offenders attended xx Marshall Street. They had travelled together in a car driven by Douglas Dennis who parked the car some distance away. The Crown case was that the four went there with an intention to rob Mr Gjedsted. It was the case for each of the offenders that they were simply going there to purchase some marijuana. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that two weapons were brought with the men, namely a machete and a knife. The evidence as to the bringing of those items to the scene was not entirely clear, but it is clear from the events which took place at the scene that such weapons were brought. 
Once they arrived at xx Marshall Street, Bevan McKellar and Douglas Dennis went to the front door while the other two offenders remained in the near vicinity. There was a knock on the door and when it was answered by John Gjedsted the offender Dennis asked him for a "stick". Soon after this, Bevan McKellar punched Mr Gjedsted to the ground. JG emerged from his bedroom and saw Bevan McKellar on the threshold before the latter turned and ran. John Gjedsted got up and pursued him and JG followed.
JG saw his father trip and fall on the lawn near the unfenced border of the neighbouring property. Bevan McKellar kneed the prone deceased. JG ran up and punched Bevan who then pursued JG. Ethan McKellar joined the pursuit. Bevan McKellar shouted to Ethan, "kill the cunt". JG was then stabbed twice by Ethan McKellar.
A machete was later found near to where Bevan McKellar had assaulted John Gjedsted on the lawn. It had the deceased's blood on the blade and Bevan's DNA material on the handle. How and when it might have been used is difficult to determine. In those circumstances, the significance of it is that it was brought to the scene, thereby supporting the proposition that the possibility of violence was foreseen.
Items of Bevan McKellar's clothing were also found in the general area of the assault upon John Gjedsted on the lawn. This indicates that there was more of a struggle between the pair than was observed by JG. 
After the stabbing of JG, Bevan and Ethan McKellar directed their attention to John Gjedsted who by this stage was on the ground near the front of the adjoining property. I infer that the other offenders had some interaction with him that resulted in his movement to that location. The four men surrounded Mr Gjedsted and he was on his hands and knees. The witness descriptions as what precisely occurred are not entirely reliable given the distance from where they were observing and the limited lighting conditions. However I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that at least some of the four men were grabbing at Mr Gjedsted and kicking him. The assault culminated with Ethan McKellar stabbing Mr Gjedsted four times. JG saw his father being stabbed in the back and he yelled out, "get off him". The men then ran away.
JG made his way back into the house and called triple 0. By that stage his father had made his way back inside the house and was sitting in the kitchen bleeding and obviously in a serious condition. Neighbours came to assist and the ambulance and police arrived shortly afterwards. Both John Gjedsted and JG were taken to hospital.
Dr Cumberlege gave evidence of the ambulance arriving at the Wagga Wagga Base Hospital at 6.44pm. He examined John Gjedsted and found no sign of life. His preliminary examination indicated that the most likely cause of death was a stab wound to the chest. Dr Stephen Wills, forensic pathologist, conducted an autopsy on 3 May 2011. He described four sharp force injuries. The principal and fatal injury was described as being a large stab wound to the left side of the back of the chest, penetrating through two ribs and into the upper lobe of the left lung. There was a further stab wound in the middle of the back penetrating through a rib and entering the chest cavity but not injuring the underlying lung. A further shallow puncture type mark was found on the front on the left side of the chest and there was also a shallow incised wound on the under surface of the front of the chin. Dr Wills also described various areas of bruising and abrasions to other parts of the body. 
Dr Cumberlege was involved in the treatment of JG. He said there were two stabs wounds: one was to the right armpit which was not actively bleeding. The other was to the back of the chest. Dr Cumberlege said that both wounds could have been fatal if the patient did not receive emergency treatment, the more so the wound to the back of the chest. Urgent surgery was carried out to repair the wounds.
The issue about the identity of the person who stabbed John Gjedsted and his son was a live one at the trial. I have mentioned that in both cases it was Ethan McKellar and I am satisfied of this beyond reasonable doubt. I do not rely much upon the purported recognition by JG. The various accounts he gave to police and others varied in their consistency. 
The verdicts of the jury confirm that it was the present two offenders who were involved in the assault upon JG. He described his two attackers as wearing a white hoodie and a black hoodie. He said it was the man in the black hoodie who had the knife and the man in the white hoodie who called out encouragement to, "kill the cunt". When he later saw his father being stabbed he was clear that it was the same man with the black hoodie. It was accepted that Bevan McKellar was wearing a light grey coloured hoodie. That leads inevitably to the conclusion that it must have been Ethan McKellar wearing a darker, probably black, hoodie who was the offender armed with the knife and who inflicted the stab wounds upon both JG and John Gjedsted. 
It is clear that the responsibility for the wounding of JG arises in relation to Ethan McKellar because he was directly responsible. Bevan McKellar is responsible because he was a participant in a joint criminal enterprise to rob John Gjedsted, he anticipated the possible intervention of a third party to prevent such a robbery occurring, and he realised the possibility that one of the participants in the enterprise might wound an intervening third party with the intention of causing grievous bodily harm. 
Ethan McKellar is directly responsible for the murder of John Gjedsted. Bevan McKellar is responsible, in my view, because he was a participant in a joint criminal enterprise to assault Mr Gjedsted and` contemplated the possibility that one of the participants in the enterprise might intentionally inflict grievous bodily harm upon him. 
The [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) prescribes maximum penalties of imprisonment of life for murder; 25 years for wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm; and 20 years for armed assault with intent to rob.

Personal circumstances of Ethan McKellar
Ethan McKellar was born in 1992 and was aged 18 at the time of the offences and is now almost 22.
A Juvenile Justice report prepared in November 2010 noted that Ethan McKellar was of Aboriginal descent and was born in Wagga Wagga to Ms Lillian McKellar. He had no contact with his father. He is the youngest of his mother's nine children (one of whom is deceased). His siblings had a different father. Some of them lived in Wagga Wagga and others in Bourke. Bevan McKellar is one of his brothers.
He commenced his education in a primary school in Wagga Wagga where he underwent Kindergarten to Year 2 but then moved to live with his mother in Bourke. He returned to Wagga Wagga in May 2008 where he lived with his sister Jodie. His formal schooling progressed to Year 9 level. He commenced a numeracy and literacy program at Wagga Wagga TAFE in September 2008 but discontinued after he was hospitalised for a number of weeks because of injuries sustained in a household "accident". There seems to be some scepticism about whether it was in fact an accident; he had a history of being a victim of domestic violence. 
In 2009 he commenced a horticultural course at TAFE but did not progress because of his unsatisfactory attendance, motivation and ability to follow directions. In 2010 he was working with an employment service agency and undertaking another TAFE numeracy and literacy course. 
It was recorded that a police officer in Bourke had advised the juvenile justice officer that the home life for Ethan McKellar and his siblings in Bourke "would have been nothing short of 'traumatic' with weekly drinking parties that have resulted in numerous incidents of intense violence". The police were cautious about attending the home and the officer wondered what it must have been like for children being raised within it. He described Ethan McKellar having a compliant nature which was a "defence mechanism that has enabled him to avoid conflict and violence". He would generally shower at home but otherwise live on the streets to avoid being at home. Ethan McKellar told the Juvenile Justice officer that he was adamant he would not be returning to Bourke. 
The Juvenile Justice officer noted that Ethan McKellar had a history of minimising his drug and alcohol abuse and had repeatedly indicated an unwillingness to engage in rehabilitation or counselling programs. However, when in custody in 2010 he had "engaged extremely well" with counselling services for such issues. However, he remained reticent in talking about his personal life and was still rejecting efforts to engage in counselling for psychological effects that may be attributed to his traumatic childhood.
Ethan McKellar has a criminal history that commenced when he was 14 years of age. He told the Juvenile Justice officer that "he offends when he is bored". The offences for which he has been dealt with include larceny; damaging property; being carried in a stolen car; possessing a knife in public; possessing implements to break into or steal a car; and taking a car without the owner's consent. There are multiple entries for some of those offences. The most serious offences are ones of aggravated enter dwelling within intent (for which he received a 7 month custodial order at age 16); reckless wounding (14 month control order at age 18); and take and drive conveyance taken without its owner's consent (13 month control order at age 18). (Control orders were imposed because the matters were dealt with in the Children's Court as he was aged 17 at the time of committing the offences.)
The period of parole for the last two of those matters ran from 21 January to 22 September 2011. Accordingly he was on parole at the time of the commission of the present offences which is a serious aggravating factor.
The reckless wounding offence occurred in the early hours of the morning of 2 July 2010 after a party at which a large quantity of alcohol was consumed. The victim was the partner of Ethan McKellar's cousin. There had been an altercation involving Ethan McKellar and the victim which culminated in Ethan McKellar saying, "I'll get you dog". A short time later as the victim was about to get into a taxi to leave, Ethan McKellar approached him with a steak knife and stabbed him in the shoulder causing a 3cm wide 3cm deep wound.
A psychological report under the hand of Dr Susan Pulman and Ms Amanda White was tendered. In addition to the matters already noted, it included that at school he was regularly involved with fighting, truancy and "serious behavioural issues". His academic work was poor although he said he was literate.
He reported drinking alcohol now and again; daily cannabis use between ages 15 and 16 and sporadic use after he was released from juvenile custody in January 2011. He had experimented with other drugs.
The authors noted an assessment by Dr Christopher Lennings, psychologist in May 2014 that Ethan McKellar had a moderately high risk of recidivism for a violent offence. 
He was unable to articulate his feelings regarding the current offences. He did not like to think about them, or about the time he would spend away from his family as a result. 
Psychometric testing revealed a level of intellectual functioning and memory at a very low level; the test results varied but some fell in the "Extremely Low" and "Borderline" ranges. Results of other tests concerned with executive or adaptive functioning (the capacity to regulate and control one's responses in accord with what is happening in a given situation) were inconsistent. Tests were also administered to provide an objective indication of level of effort and these revealed varying levels; some below those expected and others within normal limits. The report authors concluded that "his results on current neuropsychological assessment may not be an accurate reflection of his true cognitive capacity and should be treated with caution".
The authors concluded that the results of formal testing did not support a diagnosis of intellectual disability. His true cognitive ability was most likely within the Low Average range. There was a possible diagnosis of Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder. He was considered to have the capacity to engage in rehabilitation endeavours. He had the capacity to acquire new information and to reason effectively, although his abilities could be undermined by poor attention. 
The report of Dr Lennings to which I have referred was prepared in May this year. He noted that Ethan McKellar was "a particularly inarticulate young man who could provide little expansion in answer to questions". The fact that the consultation was by way of AVL might have been inhibiting to some extent. In any event, he obtained a history that was limited in some respects but broadly the same as the other psychologists reported. He did tell Dr Lennings more about his use of drugs. He said that he was regularly and heavily using cannabis from the age of 15 until he went into custody. He had consumed both alcohol and cannabis on the evening of the offence. 
A sense of hopelessness and lack of insight into his behaviour and psychological state was noted by Dr Lennings and it is a theme that seems to pervade all of the reports. Dr Lennings offered the opinion that Ethan McKellar's "antisocial behaviour appears to reflect the multiple impacts of his local culture, his substance use and his low cognitive ability rather than an entrenched antisocial personality disorder". One shortcoming in Dr Lennings' assessment that there was no evidence of psychopathy was that he understood there was an absence of violent behaviour prior to age 18; the offence of reckless wounding occurred when the offender was aged 17. 
Dr Lennings' assessment of Ethan McKellar having a moderately high risk of recidivism for a violent offence (the assessment of which was by use of a process which was structured yet of moderate validity only he warned) was accompanied by his opinion that "the most likely scenario involves him abusing drugs or alcohol (leading to disinhibition of behaviour), in the presence of anti-social peers (it needs to be recalled that Mr McKellar was the youngest and possibly least sophisticated of his peer group in the current offence and hence the presence of older and/or more sophisticated anti-social peers represents a critical risk factor for Mr McKellar) and without pro social routines to give Mr McKellar an incentive not to offend". 
Dr Lennings considered that to reduce the risk of recidivism there should be a post-prison rehabilitation plan that included substance abuse treatment, assistance with employment or structured pro-social leisure activities, and discouragement from formation of anti-social peer bonds. 
Personal circumstances of Bevan McKellar
Bevan McKellar was born in 1983 and was aged 28 at the time of the offences.
His criminal history commenced when he was aged 13. He has been dealt with for a variety of offences including receiving; break, enter and steal; entering inclosed lands; car theft; assault; assault occasioning actual bodily harm; malicious wounding; affray; contravention of an apprehended domestic violence order; intimidation; and larceny. There are multiple occurrences of some of those offences. He has been sentenced to full-time custody on quite a number of occasions. 
His past response to parole has been blemished by revocation of parole on three occasions (2004, 2006 and 2009). He has spent the vast majority of the past 13 years in gaol. 
Bevan McKellar was on bail in respect of a charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm at the time of the commission of the present offences which is a serious aggravating factor. He received a 3 month prison term for that offence on 20 June 2012 and it was specified to take effect upon imposition. Accordingly, the period in which he has been in custody solely referable to the present offences is 3 months less than it otherwise would have been.
Dr Olav Nielssen was engaged after the trial to prepare a report in respect of Bevan McKellar. In relation to his state of mind at the time of the offence he told Dr Nielssen, "I was intoxicated ... I had a few beers with the boys and I'm drunk ... next thing I know I'm sitting in here", meaning a prison cell. 
He told Dr Nielssen that he could remember little of his schooling. He could "read a little bit but it's not good". He could perform basic arithmetic. He was good at sports. He left school relatively early. His subsequent employment experience was limited. 
He began drinking alcohol when he was young and it had been a problem over the years. He told a nurse who wrote another report that I will mention shortly that, "I was on the grog from about age 11 and was pretty well drunk most of the time when I was not in custody". He gave up drinking alcohol upon his previous release from gaol (the records indicate this was probably in April 2010) and had not consumed any until the day of the offences. He began using cannabis at around age 12 or 13 and had smoked it most days of his adult life. He had also used methamphetamine, but only "from time to time".
As to his family background, he told Dr Nielssen that he was the fifth of nine children, one of whom had passed away. His father died when he was young. His parents were from the Wangkumara tribal group from the far northwest of the State. He was born in Bourke and spent his early years there. The nurse's report includes that he had "a sad dysfunction[al] childhood" and that he reported "domestic violence and years of physical and emotional abuse from his father ... and his elder brothers". 
Bevan McKellar sustained a head injury in a high impact motor bike accident in June 2006. Reports by a mental health clinical nurse consultant with the Statewide Community & Court Liaison Service dated 13 January 2011 and by an occupational therapist/outreach worker with the South West Brain Injury Rehabilitation Service dated 17 February 2011 were tendered. They indicate that while frontal lobe damage was suspected, he was transferred from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital to Dubbo Hospital but then discharged. There was no appropriate follow up involvement of a rehabilitation service. Testing indicated moderate memory impairment. He required reminders about attending appointments. Instructions given at the beginning of half an hour of conversation were not recalled by the end. 
Another impairment assessed as consequent to the head injury was a difficulty in controlling his anger: "He stated he has found that if pushed his frustration level becomes too great and he 'hits out'; this has, he stated, been difficult to control since his injury". The author of the South West Brain Injury Rehabilitation Service report indicated that it would provide a variety of rehabilitation services to Mr McKellar. However, it was only 3 months later that he was arrested and held in custody for the present offences.
Dr Nielssen discerned from his consultation with Bevan McKellar that there were signs of frontal lobe injury with significant memory impairment. He said, in part, "he appeared blank and confused, and was slow to respond to questions and his verbal responses were vague in content and simple in form". He noted that typical symptoms of frontal lobe injury involved impairment of emotional regulation, planning, social judgment and impulse control. There can also be increased susceptibility to the effects of alcohol. 
Dr Nielssen made the following formal psychiatric diagnoses: Traumatic brain injury and Substance use disorder.
Dr Nielssen concluded his report as follows: "Mr McKellar has a combination of disorders and a pattern of past behaviour that would predict further offending. He will require ongoing supervision and support after his release, to minimise the likelihood of resuming alcohol abuse and to help make up for the deficits in memory function and emotional regulation arising from his brain injury. However, it is not possible to predict Mr McKellar's individual circumstances, or the services that might be available when he falls due for release, and hence any estimate of future dangerousness can only be made in the most general terms."
It was submitted that I should find that there was a causal connection between Bevan McKellar's mental condition arising from his brain injury and the commission of the offences. I accept that difficulties with impulse control and particularly with control of anger are consequences of that injury. But a countervailing feature might be that he was aware of the potential for excessive drinking to adversely affect his behaviour. He told Dr Nielssen that his problem with drinking was "the only reason I come to gaol". However, it must also be accepted that his ability to maintain a resolve to be abstinent was rendered more difficult because of his reduced impulse control. 
If there was a causal connection between Mr McKellar's mental condition and the commission of the offences it is indirect and somewhat tenuous. It is notable that he committed a number of offences of violence, likely influenced to a degree by intoxication, both before and after the accident in 2006. 
Some observations common to both offenders
None of the statutory mitigating factors that are commonly addressed in sentencing judgments, such as remorse, good prospects of rehabilitation and the like, are present here. But the fact that both offenders have derived from a background attended by a significant degree of social disadvantage, characterised by drug and alcohol abuse and domestic violence, is a highly relevant matter and must be taken into account. The negative circumstances of their upbringing have undoubtedly left a lifelong mark affecting their ability to mature, exercise judgment and learn from experience. This, coupled with the low intellectual and cognitive capacity of Ethan McKellar, and the consequences of the brain injury for Bevan McKellar, make them less suitable subjects to be made an example of to serve the need for general deterrence. Moderation of the need for specific deterrence is also called for.

Objective seriousness of the offences 
Armed assault with intent to rob
I accept that the jury must have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that both Ethan and Bevan McKellar were each aware of the presence of a weapon; that Mr Gjedsted was assaulted at the front door of his home; and that there was a joint purpose to rob him of, what most likely was anticipated to be, a modest quantity of cannabis. As noted in the submissions of Mr Young SC, there was no evidence of a weapon being produced at the time of that assault. 
Generally speaking, that is without reference to individual culpability, this offence is in the middle of the range of objective seriousness for such an offence. Four men attended the victim's home where three of them were found by the jury to have intended a robbery. The jury must have been satisfied that those three were aware of the possession by one or the other of them of a machete and a knife. Their intention was to steal the victim's property. That there was a multiplicity of offenders and the location was the victim's home serve to elevate the seriousness of the offence. The roles of the offenders were indistinguishable in that it was an offence carried out with force of numbers. The role of Bevan McKellar is slightly greater in that he engaged in the assault upon the deceased at the front door.

Wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm
Only the present offenders were found guilty of this offence. I have previously indicated my satisfaction that Ethan McKellar actually did the stabbing of JG but he did so with significant assent and encouragement from Bevan McKellar. He must have been aware that his younger brother had a lethal weapon that would permit his encouragement to "kill the cunt" to be carried out. Objectively, Ethan's culpability is more than Bevan's on the basis that he had, and used, the knife, but the difference is not great.
I accept, however, that the offence was reactive to circumstances. However, the jury must have been satisfied that the offenders foresaw the possible need to deal with the potential intervention of a third party who might try to prevent the robbery. That was an element of the Crown's extended joint criminal enterprise case. The wounding of JG was undoubtedly serious but fortunately medical intervention averted more serious consequences. Given an offence against [s 33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s33.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) involves either wounding or the infliction of grievous bodily harm, and that grievous bodily harm can involve quite serious harm up to the level of catastrophic, I would assess this offence, in a general sense, as being below the middle of the range of objective seriousness; but it is certainly not anywhere near the bottom of the range.

Murder
I accept the submission made by Mr Young that by the time of the events out the front of the neighbour's property, the initial intention to rob Mr Gjedsted had evaporated. I accept that what there occurred was more an expression of the offenders' displeasure at the resistance that had been shown by Mr Gjedsted and his son. The stabbing of Mr Gjedsted was not something that was planned but something that occurred relatively quickly. However, it was something that was done by Ethan McKellar with at least an intention to inflict grievous bodily harm and the possible infliction of grievous bodily harm was something that Bevan McKellar foresaw as a possible occurrence in carrying out the joint assault.
I do not accept the suggestion that this was in the nature of "a robbery gone wrong". I accept the Crown Prosecutor's submission that once a plan to rob became futile, the offenders had the option of leaving; but they remained and engaged in the pointless but murderous assault of Mr Gjedsted.
I accept that it is a reasonable possibility, as Mr Young submitted, that the garments of Bevan McKellar that were found turned inside out on the ground at the scene of the final assault were indicative of a continuing struggle between him and the deceased there. How this may have related to the attack involving all of the offenders upon Mr Gjedsted is difficult to infer in the absence of any of them having given evidence about it. 
Features that render this offence more serious than it otherwise might be include that it occurred in a robbery context (although I hasten to add I am conscious of the need to avoid double counting) and that there were multiple assailants. I assess the objective seriousness of the murder of Mr Gjedsted, in a general sense, as being in the middle of the range but the individual objective culpability of the two offenders is a little different. Ethan McKellar's culpability must be considered as greater than that of his brother on account of their different states of mind and that it was Ethan who actually drew the knife and used it.

Moral culpability 
I have indicated my view of the objective seriousness of each of the offences which is, of course, an important aspect in the assessment of sentence. I have stressed, however, that I have done so "in a general sense". By that I mean I have put aside matters that are relevant to the moral culpability of the offenders. Matters that I have discussed when earlier reviewing their personal circumstances relating to their background of social disadvantage, their impaired mental functioning and, in the case of Ethan McKellar his young age and his immaturity, have the result that their moral culpability for the commission of these offences is less than it otherwise would be.

Victim impact statements
Ms Jay Gjedsted and JG provided the Court with victim impact statements. They are very moving accounts of the unfathomable sadness and loss that they have suffered as a result of the brutal taking of their father's life. Neither mere words, nor the sentences I impose, can possibly assuage their grief. But it is important that the impact of the offenders' crimes upon the loved ones of their victim be recognised and never forgotten. Again, I extend my sincere condolences.

General matters relating to sentence 
Each offender has been in custody since their arrest on 3 May 2011. It is appropriate to commence the sentences for Ethan McKellar from that date. In the case of Bevan McKellar I propose to commence his sentences from 3 August 2011 to allow for the 3 month sentence for an unrelated matter he served in 2012.
I propose to accumulate the sentences partially in order to reflect the different nature of each of the offences and, particularly, that there were two victims. The degree of accumulation will be substantially moderated by the need to have regard to the totality principle.
It was submitted that special circumstances could be found so as to warrant a longer than usual period on parole. I have considered those submissions but have determined that the usual period of parole will be more than sufficient to accommodate the needs of each offender for a variety of assistance in reintegrating into the community after release. I do propose, however, to make an adjustment so that the usual proportions are reflected in the overall sentence.

Sentence 
Ethan McKellar
Convicted.
Count 3 (Armed assault with intent to rob): Sentenced to imprisonment comprising a non-parole period of 3 year 9 months and a balance of the term of the sentence of 1 year 3 months. The sentence is to date from 3 May 2011 and will expire on 2 May 2016.
Count 2 (Wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm): Sentence to imprisonment comprising a non-parole period of 6 years and a balance of the term of the sentence of 2 years. The sentence is to date from 3 May 2012 and will expire on 2 May 2020.
Count 3 (Murder): Sentenced to imprisonment comprising a non-parole period of 14 years and a balance of the term of the sentence of 6 years. The sentence is to date from 3 May 2015 and will expire on 2 May 2035. The offender will become eligible for release on parole at the end of the non-parole period which will expire on 2 May 2029.
That is a total sentence of 24 years with a non-parole component of 18 years. 
Bevan McKellar
Convicted.
Count 3 (Armed assault with intent to rob): Sentenced to imprisonment comprising a non-parole period of 3 year 9 months and a balance of the term of the sentence of 1 year 3 months. The sentence is to date from 3 August 2011 and will expire on 2 August 2016.
Count 2 (Wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm): Sentence to imprisonment comprising a non-parole period of 6 years and a balance of the term of the sentence of 2 years. The sentence is to date from 3 August 2012 and will expire on 2 August 2020.
Count 3 (Murder): Sentenced to imprisonment comprising a non-parole period of 14 years and a balance of the term of the sentence of 6 years. The sentence is to date from 3 August 2015 and will expire on 2 August 2035. The offender will become eligible for release on parole at the end of the non-parole period which will expire on 2 August 2029.
That is a total sentence of 24 years with a non-parole component of 18 years. 
Amendments Oct 2014 
Name anonymised 
Paragraphs: [1]; [63]  ---  * * * 
