

Sanderson Computers Pty Limited versus Urica Library Systems Bv Matter No Ca /98 [1998] NSWSC 476 (30 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 November 1998 
SANDERSON COMPUTERS PTY LIMITED versus URICA LIBRARY SYSTEMS BV 
CA 40280/98; CommD 50080/97 June 1998 
Mason P, Sheller JA, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Commercial Division - Rolfe J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40280/98; CommD 50080/97 
DELIVERED: 30 June 1998 
HEARING DATE: 16 June 1998 
PARTIES: SANDERSON COMPUTERS PTY LIMITED versus URICA LIBRARY SYSTEMS BV 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, SHELLER, POWELL JJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: J McC Ireland QC 
Respondent: JC Kelly SC/VF Kerr 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Victor A Bizannes 
Respondent: Freehill Hollingdale & Page 
CATCHWORDS: DECLARATORY orders of Court - exercise of trial Judge's discretion to make orders concerning right to terminate before contract terminated. 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 16 
SANDERSON COMPUTERS PTY LIMITED versus URICA LIBRARY SYSTEMS BV 
The respondent, as licensor, and the appellant entered into a Software
Distribution Agreement (the Agreement) to appoint the appellant as licensee in respect of computer software for large areas of Australasia, Asia and North
America. A dispute arose between the parties over the payment of royalties.

The trial Judge made a declaration that the appellant's failure to pay certain sums as royalties amounted to defaults under the Agreement. In addition, the trial Judge declared that under the Agreement these defaults entitled the respondent to terminate.

The issue on appeal was whether the respondent was entitled to a declaration as to the right to terminate when there had been no election to terminate.

Held: 
By seeking a declaration as to the right to terminate the respondent was, in effect, seeking an advisory opinion from the Court.
A trial Judge's discretion to make declaratory orders should not be exercised in relation to questions which are purely hypothetical: Galaxy
Communications Pty Limited versus Paramount Films of Australia Inc (unreported)
Court of Appeal, 27 March 1998, Dormer versus Solo Investment Pty Limited [(1974) NSWLR 428], The University of New South Wales versus Moorehouse <case>; [(1975) 122 CLR 1.]
The trial Judge erred in making the declaration as to the right to terminate the Agreement because it is undesirable that questions such as waiver and relief against forfeiture be dealt with before there is a completed termination of a contract.

Authorities: 
Dormer versus Solo Investment Pty Limited [(1974) 1 NSWLR 428] 
Galaxy Communications Pty Limited versus Paramount Films of Australia Inc
Court of Appeal, 27 March 1998 
The University of New South Wales versus Moorehouse <case>; [(1975) 122 CLR 1] 
ORDERS
Appeal allowed;
Set aside declaration 3 made by Rolfe J on 4 May 1998;
Respondent to pay the appellant's costs of this appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) if so qualified.

SANDERSON COMPUTERS PTY LIMITED versus URICA LIBRARY SYSTEMS BV 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Sheller JA. 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
This is the second appeal from decisions of Rolfe J concerning a Software
Distribution Agreement (the Agreement) made between the appellant, Sanderson
Computers Pty Limited (Sanderson), then known as General Automation Pty
Limited, and the respondent, Urica Library Systems BV (Urica), on 5 October
The first of these appeals was from a decision of 7 June 1996 about the meaning of cl 4.1 of the Agreement and was decided by the Court on 2 October
This appeal concerns a declaration Rolfe J made on 4 May 1998 that pursuant to cl 10.3 of the Agreement, by virtue of defaults within the meaning of cl 10 (1) (a) of the Agreement, the respondent was entitled to terminate the Agreement by giving not less than thirty days notice in writing to the appellant. By the Agreement the respondent as licensor agreed, subject to the terms and conditions contained in it, to appoint the appellant as its licensee in respect of certain computer software for what was called "the Total
Territory" which embraced large areas of Australasia, Asia and North America.
The licensee agreed to pay specified royalties and commissions within certain times.
 [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/index.html#p10) of the Agreement "Termination" provided so far as presently relevant as follows: "10.1 Termination 
The Licensee will be in default under this agreement if: 
The Licensee fails to pay any moneys due and payable under any of the provisions of this agreement on the date those moneys are due for payment, and (but subject always to clause 10.2) does not remedy that breach to the reasonable satisfaction of the Licensor within 28 days after written notice thereof by the Licensor; .......
 .3 Licensor's rights on default 
In the event of default by the Licensee in accordance with clause 10.1, the Licensor may (notwithstanding that it may on a previous occasion or occasions have waived its rights hereunder) by not less than thirty (30) days notice in writing to the Licensee terminate this agreement.

Any such termination referred to in subclause (a) must be without prejudice to any rights, obligations or liabilities which may have accrued hereunder prior to such termination and in particular must be without prejudice to any other right or remedy which the Licensor may have against the
Licensee whether under this agreement or at equity or in law, and including without limitation in respect of damages." 
PROCEEDINGS 
By summons filed in the Commercial Division on 17 April 1997 the respondent sought declarations which included: "4. A declaration that upon the proper construction of the Agreement and in the events which have happened, default within the meaning of Clause 10.1 (a) of the Agreement occurred by reason of the fact that the defendant failed to pay the plaintiff the sum of $18,276.64Sing in respect of June 1996 sales in
Singapore and did not remedy that breach to the reasonable satisfaction of the plaintiff, or at all, within 28 days after written notice thereof by the plaintiff dated 8 October 1996.
Further and in the alternative, a declaration that upon the proper construction of the Agreement and in the events which have happened, default within the meaning of clause 10.1 (a) of the Agreement has occurred by reason of the fact that the defendant failed to pay to the plaintiff the sum of $4,569.16Sing in respect of July 1996 sales in Singapore and $3,096.00Sing in respect of July 1996 sales in Taiwan and did not remedy that breach to the reasonable satisfaction of the plaintiff, or at all, within 28 days after written notice thereof by the plaintiff dated 8 October 1996.
A declaration that the plaintiff is entitled, pursuant to clause 10.3 of the Agreement, to terminate the Agreement by giving not less than thirty (30) days notice in writing to the defendant founded upon the abovementioned defaults or either of the same." 
The appellant filed a defence admitting it withheld payment in part from royalties in the months of June and July 1996 but claiming this was an adjustment against a larger amount previously calculated following the decision of Rolfe J on 7 June 1996, the subject of the first appeal to this
Court. The appellant claimed that on 3 October 1997, after the decision of this Court on 2 October 1997 upholding the appeal, the amounts withheld were remitted to the respondent. The appellant also filed a cross-claim and the respondent a reply and defence to cross-claim.

On 27 March 1998 a statement of issues was agreed. One of these issues (4A) was whether the respondent was entitled to a declaration as to its entitlement to terminate the Agreement pursuant to cl 10.3.

THE TRIAL 
Rolfe J heard the proceedings and delivered judgment on 27 April 1998 making declarations and orders, relevantly, as follows: "2. The Court declares that upon the proper construction of the Agreement and in the events which have happened default within the meaning of clause 10 (1) of the Agreement occurred: by reason of the fact that the defendant failed to pay the plaintiff a sum of Singapore $18,276.64 in respect of June 1996 sales in Singapore and did not remedy that breach to the reasonable satisfaction of the plaintiff, within 28 days after written notice thereof by the plaintiff to the defendant dated 8
October 1996; and by reason of the fact that the defendant failed to pay the plaintiff a sum of Singapore $4,569.16 in respect of July 1996 sales in Singapore and
Singapore $3,096 in respect of July 1996 sales in Taiwan and did not remedy that breach to the reasonable satisfaction of the plaintiff, within 28 days after written notice thereof by the plaintiff to the defendant dated 8 October .
The Court declares that pursuant to clause 10.3 of the Agreement that [sic] by virtue of the defaults identified in paragraph 2 above the plaintiff is entitled to terminate the Agreement by giving not less than 30 days notice in writing to the defendant." 
The appellant appealed from Rolfe J's decision but confined it to the ground that the trial Judge was in error in making declaration 3.

BACKGROUND 
By letter dated 29 August 1996 the appellant wrote to the respondent referring to Rolfe J's judgment of 7 June 1996 and stating that based on the judgment, "we have overpaid some royalties during the period 1994 to date". The appellant said that since a satisfactory reply to an earlier letter from its solicitors to the respondent's solicitors requesting instruction regarding the reimbursement of the overpayments had not been received, "we will be offsetting these overpayments against future royalty payments in the respective currencies commencing with the payments due at the end of the month." On 30 August 1996 and again on 30 September 1996 the appellant wrote to the respondent referring to these offsets and other offsets that had been made. On 8 October 1996 the respondent gave two notices of default under cl .1 (a) of the Agreement. On 25 October 1996 the appellant's solicitor wrote to the respondent's solicitors referring to earlier correspondence in which attempts had been made to resolve the outstanding question of excess payments of royalty commissions made under protest by the appellant and saying: "The matter was not resolved and your client has seen fit to issue default notices to my client and threatening termination of the Agreement entered into between them on 5 October 1993. ........
On 7 June 1996 his Honour Mr Justice Rolfe of the Supreme Court gave judgment on the interpretation of the clause which, although presently under appeal, upheld the interpretation of my client as to the correct method of calculation of royalty payments in respect to licensed software and equipment.
 ........

My client takes issue to the threat of termination in the light of the circumstances above outlined and has instructed me to give notice of its intention to approach the Court for orders restraining your client in carrying out its threat." 
By letter dated 30 October 1996 the respondent's solicitors replied stating that their client had no intention of withdrawing the notices and saying: "It will not, however, proceed to issue a notice of termination based upon the notices dated 8 October 1996 referred to in your letter unless and until it first obtains from the Court a declaration of its rights in that regard or without giving seven days' prior notice, whichever is the sooner.

That being the case, there is no point in your client making an application for injunction: there is no threat against which an injunction may provide relief.

A fresh summons is probably more appropriate to raise the issue than an amendment to the existing proceedings for the relevant events have only recently occurred.

In the meantime, if your client feels inclined to apply for an ex parte injunction, please ensure that a copy of this letter is placed before the
Court." 
There was no response to this letter. On 2 October 1997 this Court gave its decision on the meaning of cl 4.1 of the Agreement.

ROLFE J'S REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
I need only to refer to those parts of the reasons in which his Honour dealt with the appellant's contention that the respondent was not entitled to a declaration as to the right to terminate. By seeking the declaration the respondent was, in effect, seeking an advisory opinion from the Court. His
Honour referred to submissions that it was not a proper exercise of discretion to make a declaration in such circumstances and that the respondent should have terminated the Agreement, if that is what it wished to do, and then allowed the validity of that action to be tested. This would have enabled the appellant to seek relief against forfeiture and raise certain defences, which it was not able to do in the absence of a termination. His Honour said: "Prima facie these are, generally, all sound reasons for refusing in the exercise of discretion, to make such a declaration. However, the specific facts of this case, and the particular circumstances in which the declaration is sought have to be considered." 
For this purpose his Honour assumed, as he ultimately concluded and is not now contested, that there had been an event of default entitling the respondent to terminate pursuant to the contractual provisions. His Honour referred to the correspondence, the relevant parts of which I have quoted and said: "In the result Sanderson suggested and Urica accepted that the question of the right to terminate should await further proceedings. Sanderson would have sought to restrain a termination, and it accepted, so far as the evidence disclosed, Urica's undertaking that it would not terminate until, relevantly for present purposes, it obtained a declaration of its entitlement to do so.
In these circumstances I do not consider that it is open to Sanderson to assert that the declaration should not be made, if Urica is otherwise entitled to it, for the discretionary reasons to which I have referred. Sanderson agreed on a litigious regime to decide the issue, which has been followed, and the obligation was upon it, in my opinion, to raise and prove in these proceedings any matter such as relief against forfeiture or estoppel on which it wished to oppose termination or seek relief in respect of it. It cannot have the advantage of the undertaking and the agreement, yet contend that
Urica is not now entitled to the declaration. Nor, having chartered that litigious course, can it complain that other matters of defence are not available to it." 
This passage from the reasons for judgment suggests that the appellant had deliberately agreed to a decision upon a narrow point of construction, assuming that, if default within the meaning of cl 10.1 of the Agreement was established, it would be denied the right to rely on some matters of defence.

What the evidence disclosed is the correspondence to which I have referred.
With the greatest respect to his Honour, in my opinion, it does not support a conclusion so detrimental to the appellant. The respondent had threatened to terminate and the appellant to obtain an injunction quia timet. The reply from the respondent's solicitors was to undertake not to issue a notice of termination based upon the notices dated 8 October 1996 unless and until it had first obtained from the Court a declaration of its rights in that regard or without giving seven days prior notice, whichever was the sooner. The threat which required the appellant to apply for an injunction was removed.
The respondent had put itself in a position where it was likely to be able successfully to oppose any such application.

The respondent was left to decide what action it would take. There was nothing to prevent it, in accordance with its undertaking, giving seven days notice that it intended after the expiry of the notice to terminate the Agreement. In fact, it commenced these proceedings in April 1997. It is true that the form of the summons called for the appellant to inform the Court of the nature of the dispute and the issues likely to arise if they differed from those proposed by the respondent and that the appellant's defence did not address the question of whether, even if default were proved, a declaration in the form sought in para 6 of the respondent's claims in the summons should be made. But this was squarely raised in para 4A of the agreed statement of issues. I do not think it was right to shut out this argument, particularly if the effect of doing so was to deny to the appellant defences it might otherwise have had.

In its written submissions at trial the appellant said that there was a decisive answer to the claim by the respondent for a declaration of a right of termination based on non-compliance with the 1996 notices, namely relief against forfeiture. Rolfe J said: "There are several problems, at least, with this submission on the facts of the present case. Firstly, I have noted Mr Ireland's (counsel for the appellant) concession that it is not possible to calculate the figures.
Accordingly, it is not possible to ascertain the amount, which should be tendered. Secondly, there is no claim made for relief against forfeiture. Mr
Ireland accepted this, but submitted it was not made because there had been no termination and, absent a termination there could be no claim for such relief.
In the circumstances of this case that led to a bizarre situation, because of the way in which the parties have agreed the issue should go forward. As I have said, it seems to me that it was necessary, in those circumstances, for
Mr Ireland to bring forward any claim which would defeat termination, either by way of relief of forfeiture or by way of a positive defence in these proceedings. That has not been done. Once again, perhaps repetitiously, I state that Mr Ireland made no submissions based on the entitlement to an equitable setoff nor, on the facts as presented, was there any basis on which he could have done so." 
Consistent with what his Honour said, if, as I think, there was no agreement about the way in which the proceedings should go forward and the appellant retained the right to assert that the declaration should not be made and that it was entitled to relief against forfeiture, if the respondent terminated the agreement, the manner in which this part of the proceedings was decided was highly unsatisfactory.

DECLARATORY RELIEF [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75.html) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) provides that no proceedings shall be open to objection on the ground that a merely declaratory judgment or order is sought thereby and the Court may make binding declarations of right whether any consequential relief is or could be claimed or not. However, Rolfe J said, in my opinion correctly, that prima facie there were sound reasons for refusing in the exercise of discretion to make a declaration that the respondent was entitled to terminate the Agreement by giving notice pursuant to it founded upon specified defaults.

His Honour referred to a number of cases including the recent decision of this
Court in Galaxy Communications Pty Limited versus Paramount Films of Australia
Inc (unreported) Court of Appeal, 27 March 1998 in which Stein JA, with whose reasons Meagher JA agreed, said, after referring to the decision of Holland J in Dormer versus Solo Investments Pty Limited [(1974) 1 NSWLR 428:] "......it is one thing to declare the present contractual rights of the parties, but it is another to declare them contingently on the plaintiff electing to take some course that he has not taken, is not bound to take and may not take. As with Dormer (at 434) the relief here sought is, in substance, that if the opponents elect to give a notice of termination, that notice will be valid and effective to terminate the agreements on the basis of the Court's finding on insolvency. I do think that the Court should hesitate in lending itself to such potential effects on the contractual position of the parties given the circumstances of the cases to which I have already referred." 
Towards the end of his judgment, Stein JA said that apart from determining the true construction of a clause of a contract there in question, the proceedings before the Commercial Division which remained were an abuse of process and unreasonably oppressive to the claimants.
 "They involve hypothetical future rights which may produce no foreseeable consequences for the parties. They potentially affect the contractual positions of the parties in circumstances where one party has not yet acted and indeed, may not." 
Stein JA cited the judgment of Gibbs J in The University of New South Wales v
Moorhouse <case>; [(1975) 133 CLR 1.] In that case, having referred to the width of the discretion possessed by a Judge who is called upon to make declaratory orders Gibbs J said, at 9-10: "However the power, although wide, is not unlimited. In Forster versus Jododex
Australia Pty Limited <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 421] at 437, I expressed the opinion that the Scottish rules summarised by Lord Dunedin in Russian Commercial and Industrial Bank v
British Bank for Foreign Trade Limited [[1921] 2 AC 438] at 448 should in general be satisfied before the discretion is exercised in favour of making a declaration. The first of those conditions is that `the question must be a real and not a theoretical question'. As a general rule, the power to make a declaration will not be exercised when the Court is called upon to answer a question that is purely hypothetical: see In re Barnato (deceased); Joel v
Sanges [[1949] Ch 258] at 270. In accordance with that principle, the Court of
Appeal in Odhams Press Limited versus London and Provincial Sporting Newsagency
Limited [[1936] Ch 357] refused to make a declaration that the plaintiffs, who were unable to prove any specific infringement of copyright, were joint owners of the copyright in compilations of starting prices or betting odds made by their representatives. ....... Many other examples may be found in the books of cases in which a declaration has been refused because it was claimed in relation to circumstances that had not occurred and might never happen." 
After referring to the cases, Rolfe J said: "However, the present case differs. Urica has, I am satisfied, established, firstly, that there is an event of default and, secondly, that it wishes to rely on it to terminate the Software Agreement. So much was not in issue. The reason it has not pursued its right to terminate, which, of course, can be exercised extra-curially, is the threat that Sanderson would seek an injunction. In the face of this Urica was prepared to have its entitlement decided by the Court in which course Sanderson agreed. Accordingly, there is, in my opinion, a justiciable issue. On the facts it is neither hypothetical nor is it abstract. It would be extraordinary if the parties in commercial litigation could not arrange their affairs so that real disputes are resolved in an orderly way by the Court. That is what has occurred in this case with the concurrence of the parties. It is not open to Sanderson, on the present facts, to assert that there is no entitlement in Urica to the declaratory relief it seeks on discretionary grounds and, I am satisfied, there are no discretionary reasons why I should not grant that relief, if Urica is otherwise entitled to it." 
Mr Kelly SC, who appeared for the respondent, conceded that the respondent had not elected to terminate the agreement and accordingly, reserved the right not to do so. He submitted that if the form of the declaration caused a problem, a different form could be substituted. Mr Kelly suggested a declaration be made that any right on default under cl 10 (3) of the Agreement, which had accrued by reason of the defaults in declaration 2, had not been waived or otherwise lost by reason of the respondent's conduct up to 4 May 1998. This, it was said, would serve the real purpose of the declaration which the respondent sought and obtained. The respondent submitted that the declaration made expressed in some way issues which Rolfe J had decided and, accordingly, which the appellant was estopped from further litigating against the respondent. Mr
Kelly conceded that it was now open to the appellant, if the respondent did terminate the Agreement, to claim for relief against forfeiture but suggested that at least some aspects of such a claim had already been dealt with.

Mr Kelly's submissions highlight the unsatisfactory consequence of dealing with a hypothetical or abstract question by declaration, certainly in the circumstances of this case. For reasons which are described in the judgment of
Priestley JA in Galaxy, there will always be a problem where a claimant which has not terminated an agreement, seeks a declaration that it is entitled to do so. The declaration speaks from the time that it is made. Before a notice of termination is given or expires, events may overtake its validity.
It is undesirable that questions such as waiver, and even more undesirable that questions about relief against forfeiture, be dealt with at all before there is a completed termination. Even if the respondent presently intends to give a notice of termination, it may delay it and fresh questions about election and waiver may arise. Such considerations firmly support the conclusion that in the present case his Honour's exercise of the discretion to grant such a declaration miscarried. With all respect to his Honour, until such time as the respondent elected to terminate, the question as to whether it was entitled to do so remained hypothetical and abstract.

CONCLUSION 
In my opinion the appeal should be allowed and the declaration set aside. The appellant did not seek at the hearing of the appeal to disturb Rolfe J's costs order of the proceedings before him. I would propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed;
Set aside declaration 3 made by Rolfe J on 4 May 1998;
Respondent to pay the appellant's costs of this appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) if so qualified.

POWELL JA: I agree with Sheller JA. * * * 
