

Fondfield P/L t/as Allpaint Powder Coaters versus Van Trinh Pham [1996] NSWSC (12 July 1996) 
FONDFIELD P/L t/as ALLPAINT POWDER COATERS versus VAN TRINH PHAM /95; CC 14428/94 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
HANDLEY, SHELLER, BEAZLEY JJA 
CATCHWORDS: BIAS - interjections of trial Judge during cross examination - application for disqualification refused - need for actuality and appearance of impartiality in the administration of justice - Galea versus Galea [(1990) 19 NSWLR 263] 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
The respondent brought proceedings against the appellant employer, claiming compensation for incapacity resulting from an injury sustained at work on 18
April 1994. Judge Burke heard the proceedings and gave judgment awarding the respondent a weekly payment from 8 July 1994 to the date of the award and continuing, and a lump sum pursuant to [s66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). 
Counsel for the appellant made an application that Judge Burke disqualify himself from further hearing the case. He put the matter on three bases: first, the Judge's conduct in rephrasing and reformulating his questions; secondly, the Judge's rejection of a question pertaining to credit on the basis that the respondent was unable to give an answer to that question because he was at some cultural disadvantage, having regard to his evidence, and that it was an invitation to confess to perjury; and thirdly, the appellant's perception of bias based on the Judge's interjections and comments during the cross examination of the respondent. His Honour refused to do so.

The appellant appealed on the ground that Judge Burke conducted himself in such a way as might reasonably give rise to an apprehension of bias. The respondent submitted that there could be no such apprehension where the rulings on the evidence were correct, and that his Honour's decision was inevitable and accordingly should not be disturbed.
 
HELD:
The actuality and appearance of impartial justice in the courts is such an important feature of the administration of justice that a judge should not hear a case if, in all the circumstances, the parties or the public might entertain a reasonable apprehension that he or she might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question involved in it: Galea versus Galea [(1990) 19 NSWLR 263] at 277 per Kirby ACJ; Webb versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 41] at 47 per Mason CJ and McHugh J.
The undisciplined interjections directed towards counsel for the appellant would have appeared to any reasonable person designed to discourage legitimate cross examination. Even though the rulings on evidence might have been correct, this behaviour gave rise to a perception of bias in the appellant which was both understandable and reasonable in these circumstances. Judge
Burke should have disqualified himself when asked to do so.
The respondent appeared to be an unsatisfactory witness on the face of the transcript. It was essential for the judge to be alert to the possibility that the respondent was being evasive. During the cross examination, his Honour should have been reviewing the demeanour of the witness and not the performance of counsel. Even if it were right to accept the respondent as a witness of truth, his Honour's comments showed a real risk that he failed to use, or misused his advantage in seeing and hearing the respondent.
Judge Burke's behaviour might have led a fair minded person reasonably to apprehend or suspect a lack of impartiality or prejudgment of the case against the appellant. In these circumstances there must be a new trial.

ORDERS
Appeal allowed;
Set aside the award made by Judge Burke on 13 September 1995;
Remit the proceedings to the Compensation Court for re-hearing;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: 
INTRODUCTION 
In the Compensation Court the respondent, Mr Van Trinh Pham, claimed compensation for incapacity said to have resulted from a work place injury on 18 April 1994. The respondent's complaint was that a frame, from which he was removing iron bars, collapsed and struck him on the top of his head. He claimed total incapacity from 18 April 1994 until 16 May 1994 and thereafter partial incapacity "to date and continuing". Judge Burke heard the proceedings and delivered judgment on 13 September 1995, awarding the respondent a weekly payment from 8 July 1994 to the date of the award and continuing and a lump sum payment pursuant to s66 in respect of permanent impairment of the neck.

The appellant employer appealed from the award on the ground that the Judge conducted himself in such a way as might reasonably give rise to an apprehension of bias.

TRIAL 
Judge Burke heard the proceedings on 12 September 1995. The proceedings were recorded on tape. Most of the evidence, interchanges between the Judge and counsel and counsel's submissions were transcribed. The transcript was included in the appeal papers. In addition the appellant tendered a copy of the tape recording and the transcript of parts recorded but not in the appeal papers. Some parts of the tape were difficult to hear or understand. Those parts of the tape the parties considered particularly significant were played to the Court. 
Although the tape disclosed that the Judge and Mr Reoch, of Counsel, who appeared for the respondent, discussed the case before the hearing began in the absence of Mr Gracie, of Counsel, who appeared for the appellant, no point was taken about this. The trial seemed to have got under way in the normal fashion with the calling of the respondent to give evidence. The respondent, who speaks Vietnamese, gave his evidence through an interpreter. According to the transcript, the evidence proceeded without incident and, apparently, without any objection from the appellant, until the conclusion of the respondent's evidence in chief, when Mr Gracie began his cross examination as follows: "Q. Mr Pham, before the accident on 18 April 1994 had you ever hurt your neck?
A. No.

Q. Before the accident on 18 April 1994 had you ever hurt your head? A. No." 
Mr Gracie's questions about the respondent's conversations with various doctors passed without interruption or objection until a question was put about what had taken place in the respondent's solicitor's office. An objection was taken and the question rejected.

Next Mr Gracie asked whether the respondent had been involved in a motor vehicle accident. This led to questions about whether in that accident the respondent had injured his head or neck. Mr Gracie came to matters related to an earlier court case. He asked: "But you know do you not that you sustained injuries to your head and your neck in the motor vehicle accident in 1986?" 
An objection was taken and the question allowed, but his Honour said: "There must be some reason why it is not objectionable, I cannot think of why, other than sheer boredom." 
This was an inappropriate comment carrying with it a suggestion that the Judge had no interest in the cross examination. The respondent submitted that this was but an example of what his counsel described as the robust context of a trial at first instance. We do not regard it as robust. It was open to his
Honour to rule that on the particular topic the respondent had already answered the question and should not be questioned again or repeatedly in the same terms. However if this was what his Honour intended to convey, he should have done it directly and clearly. Instead he ruled that the question should be allowed and then made the gratuitous comment. Standing alone the comment, while unfortunate, would amount to no more. But this was the first of a series of interchanges about which the appellant complained.

The next passage in the evidence had greater significance. It is recorded as follows: "MR GRACIE 
Thank you your Honour.

Q. You know that you sustained an injury to your head in this motor vehicle accident do you not? A. No.

Q. Have you a specific recollection of the hours of work that you engaged in in the three weeks after the accident on 18 April 1994? A. I can't remember.

Q. Sir, in the week ended 27 April 1994 you worked six hours overtime did you not? A. Yes, sometimes.

Q. But in that week, that is 20 to 27 April 1994 you worked six hours overtime did you not. A. I don't quite understand your question.

Q. In the week which began two days after your work accident and ended seven days later you worked six hours overtime did you not? A. Is that per day you ask? 
Q. In the week. A. Every day six hours overtime.

HIS HONOUR 
Q. No, no, no. Per week. The first week after the accident. A . Yes.

Q. You did full work plus six hours overtime? A. No." 
The following interchange then took place: "MR GRACIE: Your Honour actually put more in the question than I asked.

HIS HONOUR: Well that's true but it was.

MR REOCH: It was better form anyway.

HIS HONOUR: It was done.

MR GRACIE: Well Mr Reoch says that.

HIS HONOUR: Its probably 
MR GRACIE: Without the applicant.

HIS HONOUR: It's not the week after because there is two days and it didn't count, but it is obviously a full paid week, however you go on, you've been going on about most other things, feel free. Where's that section, I know there was a section here somewhere." 
His Honour's statement followed legitimate cross examination which went directly to the respondent's claim of incapacity. As appears from the later transcript the section his Honour mentioned and was apparently searching for was [s41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s41.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) which is headed "Improper Questions" and provides: "(1) The court may disallow a question put to a witness in cross-examination, or inform the witness that it need not be answered, if the question is: misleading, or unduly annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive, oppressive or repetitive.

Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for the purposes of subsection (1), it is to take into account: any relevant condition or characteristic of the witness, including age, personality and education, and any mental, intellectual or physical disability to which the witness is or appears to be subject." 
His Honour's reasons for this search at this time is not explained. Copies of the worker's weekly pay slips dated 27 April 1994 and 4 May 1994 were later tendered in evidence by the appellant. The first showed that in the week ended April the worker worked 32 hours normal time and 6 hours overtime, and was also paid 6 hours compensation. The second showed that in the week ended 4 May he worked 27 hours normal time and 18 hours overtime, and was also paid 11 hours compensation. The injury occurred on 18 April. The information in these pay slips was the subject of the next question and answer: "MR GRACIE: Sir in the week between 27 April 1994 and 4 May 1994 that is nine days after your accident in the week beginning on that day you worked 18 hours overtime did you not? A. No." 
The cross examination returned to the question of whether the respondent had told one of the doctors, whose reports were tendered, about a motor vehicle accident in 1986. After seven further questions came the following question and answer: "MR GRACIE: You had no doubt back in May 1995 that you had been involved in a motor vehicle accident. A. I don't remember." 
His Honour laughed and said: "Serves you right. I finally found a section but it's no good. If the question's unduly annoying you can disallow it but it's got to be annoying the witness, not the Judge." 
His Honour had found [s41.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s41.html) He expressed the view that it did not apply to the cross examination but saw fit to make comment to the litigants and their representatives and anyone else in the Court that the cross examination was annoying him. Such a display of petulance was inappropriate. The evidence continued: "HIS HONOUR: 
Q. Do you remember you had a motor vehicle accident in 1986? A. Yes.

Q. And since you had it you have not forgotten that you had it? A. Yes.

MR GRACIE: 
Q. That is the reason you were able to tell Dr Deveridge about it in May this year, is it not? A. I don't remember.

Q. Assuming that you did tell Dr Deveridge that you had a motor vehicle accident at the consultation ---" 
His Honour interrupted this question by saying: "Are these expert opinion on assumed facts?" 
Counsel for the respondent had taken no objection. This interchange followed: "MR GRACIE: Yes your Honour, the report's going to go in your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: I don't care about the report, do you want his opinion on assumed facts? 
MR GRACIE: I do your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: Actually I think he could now give it.

MR GRACIE: I beg your pardon.

HIS HONOUR: Actually I think he might now be able to give it.

MR GRACIE: I think there is a wide range of things that can be done there your
Honour.

HIS HONOUR: There's got to be something I can do to stop this, it could go on forever.

MR GRACIE: The contemporaneous complaints of hearsay.

HIS HONOUR: Unfavourable witnesses, no can't be unfavourable witnesses.
Leading questions.

MR GRACIE: Not on behalf of the respondent your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: I can rule them out - umm, what am I looking for, oh opinion, opinion, opinion that's right, opinion I was just reading it. Great stuff opinion. Documents, oral evidence, relevance, hearsay, opinion, just went past it. Starts off with, 1, it's out. Evidence of an opinion is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact about the existence of which the opinion was expressed. Therefore the assumption that you put to him no matter what he says it cannot tend to establish it one way or the other and that's the prime law.

MR GRACIE: Is that a ruling your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: The ruling I'm up to and that's the opinion rule I assume, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion expressed by a person if: the opinion is based on what the person saw, heard or otherwise perceived about the matter or event, right and; the evidence of the opinion is necessary to obtain an adequate account or understanding of the persons perception of the matter or event.

MR GRACIE: Exactly.

HIS HONOUR: No, its got nothing to do with his perception of the matter or event, anyway ask him, what the hell. Its quicker to decide to ask him the question I suppose.

MR GRACIE: It is quicker your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: What was the question, it was some fool question. Something with assume.

MR GRACIE: It was a question your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: That's right, you asked him to assume something I knew there was something with assume." 
So far as it went the question was in a form which may have been objectionable. No objection was taken. The Judge interjected and in the course of the discussion that followed, said: "There's got to be something I can do to stop this, it could go on forever" and proceeded to enumerate ways in which he might do this. Finally he decided to allow the question by saying "anyway ask him, what the hell. It's quicker to decide to ask him the question I suppose." There followed the inappropriate comment "It was some fool question". After a further four questions, one of which his Honour disallowed, this occurred: "MR GRACIE: 
Q. Sir it was not true was it when you told this court that prior to 18 April you had never had any problems with your neck? A. What do you mean I have injuries when I was young.

HIS HONOUR: 
Q. No, he means between 1986 and 1994 you had a sore neck and a sore head. A.
No.

Q. Since they were cumulative of course we get either.

Interpreter speaking in Vietnamese.

HIS HONOUR: Well it is cumulative. He's only denied the combination, he hasn't denied the individual elements .... since Mr Gracie's being so meticulous etc.

MR GRACIE: I'm trying to be your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: We will want a part a, part b, b1, b2, etc.

MR GRACIE: I'll take that as a compliment your Honour ...it's not true ....

HIS HONOUR: It wasn't intended so I assure you.

MR GRACIE: Really." 
This passage is best described as a piece of unnecessary point scoring by the
Judge. Mr Gracie had asked about the neck. His Honour then put the question by reference to both the neck and the head. If the result was as his Honour described it, he could and should have easily clarified it by dividing the question himself. Instead he turned the matter into a disparaging comment about counsel again displaying annoyance and petulance. Mr Gracie sought to divide the question by asking: "Q. It was not true was it when you told the court when I asked you the question that you had had no previous injury to your neck." 
The ground for this question was laid in Mr Gracie's first question in cross examination and the answer to it. Assuming Mr Gracie had instructions to justify it, it was a legitimate question going both to credit and the issue.
However the question to a witness giving evidence through an interpreter was not well formulated. The solution was to point out the problem and reject the question. It was then for counsel to decide whether he wished to pursue the line of questioning in a proper manner. In fact the following interchange took place after the question had been put: "MR REOCH: What basis of formula, it is a double negative putting through an interpreter to the witness.

HIS HONOUR: I'll have to do something about that.

MR REOCH: This is going to take us nowhere with the double negative.

HIS HONOUR: That was [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s40.html) something or other.

MR REOCH: This is taking us nowhere.

MR GRACIE: I will just withdraw it. I don't want to put your Honour to too much trouble.

HIS HONOUR: It is misleading, harassing, oppressive, repetitive - repetitive, oh why did I not see that before. You just try this once more after this time and see what happens. Best section that was ever put in an Act." 
Neither the form of the question nor the cross examination generally called for this interjection. The question followed his Honour's interference in the cross examination. The Judge's remarks left the impression that he regarded the cross examination as time wasting and of no importance and that he was anxious to curtail it. To this end his Honour added a threat. Mr Gracie put his next question: "Q. It was a lie was it not under oath when you said to this court that you had had no previous problems with your neck prior to the injury on 18 April ?" 
The use of the expression "no previous problems" instead of the expression "no previous injury" made this question confusing. The respondent's counsel objected and the following interchange took place.
 "MR REOCH: That's complete perjury with no means of warning or certificate. If it's got to be put in the Court it should be perjury.

MR GRACIE: Could I ask Mr Reoch to give his client a warning your Honour.

MR REOCH: I'm not giving a warning. It's perjury with no means of warning or certificate.

MR GRACIE: Could I ask Mr Reoch to give his client a warning if that's what is canvassed in it." 
The propositions in this interchange are far fetched. It was legitimate for counsel to put to a witness that evidence he had given was not true. Unless counsel did so the point could not be made in address. His Honour rejected the question and, when asked on what basis, said: "On the basis that to ask a man to confess to perjury in a situation like that is crazy, and I do not think he apprehends exactly what is meant by it. Having regard to his understanding of the questions that have gone before, no matter what answer he gave I would find it entirely unreliable. Therefore it is misleading, annoying, repetitive and some of these other adjectives that they have got in there." 
This interjection and reference to the language of [s41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s41.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) strengthens the impression that his Honour wished to discourage or inhibit legitimate cross examination. Mr Gracie then said: "Would your Honour make the same ruling if I asked the same question in relation to the head?" to which his Honour replied: "Let me make it clear what it is you want to know instead of dressing it up under the fancy legal jargon, give it the facts." 
It is impossible to know what his Honour meant by this and it is possible that his Honour's remarks were not correctly transcribed. Mr Gracie put the question again: "Sir it was a lie, was it not when you told this court under oath that you had had no previous neck problems before the accident on 18 April 1994?" 
The witness answered "No" and his Honour said "Let us finish with that topic".
After three more questions and answers the evidence proceeded: "Q. What work other than the work with this company, Fondfield Pty Limited, do you now feel capable that you could do? A. I have no skill, no trade, you know. I don't know.

Q. Have you taken any steps since 8 July 1994 to look for work. A. Yes.

Q. What work have you looked for since that time? A. All light duties work but no one accept me and also went to CES to look for job.

Q. Went to see. A. CES.

HIS HONOUR: CES, Commonwealth Employment Services he means.

WITNESS: Yes, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: We got that message.

MR GRACIE: And what sort of light work have you applied for.

INTERPRETER: Indecipherable.

HIS HONOUR: Indecipherable.

MR GRACIE: Sorry, your Honour, was that a ruling on my question? 
HIS HONOUR: No, no, no, go for your life. What sort of light work has he looked for, he might have said God Almighty since he is going to say exactly what he said last time, yeh, last time.

MR GRACIE; I'm sorry, your Honour, I thought it was a ruling." 
The question about light work was legitimate and his Honour's comment inappropriate. Again within a short time his Honour displayed annoyance and petulance and demonstrated that he regarded the cross examination as time wasting. Mr Gracie put six questions about the respondent's attempts to find work and his capacity to do work and the cross examination ended. Mr Reoch asked four questions, to which no objection was taken. During the fourth, his
Honour interrupted by saying: "For God sake, he was not even cross examined on it" which led Mr Reoch to say: "No I withdraw all those questions your Honour.
I have no further questions of this witness." 
The respondent's next witness was a fellow employee, Mr Nguyen, who gave short evidence about the accident. There was no cross examination but his Honour asked some questions.
 "HIS HONOUR: 
Q. How long had you worked with Mr Pham? A. About two years.

Q. Did he have any complaints about his health? 
INTERPRETER: 
Your Honour, I am afraid he is not answering to your question. He is -- 
HIS HONOUR: 
It does not matter, just translate it.

INTERPRETER: 
Yes, he said that after he came back from the hospital -- 
HIS HONOUR: 
Right, got the message.

Q. Before he had this accident did he complain of any problems? A. No, your
Honour." 
This interchange then took place: "HIS HONOUR: He is finished, I'm finished, you'd finished, but I've asked and do you want to ask anything more? 
MR GRACIE: No, I don't your Honour.

MR REOCH: Can he be excused your Honour? 
HIS HONOUR: mmm 
MR REOCH: Can he be excused? 
HIS HONOUR: Sure everybody can go home. I feel a bit like that myself.

MR GRACIE: I've got a doctor at 2.30 pm if that helps your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: Does this mean you're feeling a bit sick? 
Indecipherable comment.

HIS HONOUR: mmm - that's not bad. You could double the costs for putting up with him ...

MR REOCH: I tender the following medical reports.

HIS HONOUR: Yep." 
After the medical reports and certificates and the respondent's wage schedule and pay record were tendered, Mr Reoch indicated that that completed his case.
There followed this exchange: "MR GRACIE: As I have indicated your Honour, I have Dr Gonski at 2.30 pm - umm
I have Dr Wright's report but I am instructed to make an application at this juncture your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: You've got your own and buckleys if it's an adjournment.

MR GRACIE: It's not that your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: Well feel free to make it." 
Mr Gracie then asked the Judge to disqualify himself from further hearing the case. He put the application on three bases: first, the Judge's conduct in rephrasing and reformulating his questions; secondly, the Judge's rejection of a question pertaining to credit on the basis that the respondent was unable to give an answer to that question because he was at some cultural disadvantage, having regard to his evidence, and might be in peril of criminal charges; and thirdly, the appellant's perception of bias based on the Judge's interjections during the course of counsel's questions, and the Judge's comments when informed that Dr Gonski was available to give evidence at 2.30 pm. His Honour refused the application saying: "On the basis of conduct rephrasing a question made by the respondent. If it appears to a court that a question is so phrased as to be unduly complicated particularly to a witness (a) from a different culture and (b) giving evidence through an interpreter and patently not understanding it from the same question having been put previously, I think it is the obligation of the court to endeavour to convey to the witness precisely what the content of the question is. I make no apology nor do I think it is ground for disqualification.

As to the rejection of the respondent's question regarding credit and the various bases thereof and notwithstanding the rejection of it, the question was immediately rephrased in precisely the same terms, allowed and the answer given. How on earth that is then conceived as showing bias, ignoring clear canvassing of a ruling to satisfy a party who obviously seeks to have that question particularly answered, on the contrary I would think the applicant could possibly conceive it as bias in allowing a question that appeared to be clearly inadmissible.

Interjections. As far as I am concerned, except for people who unnecessarily prolong the course of litigation tend to induce some indications that that is - of disapprobation of the undue prolongation. Dr Gonski is most welcome to come at 2.30. That is your prerogative, whether you call him or not. Mr Reoch seems to think that perhaps you could do without him, but that is your decision. That is a tactical decision which you are entitled to make provided it does not impinge unduly on the court and since it is now short of two and it is half past two I do not think it impinges unduly on the court. For all those reasons I certainly decline to disqualify myself." 
The Court reassembled at 2.30 pm and after a short delay Dr Gonski's report was tendered and he gave evidence. After his evidence finished, counsel asked that he might be excused, when this occurred: "HIS HONOUR: Thank you doctor. Did you have to come far, did you? 
DR GONSKI: An hour and a quarters drive Sir.

HIS HONOUR: Holy cow.

MR REOCH: Doctor, I hope you reflect that in your attendance fee to
Vandervords.

HIS HONOUR: Don't you take any notice of him, he is just stirring up trouble.

DR GONSKI: Thank you your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: God bless." 
Counsel put their submissions. Mr Gracie attacked the respondent's credit and particularly his repeated use of the form "I don't recall" under cross examination and his failure to speak truthfully about previous neck or head injuries. Mr Gracie said: "On the question of capacity for work, your Honour, the applicant in my respectful submission is capable of doing quite a wide range of work. He did not recall doing extensive overtime in the very fortnight after the accident, that is two days past and then the fortnight, but his lack of recollection whilst I do not criticise it in that manner, stands against contemporaneous records which disclose quite extensive overtime in those two weeks." 
Mr Reoch, amongst other things, relied upon a concession that he had obtained in cross examination from Dr Gonski. In his judgment the Judge described it as "a glorious concession". His Honour observed that the respondent had been paid all entitlements up to 7 July 1994 and assumed his claim was from the following day, 8 July 1994. Speaking of the wages records, his Honour said: "The applicant tendered, Exhibit G, the wage records of the applicant over about 12 months of his employment. At the relevant time, which shows 16 hours compensation for the week ended 20 April 1994, which would seem to suggest he probably did not work for two days following the injury, the applicant said he did at least a couple of hours on one of them. Thereafter there is a record of his work that shows he worked, including overtime, in the first couple of weeks following the injury. I think 16 hours was put to him and the applicant was not sure but the records would certainly be compatible with it. On one week he did do 16 hours overtime.

Thereafter for the next eight weeks or thereabouts, there are various periods of compensation, often 38 hours for the week, sometimes 32 et cetera. Patently the applicant has said that he was back at work on light duties for four hours a day but patently even on that regime he appears to have been losing a fair amount of time." 
A little later in his judgment his Honour said: "Prima facie, on the basis of what the applicant says and the bulk of the medical evidence, one would think that the applicant had a minor or perhaps a moderate ongoing problem with his neck and headache. He was probably partially incapacitated and [that] he had a reasonable capacity to earn in a reasonably accessible labour market. The respondent says one would not accept the applicant.

There is no doubt that the applicant had on 18 October 1986, about 18 months before the injury with the respondent, been involved in a motor vehicle accident. There is also no doubt that he thereafter engages a series of firms of solicitors or at least three, serially, to represent him in respect of a claim in respect of the consequences of that injury.

The respondent has put in evidence as Exhibit 5 a Statement of Claim and particulars in relation to a claim in the District Court arising out of the motor vehicle accident of 18 October 1986. The particulars are particularly emphasised by the respondent since they nominate some wide spread injuries including head and neck, chest, shoulder, back, face and I think an eye, various things.

The applicant denies that he suffers any head or neck injury in that particular incident. It was suggested to him that the matter was ultimately disposed of by arbitration. I do not think the applicant was too sure whether it was arbitration or not but he was quite happy to accept that the matter had been disposed of and also deposed that the disposal of that claim in respect of the motor vehicle accident returned to him some $250.

The respondent suggests that despite the applicant's denial, despite the absence of any medical evidence suggested otherwise that I should not accept that the applicant did not as particularised in the District court action, suffer a head and neck injury in that motor vehicle accident. Perhaps he did, perhaps he did not. I certainly would not think it is established as the likely event. Firstly the amount recovered does not sound like he had very much wrong with him at all. No(w), I am not too familiar with damages claims these days but $250 does not seem to suggest deleterious effects of the motor vehicle accident as far as the applicant was concerned." 
Of the evidence of Mr Nguyen his Honour said: "A more interesting point was probably Mr Nguyen called in the applicant's case by Mr Reoch merely to confirm, I would think, the incident of 18 April and indeed Mr Nguyen deposed to the frame falling, striking Mr Pham, Mr
Pham being knocked unconscious, summoning help from the first aid, Mr Nguyen being assisted to a car to be taken to Bankstown Hospital 10 or 15 minutes after the event, I think. He endeavoured to communicate with Mr Pham, but obtained no response, just opened and closed his eyes apparently. I think the real purpose of Mr Reoch calling the witness was to confirm the unconsciousness. In fact indeed Mr Nguyen did, for what that was worth.

Notwithstanding that the applicant had been cross examined at some length about his prior motor vehicle accident and the deleterious effects it had had on him and notwithstanding that Mr Nguyen had deposed to working with the applicant for some two years, Mr Reoch put no question to him about the applicant's antecedent state.

Mr Gracie addressed no question in cross examination to him at all having regard to the issue that had been raised by the respondent as to whether or not the applicant had antecedent disabilities. Mr Nguyen was asked by me to comment on his observation of the applicant antecedently and as far as he was concerned there had been no prior complaint by the applicant regarding neck or head or I gather anything else for that matter.

In that context and in the absence of any medical evidence and if indeed the respondent sought to show that the applicant had had antecedent problems with his head and neck, one would think that if there was concurrent litigation, that there would be medical evidence available which could have been adduced by the respondent to establish the existence of such a condition.

Instead the reliance is purely on the nomination of such injuries in some particulars furnished in respect of the Statement of Claims in the District
Court. Overall, with that solitary straw to support the proposition in the face of Mr Pham's denial of any such injury, in the face of Mr Nguyen's confirmation that there did not seem to be any such injury, it seems to me that probabilities favour the fact that whatever consequences the motor vehicle had, if they had any consequences as far as his head and neck were concerned, it was exceedingly transient and that the applicant worked on doing what was quite arduous work for some considerable time thereafter, something like 18 months, without any apparent complaint, without any apparent loss of time. Therefore I think it is unlikely the applicant had any such problem.

I do not think the event reflects on the applicant's credibility. He certainly told Dr Wright that he probably had a neck injury when he was a child. Just how far back childhood goes is always is a bit problematical. It seemed to be beyond the recollection of Mr Pham that early in childhood because he was unable to give Dr Wright any indication of just what it was. He certainly remembered he had a shoulder injury and Dr Wright noted he indicated the acromoclavicular area of one shoulder or other, and indeed I think on examination there was some abnormality there.

By and large I do not think the applicant's credit is impugned by any of the matters raised by the respondent. I think I can accept him as a witness who has given me a reasonable account of his problem. It certainly was not embellished or overstated. He may be inaccurate of course in his estimates. It is very interesting of course, for years people have been asking workers to offer an opinion of what particular jobs they can do and whether they can or cannot do their old jobs and if not and why not, and what sorts of things in the old job. I has always been questionable as to admissibility. I think it is admissible after the 1995 [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). In any event no objection was taken to it." 
His Honour rejected a submission based on the concession Mr Reoch obtained from Dr Gonski that there was no reasonable slot in the accessible labour market into which the respondent could be put. His Honour went on to deal with the particular problems which the injury produced for the respondent.

At the end of his judgment his Honour returned to the question of disqualification and referred to Vakauta versus Kelly <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 568.] His Honour justified what he had done by reference to what he described as the "somewhat convoluted" and "negative" form of Mr Gracie's questions bearing in mind that the respondent was a native speaker of
Vietnamese and did not have English to any great extent. His Honour said that he rejected the question to the respondent as an invitation to confess to perjury but when it was put again, since the respondent took no objection, the question was allowed.

His Honour refused to release the audio tape of the hearing to the respondent leaving it open to make further application if the respondent felt not sufficiently protected by access to the transcript. The tape recordings were produced in answer to a subpoena to the Compensation Court.

THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE MUST APPEAR IMPARTIAL 
The appellant did not suggest that Judge Burke was actually biased against the appellant. However as Kirby ACJ (as he then was) pointed out in Galea v
Galea [(1990) 19 NSWLR 263] at 277 the actuality and appearance of impartial justice in the courts is such an important feature of our administration of justice that a judge should not sit to hear a case if, in all the circumstances, the parties or the public might entertain a reasonable apprehension that he or she might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question involved in it. This was the appellant's case. The High Court has recently reaffirmed this test in Webb versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 41] at 47 where Mason CJ and McHugh J said: "When it is alleged that a judge has been or might be actuated by bias, this Court has held that the proper test is whether fair minded people might reasonably apprehend or suspect that the judge has prejudged or might prejudge the case." See also
Grassby versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 1] at 20.

The conclusion that there is reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of a judicial officer should not lightly be drawn; see per McHugh JA, as he then was, in Vakauta versus Kelly [(1988) 13 NSWLR 502] at 525.
But, in the words of Kirby ACJ in Galea at 277, Vakauta and Grassby are timely reminders by the High Court of the high importance attached in the administration of justice in this country to the avoidance of pre-judgment or the appearance to the reasonable lay observer that a judge will approach his or her duties without complete impartiality.

CONCLUSION 
In this case Judge Burke conducted his court in an undisciplined way and allowed himself to make unnecessary observations irrelevant to the task in hand, disparaging of the appellant's counsel and tending to diminish the value of his cross examination. This lack of discipline emerged not long after counsel for the appellant started his cross examination of the respondent, the principal witness in his own case. Together with lack of discipline went an element of attempted overbearing which would appear to any reasonable person present designed to discourage legitimate cross examination. At an early stage, having said to counsel for the appellant "You go on, you've been going on about most things, feel free", his Honour was searching for [s41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s41.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) concerned with "misleading or unduly annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive, oppressive or repetitive questions." Counsel was charged with being "so meticulous", "wanting a part a, part b, b1, b2." Counsel responded by saying that he took this as a compliment and was told "it wasn't intended so I assure you". A question was put, objected to and withdrawn and his Honour then described it as "misleading, harassing, oppressive and repetitive". Counsel was charged with "dressing a question up with fancy legal jargon" and, after he asked the respondent what sort of light work he had applied for and, following some indecipherable comments, asked the Judge whether that was a ruling on his question, he was told "No, no, no, go for your life. What sort of light work has he looked for, he might have said God Almighty since he is going to say exactly what he said last time, yeh last time".

These interjections were directed only at the appellant's counsel. Most came, not on the respondent's objection but from the Judge, one after a question had been withdrawn and one about a question which was ultimately allowed. It is curious that, if he thought that a question amounted to asking the respondent to confess to perjury in a way that he did not apprehend and that the question was "misleading, annoying, and repetitive", the Judge should have allowed it.

We have read the cross examination carefully and listened to parts of it on tape. In our opinion counsel's questions did not call for the string of epithets his Honour extracted from [s41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s41.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). The
Judge's interruptions and interjections suggested that he had already made up his mind, without waiting for the appellant's submissions, to disregard the cross examination, whatever its effect, in reaching his decision.

The respondent submitted that there could be no apprehension of bias as all the trial Judge's rulings on evidence were correct. It was said that in the robust context of a trial at first instance counsel should not display a high degree of sensitivity. With all respect we think this misses the point.
Counsel was not unduly sensitive. Indeed in difficult circumstances he seems to me to have stuck to the task of representing his client's interest in an appropriate way. Mr Gracie asked the Judge to disqualify himself because his client had a perception of bias which, in our opinion, was both understandable and reasonable. The appellant was entitled to have its case properly heard and not prejudged. Any representative of the appellant in court would have left it thinking that its case had not been fairly dealt with. Our system of justice will not tolerate judicial behaviour which may give rise to such an apprehension of bias. When asked to do so Judge Burke should have disqualified himself.

The respondent next submitted that the Compensation Court was an expert tribunal that operates with a degree of informality. Practitioners in that jurisdiction were expected to be expert and expeditious and his Honour was entitled to admonish the appellant's counsel. We do not agree. First counsel did not engage in any dilatory behaviour even in the context of such a standard. More importantly, however, informality designed to avoid technicalities in leading evidence does not equate with undisciplined interjections directed against counsel and for the most part directed to making the admission of evidence more, rather than less, formal. It was also said that the Compensation Court commonly has large lists of cases to be dealt with on each day of the week. But there was nothing to suggest in the present case that what occurred had anything to do with the length of the list.

The respondent further submitted that the decision Judge Burke arrived at was inevitable and accordingly we should not interfere. We are not satisfied that that is so. On the face of the transcript the respondent appeared to have been an unsatisfactory witness. As the appellant's counsel pointed out, while giving his evidence in chief, the respondent seemed to have no difficulty in remembering detail of his injury, the doctors that he had seen and the work that he had done after the accident. The ninth question in cross examination elicited the answer "I don't recall" but in the following three pages of transcript nineteen questions were answered in this way. The same answer was later given to other questions. Many of these questions were directed to a
District Court action commenced by the worker on 14 November 1986 arising from a motor vehicle accident on 18 October that year involving a motor vehicle driven by a Mr Van Hiep Doai in which he was a passenger. The particulars of injuries included injuries to the worker's head and neck. The worker claimed that he had also sustained injuries to his head and neck at work on 18 April .

It is extraordinarily difficult to cross examine a witness through an interpreter at any time, but it is more so when a witness answers questions in this way. We would not endorse the cross examination as a model to be followed by others. It was not surprising that some of the questions elicited such an answer and some questions, to say the least, lacked the clarity and simplicity required for effective cross examination through an interpreter. However counsel's already difficult task was made far more difficult by his Honour's interventions and the attitude they demonstrated. His Honour should not have formed and expressed a view that the cross examination of the worker was a waste of time so early in the cross examination. Even if his Honour considered at that stage that the worker was a witness of truth whose evidence should be accepted, that view should have been no more than provisional, and should not have been made known to the parties.

It was essential in a case such as this for the judge to be alert to the possibility that a witness confronted with awkward questions was being deliberately evasive. It is true, as his Honour said in his judgment, that the claim in the District Court action appeared to be a minor one and it is also true that the employer did not tender and presumably did not have available evidence of the amount paid in settlement of those proceedings, or the medical evidence relied upon by the worker. The worker said that he only received $250 from the case and that appears to establish that the claim was a trivial one, although there could be other explanations.

Although the Judge may have considered that listening to the cross examination was heavy going it was not an appropriate time for boredom, let alone for such interventions. He should have been reviewing the demeanour of the witness and not the performance of counsel. The succession of "I can't recall" answers called for scrutiny.

Counsel then cross examined the worker on the hours he worked in the two working weeks after his accident. The worker denied working the level of overtime during those weeks for which, according to his pay slips later tendered in evidence, he had been paid. His Honour's intervention was not helpful because the relevant pay slip showed that the worker had received some compensation so he had not done "full work plus 6 hours overtime".

The worker's denials, particularly of working 18 hours overtime in the second working week after the accident, were a matter that his Honour needed to consider. At the very least the level of overtime worked during those weeks raised questions for the Judge as to the seriousness of the injuries received on 18 April. These matters were raised by counsel for the employer in address but were not referred to in his Honour's reasons for judgment.

His Honour's decision in his judgment to accept the worker as a worker of truth may have been entirely correct, but this Court cannot be satisfied that it was. His Honour's comments during the cross examination of the worker, and the attitude they reflect, demonstrate that there is a real risk that his
Honour failed to use, or misused, his advantage in seeing and hearing the worker.

Part of the appellant's case at the trial was that the respondent should not be accepted as a truthful witness. By and large his Honour did so, but his decision in this respect did nothing to dispel the appearance of bias he had generated during the hearing.

In his judgment his Honour rejected some of the claims made on behalf of the worker, but in our view this does not enable his judgment to be supported having regard to the other findings we have made.

In our opinion the Judge's behaviour might have led a fair minded person reasonably to apprehend or suspect a lack of impartiality or prejudgment of the case against the appellant. In the circumstances of this case there must be a new trial.

ORDERS
Appeal allowed;
Set aside the award made by Judge Burke on 13 September 1995;
Remit the proceedings to the Compensation Court for re-hearing;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 * * * 
