

Regina versus Tracey Lee Barton No. 60740/94 Criminal Law [2004] NSWSC 1343 (15
December 2004) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
KIRBY ACJ(2), ALLEN(1) AND DOWD(3) J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 28 July #DATE 28:7:1995 #ADD 19:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:       J C Nicholson SC 
Counsel for the Respondent:
D J Payne 
Solicitors for the Appellant:     T A Murphy 
Solicitors for the Respondent:     S E O'Connor
ORDER
Appeal allowed.
JUDGE1
ALLEN J This is an application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence. The applicant was indicted for the murder of one Lorna Squires on 18
July 1993. The Crown accepted, in full satisfaction of the indictment, a plea of guilty of manslaughter - the basis for acceptance of the plea being diminished responsibility (Crimes Act 1900, <case>). To be taken into account also, pursuant to [s 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s21.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) were further offences - the malicious wounding of Marion Egan and an assault upon Roma
Hall.
On 16 December 1994 Badgery-Parker
J sentenced the applicant effectively to imprisonment for sixteen years, comprised of a minimum term of eight years and an additional term of eight years. The sentence was dated from 18 July , that being the date upon which the applicant was taken into custody.
Accordingly some seventeen months, or roughly a year and a half, had already been served in custody by the applicant prior to the sentence being imposed upon her.
The facts were lucidly stated by his Honour in his remarks on sentence as follows: "The prisoner, who is now 24 years of age, had made the acquaintance of the deceased, an elderly and somewhat mentally retarded pensioner living in a unit at 5 Iwunda
Street, Lalor Park. She had met her, through mutual acquaintanceship with others living in the same block of units and had had a number of conversations with her.
on 18 July 1993, she visited Miss Squires and was invited into the flat for a chat and to be shown the deceased's new microwave. Upon her entering the flat, the deceased locked the door which caused the prisoner some concern. The deceased explained that it was her practice to lock the door so that nobody would intrude upon them. At some stage she asked for a drink of water and was provided with a glass and asked to fill it in the bathroom and not to go into the kitchen evidently because the deceased had recently cleaned in there.
However, having drunk some water, she did in fact go into the kitchen to place the glass in the sink. Whether that was the reason for what happened next, no one will ever know but it appears, on the prisoner's own account (and there is no evidence to suggest that it is untrue) that the deceased moved-towards the prisoner holding a kitchen knife in her left hand. Up until that moment, their contact and conversation had been friendly and there had been no sign of aggression.
The prisoner has said that she dropped the glass which broke on the floor and she put up her left hand to protect herself against the knife carried by the other woman. The knife passed through her left hand, entering at about the junction between the palm and the ball of the thumb and passing right through to exit near the base of the thumb on the dorsal aspect of the hand. ... The prisoner claims that she was afraid for her own safety. She pulled the knife from her hand and dropped it, opened a kitchen drawer and seized another knife and attacked the deceased with it to prevent the deceased from renewing the attack upon her. Her attack upon the deceased was massive and savage. The evidence of Dr. Hulewicz who conducted the autopsy was that there were on her body 24 stab wounds and 21 incised wounds as well as a number of lacerations, bruises and abrasions ... One of those neck wounds was in fact identified as the actual cause of death, it having passed through the right internal jugular vein. The prisoner's response to the initial knife assault upon her was so excessive as to exclude any possibility that she acted in lawful self-defence."
The applicant then searched for, and found, the key with which the door had been locked. She wanted to get out. However, the screaming which had occurred during the assault had attracted the attention of two ladies, who were neighbours. These were Mrs Egan and Mrs Hall. These ladies became victims of the applicant's aggression.
She thrust the knife at them through the door, which was of a screen type, before succeeding in opening it. Her thrusts penetrated the gauze of the door and injured Mrs Egan by stabbing her in the arm. She also, by her use of the knife, clearly intended to intimidate
Mrs
Hall. These ladies courageously were endeavouring to keep her in the unit until police arrived. The applicant, however, effected her escape and fled, casting the knife away in the process.
The feature which has attracted the most attention in this application for leave to appeal, one which was carefully considered in the sentencing proceedings before Badgery-Parker J, is the extent to which the conduct of the applicant was brought about by her own greatly diminished intelligence and personality difficulties which made her likely to act impulsively.
The attack upon her by Mrs Squires was, as his Honour pointed out, totally unexpected and unwarranted.
Further, it occurred in circumstances where the applicant already had some apprehension flowing from the locking of the door by Mrs
Squires when the applicant first entered the unit. Her response to the attack upon her was described by his Honour as follows: " ... it seems that the effect of her intellectual and personality deficits was to deprive her of the ability to control the measure of her response and as Dr. Shand points out, the nature of the multiple stabbings of the deceased while she was on the floor suggests frenzy."
Towards the end of his remarks on sentence his Honour, in dealing with the applicant's capacity to control her actions, described her as having been "quite incapable of formulating a sensible response". That finding was fully in accordance with the evidence. It is based particularly upon the report of
Mr Taylor, a psychologist. In his report Mr Taylor stated: "Due to the sudden and unprovoked attack upon her it would have been outside Tracy's ability to be able to think rationally and to cope in a mature and considered way to such an attack ... As a result, she simply reacted in an immature and impulsive way to what she perceived as being a direct threat to her life. This resulted in her then attacking the victim and stabbing her.

It would have to be considered that in attacking the victim, there were considerable elements of self-defence applicable
Tracy as she made the comment that 'I thought it was my life or hers -it was so quick'."
The level of intelligence of the applicant has been assessed at 67 placing her in the bottom 1% of the community. More than 99% of the community have higher intelligence then does she: and his Honour accepted the description of
Mr Taylor that she had the functioning capacity equivalent to that of a child of not more than seven. Her conduct clearly was accepted by his Honour as explicable on the basis of an impulsive, instinctive reaction to the initial attack followed by panic as she sought to escape from the unit and, in the course of doing so, injuring one lady and intimidating the other. Everything points to that - including her own description to other people immediately after the event and to the police. Her description included that after the attack was finished and she saw the victim lying there she asked herself, "What have I done?". It was then, unfortunately, too late for rational appreciation to undo what had happened.
As to whether or not she presents a danger to the community for the future, his Honour, not surprisingly, was initially concerned at the ferocity of the attack which was mounted in response to the single knife blow delivered, or attempted, by the victim. He said: "The savagery of the killing suggests the need for a substantial sentence not only because of the need from the community point of view to punish such behaviour but because it is strongly suggestive that she is likely after her release to represent a source of danger to others."
Having made that observation as to what the ferocity of the attack suggested, his Honour said: "The question of possible future dangerousness was examined at length in the course of the sentencing proceedings, and three psychiatrists gave oral evidence, Dr. Barclay and Dr.
Lucas called on behalf of the prisoner and Dr. Shand called on behalf of the Crown."
He considered their evidence and came to the conclusion that their unanimous opinion should be accepted by him. The three psychiatrists were of one mind in their conclusion which his Honour paraphrased as being that "Although no guarantee could be given that following ... treatment (extensive therapy given in the prison system for five years) she would never again respond violently should she be placed in a situation of a kind capable of provoking a violent reaction in her" there was confidence as to her prognosis.
His Honour continued: "I am satisfied that there is every reason to believe that with an appropriate programme of therapy of the kind contemplated by the experts and extending over a sufficient period of time a situation will be achieved in which the prisoner can be released into the community without substantial risk. The minimum term of her sentence should be sufficiently long to cover such a period of treatment which in the opinion of Dr.
Shand (which I accept) must be at least five years."
This is a case which is unusual in many ways. Not the least is it unusual because of the confidence of the opinion expressed by three psychiatrists, one of whom was called by the Crown, that after treatment for five years in the prison system she could be released into the community without substantial risk. Not often is the court favoured with such unanimity.
Having been so satisfied, his Honour then looked at other matters pertinent to the formulation of an appropriate sentence. I see no error at all in his Honour's statement of the relevant factors. He stated, in particular, that where you have a person such as this applicant, who has offended in the way she did, the element of general deterrence does not loom large. It plays a less significant role than otherwise would be the case. The law as to that has been settled in cases such as R v Scognamiglio [(1981) 56 A Crim R 81], and R v
Letteri (CCA, unreported, 18 March 1992). He took into account, also, that she was grossly provoked, that the attack was unsuspected, that she was already somewhat apprehensive before she was attacked, and that she was only twenty-four years of age at the time of sentence. Having taken those and other relevant factors into account his Honour concluded: "Giving full weight to the objective gravity of the offence but recognising that it had its origin in the assault which was made upon the prisoner by the deceased, the prisoner being, by reason of intellectual and personality defects, quite incapable of formulating a sensible response and also giving due weight to the need to protect the community against the risk which this young woman is likely to represent upon her release, noting her plea of guilty and taking into account the matters of malicious wounding and assault which have been scheduled, it appears to me that an appropriate sentence is a sentence of penal servitude for years."
He specified eight years as the minimum term and eight years as the additional term.
The problem which his
Honour's approach presents is that it is difficult to see on what basis a sentence in excess of one containing a minimum term of five years from the date of sentence could be imposed; The psychiatric evidence was unanimous. At the end of five years from the date of sentence she could be released to the community without presenting a substantial risk. Why then was a sentence, which was eighteen months longer, imposed?
It cannot be, as I see it, that a sentence longer than one containing a minimum term of five years would have been appropriate if the consideration of protection of the public were left out of account. Five years would represent, as a minimum term, the absolute maximum in the extraordinary circumstances of this case. Yet his Honour imposed a minimum term of eight years, back-dating it to the date of arrest, which made the sentence, effectively, six and a half years as a minimum term from the date of sentence.
I find myself forced to the conclusion that his Honour added the additional eighteen months for the further protection of the community, notwithstanding the psychiatric evidence, which he accepted, that at the expiration of five years she could be released into the community without substantial risk to it. In law that amounted to imposition of eighteen months imprisonment as protective custody - as distinct from what was appropriate by way of sentence.
The problem of protective custody was dealt with by the High Court in
Veen versus The Queen (No.2) <case>; [(1987-1988) 164 CLR 465.] It suffices to refer to the following passages. In their joint judgment Mason CJ and Brennan, Dawson and
Toohey JJ said: "The principle of proportionality is now firmly established in this country. It was the unanimous view of the Court in Veen (No.
) that a sentence should not be increased beyond what is proportionate to the crime in order merely to extend the period of protection of society from the risk of recidivism on the part of the offender" (at 472).
Their Honours said, further: "It is one thing to say that the principle of proportionality precludes the imposition of a sentence extended beyond what is appropriate to the crime merely to protect society; it is another thing to say that the protection of society is not a material factor in fixing an appropriate sentence. The distinction in principle is clear between an extension merely by way of preventive detention, which is impermissible, and an exercise of the sentencing discretion having regard to the protection of society among other factors, which is permissible." (at 473).
Their Honours also remarked (at 474) that it is a difficult exercise to draw the distinction. It is an exercise in which error very easily can be made, no matter what care is taken. I consider that despite his Honour's diligence in the present case he did err in performing that difficult exercise.
In all of the circumstances I consider it appropriate that leave to appeal be given, that the appeal be allowed and that the sentence imposed by his Honour be quashed.
One comes then to the matter of re-sentence. In my opinion the appropriate sentence to be imposed is one of ten years commencing on the date when the applicant was sentenced by Badgery-Parker J, namely 16 December .
That sentence of ten years should be comprised of a minimum term of five years commencing on 16 December 1994 and expiring on 15 December 1999, on which date she will be eligible for release on parole, together with an additional term of five years commencing on 16 December 1999 and expiring on 15 December 2004, and that time served should count.
The sentence so framed fully satisfies the elements of sentence apart from her mental condition. It also fully satisfies the need for protection of the community without exceeding the proper limits of sentence. The additional term ensures that the applicant will receive appropriate care after her release.
JUDGE2
KIRBY ACJ The Crown accepted that the sentence imposed on the applicant was a very high one having regard to the objective facts and having regard to such cases as were said to be analogous. It has been stated many times that there is no tariff in cases of manslaughter (see for example R versus Bond (1990) 48 [8
ACR 1] at 5). It was suggested that perhaps in some way the case was analogous to that of R versus Jeanna Ann Troia, (unreported decision CCA July 1991).
In that case at page 3 of the manuscript I stated: "It is trite to say that the range of sentences available on a conviction of manslaughter is greater than for virtually any other crime."
However, Troja was a very different case involving considerable forethought and planning. If the violence was similar to the evidence in this case, the events which preceded the offence could hardly have been more different.
The maximum penalty which is fixed by Parliament for the worst case is twenty-five years penal servitude (see the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), [section 24:](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s24.html) [Criminal Procedure Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), [section 21(3).)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s21.html) But, for the reasons which Allen
J has explained, this was far from the worst case, either in terms of the objective circumstances or more particularly in terms of the intellectual capacity of the applicant.
It was also accepted by the Crown that a court may not extend a sentence beyond that which was appropriate to the particular case on the ground of the need to protect the public by an order in the nature of preventative detention. It cannot be said too often that the common law does not provide judges with the power to impose sentences of preventative detention. There are powers under the mental health legislation to help persons needing mental treatment for mental illnesses. But in respect of sentencing, the common law does not provide an analogous power. The purpose of the court is simply to sentence the offender for the particular criminality found.
Mention was made during argument on this point of the [Bail Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ba197841/) and the [Community Protection Act 1994](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1994270/) and the relevant principles in that legislation which requires, to some extent, consideration of the prophesy of dangerousness on the part of the offender. But the very enactment of such legislation involves an acknowledgment by Parliament of the absence of common law power and the need specifically to provide to judges with power to deal with the cases mentioned in the legislation. It would be contrary to legal principle to expand or develop the common law by analogous reasoning from such wholly exceptional and specific legislation. The [Community Protection Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1994270/), for example, has been criticised by the Court of Appeal for the reason that it is contrary to ordinary legal principles.
Nevertheless, the common law of sentencing will permit consideration by the sentencing judge of deterrence, both individually and general. In this case general deterrence is of less significance than in the ordinary case because of the mental incapacities of the applicant, to which Allen J has referred. The reason why in such cases general deterrence is less significant was expanded by Dixon J in R versus Porter <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 182] at 186 and in the cases mentioned by Allen J to which I would simply add a reference to my own remarks in R versus Champion (1992) 64
A Crime R 244. However, individual deterrence may take into account, in a general way, the need to protect the community from the propensities demonstrated, or the character manifested, by the particular crime which brings the prisoner before the court.
 .
It is important that this Court should say firmly that such use of deterrence should never be expanded into orders in the nature of preventive deterrence by the back door. Proof of matters relevant to deterrence are factors which may aggravate the seriousness of the case. The onus of establishing the nature of the deterrence alleged and the level of any propensity lies on the prosecution.
It must establish contested matters to the criminal standard of proof.
When I look at what Badgery-Parker J said in the course of his reasons I consider, with respect to his Honour, that he may have fallen into error. His
Honour said this: "The savagery of the killing suggests the need for a substantial sentence not only because of the need from the community point of view to punish such behaviour but because it is strongly suggestive that she is likely after her release to represent a source of danger to others. It is always difficult to predict dangerousness, and particularly to predict what such a person as this may be like when released into the community at the end of a necessarily fairly substantial period of imprisonment. The same lack of maturity and control which led to this killing could all too easily recur should she at some future time find herself under threat. The question of possible future dangerousness was examined at length in the course of the sentencing proceedings, and three psychiatrists gave oral evidence, Dr Barclay and
Dr Lucas called on behalf of the prisoner and Dr Shand called on behalf of the Crown."
It seems to me that it is here that his Honour may have taken an approach which led him to take into account his perspective of future dangerousness by a standard which was less rigorous than that which the law requires. I say this with hesitation because, in every other way, his Honour's remarks on sentence indicate the great care and seriousness with which he approached the sentencing of the applicant.
I take into account in the re-sentence, agreeing as I said in the orders which
Allen J has proposed, the other offences which the applicant asked the
Court to take into account. The special circumstances justifying the variation in the relationship between the minimum term and the additional term are those which Allen J has explained in the course of his reasons. No further material was tendered to the Court, in the re-sentence. Nor was it suggested that any further up to date or different material had to be taken into account by this
Court.
Accordingly, for the reasons which Allen J has mentioned and those to which I have now added in these remarks, I agree with the orders proposed.
The orders of the court accordingly are:
Grant leave to appeal.
Appeal allowed.
Sentence imposed by Badgery-Parker J quashed.
The appellant is re-sentenced as follows - to ten years penal servitude from 16 December 1994, such sentence to be served by a minimum term of five years penal servitude commencing on 16 December 1994 and expiring on 15
December 1999, on which day the appellant will be eligible for release on parole, and an additional term commencing on 16 December 1999 and expiring on December 2004. Time served is to count.
 .
Ms Barton, the Court has granted you leave to appeal, has allowed the appeal, has set aside the sentence that was imposed by Badgery-Parker
J and it has substituted a new sentence. The new sentence is a total sentence of ten years dating from the date on which you were sentenced by Badgery-Parker J.
The Court has divided that sentence into two parts. The minimum term of penal servitude you will serve commenced on that date you were sentenced by his
Honour and that is of five years. Thereafter, there will be an additional term of five years. But you will be eligible for release to parole on 15 December
All of the time you have served up to date is to count.
If you have any questions about the sentence, that will be explained to you by Mr Nicholson or your solicitor. You will now be returned to prison to continue serving your sentence.
JUDGE3
DOWD J I concur in the remarks made by Allen J and the orders proposed by him. I also concur in those remarks made by the Acting Chief Justice.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2004/1343.html  
