

Regina versus Mhn Matter No 70085/97 [1998] NSWSC 533 (29 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 November 1998 
REGINA versus MHN /97 October 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: 
For the assistance of members of the media who intend to report these remarks on sentence, I point out that, although the prisoner being sentenced today is now more than eighteen years of age, he was a young person at the time his offence was committed, so that s11 of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) continues to prohibit the publication of his name or any other material by which he may be identified.

The prisoner was arraigned on 19 October 1998 upon an indictment charging him with the murder of Hoang Huy Le on 7 August 1996.

The Crown brief was tendered without objection. The material within the brief is not entirely consistent. Some of it is sketchy. In resolving contradictions, I have been conscious of the need to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt in respect of any matter which may constitute a circumstance of aggravation (R versus Martin [(1981) 2 NSWLR 640] at 642, ).

The Crown brief included a transcript of an ERISP interview with the prisoner by the Police on 18 November 1996. After the interview, the prisoner accompanied the Police to the scene of the crime. Indeed, he and the Police went to a number of locations because aspects of the crime occurred at different locations. In the course of these inspections, and after a warning had been administered, questions were asked, and answered, and the commentary was recorded upon video. A transcript of what was said has been included in the Crown brief. The prisoner, in these interviews, made a number of admissions. He acknowledged that he had intended to kill Hoang Huy Le, and that he ultimately did so by cutting his throat with a knife.

Woven into the account provided by the prisoner are statements which he attributes to Hoang Huy Le, who I shall refer to, for convenience, as "the victim". Much of the material is self-serving. Some of it is false. Some of it tells only part of the truth. Conversations are related which I have no doubt took place. However, the sequence, as related by the prisoner, and the locations in which he described these conversations as having occurred, are false.

The prisoner did not give evidence. Counsel appearing for the prisoner, Mr
Hobart, prepared written submissions. The submissions sought to deal with the contradictions between the prisoner's version, as it emerges from the Police interviews, and evidence in the Crown brief, including the post mortem report.
When the matter proceeded on Friday 23 October 1998, Counsel for the prisoner sought a short adjournment. He wished to take instructions from the prisoner.
The adjournment was granted. Upon resuming later the same day, Counsel said this: (T48) "HOBART: Your Honour, I have been speaking with the prisoner. The position is that the written submissions that I have prepared contain instructions (which) may indeed, and most certainly will, change in relation to not so much the plea, but what happened.

I wish to have the matter adjourned so that I can firstly obtain a statement and, secondly, amend my written submissions." 
An adjournment was granted. When the matter resumed on Monday 26 October 1998,
Counsel for the prisoner said this: "HOBART: Despite what I said on Friday in relation to this matter the prisoner does not wish to give evidence and does not wish to give a statement to the
Police. He says because to do so will place him in jeopardy. That being the case that is the case for the prisoner." 
The account given by the prisoner described the following sequence: * First, an invitation by the prisoner to the victim to resolve their differences by fighting one to one. * Secondly, a car journey (with one other person) to the Bankstown City Sports Complex. * Thirdly, a fight between the prisoner and the victim in the parkland associated with that complex. The victim appeared tired after that contest, but otherwise uninjured. * Fourthly, a journey from the sports complex to a building site at Chester Hill. * Fifthly, a further discussion (said to last half an hour) at Chester Hill, culminating in a fight in which the prisoner stabbed the victim, and then pulled the knife across his throat. 
I will shortly refer to the evidence. It will become apparent that the sequence as described by the prisoner is false in a number of respects. The victim was seriously injured as a result of the assault at the Bankstown City
Sports Complex. He lost consciousness soon thereafter. The remarks attributed to him by the prisoner could not, therefore, have been made in the journey to
Chester Hill. There was no discussion at Chester Hill. Nor was there a fight.
Instead, the victim was strangled, and the prisoner then cut his throat. The body was then dumped on the building site.

The prisoner is now aged twenty years. On the day of the murder, 7 August , he was seventeen years old. So was his victim. They had known each other for some time. It is plain that there was ill-feeling between them. What each had done to the other to engender such ill-feeling is not clear. The prisoner, in his interview, spoke of a row at the Bankstown roller skating rink. A former girlfriend of the victim described a fight at the Bankstown railway station in 1995. No satisfying explanation for the long standing enmity between the victim and the prisoner has emerged from the material provided to the court.

On 21 June 1996 a fight occurred at the Petersham roller skating rink. A number of individuals were involved. They were said to be Asian. The prisoner was present at the scene. A boy named Jason died as a result of the fight. The victim, Hoang Huy Le, claimed to have witnessed the fight. According to the prisoner, he thereafter made the following threat, directed at the prisoner: "Hoang said to me, I kill your family, I kill you. He said, I will tell the
Police you kill someone at Petersham because I saw you." 
I do not accept that a threat in these terms was made by the victim to the prisoner. I do not accept that at any stage the prisoner felt threatened physically by the victim. Nor do I accept that there was any threat made against the prisoner's family. The prisoner was essentially without a family.
His mother was in Vietnam. So was his sister. Although he had lived with his father for a time, when he came to Australia in 1990, he had left his father's home some years before, and was estranged from him. I will return to the prisoner's background later in these remarks.

I do accept, however, that the prisoner learned of the victim's presence at
Petersham on the night of 21 June 1996, and that the victim claimed to be an eye witness, capable of incriminating the prisoner. The prisoner may have learned that from the victim himself, or from others, since the victim told a number of others what he had seen. It is in this respect that the prisoner felt threatened by the victim, especially since the victim was someone whom he disliked, and who disliked him.

The prisoner asserted that the day after the threat there was a further threatening episode. The victim and a fifteen year old boy went to his house, and remained outside all day. The consequence was that he could not go out.

Again, the suggestion is that the prisoner was physically intimidated by the victim, or perhaps the victim and a fifteen year old boy. I do not accept that evidence. Amongst other things, the prisoner was skilled in martial arts.

The victim was a student. He attended college at Bankstown. He was, to some extent, himself, living on the fringes of crime. He had a number of minor convictions, including one for supplying drugs. On Wednesday 7 March 1996, the victim went to the Sunshine Cafe in Bankstown. It is a coffee shop patronised by Vietnamese students, and others. He spent much of the day at the coffee shop. He told a number of people that he was waiting for his girlfriend who was delivering money.

At about 3.30 pm a number of young men, including the prisoner, assembled outside the coffee shop. The victim was inside, seated at a table talking to one of his friends. One of the group outside, although not the prisoner, entered the coffee shop and asked Hoang Huy Le, the victim, to come outside and talk. The victim got up, and walked to the door. However, he forgot his schoolbag. He turned back to get it. The person with whom he had been sitting watched him as he retrieved his bag. He gave that person what was described as "a very worried look". He appeared to be scared.

I accept that the victim was scared. He left the cafe with reluctance.

The prisoner gave the Police a different version of the circumstances in which the victim left the cafe. He said this: (ERISP p6) "Q34 Another day I seen him at coffee shop at Bankstown station.

A (INTPRTR) Yes.

Q35 I said, If you want to fight one on one with me? He said, OK.

A (INTPRTR) Yes.

Q36 I said, Where? He said, At Bankstown near high school." 
I reject that evidence. I am satisfied the events unfolded as I have described. Once outside the cafe, the victim walked down a lane. He was observed to be in the middle of four men, one of whom was the prisoner. They were described as walking very close to each other. The victim, by this means, was escorted from the coffee shop. I am satisfied that the victim did not believe himself to have a choice. He was, no doubt, apprehensive. He cannot possibly have imagined, however, what in fact was about to be done.

The victim was taken to a carpark in Bankstown. One of the four men, although not the prisoner, had borrowed a vehicle. It was a brown Toyota Corona station wagon. The victim got in the back seat, in the middle, alongside the prisoner.
The group drove to the Bankstown City Sports Complex, which includes parkland.

When interviewed by the Police, the prisoner described another car journey; that from Bankstown to the Chester Hill building site, where the body was eventually found. His description included the fact that the victim was restrained by him, by means of a screwdriver, which he held like a knife against his stomach. He also attributed to the victim these words: "Hoang asked me where I was taking him and I answered that, you'll find out when we get there." 
According to the prisoner's account, the victim also made the following comment in the course of the journey from the park at Bankstown to Chester
Hill.
 "... and he kept asking me, What did you want? What did you want? Stop the car and we'll get out and talk about it." 
The prisoner described what occurred once they arrived at their destination.
He told the Police the following: "He didn't want to get out, so I went over to that side and opened the car and told him to get out." 
The prisoner elaborated in these words when subsequently interviewed by the
Police at Chester Hill itself. He said: "I just told him, You get out of the car and we talk.

Q118 And he did that? 
A (INTPRTR) He asked me, What is the point of getting out of the car? So I told him that, Before you said that you wanted to play against me." 
The prisoner added: "A (INTPRTR) I ask him why did he want to play dirty against me.

Q126 Yes, and what did he say? 
A (SUSPECT) I don't know.

A (INTPRTR) I can't recall." 
I am satisfied that these events, and these conversations, did not occur on the journey from the park to Chester Hill, or at Chester Hill, as the prisoner has asserted. The victim was unconscious, or semi-conscious, on that journey.
He was in no need of restraint. He was incapable of conversing. Though he falsely suggested otherwise, I am satisfied that the prisoner was describing the journey from the carpark at Bankstown to the parkland nearby.

The car load, including the prisoner and the victim, arrived at the Bankstown
Sports Complex some time shortly after 3.30 pm.

The prisoner told the Police that he fought the victim, one on one, at the park. He alleged that he and the victim traded punches. He hit the victim five or six times in the face. The victim hit back. He also said this: "Q217 Did you kick him? 
A (INTPRTR) I did.

Q218 How many times did you kick him? 
A (INTPRTR) About three or four times." 
The submissions on sentence, made by his Counsel, include the following words: "The Prisoner agrees he kicked the deceased and that he was wearing Doc
Martens at the time." 
According to the prisoner, the person who had driven the vehicle to the park was close by, but did not participate. He stood guard. He ultimately warned the prisoner of the approach of a person described as "a westerner". That person was Mr Frier. Mr Frier made a statement to the Police the next day. His evidence is accepted. As Mr Frier approached the park in his car, he saw four men assaulting a person on the ground. Two were on their knees throwing punches. Two were standing, kicking the person on the ground.

Mr Frier, bravely, jumped the fence surrounding the park. He approached to within thirty metres of the group. They ceased the assault. The victim sat up, with his legs outstretched. He was rubbing the back of his head. The witness told the Police that all persons involved, including the victim, were
Vietnamese, and aged between seventeen and eighteen years. He described the victim, accurately, as having long black hair.

I am, therefore, satisfied that the account given by the prisoner to the
Police was false in a number of respects.
 * First, this was not a fair fight, one on one, as the prisoner suggested. It was a cowardly attack by four persons against one. The victim, incidentally, was unarmed, as the prisoner acknowledged. * Secondly, the prisoner, curiously, acknowledged sole responsibility, when it is plain that the responsibility was shared. He identified one person present (although asserted that he did not participate beyond standing guard). The prisoner has not named the other two persons who were present. * Thirdly, the prisoner acknowledged to the Police that he intended to kill the victim at the park, and would have done so but for the interruption of the westerner. I am satisfied that the prisoner certainly intended to occasion grievous bodily harm to the victim. I am uncertain, notwithstanding the admission made by the prisoner, as to whether he intended to kill the victim at this point in time. I am satisfied, however, that it was the prisoner who kicked the victim to the back of the head. The victim was his enemy. He was skilled in martial arts. He was apparently wearing heavy black shoes known as Doc Martens. 
A post mortem was carried out by Dr Bradhurst. Dr Bradhurst noted, amongst other injuries, the following: "There was a comminuted fracture of the posterior base of the skull as described above. This was a depressed fracture with the depression occurring into the cranial cavity. There was the small left recent subdural haemorrhage as described above." 
Dr Bradhurst gave evidence. He enlarged upon that brief description as follows: (T22) "Q. How severe was the fracture to the back of the skull? 
A. It was a severe fracture, in that it extended in area - ... The area was a by 50 millimetre area of fractured bone. It was not only fractured, but it was fractured in a number of places. It was also depressed, the bone was pressed into the cavity, the cranial cavity where the brain is held. There was a small subdural haemorrhage over the left cerebral hemisphere, which in itself, just the size of the haemorrhage would not necessarily cause death.
There was also subaxial haemorrhage over the brain, and certainly in my opinion capable of causing death.

Q. Would you expect with an injury of that severity, somebody, after receiving an injury, would be able to walk with assistance, but still remain conscious? 
A. I feel that they may not necessarily become immediately unconscious, but I think they would - I feel it most likely that they would lose consciousness straight away. It is possible that they may have been severely dazed, and then lapsed further into (un)consciousness." 
Mr Frier continued to observe the group as they withdrew from the park. They walked towards a brown Toyota Corona station sedan. The victim appeared very unsteady on his feet. He was assisted by one of his assailants, who had his arm around his shoulder. That description coincides, more or less, with the description given by the prisoner.

Although Dr Bradhurst thought it likely that an injury of this severity would cause an immediate loss of consciousness, he could not exclude the possibility of a more gradual decline. On the basis of the eye witness account, I am satisfied that the depressed fracture was inflicted during the assault, rather than at some later time. I am also satisfied that the victim was able to walk, assisted, to the car. The victim, soon thereafter, became either unconscious or semi-conscious.

The prisoner's account suggested that the victim was taken directly to a building site at Orchard Road, Chester Hill. It was at this site that the body was discovered the next morning at 6.30 am. The prisoner further asserted that, once at the site, in the course of their lengthy discussions, he, the prisoner, produced a knife. He described the circumstances, and what occurred thereafter, in these words: "A (INTPRTR) I only remembered the last thing he said. He said, Do you think that you can really play against me? 
Q129 And what did you do when he said that? 
A (INTPRTR) I pulled out the knife from my pocket.

Q130 And what happened then? 
A (INTPRTR) Hoang then said, If you can't manage to kill me, I will kill you.
He said, If you can't kill me, I, I will kill you." 
The prisoner then stabbed the victim, and whilst holding his back, pulled the knife across his throat. The victim fell backwards. He then tried to crawl. At this point the prisoner withdrew. The prisoner specifically denied having attempted to strangle the victim.

I am satisfied that the prisoner deliberately stabbed the victim, and thereafter cut his throat. However, the account given by the prisoner as to the circumstances in which Hoang Huy Le died is otherwise false.

Having left the Bankstown park, and the victim having lost consciousness or become semi-conscious, the prisoner, and those with him, were confronted with a dilemma. What should be done with the victim? It was plain that the victim had been seriously injured. However, he was still alive. In these circumstances the victim was taken to premises at Camira Street, Villawood.
The premises were occupied by the owner of the brown Toyota station sedan. A number of people stayed at the premises from time to time, on a casual basis.
Hence, a number of people had keys to the premises. The victim was placed on a mattress within a bedroom at those premises.

The group, including the prisoner, then returned to Bankstown. They picked up the owner of the car, in accordance with the arrangement which had been made at the time the vehicle was borrowed. They then returned to Camira Street.

Once they arrived at those premises, the person who was the occupant of the premises, noticed a bedroom door had been closed. That was unusual. He, therefore, entered the bedroom. He saw that someone was lying on a bed with a blanket pulled over them, including over the face. He pulled back the blanket a short way. He saw a young man. He looked like he had been bashed. He had a black eye. He was bleeding from his nose. There was the smell of vomit. He was semi-conscious.

The prisoner had followed the occupant of these premises into the bedroom. He stopped his investigating further, asking him to step outside the bedroom.
Once outside, the prisoner said to ignore what he had seen.

Later that evening, the occupant of these premises saw the prisoner go into the kitchen and select a kitchen knife, which he placed in his pocket. The group, including the prisoner, then left the premises. By the time they left it was well after dark. When the occupant later checked the bedroom, the person who had been lying on the mattress had been removed.

Orchard Road, Chester Hill, where the victim was found the next day, is very close to Camira Street, Villawood. It appears that, first, an attempt was made to strangle the victim. The following was noted by Dr Bradhurst on post mortem: "There was a 1.5 mm wide brown slightly indented friction abrasion in the form of a ligature mark completely encircling the neck." 
There was a fracture of the hyoid bone (the Adam's apple), caused by the ligature. The victim had haemorrhages over the eyelids and eye, consistent with strangulation. There were fingernail abrasions on the face, consistent with an attempt to pull the ligature away from the throat.

On the left side of the neck the continuity of the ligature mark was broken by a stab wound. Dr Bradhurst thought it likely that the victim had been stabbed, and his throat cut, after the attempt at strangulation. I accept that evidence.

There were no indications of a struggle at the Chester Hill site where the victim was found. The victim had bare feet (consistent with his having been placed on the bed at the Camira Street premises). There were no footprints at
Chester Hill, although there were the impressions left by shoes. Commenting upon the small amount of blood immediately adjacent to the body, Dr Bradhurst said this: "... it would be consistent with the wound, I think, particularly if the knife wounds had occurred towards the end of his life, if he was still alive, but not much life left in his body, could've given that sort of amount of blood." 
The victim, therefore, was strangled, and had his throat cut, away from the building site. The ligature may well have been applied soon after the assault in the park, on the drive to Camira Street. Ultimately, the victim was taken to the Chester Hill site, and dragged by his feet. His body was placed next to an industrial waste bin, where it was discovered early the next morning.

It is uncertain how many others, apart from the prisoner, were involved. One gathers, however, from the occupant of Camira Street, that the group returned to that address about an hour later. The prisoner came up to this person, put his arm around him, and said the following words: "Don't worry about it, ... we've fixed it up. It's our business, don't worry about it." 
The prisoner acknowledged that, on his way back from the building site, he disposed of evidence that may have implicated him in the crime. First, he threw away the knife as he passed across a bridge. Secondly, he burnt the victim's schoolbag on a barbecue in a park.

These, then, are the objective facts. Counsel for the prisoner made the following submission: "The admissions reveal an evolving, rather than a pre-meditated offence." 
The crime certainly did evolve. However, confronted by a victim who was semi- conscious, and seriously injured, the prisoner exhibited no mercy. He did not seek medical attention. Instead, he, apparently assisted by others, sought to eliminate the victim once and for all. The selection of the knife at Camira
Street, the strangulation, the stab wounds, and ultimately the cutting of the victim's throat, were all carried out with cool premeditation. This was, therefore, a brutal crime, exhibiting grave criminality.

No doubt the prisoner's motivation was complex, and could only be fully understood if the history of his relationship with the victim were known.
However, part of the motivation, as revealed by the evidence, including that of the prisoner, was the elimination of a person who claimed to have witnessed a crime, and threatened to go to the Police. The prisoner has not been charged with perverting the course of justice. He is not being dealt with by me upon that basis (De Simoni versus The Queen <case>; [(1980-1) 147 CLR 383).] I am entitled, nonetheless, to have regard to that motive. It underlines the premeditation involved in this case.

Other matters which I am required to consider are matters personal to the prisoner. Prominent amongst these is the fact that he was, at the time of committing this offence, a very young man. He was born on 11 October 1978 in
Vietnam . He spent the first seven years of his life in an institution. He recollects a fairly sterile environment with no contact from his family. At the age of seven he was claimed by his mother. There began a happier phase of his life, although it was not without its difficulties. He found it difficult to adjust to family life. His father had apparently separated from his mother when he was very young. His father had, thereafter, gone to Australia, remarried, and established a new family. When the prisoner was twelve, he was sent to Australia. He was not consulted beforehand. He, thereafter, lived with his father. He spoke no English. He found schooling difficult. After a couple of years he ran away from home. Since then he has essentially lived with friends, and on the street. Unfortunately, it is not an unfamiliar story. In
Regina versus Pham & Anor [(1991) 55 A Crim R 128],
Lee CJ at CL said this: "Whilst the early background of each respondent merits sympathy and understanding it cannot be used to cloak or disguise the fact that the actions of the respondents and the other men involved can only properly be described as the actions of a gang of thugs ... " 
At the time the prisoner committed the offence he was seventeen years and ten months. He was, for the purposes of the law, a "child", being under the age of eighteen years. He is now twenty years. He is still a very young man. However, the fact that he was almost eighteen years when the crime was committed, and the fact that the crime itself if so serious, and so brutal, makes his youth less important, when it comes to sentencing, than it might otherwise have been. Referring to [s6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s6.html) of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/), Hunt CJ at CL made the following comment in R versus Bus & Anor (CCA, unreported, November 1995) at p7: "In any event, it is obvious that the relevance of the principles stated in [s6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s6.html) to each individual case depends to a very large extent upon the age of the particular offender and the nature of the particular offence committed. An offender almost eighteen years of age cannot expect to be treated according to law substantially differently to an offender just over eighteen years of age.
In both cases, the youth of the offender remains very relevant. Rehabilitation plays a more important role and general deterrence a lesser role. But that principle is subject to the qualification that, where a youth conducts himself in the way an adult might conduct himself and commits a crime of considerable gravity, the function of the courts to protect the community requires deterrence and retribution to remain significant elements in sentencing him.
That qualification does apply in the present case, although perhaps not to the extent that it would have in relation to an offence involving greater physical violence." 
The circumstances of this case fall within the qualification identified by
Hunt CJ at CL. It was, as I have said, an extremely brutal crime by a person almost eighteen years old.

Two matters were put forward which may suggest that deterrence ought to be given less weight in the circumstances of this crime. First, an intelligence test administered by a psychologist, Ms Robilliard, placed the prisoner well below the average range (in the bottom ten percent). The test given was non- verbal, in an effort to compensate for the deficiencies in the prisoner's
English. Even so, there was, according to Ms Robilliard, a cultural bias in the questions which formed part of that test. The prisoner's ability, therefore, was likely to be greater than the results suggested. The prisoner, when interviewed by the Police (admittedly through an interpreter), did not appear to be in any way at a loss. Ms Robilliard thought that he had some insight into his own problems. The mental capacity of the prisoner, in my view, is not such as to create the need to moderate ordinary principles of deterrence (cf R versus Bus & Anor (supra) at p5).

The second matter related to the prisoner's mental health. There is, of course, no question that he knew what he was doing, and the gravity of what he was doing. However, Dr Canaris, psychiatrist, who saw the prisoner after the offence, formed the view that he was suffering from a psychiatric illness, namely depression. He believed he was in need of treatment. Ms Robilliard formed the same view. I accept their evidence. I accept that the depression pre-dated the offences, and indeed may well have operated for a number of years. The prisoner may well have benefited from psychiatric treatment, and especially medication. In many respects, however, he appeared, nonetheless, to lead a relatively normal life. He formed friendships. He had a girlfriend. At various times he held jobs. However, I accept, that, in the circumstances, the principle of general deterrence may, to a degree, need to be moderated in his case, by reason of the psychiatric illness diagnosed (Anderson <case>; [(1981) VR 155]; R versus Scognamiglio [(1991) 56 A Crim R 81], per Grove J at 85/6).

There is a further aspect. In Veen (No 2) <case>; [[1987-1988] 164 CLR 465] at , Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ said this: "However, sentencing is not a purely logical exercise, and the troublesome nature of the sentencing discretion arises in large measure from unavoidable difficulty in giving weight to each of the purposes of punishment. The purposes of criminal punishment are various: protection of society, deterrence of the offender and of others who might be tempted to offend, retribution and reform. The purposes overlap and none of them can be considered in isolation from the others when determining what is an appropriate sentence in a particular case. They are guideposts to the appropriate sentence but sometimes they point in different directions. And so a mental abnormality which makes an offender a danger to society when he is at large but which diminishes his moral culpability for a particular crime is a factor which has two countervailing effects: one which tends towards a longer custodial sentence, the other towards a shorter. These effects may balance out, but consideration of the danger to society cannot lead to the imposition of a more severe penalty than would have been imposed if the offender had not been suffering from a mental abnormality." 
There are significant indications that the prisoner is given to explosive anger, and physical violence. Whilst still a juvenile, he was convicted on 8
December 1995 of malicious damage and assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
He was put on probation for eighteen months. The murder of Hoang Huy Le occurred on 7 August 1996, that is, within the period during which the prisoner was on probation. That is a circumstance of aggravation (R v
Moffitt [(1990) 20 NSWLR 114]; Colin
Bruce McMahon (CCA, unreported, 4 April 1996) per Badgery-Parker J).

Shortly before 16 September 1996, that is, within a matter of weeks after the murder, the prisoner was involved in a further incident. He attended the
Bankstown Sports Club. While he was standing at the top of a stairway with friends, a woman walked past him. He took hold of her buttock. She protested, and an altercation ensued. A friend of the woman intervened. She told the prisoner to leave her friend alone. The prisoner then did a karate style kick into the stomach of the woman who had intervened. She fell backwards down the stairwell. She struck her head on the wall.

A third woman then intervened. The prisoner alleges she insulted him by saying, "Fucking Vietnamese". However that may be, he produced a large knife.
He stabbed the woman in the chest, and the left knee.

When arrested, he admitted what he had done. By the time the matter came to
Court (7 February 1997), the prisoner was already in custody awaiting trial on a charge of murder. The Court imposed a control order, without conditions, for twelve months commencing on 20 November 1996. The prisoner was sent to the
Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre.

Whilst at the centre further difficulties arose. I believe they are relevant to an assessment of the true circumstances of the prisoner, and it is therefore appropriate for me to have regard to them (R versus Wilson <case>; [(1956) VLR 199] at 201, Lowe J (diss); R versus Hansen [(1961) 79 WN ).] On 13 January 1997, the prisoner damaged property at the
Kariong Centre. A month later, 12 February 1997, he was washing up alongside another prisoner. The other prisoner bent down to the garbage. Holding a ceramic plate in both hands, the prisoner smashed it on the other prisoner's head. That person required eleven stitches. The next day, 13 February 1997, the prisoner threw a jar of Vegemite or honey across the breakfast room, hitting another prisoner on the back of the head. That person required eight stitches.

The prisoner was taken before the Gosford Local Court on 27 March 1997. He was convicted of malicious wounding and assault occasioning actual bodily harm. A fixed term of six months, commencing on 27 March 1997, was imposed in respect of each offence, concurrently. The prisoner served that sentence at the
Lithgow gaol.

These matters were drawn to the attention of Ms Robilliard. She acknowledged that the prisoner could, quite suddenly, be violent and dangerous.

That is not to say that the prisoner is beyond redemption. Dr Canaris saw a number of signs that gave him hope. He detected a sadness in the prisoner which he saw as a positive sign. He said this: "There is an element of the normal response of a normal human being wanting normal things in life underlying that sadness. That actually significantly improves his chances of responding reasonably well to treatment, responding reasonably well to attempts to rehabilitate him." 
Dr Canaris urged that psychiatric treatment be provided for the prisoner whilst in gaol. He said: "A. ... I mean if I were to say look, treatment will guarantee some kind of wonderful result for this man, I would be misleading the court. I mean there are no guarantees. But I can say that without treatment a disastrous result is almost guaranteed." 
Dr Canaris added to following observation, relevant to the issue of special circumstances under [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/): "I think first of all he really would need the opportunity of a lengthier period of parole, if that is possible, within the sentencing options. It is essential that this man, upon release into the community, continue with his treatment, continue with a lot of structure around him, and continue to have available to him a considerable amount of support." 
I will return to the issue of special circumstances later in these remarks.

One other aspect which provides some basis for hope, and which is relevant to the sentence which should be imposed, is that the prisoner has shown a degree of contrition. He was asked to attend the Flemington Police Station by
Detective Karras. Detective Karras was the officer in charge of the investigation into the charges arising out of the offences at the Bankstown
Sports Club in September 1996. Whilst at the station, the prisoner volunteered to speak about the murder of Hoang Huy Le. In the course of doing so, or before doing so, he broke down and cried. The account that he gave, as
I have demonstrated, contained a number of falsehoods. It certainly could not be described as full and frank. He omitted reference to a number of individuals. His having done so, however, is consistent with his fearing to name them, and I draw no adverse inference against him. His account of his conversations with the victim, and threats said to have been made by the victim, were, in my belief, false. That is hardly consistent with contrition.
In short, he was sorry to a degree.

However, he did volunteer matters in respect of his own guilt which the Police may otherwise have found difficult to prove. He ultimately pleaded guilty to an indictment for murder. The principles relevant in this context were enunciated by Street CJ in R versus Ellis [(1996) 6 NSWLR 603] where his
Honour said (at 604): "This Court has said on a number of occasions that a plea of guilty will entitle a convicted person to an element of leniency in the sentence. The degree of leniency may vary according to the degree of inevitability of conviction as it may appear to the sentencing judge, but it is always a factor to which a greater or lesser degree of weight must be given.

When the conviction follows upon a plea of guilty, that itself is the result of a voluntary disclosure of guilt by the person concerned, a further element of leniency enters into the sentencing decision. Where is was unlikely that guilt would be discovered and established were it not for the disclosure by the person coming forward for sentence, then a considerable element of leniency should properly be extended by the sentencing judge. It is part of the policy of the criminal law to encourage a guilty person to come forward and disclose both the fact of an offence having been committed and confession of guilt of that offence.

The leniency that follows a confession of guilt in the form of a plea of guilty is a well-recognised part of the body of principles that cover sentencing. Although less well recognised, because less frequently encountered, the disclosure of an otherwise unknown guilt of an offence merits a significant added element of leniency, the degree of which will vary according to the degree of likelihood of that guilt being discovered by the law enforcement authorities, as well as guilt being established against the person concerned." 
At the time the prisoner made his confession to the Police (18 November 1996), he was a suspect in relation to the murder of Hoang Huy Le. However, he had not been charged. He had apparently, at one point, been interviewed, but made no relevant admissions.

There was, at the time of his confession, certain evidence linking him to the death of Hoang Huy Le. He had an identifiable motive. He had a poor relationship with the victim. The victim claimed to have witnessed wrong-doing on the part of the prisoner at the Petersham roller skating rink on 21 June
The prisoner had been identified as one of the group who accompanied the victim from the Sunshine Cafe at about 3.30 pm on 7 March 1996. The assault at the Bankstown complex was at a location close by the coffee shop, and occurred at a time which was soon after the victim had been seen to leave the coffee shop. The eye witness identified the assailants and the victim as Vietnamese, aged seventeen or eighteen years. He described the victim as having long black hair, which was consistent with the deceased.

However, it was not until the Police interviewed the occupant at Camira
Street, Villawood, in January 1997, that one could successfully construct a chain of causation. That person was able to provide information concerning the borrowing of the brown Toyota Corolla station sedan. That vehicle was seen at the site of the assault. The occupant of Camira Street was also able to describe the movements back and forth at that house, and the presence of the boy in the bedroom who appeared to have been bashed.

At the time the prisoner came forward, therefore, the case against him was problematical, although investigations were continuing. The prisoner is entitled to a discount for the disclosures he made, and ultimately for the plea of guilty entered to the charge of murder (s439 [Crimes Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)).

Counsel for the prisoner, in written submissions, said this: "Post-Sentence Hardship: Conditions of Detention.

The conditions of custody of the Prisoner after sentence will be hard. He is on strict protection." 
However, when asked by me about that matter, it was not pressed.

The prisoner has been in custody for almost two years after his arrest in respect of this and other matters (on 18 November 1996). However, part of the period he has spent in custody is referable to the sentences imposed by the
Local Court in 1997. The amount of time which the prisoner may be regarded as having been in custody, bail refused, has been calculated as 437 days (1 year months and 11 days). Counsel for the prisoner has acknowledged the accuracy of that calculation. For the purposes of determining the appropriate commencing date, the prisoner will be given credit for a period of 437 days.

These are the objective and subjective circumstances which I intend to take into account. Murder is the most serious offence in the criminal calender. It calls for a substantial sentence by way of penal servitude to serve the interests of punishment which I have identified, including the protection of the community.

I am satisfied that special circumstances exist in the prisoner's case which make it appropriate to adjust, to a small degree, the normal proportion between the minimum and additional terms. For the reasons given by Dr Canaris, the prisoner is likely to require longer supervision than is usual upon his release from gaol.

MHN, I sentence you to penal servitude for a period of 22 years made up of a minimum term of 16 years and an additional term of 6 years. Making the adjustment for 437 days in custody awaiting trial, the commencing date of the minimum term will be 19 August 1997, which will expire on 18 August 2013; with an additional term of 6 years, commencing on 19 August 2013. The earliest date upon which you will be eligible for release on parole will be 19 August 2013. 
I strongly recommend that, during his time in gaol, the prisoner should be provided with psychiatric assessment and treatment, and that such treatment should continue after his release on parole.
 * * * 
