

Roquin Office Services Pty Limited and 2 Ors versus Tingdale Pty Limited and
Anor Matter No CA 40175/95 [1998] NSWSC 319 (21 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
ROQUIN OFFICE SERVICES PTY LIMITED & 2 ORS versus TINGDALE PTY LIMITED & ANOR 
CA 40175/95 July 1998 
Mason P, Meagher JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The transcript will reveal the matters in issue and the matters which have thankfully become common ground. 
On the three matters debated I think that the appellant should have the ordinary costs of the appeal with the Suitors Fund Certificate to follow, given the fact that the appeal took less than a day and the superfluous grounds were jettisoned before the respondent had to spend any costs in preparing submissions.

On the question of interest on the outstanding amount I would otherwise order, in accordance with <case> A considerable amount of rent was at all times outstanding under a lease agreement that had a twenty percent interest component. In my view that was the contract. The debtor could have tendered that which it admitted was due or made some attempt to do so, but that was not done and I therefore think the contractual rate should apply.

On the question of the costs of the proceedings at first instance I do take into account significantly the fact that possibly eighty percent of the proceedings were taken on the one issue on which the appellant ultimately succeeded. But I also have regard to the fact that a net money judgment was entered in the respondent's behalf at the end of the day under the cross claim.

I think the proper order for costs at trial is that the respondent pay fifty percent of the costs of proceedings at first instance. That will avoid any taxing or cost assessment issues that would flow from the alternative formulation suggested by Mr Bowers for the respondent.

MEAGHER JA: I quite agree 
MASON P: The orders then subject to anything you may say gentleman are as follows: 
Appeal allowed in part.
Set aside the orders of Brownie J.
Order the appellant to pay $43,655 plus interest at the rate of 20% per annum from 10 March 1995 to date of payment.
Respondent to pay 50% of the costs of the proceedings at first instance.
Respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and to have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if qualified.
 * * * 
