

Fleming versus State of New South Wales and Anor Matter No 3207/92 [1997] NSWSC (10 November 1997) 
Last Updated: 6 March 1998 `Fleming versus State of NSW & Anor` ` 3207/92` `10 November 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /92 LLOYD FRANCIS FLEMING versus STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff claims damages arising out of a situation which, he says, gives rise to an equity by virtue of estoppel by acquiescence. Originally the plaintiff also sued in negligence, but that count was not pressed at the hearing. This present judgment deals simply with the question of liability, as it was agreed that the quantum of damages could wait to another day. 
The plaintiff says that his father had a freehold at Delungra near Inverell, being property described as Portion 19, Parish of Dingo, County of Murchison.
During 1954, the plaintiff became aware that Portion 20 of the Parish of Dingo was available for lease. A prickly pear lease numbered 1955/7 was granted in
October 1955. The grantee was one A.F. Kemp. I am told from the bar table, though there is no actual evidence of this, that there was a term contract between Mr Kemp and the plaintiff in existence at that time. This probably explains why it is that the plaintiff in due course became the proprietor of the Crown lease over Portion 20.

On 4 November 1955, the plaintiff says that he applied to convert the prickly pear lease to perpetual leasehold. This application was granted and the perpetual lease was granted to Mr Kemp on 5 December 1957.

The register shows that Lot 20 was reserved from sale by reservation gazetted in 1929. On 16 August 1957, shortly before the conversion to perpetual lease was granted, that reservation was replaced by reservation from sale number
On 19 August 1958, the perpetual lease was transferred to the plaintiff.

The plaintiff says that he contacted the Land Board for the area in 1958 and received a letter from the Board. That letter is in evidence. It shows that the current lease was a lease in perpetuity which could be converted to a conditional purchase, but revocation of the reservation from sale would be necessary and there would be necessity for the Minister's consent. The letter asked for a fee of 2s/6d.

In 1964, the plaintiff's then solicitors wrote to the Land Board again and received almost the same letter except that the fee was now 10 shillings.

By 1965 the plaintiff had acquired Portion 19 from his father. He was intending at that stage to operate Portions 19 and 20 as one whole enterprise.
Portion 20 had been logged between 1958 and 1969. In 1965 there was a conversation between the plaintiff and Forestry Officer Crompton during which the latter told the plaintiff that the Forestry Commission was only interested in the timber and would have no objection to converting the lease to a conditional purchase.

A letter was written by the Inverell Forestry Office to the plaintiff on 23
March 1972, the text of which is as follows: "The Forestry Commission has decided that no further logging operations will be undertaken on your Crown Lease 55/7 Inverell, being Portion 20, Parish of
Dingo, County Murchison.
 "Under these circumstances, if you were to apply to the Lands Department for conversion of this lease, the Forestry Commission would raise no objections to such an application." 
In April 1974, the plaintiff asked the Land Board office as to the amount required to convert his lease to conditional purchase. He was informed that the lease might be converted to a conditional purchase at a capital value of $3,512. He was told how an application could be lodged and was informed that the conversion price could be paid by annual instalments over a period of 33 years.

The plaintiff did not at that stage have the wherewithal to convert the land and it would seem that he was in discussions with the Rural Assistance Board and his then mortgagee, but those discussions did not enable the application to be lodged. It was not until 1988, after the plaintiff came into some money as the result of the death of a near relative, that he was in a position to make an application.

The plaintiff inquired of the Lands Board Office on 26 July 1989 as to the cost of conversion. He was told that it would be $3,512 plus administrative costs, which brought the figure to somewhere near $4,000. He then applied to convert the lease. He paid the price by cheque dated 20 October 1989 made out to the Department of Lands at Armidale for $3,512. This was after there had been some correspondence which had gone back to April 1988.

On 8 April 1988, solicitors had lodged an application for conversion of the
Crown lease and there had been correspondence between the plaintiff and the then Minister for Natural Resources, particularly the letter of 24 November , which is Exhibit DX02. The Minister advised that, after the 1972 letter, the [Forestry Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/) had been amended, that Mr Fleming had not applied for 16 years, and during that time much of the cypress pine on the land had grown to marketable size. The
Minister considered that there was a sound case for management of the lease as a multiple-use forest, which would include grazing by the plaintiff as the lessee and there was a proposal to dedicate Portion 20 as State Forest. If that happened, there would be a permanent bar to conversion.

On 11 October 1989, the Minister, after further correspondence with the plaintiff or persons making representations on his behalf, said that although there had been statements from 1956 to 1972 to the effect that the Forestry
Commission would have no objection to a conversion, things had changed and that the Crown lease 1955/7 had been dedicated as Daffeys Creek State Forest by notification in the Government Gazette on 1 September 1989. The Minister pointed out that that gazettal did not extinguish the lease but did act as a bar to conversion to purchase tenure.

Thus on 30 October 1989, the Lands Office at Armidale returned the plaintiff's cheque, indicating that because Portion 20 was included within the Daffeys
Creek State Forest, in accordance with [s
E(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/s25e.html) of the [Forestry Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/), the application would need to be refused. There was further correspondence and these proceedings were commenced on 2 September 1991.

The evidence before me consisted of a series of affidavits by the plaintiff, two affidavits of valuers which were read for limited purposes only, seeing that this hearing is on liability alone, and an affidavit by Mr Dodds, who was the forester at Inverell at the time. Both the plaintiff and Mr Dodds were cross examined.

The plaintiff said in his affidavit, and it was not challenged, that he had done work on the land, Portion 20, between 1958 and 1989 which he would not have done if he had been of a view other than that he could convert Portion 20 to a conditional purchase and that there would be no objection by the Forestry
Commission to him so doing. He says, accordingly, that he is entitled to damages in equity to atone for the unconscionable conduct of the defendants (namely the State of New South Wales and the Forestry Commission). He recognises that the only appropriate atonement is by way of damages. The submissions as to law on behalf of the plaintiff were well and strongly put by
Mr Fitzgibbon of counsel, which he summarised in a 10-page document, which I will leave with the papers. Mr Fitzgibbon supplemented these in his oral address.

The vital letter of 1972 was written before the [Forestry Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/) was amended by Act No. 26 of 1972, which came into force on 1 July 1972. That amending Act replaced [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/s17.html) and added new [sections
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/s25c.html) and [25E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/s25e.html) into the [Forestry
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/). [Section
E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1916139/s25e.html) provides that an application for conversion from leasehold to a conditional purchase shall not be granted if certain conditions take place. One is that the Forestry Commission has certified that the land is within a State Forest.

Mr Fitzgibbon says that all the elements of a cause of action in proprietary estoppel have been made out in the instant case. He takes for the elements the summary given by Brennan J in Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] at -429. He goes through these one by one and says that all the pre-conditions are satisfied.

Mr P Johnson SC, who appeared for the defendants, was content to adopt the
Brennan J test but he says that if one does, then at least some of the elements, in particular element 4, have not been made out. So the plaintiff must fail.

The matter, accordingly, can best be judged by going through the six elements of the test, looking at the evidence and drawing conclusions. The principles I will use below are the principles enunciated by Brennan J in the Waltons
Stores case.
The plaintiff assumed that a particular legal relationship would exist between the plaintiff and the defendant so that the defendant was not free to withdraw from that relationship.

The plaintiff says that the 1972 letter was the culmination of what the plaintiff had been told between 1956 and then. I am not too sure of the significance of what the plaintiff may have been told before he became proprietor of the lease in 1958 but it would seem as a matter of fact that the plaintiff was told that the Forestry Commission would have no objection to the conversion from 1958 to 1972. It is apparent that the plaintiff did, in fact, make that assumption. Apart from other evidence, Mr Dodds' affidavit, which annexes a report that he made in June 1988, says (page 5, heading 12, second paragraph): "The current lessee was advised by the District 
Forester on 23 March, 1972 that following logging the 
Commission would offer no objection to conversion. Mr 
Fleming still has a copy of that letter and it is known from information obtained from other parties that he believes it confers a moral obligation on the part of the Commission to allow this present conversion to proceed." 
Mr Dodds then went on to say: "The reality is that things have changed since 1972 ..." 
Mr Johnson SC says that the assumption that the plaintiff must draw, in order to succeed under the first element of the test, must be a reasonable assumption and that it could not be reasonable for someone to accept that an acknowledgment that in 1972 a government department would not object to his application to conversion would still hold good 16 years later. At the very most, the assumption could only be made that the objection would not be lodged if the plaintiff proceeded to conversion within a reasonable time of 1972.

Again, the other factors in the case show that it would be unreasonable to make such an assumption, one of them being that even though the land had been logged and the Forestry Commission had said in 1972 that it did not intend to log again, the trees, which the evidence would suggest take something like 26 years to grow to maturity, had moved from being more or less undergrowth to some patches of quite developed trees by 1988. Still further, there had been quite considerable changes in law and policy governing Crown lands. In particular though, there is no evidence that the plaintiff actually knew about this change to policy which was brought in by Act No. 26 of 1972.

Surely, any reasonable person would not have made any greater assumption, says
Mr Johnson SC, than that if he made an application within a reasonable time of then, subject to the then prevailing policy, the Forestry Commission would not lodge any objection. In any event, the whole of the application was subject to the Minister's consent and the plaintiff knew that there was at least one barrier to the consent in that the reservation from sale would have to be lifted. Accordingly, he could not assume that the application must be granted.

Mr Johnson SC relies on a passage in a tort case, Curran versus Greater Taree
City Council [1992] Aust Torts Reports 81-152 at page 61,159 where, when looking at duties of care, Samuels JA said that one must show that it was reasonably foreseeable that the plaintiff would reasonably rely on certain things.

I do not, with respect, think that one can transpose those words into the law of equitable estoppel. The reason is that at the heart of equitable estoppel is the knowledge or intention of the person sought to be estopped that the plaintiff make the assumption. Especially remembering that equity is always very tender towards those who are not fully experienced commercial business people, it seems to me that even an unreasonable assumption judged by the standard of the person on the Bondi bus would be sufficient to come within the first element so long as the first defendant knew or intended that the plaintiff would make the assumption.

I should note that there are some dicta in the English cases reviewed in
Pawlowski on The Doctrine of Proprietary Estoppel (Sweet &
Maxwell, London, 1996) pp 22-28 that the assumption made by the plaintiff cannot be assessed solely on the plaintiff's subjective belief and that the plaintiff must show that a reasonable person could reasonably make the assumption; see J T 
Developments Ltd versus Quinn [(1990) 62 P & CR 33], 50. 
However, with proprietary estoppel what matters is the effect on the defendant's conscience at the time he or she resiles form the former position.
If, at that time the defendant knows that the plaintiff has made an unreasonable assumption and has acted upon it to his detriment, there may be circumstances where the defendant's conscience will be affected.
The defendant induced the plaintiff to adopt that assumption or expectation.

Mr Fleming says that the letter induced him to adopt the assumption and he, in fact, did so. There is no material, however, to suggest that anyone on the part of the defendants ever intended that the letter of 1972 would act as an inducement. It does not seem to me that in this present case the mere fact that the letter caused Mr Fleming to act in this way is sufficient.

One of the seminal cases in this area is Ramsden versus Dyson (1865) LR 1 HL
At 170 to 171, Lord Kingsdown contrasts two situations. At page 170 he puts situation A, namely, "If a man, under a verbal agreement with a landlord for a certain interest in land, or, what amounts to the same thing, under an expectation, created or encouraged by the landlord, that he shall have a certain interest, takes possession of such land, with the consent of the landlord, and upon the faith of such promise or expectation, with the knowledge of the landlord, and without objection by him, lays out money upon the land, a Court of equity will compel the landlord to give effect to such promise or expectation." 
This is compared with situation B on page 171: "If, on the other hand, a tenant being in possession of land, and knowing the nature and extent of his interest, lays out money upon it in the hope or expectation of an extended term or an allowance for expenditure, then, if such hope or expectation has not been created or encouraged by the landlord, the tenant has no claim which any Court of law or equity can enforce." 
Earlier, Lord Eldon had said something quite similar in Dann versus Spurrier <case>; [(1802) 7 Ves 231], 236; <case>; [32
ER 94], 96. His
Lordship said that the plaintiff must "prove that case by strong and cogent evidence; leaving no reasonable doubt, that he acted upon that sort of encouragement". It seems to me that the mere fact that something said by the defendant is fixed upon by the plaintiff as a reason for his hope is not sufficient. One has got to look objectively as to what would induce the reasonable man to so act or, alternatively, the plaintiff has by strong and cogent evidence got to show that the reasonable expectation would have been that that was what the defendant intended or knew. This, in a sense, brings in by a back door the principle that Mr Johnson SC was trying to get in under 1, but it seems to me that it is only consistent with the persistent stressing in the cases of the knowledge of the defendant that this must be so. This knowledge is again stressed throughout the judgment of Brennan J in the
Waltons Stores case.
The plaintiff must act on the assumption. All that need be said here is that there is some evidence that he did and, indeed, there is no evidence to the contrary.
Did the defendant know or intend the plaintiff so to act? It seems to me that it is here, if nowhere else, that the plaintiff's case fails. There is no evidence before me that at any time before Mr Dodds was making his investigation for his 1988 report that any knowledge is shown by the defendants that the plaintiff acted on an assumption. There may be cases where the nature of the communication is such that it would be almost self evident that someone would act upon it in a particular way.

In my view, that is not this case. There being no evidence of the knowledge of the defendants between 1972 and 1988, I cannot see how the principle could apply.

This being so, it is unnecessary to deal with the other two heads laid down by Brennan J, which in any event appear to me only to be supplemental.

I might add that there is a lot to be said for Mr Johnson SC's proposition that it is very difficult to believe that anybody would think that what was said in 1972 was open ended. Surely, there would be a recognition that, if circumstances changed or policy changed, things would be different. However, it would seem more likely than not from the evidence before me that the plaintiff did, in fact, think that the offer was open ended. I do not believe that that would protect him from changes of policy because anyone must have understood that the statement made in 1972 was subject to the policy at the time when the application was put in. There is no material to indicate that Mr
Fleming ever understood that, but the line of territory which is mentioned in one of the two cases cited by Mr Fitzgibbon, namely, Ansett Transport
Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd versus The Commonwealth of Australia <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 54] suggests that is generally so in the case of contracts and I think a fortiori in the case of proprietary estoppel.

Accordingly, the plaintiff's case fails and the suit must be dismissed with costs. The exhibit PX01 can be returned on the usual basis. The other exhibits should remain with the papers.
 * * * 
