

Homestake Gold of Australia Ltd versus Penisula Gold P/L and Ors [1996] NSWSC (9 May 1996) 
HOMESTAKE GOLD OF AUSTRALIA LTD V PENINSULA GOLD PTY LTD & ORS /96 
Thursday 9 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The present proceedings, which have been sometimes referred to as the "Ham Scam Case" involve a novel scheme to defeat compulsory acquisition in a takeover by warehousing shares in the names of minors. The minors or their guardians benefit by a small amount of money or a free ham; the promoters of the scheme benefit from having their shares registered in a large number of small individual holdings by minors.

In the present case, however, the commercial "game" was played out before the hearing was begun. Accordingly the real defendant made no opposition to orders correcting the Register of Members of the company concerned. Nonetheless, unscrambling what had been done requires a considerable amount of delving into obscure areas of the law.

The proceedings, commenced by summons filed in Court on 15 March 1996, sought various declarations and an order correcting the Register of Members of the plaintiff ("Homestake Gold"). The essence of the relief sought is twofold: 
A declaration that the share transfers executed by the first defendant ("Peninsula") in October 1995 in favour of persons who are or include minors are voidable at the option of Homestake Gold, and a subsequent order correcting the Register so as to restore Peninsula as the registered holder of the shares; 
Declarations that the share transfers executed in 
February 1996 on behalf of the minors in respect to half of their shares in each case in favour of certain third parties (referred to in these reasons as the "volunteers") are not in registrable form; and accordingly the directors of Homestake 
Gold are obliged not to register the share transfers.

The background to the proceedings is that Homestake Gold carries on business as a gold mining company. On 14 August 1995 Homestake Mining Company ("Homestake Mining") announced its intention to make takeover offers to acquire the outstanding shares in Homestake Gold. At that stage, Homestake
Mining owned 81.5% of the ordinary shares on issue of Homestake Gold.
Homestake Mining served its Part A statement on Homestake Gold on 13 October
By a letter dated 16 October 1995, Homestake Gold's share registry,
Ernst & Young Registry Services Pty Ltd ("EY") received 918 transfers executed by Peninsula each transferring 100 shares in the capital of Homestake
Gold. The October transfers were all registered on 24 October 1995. At that stage the directors of Homestake Gold were not aware that any of the transferees were minors. The effect of the registration of the October transfers was that the number of members in Homestake Mining increased by 918 to 4357.

Homestake Mining's takeover offers were dispatched to Homestake Gold's shareholders on 31 October 1995. Following various extensions, the offer closed on 9 February 1996. At the close of the offer Homestake Mining had become entitled to 99.5% of the fully paid ordinary shares of Homestake Gold.
Homestake Mining claims to have satisfied the requirement for compulsory acquisition (vide <case> of the Corporations Law). It dispatched compulsory acquisition notices under <case> of the Corporations Law shortly after the close of offer of 9 February 1996.

During the period from 2 February 1996 to 22 February 1996, further share transfers were lodged with Homestake Gold's share registry EY or its solicitors. Homestake Gold, after obtaining legal advice, declined to register certain of the February transfers on the basis that the transferors were minors and there was no evidence that the transfers were binding on the minor.
Homestake Gold was delisted at the close of business on 26 February 1996.

Separate proceedings in this Division of the Court were commenced on 6 March against Homestake Gold by Joy Jakeman. Those proceedings were heard on a final basis on 8 March 1996. Windeyer, J granted the plaintiff's application and directed Homestake Gold to register the transfer in favour of Joy Jakeman.
As a result of that decision, Homestake Gold on 8 March 1996 registered most of the remaining registrable transfers outstanding from February 1996.

Homestake Gold did not register the transfers from minors and Windeyer, J was not required to deal with that issue in the Jakeman proceedings.

It will be necessary to refer a little later in these reasons to the facts surrounding the October 1995 transfers to the minors and the February 1996 transfers from the minors to the volunteers.

When the proceedings came before me on 15 March 1996, I granted leave for the summons to be returnable on 21 March 1996. I also made directions for the summons and affidavits in support to be served on the first and second defendants. I further made directions for notices to be dispatched to each of the minors and each of the volunteers advising them of these proceedings. I made further directions for the proceedings to be advertised in various daily newspapers.

When the proceedings were returned before the Court on 21 March 1996, Mr
Justin Gleeson of counsel appeared for the plaintiff and Mr Stephen Archer of counsel appeared for Peninsula as well as for the second defendant, Mr
Thompson. Mr Archer indicated that his clients consented to the relief being sought by the plaintiff.

The matter was called outside Court and there was no appearance for any of the minors or any of the volunteers.

Although the relief sought is consented to by the defendants before the Court and although those defendants would appear to be the prime movers in the present situation having come about, this Court cannot grant the relief as sought by the plaintiff merely on the basis that it is consented to by these defendants. Since the relief sought involves declarations which may affect the public and persons other than those who appeared, there remains a question whether it is an appropriate case for such declarations.

The questions which arise can be dealt with under the following headings: 
Has adequate notice been given to the minors and the volunteers to allow the Court to proceed to determine the claim for declaratory relief and rectification in the absence of those parties? 
What is the legal effect of the share transfers executed in favour of the minors in October 1995? 
What is the legal effect of the share transfers executed on behalf of the minors in favour of the volunteers in February 1996? 
If the Register of Members of Homestake Gold is to be corrected, should that correction take place from the date of making of this order? 
I will deal with each group of questions in turn, indicating where appropriate also the sub-questions that arise under each heading.

Has adequate notice been given to the minors and the volunteers to allow the Court to proceed to determine the claim for declaratory relief and correction in the absence of those parties? 
The following sub-questions arise:
What notice was given?
What response has there been?
Is that notice sufficient in the circumstances of the present case?
What notice was given? 
The evidence shows that a letter was sent by prepaid mail on 15 March 1996 to each of the minors at the address found on the "details of purchaser" section in each of the deeds (to which I refer later in these reasons) which were executed by the parents or guardians on behalf of these minors. The total number of minors was 84. I had approved of the text of that letter in directions given on 15 March 1996. It informed the minor of the nature of the relief that Homestake Gold was seeking in the proceedings; that the minor would be affected by the decision of the Court; that the minor or his/her guardian may wish to participate in the proceedings; that the proceedings were next before the Court on 21 March 1996 at 9.50 am; and a contact address was given at which the minor or the guardian could be provided with a copy of the
Court documents.

A letter was dispatched by prepaid post on 15 March 1996 to each of the volunteers. The address in each case was that provided on each of the transfers namely PO Box 718 Neutral Bay NSW. The reason why each of the transfers recorded the same address will emerge a little later in these reasons when I refer to the circumstances of the February 1996 transfers.
There were 227 such letters sent. Each letter, in broadly similar format to the letter to the minors, informed the volunteer of the nature of the relief being sought; that the volunteer would be affected by the decision of the
Court; when the proceedings were next on and a contact number to obtain the
Court documents.

Notices were published in the Sydney Morning Herald on 18 March 1996, in the Daily Telegraph on 18 March 1996 and in The Australian on 18 and 19 March
In each paper, one of the notices (intended to reach the volunteers) was under the heading "Homestake Gold of Australia Limited" and enquired of present and former shareholders whether they had replied to correspondence from John Leslie Thompson in relation to some "free shares in Homestake and a free ham". The notice went on to provide details of the proceedings and a contact number to obtain the Court documents. The second notice (intended to reach the minors or their guardians) was headed "Did you sign a Deed of
Agreement in relation to shares in favour of John Leslie Thompson on your behalf or on behalf of children (under 18)?" The notice went on to say that such persons may be affected by proceedings brought by Homestake Gold. Details were provided of when the proceedings were on and a contact number.
What response has there been? 
The evidence shows that only 4 persons responded to the contact address given.
One lady was the grandmother of Matthew Murphy. She said that Matthew was still a minor who would be turning 18 on 23 March 1996. He did not know anything about any share deal. What she understood to be a "petition" was signed at the request of the licensee of the Glebe Hotel. This lady did not want to see any of the Court documents. The second gentleman was Garry Morris who was 43. He said he did not know anything about the shares (Mr Morris' name is marked in Schedule A to the summons as being a minor transferor. It would appear from his age that he should not be in this category and no declaration should be made in respect to his shares). The third response was from Nita
Lyons who was the mother of Melissa Lyons and also the mother of the three
Fuller boys. She said that her children were given the shares and they were paid $10. She further said that she had been told that a friend of a friend had a boss, who could be Mr Thompson who was not allowed to buy shares in his own name. The fourth respondent was Mrs Jackie Kirk from the United Kingdom.
She had received the letter addressed to her daughter Zoe Ann Blackburn.
Neither she nor her daughter knew anything about the shares. She had been living in the United Kingdom since 1987 but her ex-husband lives in Perth. Mrs
Kirk enquired whether there would be any recompense to Zoe if the shares were transferred back to the company. I should note that there is other evidence that some other (but not all) minors were paid $10 for their involvement in the scheme.
Is that notice sufficient in the circumstances of the present case? 
Apart from Mr Morris who turned out not to be a minor, the other three respondents were the parents or in one case a grandparent of minors. They chose not to be represented in Court on 21 March 1996. I will refer later in these reasons to the terms of the Deed of Agreement signed by the guardians on behalf of the minors. It is sufficient to note that by virtue of those terms, the minors never had any economic interest in the shares nor any ability to control the voting or disposal of the shares. In these circumstances I am satisfied that it is likely that most if not all of the minors have received notification of the proceedings being brought on 21 March 1996 and have chosen to take no part in them. I am satisfied that it is likely that there is no serious argument which any of the minors would wish to advance that they do have an equitable or legal interest in the shares such as would entitle them to remain on the Register in respect of the shares.

Turning to the volunteers, none of them have contacted the solicitors for the plaintiff or attended at the hearing on 21 March 1996. This is perhaps not surprising since in each case the address on the Share Register, obtained by reason of the transfer executed by the volunteer, was the same, namely PO Box Neutral Bay NSW. Their address is the same, it would appear, because that is what Peninsula and Mr Thompson procured from each of the volunteers. Thus the notification sent to that address may not have been forwarded on to the individual volunteers. It may be that Peninsula and Mr Thompson do not know the actual addresses of the volunteers. Although advertisements have been placed in the daily newspapers such as the Daily Telegraph and the plaintiff has done everything it could be reasonably expected to do at this stage to bring these proceedings to the attention of the volunteers, I could not conclude that it is likely that they or most of them have knowledge of the proceedings being brought on 21 March 1996. However, in circumstances where, as I have said, blame cannot be laid at the foot of the plaintiff, and there does not appear to be any readily available practical means to speedily bring the proceedings to the attention of these other persons. Furthermore, as these persons never gave any consideration for the shares and indeed may even have received a "free ham" the law must regard them as volunteers in the true sense and commercially as puppets. Thus, I consider that I am justified in proceeding to hear the claim for the declaratory relief and correction of the
Register in the absence of the volunteers. If they have signed documents which are submitted to the company as share transfers and they have nominated in those documents a post office box which in fact will not result in mail reaching them, then it is difficult for them later to complain that notice of an application for orders which affect their position has not reached them.

The context in which I make these observations is that compulsory acquisition is about to be completed. In the absence of proceedings being successfully brought by Peninsula to challenge the validity of compulsory acquisition, or to challenge the fairness of the terms (and I express no observations on the likelihood or prospects of any such proceedings) the consequence of compulsory acquisition will be that money will be received by the target Homestake Gold from Homestake Mining which it will account for to the registered holder. As a result of the orders which I later propose to make, those moneys will be accounted for to Peninsula. Should any minor or volunteer subsequently seek to assert he or she should have received these proceeds, that might raise a question whether Peninsula is obliged to account for those proceeds back to the minor or the volunteer. That is an issue, should it ever arise, which could be dealt with in later proceedings and I do not consider that the prospect of such an issue being raised at a later time should prevent me proceeding to deal with the applications at present.

What is the legal effect of the share transfers executed in favour of the minors in October 1995? 
The following sub-questions arise:
What precisely occurred?
Which system of law applies?
Do the parents or guardians have the ability to bind the minors?
Can the minor affirm or ratify the contract?
Can Homestake Gold avoid the transfers to the minors?
What precisely occurred? 
On 12 October 1995 a transfer of shares was executed purportedly from
Peninsula as transferor to Miriam Pakoti and Patrick John Donovan of 100 shares at 20 cents each. The transfer was said to be in consideration of the sum of $200 paid [(sic) as one would think the sum should be but $20]. Mr VR
Gordon, a solicitor from Clayton Utz the firm acting for Peninsula and Mr
Thompson signed the transfer as attorney of Peninsula under a power of attorney dated 12 October 1995 and also as attorney of the supposed transferees under a power of attorney dated 22 September 1995. Miriam Pakoti is a minor. The transfers to the other minors follow the same form.

In respect to Miriam Pakoti, and each of the other minors a deed of agreement in relation to shares was executed by a parent or guardian supposedly on behalf of Miriam Pakoti. That deed provides as follows, relevantly: 
Clause 1: Miriam Pakoti agreed to acquire shares in her name alone or jointly with others in companies from time to time nominated by John Leslie Thompson.

Clause 2: Pakoti acknowledged that Thompson would from time to time advance to Pakoti funds necessary to meet all costs incurred by Pakoti in acquiring the shares (including brokerage and stamp duty).

The advance would be repayable upon Thompson exercising his option (referred to in clause 3).

The liability of Pakoti was limited to the value of the relevant shares.

Clause 3: Pakoti granted to Thompson or his nominee an option to acquire the shares in the companies.

The exercise price for the option was equal to the costs incurred on behalf of Pakoti in acquiring the relevant shares (including brokerage and stamp duty). Thus the exercise price for the option was the same amount as the amount of the advance. Upon exercise of the option, 
Thompson could offset the money owed by the purchaser to Thompson against the exercise price of the option.

Clause 4: Pakoti agreed not to deal with the shares in any fashion.

Clause 5: Pakoti irrevocably appointed Thompson (or a person authorised by him in writing) to act as 
Pakoti's attorney to do anything which in the opinion of Thompson ought to be done in relation to the shares including without limitation procuring the acquisition of the shares on terms determined by Thompson in his absolute discretion (including use of a post office box as the address to which the share registries of the companies are to forward all cheques notices and other documents), attending and voting at any meeting and doing any acts in relation to the shares arising as a consequence of 
Part 5.1 or Chapter 6 of the Corporations Law.

Clause 6: Pakoti agreed to provide to Thompson all cheques, notices and other documents received by Pakoti from any of the companies.

Clause 7: Pakoti agreed to comply with all directions given by Thompson in relation to the shares.

Clause 10: Pakoti agreed to deliver to Thompson or his nominee a blank share transfer signed by 
Pakoti in relation to the shares.

Clause 11: Pakoti agreed that Thompson or his nominee may complete Schedule B of the deed as and when necessary with the details of the shares acquired pursuant to clause 1.

Clause 12: Pakoti agreed that Thompson shall be entitled to all moneys received by the purchaser in relation to the shares.

Clause 13: Pakoti agreed that Thompson shall be entitled to any bonus issues and rights issues in respect of the shares.

Schedule B to the deed was blank. Also signed is a transfer of shares by the guardian on behalf of Pakoti with the details of the companies and the shares left blank and the details of the transferees left blank. Further signed is a direction by the guardian on behalf of Pakoti directing the broker to transfer the shares from the CHESS sub-register to a certified sub-register and forward all share certificates to and the name is there left blank. Again the details of the companies and the shares and details of the broker are left blank.
(CHESS is an acronym for Clearing House Electronic Subregister System).

Thus what has occurred is that the parent or guardian has purported to bind the minor to a contractual relationship with Mr Thompson whereby Mr Thompson has an ability to put shares in companies chosen by Mr Thompson in the name of the minor; Mr Thompson can procure the shares to be transferred from the minor to any other person; the minor is exposed to no liabilities; the full economic interest in the shares and the power to control voting and disposal of the shares rests with Mr Thompson rather than the minor. It should be noted that because of clause 2 of the deed, the minor never had to pay the purchase consideration.
Which system of law applies? 
A question arises in the law of contract, namely, whether the transaction between the guardian and Mr Thompson serves to create a binding contract between Mr Thompson and the minor. Within that question there are sub- questions: 
Does the guardian have an ability to bind the minor to a contract without reference to the minor's intentions or knowledge of the transaction? 
If no to sub-question (a), where the guardian has purported to bind the minor to the contract does the minor have the capacity to ratify or affirm the contract? 
There are three potential answers to this question, viz (i) the proper law of the contract; (ii) the law of the place of contracting; or (iii) the law of the domicile of the minor.

The evidence shows that the Deeds of Agreement were executed either in New
South Wales or New Zealand. I note that the Deeds executed in New South Wales were duly stamped in New South Wales. At least one minor is resident in the
UK. Some are resident in New Zealand.

As is said in Cheshire & North's Private International Law (12th ed
Butterworths London, 1992) at p 511, "Such modern authority as there is would indicate that capacity to conclude a commercial contract is regulated by the proper law of the contract objectively obtained." The only decision which actually says this is in the Ontario Court of Appeal in Charron versus Montreal
Trust Co [(1958) 15 DLR (2d) 240.]
That is a strong case, however, as the court was compelled to make a decision on the point in order to deal with the case before it and made a deliberate choice. Modern text writer opinion almost unanimously favours this view, see, for example, PE Nygh, Conflict of Laws in Australia (6th ed 1995) at p , Sykes & Pryles, Australian Private International Law (3rd ed ) at p 614 and McLeod, The Conflict of Laws (Carswell, Calgary 1983) at pp 490-2. There is also support for this view in The Bodley Head Limited v Flegon [[1972] 1 WLR 680.] 
The only support for the lex loci contractus comes from cases involving negotiable instruments such as Bondholders Securities Corp versus Manyville [[1933] 4 DLR 699] or cases of contracting marriage.

The most recent edition of Dicey and Morris, Conflict of Laws (12th ed ) at p 1271 contains a suggestion that an individual's capacity to contract is governed by either the proper law or the law of domicile and residence. The older authorities supporting the law of the domicile include
Sottomayor versus De Barros (No 1) [(1877) LR 3 PD 1]; Cooper v Cooper [(1888) 13 App Cas 88] at 99 per
Lord Halsbury LC and Republica De Guatemala versus Nunez [[1927] 1 KB ] at
As McLeod says at p 491, in modern commerce, reference to the lex domicilii is unsatisfactory and should be abandoned.

The question whether the guardians have the ability to bind the minors raises a question whether the agreement gives rise to legally enforceable rights and liabilities which is determined by the proper law of the contract; see
Mackender versus Feldia AG [[1967] 2 QB 590] at 601.

I believe I should follow the Charron case and apply the proper law of the contract.

I should, however, note that it is unlikely that any of the minors, were they to seek to uphold the effectiveness of the Deeds of Agreement, would wish to assert or be able to assert that the law of a place other than the forum governs the question. It is, of course, familiar territory that even if foreign law governs a question under conflict of laws rules, that law will be presumed to be the same as the law of the forum unless evidence is led to the contrary. For the present purpose I am satisfied it is proper to proceed on the basis that New South Wales law governs these questions.

There is a further stage to consider. When one turns from the Deeds of
Agreement, which are perfectly general as to the shares and the companies involved, to the authorisation which Mr Thompson gave Mr Gordon on 11 October and the share transfer executed by Mr Gordon on 12 October 1995, were a minor to seek to uphold the validity of the share transfer, the minor would be asserting that there was a binding and enforceable contract for the transfer to the minor of intangible personal property, namely the shares in Homestake
Gold. A share in the company is personal property which is transferable as provided by the articles of association of the company: Corporations Law s (1)(a) and (b). The laws applicable to ownership of and dealing with personal property apply to a share as they apply to any other property: s (2). A share is taken to be situated in the State or Territory in which the Share Register on which it is entered is kept: <case>. The evidence is that Homestake Gold maintains a Register of Members in New South Wales; all of the transfers to minors have been entered on a certificated register in New
South Wales or a CHESS sub-register maintained in New South Wales. Where a question arises as to the enforceability of a contract to transfer intangible property which is deemed to be located in New South Wales, it must be strongly arguable that the law of New South Wales would govern that question. For this reason also, I proceed in these reasons to consider only the law of the forum.
Do the parents or guardians have the ability to bind the minors? 
Professor Harland, in his Law of Minors (Butterworths, Sydney 1974) truly says at p 7, "In many systems also the consent of a parent or other guardian may give validity to a particular transaction entered into by an infant.
Despite some early dicta to the contrary, this was not the case at common law.
The guardian of an infant did have certain powers in respect of his ward's property, but these powers were very limited in extent." These limited powers did not include a right to dispose of the minor's property, Field versus Moore <case>; [(1855) 7 De GM & G 691], 706; <case>; [44
ER 269], 274. There is no evidence that any of the guardians in the present case were testamentary guardians with special powers which might enable them to deal with the property of the minors. Accordingly, I would conclude on the basis of the material available to me that the actions of the guardians in signing the
Deeds of Agreement were not effective of themselves to bind the minors to the
Deed of Agreement.
Can the minor affirm or ratify the contract? 
The effect of the guardian's actions was to purport to enter into a contract on behalf of a disclosed principal, namely, the minor. The question which does arise is whether the minor has the capacity to ratify or affirm that contract, and if so, how ratification or affirmation could occur. Under the Minors (Property & Contracts) Act 1970 , a person is not under the disability of infancy in relation to a civil act in which he participates when aged 18 years or upwards: <case>. Part 3 of the Act applies in relation to a civil act in which a minor participates: <case>. There is no evidence that any of the minors participated in the transaction at the stage of the guardian signing the Deed of Agreement. Participation could occur if the minor thereafter sought to ratify the Deed of Agreement and take advantage of the transfer of shares made to the minor pursuant to the Deed of Agreement. Even once there is participation, the civil act is not binding on the minor except as provided by the Act: <case>. The civil act will not be presumptively binding on the minor where he lacks by reason of youth the understanding necessary for his participation in a civil act: <case>. If the minor participates in a civil act (with the necessary understanding) and the civil act is for his benefit at the time of participation, the civil act is presumptively binding upon him.
The consequence in the present situation is that it is conceivable that some of the minors have the necessary understanding to participate in the ratification of the action of the guardian and if that could be said to be for the benefit of the minor then ratification could be presumptively binding upon him or her.

There are various provisions in the Act not presently relevant for the Court to grant to the minor capacity to engage in specified transactions or for a
Court of Petty Sessions to approve particular contracts or dispositions of property made by a minor. Under <case>, where a person participates in a civil act while he or she is a minor, the civil act may be affirmed after he or she attains the age of 18 years or while he or she remains a minor on his or her behalf by order of the Court. Thus, there would be a possibility that the minors in the present case could seek to affirm the Deeds of Agreement after they reach 18 provided they have participated in the civil act. Conversely, under <case>, the minor may repudiate the civil act (assuming he or she has participated) at any time during his or her minority and for one year after attaining his or her majority. This may not occur if the act appeared to be for his or her benefit at the time of repudiation. Section 46(1) provides that a civil act in which a minor participates by an agent has no greater validity or effect as against the minor than it would if participated in by the minor without an agent. Thus the same questions arise.

The evidence contains two statutory declarations from parents of minors saying that the Deed of Agreement was beneficial to the minors because they received $10 and the minors suffered no loss or detriment. The deeds do not, however, say that the minor in any way participated in the execution of the Deed of
Agreement by the guardian. Thus, these facts would not be sufficient to make the Deeds of Agreement presumptively binding on the minors under <case> of the
Act.

To conclude this analysis, it would appear that on the current material there is a strong likelihood that no presently binding contractual obligation has been entered between any of the minors and Mr Thompson, although there is still a potential for such an obligation to come into later existence, for example by way of affirmation of the minor after attaining the age of 18.

The consequence for the position of Homestake Gold is that it has placed on the Register the minors as members when at present there is no binding underlying agreement between the minors and Peninsula whereby the shares are to be transferred from Peninsula to the minors. Section 184 of the
Corporations Law provides that a person who agrees to become a member of a company and whose name is entered in the company's register becomes a member.
At present the lack of a binding underlying agreement to become a member means that the minors' names wrongly remain on the Register.

A question remains, were the matter to rest there, as to the ability of
Homestake Gold to obtain correction of the Register or to avoid once and for all the contract of transfer, leaving the minor with no ability to affirm it.
However, there is an additional matter to which I turn.
Can Homestake Gold avoid the transfers to the minors? 
I have referred above to <case>(b) of the Corporations Law which provides that shares are transferable as provided by the articles. Article 32 provides that a share shall not be registered unless a proper instrument of transfer is delivered to the company. The instrument of transfer must be signed by or on behalf of the transferor.

Article 34 is as follows: "A transfer cannot be made to an infant, or to a lunatic so found, or to a person of unsound mind.

The Board is not obliged to enquire as to the age or soundness of mind of any transferee." 
A minor is capable of holding shares, Re Laxon & Co (No 2) [[1892] 3
Ch 555] and see Burns "Infants as Shareholders" [(1955) 28 ALJ 407.] This is a consequence of the rule that a conveyance to a minor is merely voidable not void. The authorities under the general law provide support for the proposition that where the articles contain a regulation in the form of Article 34, the company, via its directors, is entitled to avoid a transfer to the infant, even if the infant's name has been entered on the Register, provided that a subsequent transferee of adult status has not been entered on the Register; see In re Asiatic Banking Corporation;
Symon's Case [(1870) 5 Ch App 298] and
In re Contract Corporation; Gooch's Case [(1872) 8 Ch App 266] especially at 268.

Section 24 of the Minors (Property & Contracts) Act provides that when a minor participates in a civil act and a person other than a volunteer acts so as to alter his or her position on the basis of the validity of that civil act, that civil act is presumptively binding on the minor. Professor Harland argues at [908] of his book that as the company is not a volunteer, neither the minor nor the company can repudiate the transaction. He says that whilst s speaking in terms of a something that is binding "in favour of" a participant, the effect of <case>(b) of the Act is to make it binding on both parties. With respect, I do not think this is so. In my view, the words "in favour of" in <case> show an "other provision" to exclude <case>. Thus, the general law still applies to this situation.

Thus, I consider that those authorities in the present case would justify the declarations sought by the plaintiff in the summons that the plaintiff company is entitled to avoid the transfers from Peninsula to the minors. It would follow that this is a proper case for the making of an order under s216H of the Corporations Law for the Register of Members to be corrected to reinstate the name of Peninsula.

What is the legal effect of the share transfers executed on behalf of the minors in favour of the volunteers in February 1996? 
The following sub-questions arise:
What occurred?
Which system of law governs the question?
Are the transfers void or voidable?
What occurred? 
Peninsula and Mr Thompson, having procured the names of all of the minors to be placed on the Register as shareholders, determined in February 1996 that 50 of the 100 shares held in the name of each of the minors would be transferred to third parties. The evidence discloses that on 10 November 1995 Mr Thompson dispatched letters to a number of people who were then or had recently been shareholders in Homestake Gold inviting them to assist him in preventing
Homestake Mining being able to proceed to compulsory acquisition. Such persons could assist him if they accepted the transfer to them of 50 free shares (for no consideration with all stamp duty payable by him) subject to certain conditions. Mr Thompson said that the shares will be transferred to the volunteers and held until six weeks after the offer closed at which time the certificates would be mailed to them and they would be free to deal with the shares any way they wished and to retain all proceeds received.

Mr Thompson sent a further letter in December 1995 in which he described himself as "John L (Father Christmas) Thompson" saying that he was prepared to sweeten the deal by offering a succulent cooked leg ham (approximately 5 kg) on the bone. As soon as he received the properly executed transfer form he would arrange for the ham to be delivered to their address. They would still be eligible to receive the 50 free shares.

On 20 February 1996 Mr Thompson signed an exercise of option to acquire 50 shares from each of the minors and directed that they be transferred for nil consideration to the volunteers. It may be assumed that these were the people that were offered the free ham. Mr Thompson has sworn a statutory declaration that on the same date he provided an authorisation to Ruth Lesley Palmer to act as attorney for each of the minors so as to execute the documents required to transfer 50 of their shares to the volunteers. It would appear that Ruth
Palmer then executed the transfers on behalf of the minors and they were lodged with the company's solicitors for registration.

Thus one has Mr Thompson purporting to exercise the powers conferred on him under the Deed of Agreement (and doing so through Ruth Palmer) so as to transfer the shares or 50 of them from each of the minors to the volunteers.
Which system of law governs the question? 
For the reasons set out above, it is safe to proceed on the basis that New
South Wales law applies.
Are the transfers void or voidable? 
In the light of my reasoning above, the Deeds of Agreement at present appear not to give rise to any enforceable obligations. Accordingly, although the minors' names are on the Register, those names are at present liable to be removed from the Register and the minors do not have a legal or equitable interest in these shares previously held by Peninsula. It would follow that the minors at present have nothing which can be transferred to the volunteers; nor does the Deed of Agreement authorise Mr Thompson to act in the way he has purported to act. It follows that the transfers which have been lodged with the company are at present of no effect. The directors have no duty to register them because under Article 32 the instrument of transfer has not been signed by or on behalf of the transferor. Further, because the directors are entitled to avoid the transfers from Peninsula to the minors then upon such avoidance occurring the minors will never be able to transfer these shares to the volunteers. It follows that the directors are obliged not to register the transfers.

If the Register of Members of Homestake Gold is to be corrected, should that correction take place from the date of making of this order? 
It follows from the above reasoning that Homestake Gold is entitled to avoid the transfers to the minors. However, upon this occurring, Peninsula should be restored to the Register in respect of the shares and the transfers in favour of the volunteers should never be registered. Correction of the Register should occur from the date of the orders. Absent the company choosing to avoid the transfers to the minors there remains a possibility that at a later date a binding agreement could come into force between Peninsula and the minors which might entitle the minors to remain on the Register; or in accordance with
Gooch's case, if an adult subsequent transferee got onto the Register then the company would lose the ability to avoid the transfer to the minor. Thus, it is proper to view the transfers originally made by Peninsula as voidable rather than void and rectification should occur from the date of the orders I propose to make rather than from the date of the transfers in October 1995.

An additional matter arises in relation to the company RBM Nominees Pty
Limited ("RBM"). I granted leave to add this company as a third defendant on March 1996. Mr Archer subsequently appeared for that company as well. It turns out that a small number of the transfers which were put forward in the summons as having been from Peninsula to minors were in fact from RBM Nominees to minors. RBM is a stockbroker's nominee company which acted at the direction of the Thompson Group. Since it also consents to the orders, and appropriate notification to the relevant minors and volunteers had already been given, it is appropriate that the orders also be made in respect to that company. The same principles apply.

ADDITIONAL COMMENTS 
In cases where there is virtually only one set of submissions made to me and where those submissions are being made by competent counsel and appear to be correct, I have adopted the practice of requesting counsel to provide a draft set of reasons for judgment in hard copy and on disk. This then enables me to provide the final judgment without duplication of effort. I regret to say that sometimes, there is a long delay in forwarding the draft, doubtless because counsel has obtained the orders or feels that there is no reason why he or she should do the judge's work. Of course, the answer to this last point is that counsel needs to assist the Court especially in times such as the present where the capacity of the Court to deal with the work is stretched to the limit.

In the instant case, not only did Mr Gleeson comply with the request promptly, he furnished a draft which was thoroughly researched and well reasoned. He also, helpfully included references to the affidavits in which the statements which I was to find were true in fact occurred. This needs to be done on drafts submitted under this scheme. I have omitted these in the final version.
I have adopted most of the draft as my own; I have made decisions as to which of available alternatives to adopt. The draft was handed to me at about 9 am one morning when I was Duty Judge and the plaintiff's solicitors expected me to make orders at 9.50 that morning. That attitude completely misunderstands the procedure. The Judge will not just "rubber stamp" the draft. The draft must be thoroughly checked and only adopted (if at all) when the Judge is sure it is correct. The Judge must take full responsibility for the resultant product. The main point of the exercise is to have the facts upon which the party relies set out in judgment form to save duplication of effort.

In the instant case the draft had to have a considerable number of corrections made to it including the removal of inconsistencies and had to be completely retyped. This is not unexpected: I merely note it to avoid future misunderstandings.

In conclusion, I turn to the orders that flow from these reasons. I note that the first and third defendants consent to the orders sought on the basis that there will be no order as to the costs of the proceedings. The plaintiff does not seek any order as to costs.

On 25 March 1996 I made orders in terms of the Short Minutes which were submitted to me. Those orders carry out the reasons I have now given. These orders had to be made then as the time for compulsory acquisition of non- accepting shares was close to expiring. It was not possible to give fully detailed reasons at that stage, though I had in my mind the basis for those orders.
 * * * 
