

Coot Pty Limited versus Admin Management Pty Limited Matter No 13254/97 [1998]
NSWSC 512 (3 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 November 1998 
COOT PTY LIMITED versus ADMIN MANAGEMENT PTY LIMITED /97 November 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This matter came to the court by way of stated case from Mr Elliott LCM, sitting on the Local Court at Newcastle. 
Coot Pty Limited (the vendor) owned land, Lot 52, Ewing Street, Garden Suburb.
Another company, Admin Management Pty Limited (the purchaser), wished to purchase that land. A contract of sale was prepared in the form of a 1992
Standard Form Contract. The contract contained a definition clause, which included the following: "`date of this contract' - the date on which the contract is made, whether by exchange of contracts or not." 
The completion date was defined as follows: "The date which is 5 weeks after the date of this contract (clause 15)." 
Clause 15 was in these terms: "15. Completion date .1 The parties must complete by the completion date (being a fixed but inessential date).
 .2 If the parties do not complete by the completion date, a party can serve a notice to complete if that party is otherwise entitled to do so." 
Clause 24 is headed "Notice to Complete", and is as follows: "24.1 The parties acknowledge that if a party serves a notice to complete pursuant to provision 15.2 then fourteen (14) days shall be reasonable and sufficient notice." 
The issue, as I will shortly explain, turns upon the date of the contract. The vendor and the purchaser each appointed solicitors in Newcastle. On 15 August the purchaser's solicitors wrote to the vendor's solicitors in these terms: "We refer to previous correspondence herein and now enclose herewith counterpart Contract executed by the purchaser company to be held in escrow by you pending receipt by us of the original executed by the vendor company to complete the exchange." 
That letter, and the purchaser's counterpart of the contract, were received by the vendor's solicitor the next day, 16 August 1995. The Stated Case described what occurred thereafter in these terms: "6. On 21 August, 1995, the vendor executed the contract which was then dated by the vendor's solicitor, in accordance with longstanding conveyancing practice in Newcastle.
On 22 August, 1995, the vendor's counterpart of the contract was received by the purchaser's solicitor, having been sent via the document exchange." 
The purchaser had not completed the purchase by 25 September 1995. The vendor's solicitors, relying upon clause 15.2 of the contract, then served a notice to complete. The notice nominated a completion date more than fourteen days thereafter (namely, 11 October 1995 at 3.30 pm), as required by clause .1. However, the notice to complete was only valid if the date of the contract was 21 August 1995. If the date were 22 August 1995, five weeks would not have elapsed. It would, in those circumstances, be one day premature, and invalid.

On 4 October 1995 (that is approximately half-way through the period nominated by the notice to complete), the purchaser's solicitors wrote to the vendor's solicitors drawing attention to the date. They asserted that the notice had been issued one day prior to the expiration of the time for completion. The vendor's solicitors apparently disagreed. No fresh notice was served. Instead, one gathers (although this does not form part of the Stated Case), that the land was otherwise sold, and an action commenced against the purchaser to recover the shortfall in the price obtained.

The learned Magistrate determined that the contract date was 22 August 1995.
It followed that the notice to complete was invalid. The purchaser could not be said, in these circumstances, to be in default, and there was, therefore, no right of recovery. The appellant seeks to overturn that finding.

The appellant relies upon three arguments, although the third argument was pressed only faintly. The three arguments were as follows: * First, the date of the contract should not be confused with the date upon which binding obligations arose between the parties. They are quite separate concepts. * Secondly, if that submission were rejected, and the date of the contract was the date upon which binding obligations arose, then they arose on 21 August 1995, not 22 August 1995. * Thirdly, the purchaser is estopped (by a common law estoppel) from denying the date, since it was inserted by the vendor's solicitors in accordance with long standing conveyancing practice in Newcastle, not objected to by the purchaser's solicitors, and relied upon by the vendor's solicitors for the purposes of calculating the five weeks which must elapse before a notice to complete under clause 15.2. 
The appellant's first argument seeks to confront the difficulty created by the purchaser's letter of 15 August 1995. That letter imposed a condition before binding obligations would arise, namely the "receipt by us (ie the purchaser's solicitors) of the original executed by the vendor company to complete the exchange". Since the original was not received until 22 August 1995, binding obligations had not arisen until that date. However, the contract was sent by the purchaser's solicitors to the vendor's solicitors with the date blank.
There was an implied authority for the vendor's solicitors to fill in the date, applying the principle enunciated by Gleeson CJ in Wright versus Gasweld
Pty Ltd [(1991) 22 NSWLR 317] where his
Honour said this (at 323): "It is true that in appropriate circumstances it may be open to a court to reach a conclusion that by signing a document containing blanks and handing it over to the other party a person should be regarded as having conferred on that party implied authority to fill up the blanks, and the document will then operate according to its terms with the blanks filled in. That may be so, for example, in a case where the parties have reached express agreement upon the terms of a contract and one party signs it leaving in blank certain aspects of the agreement. If the document is handed over to the other party in that condition it may readily be inferred that there is authority in the other party to fill in the blanks in accordance with the prior agreement: Warburton v National Westminster Finance Australia Ltd (1988) 15 NSWLR 238. There may also be cases in which, even though there has been no express agreement between the parties upon the particular matter in respect of which the document remains blank at the time it is signed and handed over, nevertheless it is proper to conclude that the party handing it over had impliedly authorised the other party to fill up the blank. It may be, for example, that the information is unimportant, or that the common intention of the parties is such that the nature of the insertion is something which necessarily flows from that intention. I do not suggest that this account of the possibilities is exhaustive. Ultimately, however, the issue is one of fact. ..." 
There was, in Newcastle, as the Magistrate found, a longstanding conveyancing practice, whereby the solicitor for the vendor dated the contract once it was executed by the vendor. Since the purchaser's solicitors were from Newcastle, they can be taken to have been aware of that practice. The vendor's solicitors, following that practice, inserted 21 August 1995 on the contract.
That became the date of the contract.

Although the letter of 15 August 1995 stipulated when contracts could be regarded as having been exchanged (namely, when the vendor's copy had been received by the purchaser's solicitor), that was not determinative. The "date of the contract", as defined by the contract itself, was not confined to the time of exchange. Here the parties, by implication, had agreed to allow the conveyancing practice in Newcastle to define the date of the contract. It was the date the solicitor inserted on the document. It was not the date that the parties became contractually bound.

I am not persuaded by the appellant's argument. The phrase "date of contract" is defined as "the date on which the contract is made, whether by exchange of contracts or not" (emphasis added). Here, by reason of the stipulation in the solicitor's letter of 15 August 1995 (and subject to the second argument which will be dealt with shortly), the contract was made on 22 August 1995.
That was the day the purchaser's solicitor received the vendor's counterpart contract, thereby fulfilling the condition stipulated. Although the definition of "date of contract" contemplated that the contract may be made by means other than exchange (such as all parties subscribing their names to the one document), that was not relevant to the agreed basis for making the contract in this case. The contract was made by each party being in possession of an executed counterpart. No doubt, the parties had the power to agree upon a date from which the contract would operate which was different from the date the contract was made. However, they did not do so.

The second argument was that the contract, in any event, was made on 21 August
That argument rested upon two propositions: * First, that the "postal acceptance rule" applied to this contract, so that the contract was made at the moment it was "posted". * Secondly, that for the purposes of that rule, the DX may be regarded as the equivalent of the post. 
There are a number of difficulties with that argument. Before the "postal acceptance rule" can apply, it must be established that it was within the contemplation of the parties (or at least the offeror) that the post might be used as a means of communicating acceptance of the offer (Henthorn versus Fraser [[1892] 2 Ch. 27] at 33; Tallerman & Co Pty Ltd versus Nathan's Merchandise
Pty Ltd  <case>; [(1957) 98 CLR 93] at 111). Here the Stated Case included no such finding.
Further, the "postal acceptance rule" has no application where the parties have agreed upon some other basis for the creation of binding obligations. In
Butt, Standard Contract for Sale of Land, 1985, the rule is stated in these terms: "Further, the postal acceptance rule cannot apply where, although the parties contemplated acceptance via the postal service, it was an express or implied term of the offer that there should be no binding contract until the letter of acceptance be received by the offeror; thus, it has been held that the postal acceptance rule did not apply to the exercise of an option where by the terms of the grant of option it was necessary for notice of exercise to reach the grantor, even though the parties contemplated that the option might be exercised by post." 
The letter of 15 August 1995 from the purchaser's solicitor expressly defined the circumstances in which exchange would occur, and binding obligations arise. The executed contract had to be received by the purchaser's solicitors.
The facts in this case are not dissimilar to those in Nunin Holdings Pty
Ltd versus Tullamarine Estates Pty Ltd <case>; [[1994] 1 VR 74.] In that case a letter was sent defining the circumstances in which binding obligations would arise. It was in these terms: (at 83) "The contract is forwarded on the basis that it will be held by you on our behalf pending receipt by us of an identical contract signed by the vendor company." 
Hedigan J, in the context of that letter, said this: (at 83) "If the purchaser's intention was that posting of the contract was sufficient acceptance, it clearly might have stated so. Silence as to the disposition of the vendor's executed part might well have produced the consequence argued for. But the purchaser, though its solicitors, clearly addressed the circumstances in which the exchange would be completed, and described the time at which and the event on the happening of which its already executed part, held by the vendor, would coalesce with the vendors executed part, to produce a concluded agreement. That circumstance was receipt of the identical executed part, not its posting." 
Counsel for the respondent, Mr Trebeck, drew attention to the terms of the
Stated Case. It simply said that the contract was put in the DX. It does not say when that occurred. It is consistent with the Stated Case that the document was put in the DX on the date it was received by the purchaser's solicitor, 22 August 1996, depending upon the way in which the DX operated in
Newcastle (about which there was no evidence).

However that may be, the DX, or document exchange system, is very different from the post. When a letter is posted it is delivered. With the document exchange system, receipt of a document is dependent upon the person attending the exchange, and collecting the document. In Nunin Holdings Pty Ltd , Hedigan J said this: (at 80) "Notwithstanding that we live in the electronic age of telephones, telexes, facsimile transmissions, courier services and document exchange facilities, the use of the post, perhaps less reliable and speedy for all its modern equipment, is still commonplace. The rule has not been expanded but it has not been abandoned either. Nor must it be overlooked that the offeror may prescribe the method of acceptance. If that is done in clear terms then compliance with the method laid down is necessary to make the putative acceptance effective." 
The parties did not nominate the document exchange system as the means of acceptance. It is doubtful that the "postal acceptance rule" applies where the
DX is used. It is, however, unnecessary to resolve that issue. In this case, the purchaser expressly defined the means by which binding obligations would be created. That express condition ousted the "postal acceptance rule". The executed contract had to be received by the purchaser's solicitors.

The third argument was based upon estoppel. The purchaser was estopped from denying that the date of the contract was the date which the vendor's solicitors had inserted on the contract, in accordance with the longstanding conveyancing practice. The purchaser's solicitors, according to this argument, can be taken to have noticed the date which had been inserted. They said nothing to correct it. The vendor's solicitor thereafter relied upon that date in calculating the five weeks which needed to elapse before the notice to complete could be served.

In my view no estoppel arises. The elements of such an estoppel were set out succinctly by Jordan CJ in Franklin versus Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Ltd <case>; [(1935) 36 NSWSR 76] at 82: "The type of estoppel which became definitely established in the common law by the case of Pickard versus Sears <case>; [(6
Ad & E 469)] - estoppel by representation - depends upon different principles. In order that this type of estoppel may arise, it is necessary that (1) by word or conduct (2) reasonably likely to be understood as a representation of fact, (3) a representation of fact, as contrasted with a mere expression of intention, should be made to another person, either innocently or fraudulently, (4) in such circumstances that a reasonable man would regard himself as invited to act upon it in a particular way, (5) and that the representation should have been material in inducing the person to whom it was made to act on it in that way (6) so that his position would be altered to his detriment if the fact were otherwise than as represented." 
Here, it was the vendor's solicitors who inserted the date. The silence of the purchaser's solicitor was not a representation, by word or conduct. The solicitor may or may not have noticed the date. It was not until October 1995 that it became relevant, once a notice to complete had been served. No word or conduct by the purchaser (or his solicitor) induced the vendor to act in a particular way. The vendor's solicitor was required to ensure that five weeks had elapsed. In making that determination, he was required to examine the date of the contract That, in its turn, required a determination of the date the contract was made. There was, moreover, no detriment to the vendor. A fresh notice could have been issued. That vendor chose not to do so.

I believe, therefore, that the appeal should be dismissed. I find that the determination by the learned Magistrate as to the date of the contract, namely August 1995, was not erroneous in law. The appellant should pay the respondent's costs.
 * * * 
