

In the matter of Eastmark Holdings Pty Limited (Costs) [2011] NSWSC 1284 (31 October 2011) 
Last Updated: 13 December 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
In the matter of Eastmark Holdings Pty Limited (Costs)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): 
Written submissions  
Decision Date: October 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Barrett J  
Decision: 
No order as to costs  
Catchwords: 
PROCEDURE - costs - application for order setting aside statutory demand - order that demand stand but for reduced amount - competing submissions as to costs - no matter of principle  
JUDGMENT 
In these proceedings, the plaintiff was successful in its challenge to a statutory demand served on it by the defendant, but only to the extent of obtaining an order under <case> varying the demand by reducing its amount: see In the matter of Eastmark Holdings Pty Limited  <case>
It remains to deal with the matter of costs, as to which written submissions have been filed. 
The defendant says that, because the plaintiff was unsuccessful in resisting reduction of the amount of the demand by about one-half, the plaintiff should pay one-half of the defendant's costs. Reliance was placed, in that respect, on New Era Installations Pty Ltd versus Don Mathieson & Staff Glass Pty Ltd <case>; [(1999) 31 ACSR 53.] (at [4]): "These principles are applicable to proceedings to set aside a statutory demand, but special features of such proceedings need to be taken into account in judging the reasonableness of the parties' conduct. A company faced with a statutory demand in relation to a debt, disputed in whole or in part, has no option but to commence an action under <case> to set aside the demand within days even if the ultimate order sought will be an order under <case> varying the demand to the amount which is not genuinely in dispute. If a company were merely to pay the amount which was not genuinely in dispute, without securing or compromising the balance to the reasonable satisfaction of the creditor, it would face the prospect of winding up proceedings being brought against it, of its being presumed to be insolvent (s 459C(2)(a)), and of its being unable to oppose the winding-up application on a ground upon which it could have relied for the purposes of an application to have the demand set aside unless leave is given (s 459S)."
The plaintiff also says that, particularly after service of Ms Choe's affidavit of 23 June 2011, the defendant should have seen the strength of the plaintiff's case and conceded the result which eventually emerged from the court's decision. In the result, the plaintiff says, it should have part of its costs. 
In my assessment, there is merit in the stance taken by each party on the matter of costs. Each side had a significant measure of success. The plaintiff succeeded in showing that there was an arguable case of mis-allocation of payments - something that was by no means uncontroversial. The defendant succeeded in showing that the statutory demand was supportable to the extent of some 50% of the sum demanded. 
The appropriate way of dealing with the fact that each side had a significant measure of success is to let costs lie where they have fallen and not to require either party to bear any part of the other party's costs. 
I make no order as to costs to the intent that each party shall bear its own costs. * * * 
