

Regina versus Kennedy Matter No Cca 60570/98 [1998] NSWSC 671 (9 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
REGINA versus MICHAEL GRAHAM KENNEDY 
CCA 60570/98 December 1998 
Ireland J, Dunford J, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Application for leave to appeal against Interlocutory Order (Howie DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60570/98 
DELIVERED: 9 December 1998 
HEARING DATE: 9 December 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Michael Graham KENNEDY 
JUDGMENT OF: Ireland, Dunford, Bruce JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - M Thangaraj 
RESPONDENT - R D Ellis 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Direct Access 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Leave to appeal granted. Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - Criminal law and procedure - sexual assault - stay of indictment - complainant unable to specify dates 
NO. OF PAGES: 10 
R versus Michael Graham KENNEDY 
JUDGMENT 
IRELAND J: I will invite Dunford J to give the first judgment. 
DUNFORD J: This is an application pursuant to [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act, 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) for leave to appeal against the decision of His Honour Judge Howie QC in the District Court at Sydney on 25 September 1998, refusing an application for the permanent stay of an indictment against the applicant, alleging a number of counts of child sexual assault. 
The Crown case which it would seek to prove at trial, may be summarised as follows. The complainant, who is now 17 years old, says that when she was 13 years of age, she travelled with her guardian, Robert Colby, from their home in Blayney to Sydney on a number of occasions. On four or five of these trips she met the applicant, who was a friend of Colby and on one of these occasions, the applicant indecently assaulted her and forced her to perform fellatio on him. This occurred in the back of Colby's vehicle which, at the time, was parked in a laneway somewhere in Sydney. On another occasion which, as I understand it, is on the evening of the same day, the applicant, along with Colby, committed a number of acts of sexual intercourse upon her in a motel room.

The complainant first complained about the applicant's conduct in October , three months at the most after the incidents are alleged to have occurred, but has never been able to specify exactly when or where they took place. Her first statement to police was made on 26 October 1994 and concerned, principally, allegations of sexual assault upon her by Colby. On 27
October 1994, she made a further statement setting out in detail the allegations against the applicant.

On 22 November 1994 the applicant was interviewed and, although he admitted to police that he had met the complainant on occasions in Sydney, he was unable to say when these occasions were but he denied that he had ever sexually assaulted her and, in particular, he denied that he had ever been in a motel room with the complainant.

Committal proceedings were heard in respect of Colby and the applicant jointly in June to August 1995. During those proceedings, two applications were made on behalf of the defence for the complainant to be required to give evidence at the committal pursuant to [s48E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48e.html) of the [Justice's Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/). These applications were opposed by the Prosecution and refused by the Magistrate and the applicant, along with Colby, was committed for trial on 8 September 1995.

An application for leave to appeal then purported to be brought to this Court, pursuant to [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) in respect of the refusal of the Magistrate to order the complainant to give evidence at the committal: R versus Colby and Kennedy [(1995) 84 A Crim R 125 (Kennedy] No. 1).

The Court held that the application for leave to appeal was incompetent as it did not fall within [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html), but that it was open to the applicants to seek relief in the Administrative
Law Division in relation to the Magistrate's decision.

In giving judgment in that case, Gleeson CJ said at 127: "It was mentioned earlier that these events occurred a little over a year ago.
We are not dealing here with a case of the kind sometimes encountered where a person complains of sexual activity that occurred many years previously in circumstances where it would be unreasonable to expect that the person could have anything like a clear recollection of the date. These events occurred between March and September 1994 and, unless the complainant was a person possessed of a singular degree of sangfroid, must have been found by her to be memorable." 
No application was made to the Administrative Law Division.

On 29 November the Crown indicated to the accused's legal representatives that it could not give any further particulars in relation to the offences alleged.
Application was then made to His Honour Judge Kinchington QC in the District
Court for a stay of the indictment on two grounds, firstly, the refusal of
Legal Aid (see Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 292)], and secondly, that the Crown had failed to provide proper and adequate particulars of the charges. This application was refused on 23
April 1997.

In the meantime, the applicant had been granted a separate trial from Colby.
The applicant sought leave to appeal against the refusal of the stay and this application was determined on 1 July 1997: R versus Kennedy [(1997) 94 A Crim
R 341 (Kennedy] No. 2).

The Court was of the view that the stage had not been reached where it was appropriate to consider whether the proceedings should be stayed and the Court indicated that a "Basha" inquiry (see R versus Basha (1989) 39 A Crim R 337) should be held before any trial took place to see whether the complainant could give further information. Hunt CJ at CL said at 350-1: "The Crown cannot be compelled to give particulars which it is impossible to give. There can be no stay upon its failure to do so in such a case... The inability of the Crown to provide proper particulars may itself demonstrate sufficient prejudice to an accused as to make a trial necessarily unfair. . .
.

An application for a stay on the basis that the trial will necessarily be unfair must be very carefully distinguished from an application based upon the claim that any verdict of guilty will necessarily be an unsafe and unsatisfactory one. Just as a trial judge cannot take a case away from a jury on that basis, the proceedings cannot ordinarily be stayed in advance of the trial upon that basis. Obviously enough the fact that the complainant could give no particulars about the date or place within a few months of it happening must considerably reduce the value of her evidence.

The issue to be determined therefore is whether the Crown's inability to give better particulars in the present case makes the trial necessarily unfair. I do not think that that stage has yet been reached." 
A further statement was then furnished on the 6 November 1997, in which the applicant stated that the last time she came to Sydney was the last weekend in
August 1994, and on 23 March this year, a "Basha" inquiry was held, and in her evidence on that occasion, the complainant confirmed that the date of a Gun
Show to which she had referred in her statement was 2 to 3 July 1994, and she stated that the two incidents when she was sexually assaulted by the applicant occurred after that weekend, but she could not say how long after. Accordingly the Crown has now limited the dates in the indictment which it proposes to present against the applicant, to the period 2 July to 31 August 1994.

On 10 July the present motion for a stay was filed. It was heard on 3
September and his Honour refused the stay in a judgment delivered on 25
September.

As the power to grant a stay is discretionary, the ordinary principles relating to appeals in respect of the exercise of discretion apply; see
House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] at 504 to 5. In R versus Alexandroaia [(1994) 81 A Crim R ] at 290, this Court said in relation to appeals on discretionary matters: "There is a strong presumption in favour of the correctness of the decision, but that presumption will be overcome where it is shown that the judge has acted on some wrong principle, or has given weight to extraneous or irrelevant matters, or has failed to give weight or sufficient weight to relevant considerations, or has made a mistake as to the facts. Even if the precise nature of the error may not be discoverable, it is sufficient that the result was so unreasonable or plainly unjust that the appellate court may infer that there has been a failure properly to exercise that discretion." 
The right to a fair trial is basic to our criminal justice system and to ensure that innocent people are not convicted of criminal offences, a stay of proceedings may be granted to prevent an unfair trial: Jego versus District
Court of New South Wales <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 23.] But that right must be balanced against the right of the community to expect that persons charged with serious criminal offences are brought to trial and the grant of a stay of proceedings is discretionary and the circumstances will usually have to be extreme for such relief to be given.
The onus lies on the applicant to a stay to demonstrate that the disadvantage or prejudice which he would suffer by refusal of a stay is, in a relevant sense, unacceptable to the extent that the trial would be unfair: R v
Helmling (CCA - 11 November 1993) at p 4 and authorities there cited. See also R versus Tolmie (CCA - 7 December 1994).

In delivering his judgment, Judge Howie pointed out a number of matters which he took into account. In my view, his Honour took into account all relevant considerations and I can see no basis for this Court interfering with the exercise of his discretion.

However, two specific grounds have been raised in the written submissions.
Firstly, it was submitted that the particulars provided by the Crown as to the time and places at which the conduct is alleged to have occurred are insufficient to allow the accused to have a fair trial, and in particular deny the applicant a reasonable opportunity to raise a reasonable defence, other than a blanket denial.

It is true that the failure of the complainant, and therefore the Crown, to specify the dates and the places on and where the offences allegedly took place, does restrict the opportunity of the applicant to investigate the possibility that he may have an alibi, or the possibility of cross-examining the complainant on the surrounding circumstances, such as the location of the furniture in the room and matters of that nature. But these matters were expressly considered and taken into account by his Honour at pp 9 to 10 of the judgment.

In cases such as these it would be appropriate, and indeed necessary, for the trial judge to point out the difficulties that an accused in the position of the applicant would face in investigating these matters. It may also be relevant to point out that the failure of the complainant to be able to specify with greater particularity the date and places of the alleged offence, when her original complaint was made so soon after the events are alleged to have occurred, may reflect on her credibility. But there is no reason to suggest that such warning will not be given, or will not be given proper attention by the jury.

We were referred to what was said by Smart J delivering the judgment of this
Court in R versus Nicolson (CCA - 22 July 1998) at p 10, particularly where reference is made to the loss of an opportunity to pursue a line of enquiry; but it is relevant also to bear in mind that, as Hunt CJ at CL said in
Helmling at p 8: "What the applicant has lost, therefore, is the chance that he may be able to do better. He has not lost the chance that he would have done better. He had been permanently deprived of an opportunity simply to explore an avenue of enquiry which might have led to his acquittal. That may in some cases be sufficient, but they would in my view, be rare. They would not usually produce the extreme situation which the authorities require." 
It is a fact that in these type of sexual assault cases, it not infrequently happens that the date of the alleged offences is expressed to be within a range, often a range of up to six months, or even occasionally up to 12 months and, in many such cases, the offences are alleged to have been committed many years before. The fact that specific dates were not specified has not in the past been regarded as a ground for a permanent stay, although justifying the need for particular warnings to be given to the jury. I fail to see how this applicant is any worse off, indeed he is not as badly off because here the complaint was not made some years later, but within two to four months. It was submitted that, in a case such as this where the complaint was made reasonable promptly, there would be an expectation that the date and place would be more readily identified and the failure to be able to do so is unreasonable.

It may be that the failure to do so is less explicable. But the difficulties for an accused are not any worse. If anything, the fact that the complaint when made and brought to his attention is more recent tends to reduce the prejudice suffered by him as a result of the absence of the particulars.

The second substantive ground of appeal is that the continued refusal of the
Crown to allow the complainant to be cross-examined at the earliest possible time has denied the accused any reasonable opportunity to present a defence, other than a blanket denial "which is not a real defence." 
It was submitted that his Honour erred firstly in deciding that a stay required a finding that either the Magistrate would have allowed the s48EA application if the Crown consented and secondly, that the question of any material assistance provided by early cross-examination was a relevant question.

Our attention was drawn to the criticism of the Crown in both Kennedy No. 1 and Kennedy No. 2, relating to the objections taken by the Crown at the committal to the complainant being cross-examined, and I am very conscious of those, as was his Honour. But it seems to me that in the final analysis, these factors are not decisive. His Honour found that in the circumstances of this case it was unlikely that, even if the complainant had been cross-examined at the committal, she would have been able to specify dates or places with any greater particularity than she has now done. This was a finding which was open to his Honour on the facts and therefore is not a matter which can be relied on in an appeal against the exercise of discretion.

It is also important to bear in mind that in considering whether to stay an indictment, it is necessary to weigh up, as his Honour did, the interests of the community, as well as those of the accused.

If an offence or offences has or have been committed, the community has a legitimate interest that the offender be brought to justice, provided that it can be done without unfairness to such offender. It is not in the community's interest to allow offenders to avoid justice, merely in order to punish the prosecuting authorities because of the tactics or procedures that have been adopted in the conduct of the prosecution, provided always, that it does not result in an unfair trial of the accused.

The applicant is not without some knowledge of what is alleged. The complainant's allegations are that the offences took place when he was in the company of Colby. Colby, like the complainant, resided at Blayney in the
Central West of this state, and only visited Sydney on occasions. The period of the alleged offence has now been reduced to a period of two months.

In all the circumstances I am not satisfied that his Honour failed to have regard to any relevant considerations, that he took any irrelevant considerations into account, or that he failed to properly exercise his discretion. I would therefore grant leave to appeal but dismiss the appeal.

IRELAND J: I agree. 
BRUCE J: I agree. 
IRELAND J: The order of the Court will be that leave to appeal is granted, but the appeal is dismissed. * * * 
