

Valassis versus Valverde Matter No 13166/97 [1998] NSWSC 205 (26 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
VALASSIS versus VALVERDE /97 February 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 7 November 1997. The principal claim made in the Summons is for a review of a Certificate as to Determination issued by a Costs Assessor. The issue date of the Certificate is 29 September 1997. 
There had been District Court proceedings between the parties. Certain costs orders were made in those proceedings. The assessment determined the amount of costs payable under order made in those proceedings. It was determined that the costs be assessed in the sum of $1,490.

The Summons came before the Court on 25 November 1997. On that day, the proceedings were adjourned for hearing to 3 February 1998. On 3 February 1998, the proceedings came before Master Harrison. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the applicant. The proceedings were dismissed with costs.

On 13 February 1998, the applicant filed a Notice of Motion. The precise relief sought in the application is not entirely clear. However, it appears to involve a claim for relief pursuant to Part 8 rule 1 of the Supreme Court
Rules concerning another assessment of costs determined in 1996.

The applicant relies on two affidavits. I have read this material. The applicant has specifically drawn my attention to parts of it and has addressed the Court in support of both the Summons and the Notice of Motion.

Both the Summons and the Notice of Motion are misconceived and doomed to failure. The Court does not have any jurisdiction to review an assessment of costs made by a costs assessor pursuant to the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the
Act). The avenues of appeal are prescribed by the Act. They do not contemplate a review. The applicant has not sought to pursue the prescribed avenues of appeal. The time for the bringing of an appeal had expired when the
Summons was filed.

I should add that there is nothing in the material placed before the Court to suggest that an appeal would have any real prospects of success.

This can be illustrated by referring to just some of the matters which are the subject of the applicant's complaint. At all times, he has acted in person. He had sought to recover profit costs as if he had been a solicitor. He had sought to recover the costs of the preparation of the bill to recover, inter alia, those costs and certain disbursements. He had sought to recover for alleged disbursements such as for, inter alia, parking and meals.

The relevant law as to what a litigant in person may recover under a costs order is reasonably well settled. The firm of costs consultants employed by the applicant had given him advice as to these matters prior to receiving instructions to prepare a bill of costs.

The proceedings were dismissed in early February 1998. It is not presently open to the applicant to bring the Notice of Motion. There would be no utility in setting aside the dismissal order. Indeed, to do so would put the parties to further needless expense and waste more valuable Court time. I should also add that Part 8 rule 1 does not assist the applicant in this case. Any claim for relief in respect of the 1996 assessment is well out of time.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The applicant is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion.

The circumstances of this case call for the making of some additional comment.
The misconceived process has now been before this Court on four occasions (the fourth occasion involved a special fixture). It is vexatious and trivial (it involves less than $1,500). The Court can no longer expeditiously conduct its business if it is required to devote valuable court time to such matters.
 * * * 
