

Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd versus Commonwealth of Australia Commonwealth of
Australia versus Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd Nos 50256/95 [1996] NSWSC 379 (29 August )
 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
BAINTON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 17, 18, 19, 23 April 1996 #DATE 29:5:1996 #ADD 29:8:1996 
Counsel for Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd   Mr T.E.F. Hughes QC with 
Mr T.G.R. Parker 
Solicitors for Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd  Allen Allen and Hemsley 
Counsel for Commonwealth of Australia
Mr B.W. Rayment QC with
Mr D.A. Caspersonn 
Solicitors for Commonwealth of Australia
Australian Government
Solicitor
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
BAINTON J I have for determination two applications which I heard together.
That which logically I must determine first is an application by the
Commonwealth of Australia for leave to appeal from the award of Mr J.N. West
QC, an arbitrator consensually appointed to determine a dispute between
Cockatoo
Dockyards Pty Ltd ("Codock") and the Commonwealth of Australia ("the
Commonwealth"). The second is an application by Codock to enforce the award in its favour by the entry of judgment against the Commonwealth in the amount of $10,864,240 plus interest in the amount of $5,315,355 plus additional interest on the first of those two amounts at Supreme Court rates from 8 December 1995 to the date of judgment. Should I determine to grant leave to appeal the decision on the enforcement of the award must obviously await the outcome of the appeal.
I should also add, to facilitate the understanding of some of what follows, that there were two areas of dispute between Codock and the
Commonwealth. That in which Codock was the claimant arises under the arrangements between Codock and the Commonwealth for the refurbishment of naval vessels at the dockyard on Cockatoo Island in Sydney Harbour and was described by the parties and in the award as "the commercial case". The other was a claim by the Commonwealth against Codock which arose out of its asserted state of Cockatoo Island at the cessation of occupation by Codock and was referred to as "the pollution or contamination case". The Arbitrator has not yet made any Award in the pollution case.
The material available to me does not indicate when the Commonwealth acquired ownership of Cockatoo Island but in 1933 the Commonwealth entered into an agreement and lease with Codock (then known as Cockatoo
Docks and
Engineering Co. Ltd) under which Codock did work for the Commonwealth in the refurbishment of naval vessels. By 1972 there had been a number of agreements between Cocock and the Commonwealth. On 14 January 1972 the Commonwealth and
Codock documented an arrangement called a "Trading Agreement and Lease".
Codock was then called Vickers Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd. The trading agreement related to the construction, modernisation, conversion and refitting of naval vessels. The "Lease" was by deed dated 14 January 1972 and was for a period of 21 years commencing 1 January 1972. It was of the whole of Cockatoo
Island. Both were to take effect from January 1972. Under this trading agreement, referred to by the parties as the TAL, a description which I shall henceforth use,
Codock was to carry out the refurbishment of the Navy's fleet of Oberon class submarines. There were, when the agreement was entered into, four of those submarines in service and two more partly constructed in the
United Kingdom. The Oberon class submarine required an extensive refit taking approximately two years to accomplish after four years in service. It can be seen accordingly that once the remaining two submarines were delivered the refurbishment program would require that there would be two submarines in dock for refit all the time (subject of course to any necessary short delay between one leaving and another replacing it). A major issue between the parties was whether the Commonwealth was obliged under the TAL to have all its Oberon class submarines refitted at Cockatoo Dockyard, or whether Codock was entitled to the refit only of such of those as the Commonwealth chose to send to Codock for refit. This argument broke out when the Commonwealth decided to have two of those submarines refitted at Garden Island. That decision was reached sometime in 1989.
Codock asserted that that decision by the Commonwealth (which it implemented) amounted to a breach of the TAL and associated lease. For that breach and for other asserted breaches which I need not detail at this stage,
Codock claimed damages from the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth, as well as denying liability for the Codock claims, asserted that Codock had polluted
Cockatoo
Island and it claimed damages for that pollution.
The claims of each party were referred by the parties to the arbitration of Mr J.N. West QC. For reasons which are not presently material the hearing of the Commonwealth's pollution claim had to be deferred.
Having heard
Codock's claim, the Arbitrator delivered his "Reasons and Interim Award" on the Codock claim on 8 December 1995. As
I have earlier indicated, the Award was for $16,179,595 plus additional interest to be calculated. The reasons for that Award occupy A4 pages of typescript.
Apart from the Commonwealth's pollution claim which remains to be heard there awaits determination in this Court Codock's application to enforce the
Interim Award by the entry of judgment in its favour for the sum awarded (plus interest), an application by the Commonwealth to stay proceedings on the interim Award until its pollution claim is determined and an application by the Commonwealth to remove Mr J.N. West QC from his office as Arbitrator (of the disputes between Codock and the
Commonwealth) on the basis that he has misconducted the Arbitration Proceedings and that, in the alternative, he has denied to the
Commonwealth natural justice in the Arbitration proceedings. The
Commonwealth complaints are particularised under the following subheadings:
Rejection of the Commonwealth's evidence on damages. It asserts error in law in rejecting that evidence. 
Refusal to admit the Commonwealth's evidence of damage obtained after the "Inhibited Period". That is not a defined term - it is probably the duration of confidentiality orders made by the Arbitrator. 
Shutting out of the Commonwealth on the basis of its alleged Particulars.
Ordering the Commonwealth to open when by reason of the confidentiality orders, the nonservice of Codock's evidence and other matters it was unfair to do so. 
Apprehended bias.
I should add that this summons with its complaints and particulars occupies 38 A4 pages.
To the above, I add that the evidence before me does not indicate how many days have been spent so far before the Arbitrator on this Arbitration, save for what general impression can be gained from knowing from references in the
Interim
Award and from the Summons seeking to remove the Arbitrator, a copy of which was furnished to me without any objection on the hearing of the application for leave to appeal from (by the Commonwealth) and to enforce (by
Codock) his Interim Award, that there are already over 8,500 pages of transcript, and that there have earlier been at least three reported applications to this Court by the Commonwealth in this Arbitration seeking leave to review decisions of the Arbitrator. The first is reported at [(1995) NSWLR 689] J) and the third at [(1995) 36
NSWLR 662 (Court] of Appeal on appeal from Rolfe J). In that third case Kirby P recorded (at 65) "that the Arbitrator had sat for more than 110 days when the appeal came to this Court" (7 April 1995).
Arbitration proceedings are intended and expected to provide a comparatively expeditious and cheap way of resolving disputes. These disputes arose in or prior to 1992; the Arbitrator was appointed early in pursuant to Codock's Notice of Dispute dated 23 December 1992; Codock's solicitor in an affidavit sworn on 12 April 1996 has estimated ("to the nearest million")
Codock's costs to date to have been "approximately $11m" (including costs incurred in respect of the pollution case). I have no indication of the amount of the costs incurred by the Commonwealth, save for what I can infer from the
Interim Awards and reported cases and references to the Counsel engaged.
Beyond doubt the Commonwealth's costs to date must be quite high.
The oral argument on the applications before me, all but less than two hours of which was spent in propounding and rebutting the application for leave to appeal, occupied four days. It canvassed most steps in the
Arbitrator's disclosed reasons and debated the scope of this Court's powers under [s38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/s38.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/) of this State and each critical step in the Arbitrator's reasons. The Commonwealth's outline of its argument occupies 131/2 A4 pages and Codock's response to it is a little over 8 pages.
That arbitration proceedings which are still far from completed could get into this state requires some detailed consideration of the relevant law and practice and a plain statement from this Court, so far as it is possible to make one, of what must be established (in the absence of the consent of all parties to the Arbitration) to justify this Court's granting leave to appeal "on any question of law arising out of an award".
What I have to decide first is whether there is any manifest error of law on the face of the Award (Commercial Arbitration Act, s38(5)(i)) or whether there is "strong evidence that the Arbitrator ... made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add or may be likely to add substantially to the certainty of Commercial Law". [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/) [s38(5)(ii).)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/s38.html) And if I answer "Yes" to either of those questions I must then consider whether I should grant leave to appeal under [s38(4)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/s38.html) of that Act, and if so whether I should impose any conditions upon the Commonwealth as applicant. (See [s38(6).)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/s38.html) The Commonwealth also seeks, in Codock's application for judgment, to canvas Codock's entitlement to enforce the order in its favour, pending determination of the Commonwealth's pollution claim.
The proper performance of the tasks requires me to acquaint myself with the history of the law relating to commercial arbitrations in this State and thus, because it has been substantially followed here, of the law relating to such arbitrations in England and Wales. I regard that as necessary because amendments to these laws have usually followed and attempted to overcome perceived inadequacies and imperfections in the law as it has been seen to be from time to time.
The earliest legislation in England on this subject matter is the
Arbitration Act 1698, 9 and 10 Will III Ch
It is, by present day standards at least, quite a short Act. I reproduce it in its entirety. "Cap. XV.

An Act for determining differences by arbitration.

Whereas it hath been found by experience, that references made by rule of court have contributed much to the ease of the subject, in the determining of controversies because the parties become thereby obliged to submit to the award of the arbitrators, under the penalty of imprisonment for their contempt in case they refuse submission: now for promoting trade, and rendring the awards of arbitrators the more effectual in all cases, for the final determination of controversies referred to them by merchants and traders, or others, concerning matters of account or trade, or other matters; be it enacted by the King's most excellent majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and commons, in parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, That from and after the eleventh day of
May, which shall be in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred ninetyeight, it shall and may be lawful for all merchants and traders, and others desiring to end any controversy, suit or quarrel, controversies suits or quarrels, for which there is no other remedy but by personal action or suit in equity, by arbitration to agree that their submission of their suit to the award or umpirage of any person or person; should be made a rule of any of his Majesty's courts of record, which the parties shall choose, and to insert such their agreement in their submission, or the condition of the bond or promise, whereby they oblige themselves respectively to submit to the award or umpirage, of any person or persons which agreement being so made and inserted in their submission or promise, or condition of their respective bonds, shall or may, upon producing an affidavit thereof made by the witness thereunto, or any one of them, in the court of which the same is agreed to be made a rule, and reading and filing the said adffidavit in court, be entred of record in such court, and the rule shall thereupon be made by the said court, that the parties shall submit to, and finally be concluded by the arbitration or umpirage which shall be made concerning them by the arbitrators or umpire, pursuant to such submission; and in case of disobedience to such arbitration or umpirage, the party neglecting or refusing to perform and execute the same, or any part therof, shall be subject to all the penalties of contemning a rule of court, when he is a suitor or defendant in such court, and the court on motion shall issue process accordingly, which process shall not be stopped or delayed in its execution, by any order, rule, command, or process of any other court, either of law or equity, unless it shall be made appear on oath to such court that the arbitrators or umpire misbehaved themselves, and that such award, arbitration or umpirage was procured by corruption or other undue means.
 
II. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That any arbitration or umpirage procured by corruption, or undue means, shall be judged and esteemed void and of none effect, and accordingly be set aside by any court of law or equity, so as complaint of such corruption or undue practice be made in the court where the rule is made for submission to such arbitration or umpirage, before the last day of the next term after such arbitration or umpirage made and published to the parties; anything in this act contained to the contrary notwithstanding."
I am indebted to the erudition which went into the New
South Wales Law
Reform Commission's 1976 Report on Commercial Arbitration for an account of the purpose of the 1698 Act and its operation.
I can do no better than reproduce paragraphs 9.6.1 to 9.6.6 inclusive of that Report. .6.1 Present statute law. 'Where an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted himself or an arbitration or award has been improperly procured, the Court may set the award aside.' (Arbitration Act, 1902, s13(2)). An understanding of this provision calls for some reference to history.
 .6.2 Common low practice before 1698. Before 1698 a practice had arisen in the superior courts of common law at Westminster whereby the parties to an action might obtain by consent a rule of court ((1) Or an order of a judge or an order at nisi prius, which orders had to be made rules of court for the purposes of the practice discussed in this paragraph) referring their differences to arbitration. The award of the arbitrator was liable to be set aside by the court under whose rule the arbitration was held.
The grounds for setting aside the award no doubt were elaborated and enlarged in the years prior to 1890, but this was done by the process of the common law, without aid or restriction by
Parliament. The courts of common law had no jurisdiction to set aside an award on a submission by consent out of court. ((2)
Russell (1882) p663.) .6.3 Chancery practice before
Also before 1698, a jurisdiction had arisen in the Court of Chancery to set aside an award on a submission by consent out of court. Such an award was liable to be set aside in Chancery on various grounds, including misconduct of the arbitrator and extending also to mistake of law made by the arbitrator in making his award. ((1)
Brown versus Brown <case>; [(1683) 1 Vern. 157]; Racecourse Betting Control Board v Secretary for Air [(1944) Ch 114], 127; Kyd (1791) p 239.) The procedure was by bill, not by any summary application.
 .6.4 The Arbitration Act 1698. The
Arbitration Act 1698 was addressed in part to the arrangements for setting aside an award an a submission by consent out of court. It was concerned, that is to say, to put new procedures and powers in the place of those of the Court of Chancery in respect of awards an the submissions to which the Act applied. It seems probable that three mischiefs were perceived in the Chancery jurisdiction: the procedure by bill was too slow and costly, the grounds on which an award might be set aside were so extensive as to threaten the utility of arbitration, and there was an inconveniently long time, probably twenty years, ((1) Nichols versus Roe (1834) 3 My. and K 431, 440; <case>; [40
ER 164], 168) during which the award was liable to be set aside.
 .6.5 The fourfold remedy of the Act of 1698. The remedy prescribed by the Act of 1698 was fourfold. In the first place, the Act permitted an application for the setting aside of an award to be made by summary application on affidavit rather than by suit or action. ((1) Arbitration Act 1698 (UK), s1; Nichols versus Roe My and K 431, 440; <case>; [40 ER 164], 168.) Secondly, the Act specified exhaustively the grounds upon which an award on a submission within the Act might be set aside. ((2) Arbitration Act (UK), s2.) Thirdly, the Act forbade the exercise of the old
Chancery jurisdiction so far as concerned awards on submissions within the Act. ((3) Arbitration Act 1698 (UK), ss1, 2. But the submission might, if so agreed by the parties, have been made a rule order of the Court of Chancery and then that Court might have exercised the summary jurisdiction under the Act of 1698.)
Fourthly, a time was fixed after which proceedings for the setting aside of an award were precluded (Arbitration Act 1698 (UK), s2).
 .6.6 Judicial treatment of the Ad of 1698. The Act of 1698 was effective as regards the first, third and fourth of these remedies, but was ineffective as regards the second. The only ground upon which an award might be set aside under the Act was that the award was 'procured by corruption or undue means'. ((1)
Arbitration Act 1698 (UK), s2. The reference to misbehaviour of the arbitrator in s1 is literally concerned only with the stopping or delaying of process for contempt, not with setting aside the award, and is expressed as a requirement additional, not alternative, to procurement by corruption or other undue means.) By the time the Act was repealed in 1890 (Arbitration
Act (UK), ss26(1), 29), however, NEARLY TWO HUNDRED YEARS OF
JUDICIAL DECISION HAS SO ENLARGED THE GROUNDS UPON WHICH
AN
AWARD MIGHT BE SET ASIDE ON SUMMARY APPLICATION THAT THE LAW AS
ADMINISTERED BORE NO RESEMBLANCE TO THE LAW AS ENACTED.
The judicial enlargement is easier to perceive in its result than are the steps by which the result was reached. Probably the events were something like the following. As late as 1738 the courts were substantially adhering to the terms of the
Act: an award on a submission within the Act of 1698 might be set aside only an grounds of fraud or corruption in the arbitrators, not on the grounds, for example, of want of finality or want of mutuality (Hutchins versus Hutchins <case>; (1738) Andr. 297; [95 ER 406).] But within twenty-five years it was established in the Court of King's
Bench that an award on a reference in a cause might be set aside in equity, including error of law on the face of the award, ((2)
Lucas d. Markham versus Wilson <case>; [(1758) 2 Burr 701] See the view of Story
J in Kleine versus Catara [(1814) 2 Gall. 61], that an arbitrator who gives his reasons is presumed to refer it to the Court to review his decision on the law) and that an award on a submission within the Act of 1698 stood on the same footing as an award on a reference in a cause (Lucas d.
Markham versus Wilson). It is likely that these steps are the work of Lord Mansfield, who sat as Lord
Chief Justice from 1756 to 1786. (Emphasis mine)
The authors of that report examined the position after the Courts of
Chancery, Queen's Bench and other superior courts of Westminster were united in the Supreme Court of Judicature by the Act of 1875 and concluded that that amalgamation made no difference to the position as it had been before that amalgamation. What they said, omitting the footnotes, was "9.6.7
The position in 1875.

By 1875, when the Court of Chancery, the Court of Queen's
Bench and other superior Courts at Westminster (and other courts) were united in the Supreme Court of Judicature, it had become settled that the courts might, on summary application, set aside an award on a submission within the Act of 1698 on a great variety of grounds, including error of law on the face of the award, misconduct of the arbitrator not involving corruption termination of the authority of the arbitrator by revocation or by death of a party, award made out of time, excess of authority, want of finality and uncertainty. The practice on the setting aside of awards on a submission within the Act of 1698 were so far equated to that on the setting aside of awards on a reference by consent in a cause that the reported cases frequently did not distinguish between the two classes of award. There were occasional attempts to reconcile this course of practice with the words of the Act of 1698 and there were occasional attempts to maintain the position that an award an a reference in a cause might only be set aside on grounds of fraud or corruption of the arbitrator or of error of law, a position which might have been held with greater strength as regards an award on a submission within the
Act of 1698. But the fact that the practice of the Courts had departed from the requirements of the Act of 1698 was frankly recognised.

Proceedings to set aside an award on a submission within the
Act of 1698 were treated as proceedings to invoke the jurisdiction given by that Act whatever was the ground upon which the applicant relied, indeed the courts of common law had no jurisdiction to set aside such an award except the jurisdiction given by the Act.
Accordingly, the time limit flied by the Act of 1698 was applied whatever ground was relied upon. This time limit was applied as a direct requirement of the Act of 1698, not by analogy as was done in the case of an award on a reference by consent in a cause.
 
The result was that, with the single exception of the time limit for the application, the courts dealt with applications to set aside awards in the same way, whether the award was on a reference in a cause or on a submission within the Act of 1698.
The result this reached appears to have received adequate statutory support in 1854, for it was enacted in that year that the proceedings upon specified arbitrations should, except as otherwise directed by the Act or by the submission or document authorising the reference, be conducted subject to the same rules as to (amongst other things) the setting aside of the award, as upon a reference by consent in a cause. (Common Law Procedure Act (UK) s7). This enactment applied to an arbitration on a submission within the Act of 1698.

Such was the law touching the setting aside of an ward on a submission within the Act of 1698 on the eve of the union of the old courts in the Supreme
Court of Judicature in 1875. The old
Chancery jurisdiction to set aside an award on a submission by consent out of court, although excluded by the Act of 1698 as regards an award on a submission within that Act, remained otherwise unimpaired and was and is exercised from time to time in cases, for example, where the submission is not in writing. On our reading of the numerous cases on the subject, we have formed the view that the grounds for setting aside an award in Chancery were no less extensive than those available in a court of common law."
The Act of 1689 was repealed by the Arbitration Act 1889. This
Act is divided into three parts. The first is "References by Consent out of Court"; the second "References under Order of Court", and the last is "General". The first part of he Act set out, by reference to the First Schedule, provisions to be deemed to be included in a submission unless a contrary intention is expressed therein. Ss 11 and 12 of this Act (in that part of the Act under the heading "References by Consent out of Court") provided "11. (1) Where an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted himself, the Court may remove him.

Where an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted himself, or an arbitration or award has been improperly procured, the Court may set the award aside.
An award on a submission may, by leave of the Court or a judge, be enforced in the same manner as a judgment or order to the same effect."
These provisions are applied to References under
Order of Court by Ss 16 and 17 which provided "16. The Court or a judge shall as to references under order of the Court or a judge, have all the powers which are by this Act conferred on the Court or a judge as to references by consent out of
Court.
Her Majesty's Court of Appeal shall have all the powers conferred by this Act on the Court or a judge thereof under the provisions relating to references under order of the Court".
S19, under the heading "General", provided: "19. Any referee, arbitrator, or umpire may at any stage of the proceedings under a reference, and shall, if so directed by the
Court or a judge, state in the form of a special case for the opinion of the Court any question of law arising in the course of the reference."
By Act No. 32 of 1892, New South Wales, "The Arbitration Act 1889", the
Parliament of this State adopted, verbatim, the References by Consent Out of
Court provisions of the English Act of 1889 other than s3 of that Act, so that ss10, 11 and 12 of the English Act became ss9, 10 and 11 of the New South
Wales Act. The New South Wales Act also adopted with immaterial changes
References under Order of Court provisions of the 1889 English Act, ss15 and of the English Act becoming ss13 and 14 of the New South Wales Act. It was apparently not thought necessary for the NSW Act to contain a provision equivalent to s17 of the
English Act. S19 of the English Act, in the part headed "General" is adopted verbatim in s16 of the NSW Act. Most of the other provisions of the English Act in the section headed "General" have a similar provision in the NSW Act. The differences are immaterial for present purposes.
New South Wales was plainly adopting English statutory law so that English
Court decisions were naturally regarded as persuasive authority in the interpretation and application of New South Wales law.
The New South Wales Act of 1892 was repealed by the
Arbitration Act 1902, but with immaterial exceptions and slight verbal changes, it was reenacted by the 1902 Act, except, oddly, the power to administer oaths or take affirmations of parties and witnesses appearing conferred by s6(a) of the 1892
Act was not included in the 1902 Act. But for present purposes it can be taken that the statutory provisions regarding arbitration in New South
Wales did not relevantly differ from the statutory provisions in England. English authorities on arbitration law remained persuasive in New South Wales.
In 1912 the House of Lords affirmed that the High Court had jurisdiction to set aside an award which contained an error of law on the face of the award (see British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Co. Ltd versus Underground
Electric Railways
Co. of London Ltd [(1912) AC 673).] That was not a novel proposition in 1912, but their Lordships affirmed it in most unusual circumstances. The dispute arose out of a contract made in 1902 between
British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Co. Ltd and Metropolitan
District Electric Traction
Co. Ltd for the supply of eight steam turbines and eight turbo alternators. That contract was subsequently novated to Undergound
Electric Railways Co. of London Ltd. The contract included a clause referring any disputes under it to arbitration under the provisions of the Arbitration
Act 1889. Disputes did arise: they were referred "to the final determination of a sole arbitrator". Those disputes involved claims and counterclaims: the amounts involved were substantial. The arbitrator made findings of fact and stated a case in which he set out those findings and the respective contentions of the parties as to the conclusions in law which each contended arose out of those contentions. Those questions came before the Lord Chief
Justice and Justices Hamilton and Avery sitting as a Divisional
Court. The answers by that Court were brought before the arbitrator and he stated in his award that he made his award acting on the answers. In fact the arbitrator annexed a copy of the special case and the Divisional Courts answers to his award and expressly made them part of his award. British Westinghouse moved a
Divisional Court consisting of Pickford and Lush JJ to set aside the award on the ground that it was bad as containing an error of law on the face of it.
That Court considered it was bound by the opinions previously given by the other Divisional Court, so it dismissed the application. British Westinghouse appealed to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal, by a majority, Buckley and Kennedy LJJ, Vaughan Williams LJ dissenting, held that the appeal was competent and then Buckley
LJ dissenting that it failed on the merits. British
Westinghouse appealed to the House of Lords. Viscount Haldane, Lord
Chancellor, with whom Lords Ashbourne, Macnaghten and Atkinson concurred. In the course of his speech, Viscount Haldane LC said "The appellants made a motion in the King's Bench Division to set aside the award on the ground that it was bad as containing an error in law on the face of it. But the Court, considering that it was bound by the opinions previously given by the
Divisional Court, dismissed the motion.

Against this order the appellants appealed to the Court of Appeal.
Two questions arose. One of these was whether it was competent to the Court of Appeal to review the opinions given by the
Divisional Court to the arbitrator.
It was argued for the respondents that, as the opinions given under the Arbitration
Act by the Divisional Court were not and could not be appealed, the Court of Appeal could not review them and was bound by the law as so stated.

On this point Vaughan Williams LJ considered that the respondents were right. Buckley and Kennedy LJJ took a different view.

My
Lords, I cannot say that I entertain any doubt that the view taken by the majority in the Court of Appeal on this question was the correct one. No doubt an opinion given by the Court under the provisions of the Arbitration Act is not a judgment or order, and is, therefore not susceptible of being the subject of an appeal. But, in my opinion, that is the only reason why it cannot be appealed, and if the law embodied in it is afterwards set out on the face of a final award, I see no reason for thinking with
Vaughan William LJ that the Act intended to make the statement of the law appearing on the face of the award binding on a higher tribunal before which the award might come for review.

It was further argued before your Lordships that the arbitrator was in reality made judge of law as well as of fact, and that the well-known case of Hodgkinson versus Fernie <case>; [(1857) 3 CB (NS) 189] was wrongly decided I see no ground for this contention, and I am of opinion that the doctrine of Hodgkinson v
Fernie, to the effect that where an error of law appears on the face of the award the error can be reviewed, is a well-established part of the law of the land. I do not think that the Arbitration
Act intended to make any modification of the existing rule in this respect, or that the decision in In re Knight and The
Tabernacle Permanent Building Society [(1892) 2 QB 613], is an authority for the proposition that it did. It is, therefore, competent for this House to review the law which the arbitrator, as he was bound to do, adopted from the Divisional Court and set out his award."
Their Lordships then determined that the Court of Appeal's decision as to the merits was in error and determined that the award be remitted to the arbitrator with a declaration to that effect.
This decision has been applied in the High Court (Australia) (see Tuta
Products Pty Ltd v Hutcherson Bros Pty Ltd <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 253).] In his dissenting judgment, Barwick CJ said at p 257-8 "It must strike an intelligent observer as somewhat farcical that a procedure designed for resolving questions, of which those arising out of the present submission are a common example, with economy, celerity and finality, should be as protracted and as fraught with such uncertainty and technicality as the arbitral process has been in this instance. The opinion of the
Supreme Court was taken and, as might have been expected, was acted upon. Such an opinion could not have been reviewed by this Court because it was merely consultative. This, the parties in requesting the arbitrators to seek it, must have known.
However, they now seek to appeal the consultative opinion of the Supreme Court upon the fiction, for in my opinion with due respect to those who do not share it, it is at best no more than a fiction, that that opinion and the stated case on which it way expressed form part of the arbitrators' award.
 
Many judges of the past have regretted, as I do now, the exception to the finality of an arbitrator's award which was made in cases decided before Hodgkinson versus Fernie. I However, it is with us, the legislature of New South Wales not having seen fit by legislation to remove it. Meantime, courts, in my opinion, should not be overready to seek for points, of law which are not clearly apparent on the face of the award. Finality in arbitration in the award of the lay arbitrator is more significant than legal propriety in all his processes in reaching that award, established only after successive appellate processes."
To the above citation, I add that neither the Act of 1689 nor the Act of nor the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 conferred any such power on any court. The Superior Courts in England had simply held it was part of their inherent jurisdiction as such courts to correct errors of law appearing on the face of arbitral awards. The Court of Appeal in this State has adopted the same view of this Court's power to control arbitral proceedings in Now South
Wales, asserting it to be par of this Court's "inherent jurisdiction" and/or that it is derived from the provisions of [s23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) which provides "The Court shall have all jurisdiction which may be necessary for the Administration of justice in New South Wales".
See Commonwealth of
Australia versus Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd [(1995) 36 NSWLR 662], another round in the long running battle between these parties.
The Courts in England had over a long period of years established two other principles of importance to curial supervision of awards. One of those was that if a specific question of law including the proper construction of a contract, or of some provision in it, was submitted to an arbitrator for decision, his decision was not to be set aside for error of law, though the
Court may have thought the arbitrator erred (Government of Kelantan versus Duff
Development
Co [1923 AC 395] - see in particular the speech of Lord Cave LC at p409)). On the other hand, if an arbitrator in his award idetified the contract which he considered and referred to provisions in it, though his award did not set them out in fun, then that contract, or at least those provisions were to be regarded as incorporated in the award so that the actual contract, or the provisions in it could be established by evidence and considered by a Court in determining an application to set aside an award for error of law on the face of the award.
That principle had been established by when Williams J said of it, in Hodgkinson versus Fernie <case>; [(1857) 3 CB (NS) 189] at 202, after stating that the general rule was that the parties having chosen their tribunal are bound by the arbitrators decision said "The only exception to that rule are cases where the award is the result of corruption or fraud, and one other, which, though it is to be regretted, is now, I think, firmly established, viz., when the question of law necessarily arises on the face of the award, or upon some paper accompanying and forming part of the award". For this purpose a "paper" formed part of the award if the award identified it.
British Westinghouse to which I have earlier referred is the classical example - the "paper" was the decision of the Divisional Court on the consultative case stated by the arbitrator. These principles were reviewed and confirmed by the House of Lords in F R Absolom Ltd versus Great Western (London) Garden Village
Society Ltd [1933 AC 592] by Lord Russell of Killowen and by Lord Wright.
The Arbitration Act 1950, 14 Geo 6 Ch 27 of the UK was assented to on 28
July and it commenced on 1 September 1950. Its provisions relevant to the task on which I am presently engaged are Ss21-26, which provided "21. (1) An arbitrator or umpire may, and shall if so directed by the High Court, state any question of law arising in the course of the reference; or an award or any part of an award, in the form of a special case for the decision of the High Court.

A special case with respect to an interim award or with respect to a question of law arising in the course of a reference may be stated, or may be directed by the High Court to be stated, notwithstanding that proceedings under the reference are still pending.

A decision of the High Court under this section shall be deemed to be a judgment of the Court within the meaning of s27 of the Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act, 1925 (which relates to the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to hear and determine appeals from any judgment of the High Court), but no appeal shall lie from the decision of the High Court on any case stated under para (a) of subs(1) of this section without the leave of the High Court or of the Court of Appeal.
In all cases of reference to arbitration the High Court or a judge thereof may from time to time remit the matters referred, or any of them, to the reconsideration of the arbitrator or umpire.

Where an award is remitted, the arbitrator or umpire shall, unless the order otherwise directs, make his award within three months after the date of the order.
Where an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted himself or the proceedings, the High Court may remove him.

Where an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted himself or the proceedings, or an arbitration or award has been improperly procured, the High Court may set the award aside.

Where an application is made to set aside an award, the High
Court may order that any money made payable by the award shall be brought into court or otherwise secured pending the determination of the application
Where an agreement between any parties provides that disputes which may arise in the future between them shall be referred to an arbitrator named or designated in the agreement, and after a dispute has arisen any party applies, on the ground that the arbitrator so named or designated is not or may not be impartial, for leave to revoke the authority of the arbitrator or for an injunction to restrain any other party or the arbitrator from proceeding with the arbitration, it shall not be a ground for refusing the application that the said party at the time when he made the agreement knew, or ought to have known, that the arbitrator, by reason of his relation towards any other party to the agreement or of his connection with the subject referred, might not be capable of impartiality.

Where an agreement between any parties provides that disputes which may arise in the future between them shall be referred to arbitration, and a dispute which so arises involves the question whether any such party has been guilty of fraud, the
High Court shall, so far as may be necessary to enable that question to be determined by the High Court have power to order that he agreement shall cease to have effect and power to give leave to revoke the authority of any arbitrator or umpire appointed by or by virtue of the agreement.

In any case where by virtue of this section the High Court has power to order that an arbitration agreement shall cease to have effect or to give leave to revoke the authority of an arbitrator or umpire, the High Court may refuse to stay any action brought in breach of the agreement.
Where an arbitrator (not being a sole arbitrator) or two or more arbitrators, (not being all the arbitrators) or an umpire who has not entered on the reference is or are removed by the
High Court, the High Court may, on the application of any party to the arbitration agreement, appoint a person or persons to act as arbitrator or arbitrators or umpire in place of the person or persons so removed.
 
Where the authority of an arbitrator or arbitrators or umpire is revoked by leave of the High Court, or a sole arbitrator or all the arbitrators or an umpire who has entered on the reference is or are removed by the High Court, the High Court may, on the application of any party to the arbitration agreement, either - appoint a person to act as sole arbitrator in place of the person or persons removed; or order that the arbitration agreement shall cease to have effect with respect to the dispute referred.

A person appointed under this section by the High Court as an arbitrator or umpire shall have the like power to act in the reference and to make an award as if he had been appointed in accordance with the terms of the arbitration agreement.

Where it is provided (whether by means of a provision in the arbitration agreement or otherwise) than an award under an arbitration agreement shall be a condition precedent to the bringing of an action with respect to any matter to which the agreement applies, the High Court, if it orders (whether under this section or under any other enactment) that the agreement shall cease to have effect as regards any particular dispute, may further order that the provision making an award a condition precedent to the bringing of an action shall also cease to have effect as regards that dispute.

Enforcement of Award
An award on an arbitration agreement may, by leave of the
High Court or a judge thereof, be enforced in the same manner as a judgment or order to the same effect, and where leave is so given, judgment may be entered in terms of the award."
In the post-war years London became a favoured place for arbitrating commercial disputes arising out of standard form agreements common in the trading of a wide variety of commodities, as well as under charterparties and other maritime contracts. There were skilled arbitrators readily available and matters could be dealt with expeditiously. Interference with that process by appeals became sufficiently common to begin to be viewed with disfavour. The tide began to turn against judicial interference.
Giacomo Costa Fu Andrea versus British Italian Trading Co. Ltd [(1962) 2 All ER ] is a useful illustration of both of those propositions. The dispute was between vendor and purchaser under a contract in the standard form of the
Incorporated Oilseed Association for the sale of ground nuts (peanuts here).
It contained a clause that disputes arising out of the contract be referred to arbitration according to the rules of the Association. Those *rules called the arbitrator the "umpire" and provided for appeal from the umpire's award to "the committee of appeals of the Incorporated Oil Seed Association".
The contract required the buyers to declare a port for shipment (either
Genoa or Taranto) not later than 1 February 1961.
They did not: they purported to do so on 22 February 1961. The sellers asserted a right to rescind. On 28
February 1961 the buyers referred the dispute to arbitration.
On 13 April 1961 the arbitrators appointed by the parties having failed to agree appointed an umpire. The umpire held a hearing on 28 April 1961 and on 24 May 1961 the umpire issued his award. It was succinct but sufficient.
It said "I hereby award that the buyers have failed to declare the final port of destination by February 1 1961 and therefore the contract is void". The buyers appealed. On 21 August 1961 there was a hearing by a board of the Committee of
Appeal. The Board confirmed the original award (the report does not disclose the date on which its decision was handed down). On 29 September 1961 the buyers applied to the High Court to set aside the award. On 24 November 1961
McNair J refused to set aside the award. On 21 February 1962 the Court of
Appeal dismissed an appeal from McNair J. The time between breach and the decision of the Court of Appeal was one year and 20 days.
There were two grounds of appeal. The first is immaterial for present purposes. The second was that the award should be set aside for error on its face. The principal judgment was delivered by Diplock LJ. It marks, it seems to me, the turning of the tide against setting aside awards for error on the face of the award. The argument was (see p59A- C) that the award incorporates the contract in the award (because it refers to it) so that the Court was not only entitled, but bound to look at the contract to see whether the finding of law, that the contract is void, was a proper finding of law, or whether it was erroneous on its face.
Diplock LJ observed that the authorities were conflicting and in his view unsatisfactory. He said, at p62 "It seems to me, therefore, that, so far as the cases have gone up to Absolom's case [(1933) All ER Rep 616], the necessity was that there should appear on the award itself some specific statement of the legal proposition involved.
There is, however, a later decision of this court in Arcos, Ltd. versus London and Northern Trading Co, Ltd ((1933), 45 Ll Rep , (CA); varying [(1932), 44 Ll Rep 219).] There, there was an arbitration on a cif contract for pulp wood from White Sea and Baltic ports for the season 1931, and certain disputes arose under particular clauses of that contract. The award consisted of three paragraphs.
No doubt it first recited the contract. Then it said ((1932), 44
Ll Rep 221).
 'I find that the sellers have not committed any breach of cl.3 of the said contract in respect of the shipments made by them. (2) I find that the buyers have broken cl.6 of the said contract by failing to declare ports of destination in respect of cargoes shipped by the steamship Johanne and the steamship Tonis
Chandris'; and in para (3) the umpire went on to make a consequential monetary award. It does not appear from the report that any serious argument was directed to the court whether the court was entitled to look at the contract; but counsel for the buyers rightly relies on a passage in the judgment of Talbot J in the
Divisional Court, in which he said ((1932) 44 Ll
Rep at 222) 'The reference to the contract is quite complete throughout the award. It was suggested, but I cannot think it was seriously argued, that because the award mentions cl.6 of the contract and does not set out its terms the court is not allowed to look at the clause which is expressly referred to to see whether the umpire has taken the correct view of its scope. I cannot think that any such artificial rule as that exists, namely, that because an award states that a party has broken cl.6 of the contract and does not set out its terms in extensor, the court is not to look and see what the clause is which the party is said to have broken.' 
When the matter went to the Court of Appeal, no point was taken as to the propriety of the court's looking at the contract.

It seems to me, therefore, that on the cases, there is none which compels us to hold that a mere reference to the contract in the award entitles us to look at the contract. It may be that in particular cases a specific reference to a particular clause of a contract may incorporate the contract, or that clause of it, in the award. I think that we are driven back to first principles in this matter, namely, that an award can only be set aside for error which is on its face. It is true that an award can incorporate another document so as to entitle one to read that document as part of the award and, by reading them together, find an error on the face of the award. But the question whether a
contract, or a clause in a contract, is incorporated in the award is a question of construction of the award. It seems to me that the test is put as conveniently as it can be in the words of
Denning LJ which I have already cited from Blaiber and Co, Ltd v
Leopold Newborne (London) Ltd ((1953)2 Ll Rep at 429) 'As I read the cases, if the arbitrator says: "On the wording of this clause I hold so" so and so, then that clause is impliedly incorporated in to the award because he invites the reading of it.' 
I, therefore, apply that principle to the award in the present case - that is to say the award of the board of appeal, incorporating that of the umpire, in which he says 'I hereby award that buyers have failed to declare the final part of destination by Feb 1 1961'. this is a finding of fact, and there is nothing about any clause of the contract there. Then he goes on to state the consequences of that finding - 'and therefore the contract is void. There is to reference to any specific provision of the contract from which that consequence flows.
It seems to me that it is quite impossible to say, reading those words, that he has incorporated the contract in the award, in the sense that he has invited those reading the award to read the contact.

This case seems to me to be far away from either Absolom's case or the Landauer case ((1905) 2 KB 184), or the Arcos case ((1933) 45 Ll Rep 297). The principle of reading contracts or other documents into the award is not in my judgment, one to be encouraged or extended, and, in my view, we are not entitled in this court, on an award where there is a purely general reference to 'the contract' -and a reference only in that part of the award which deals with the consequences of the finding of fact - to look at the contract and search it in order to see whether there is an error of law. The second ground, in my view, therefore, also fails."
The Arbitration Act 1975 (UK) Chapter 3 of 1975 was enacted primarily in furtherance of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards adopted by the United
Nations Conference on International
Commercial Arbitration on 10 June 1958 (The New York Convention). It contained some minor repeals of provisions in the 1950 Act, but none of any relevance to the question which these reasons are addressing.
The New South
Wales Law Reform Commission formally adopted its Report on
Commercial Arbitration on 29 September 1976 and presumably submitted it to the then Attorney General shortly thereafter. Appendix 1 to that Report was a draft Bill for a new Arbitration Act. This Bill proposed to replace the 1902
Act and various provisions in various other Acts dealing with arbitrations.
This Draft Bill proposed new provisions relating to the statement of a case to the Supreme Court for determination of a question of law (s49), for permitting or requiring an arbitrator to state a case for the determination of a question of law arising in the course of a reference (s50), and empowering the Supreme Court to remit the whole or any part of an award to the arbitrator, whether or not an error appears on the face of the award or the arbitrator admits an error or asks for a remission, or a question of law was specifically referred to the arbitrator, or any error is identified to the
Court "where it appears to the Court that the award or any part of the award
IS
OR MAY BE GROSSLY WRONG" (s57). And a power simply to set aside an award was also proposed "where it appears to the Supreme Court that an award or part of an award IS OR MAY BE GROSSLY WRONG" (s58(1)). (Emphasis mine)
The English law on this matter was further amended by the Arbitration Act (Ch.42 of 1979) assented to on 4 April 1979, and commencing on 1 August
Ss 1, 2 and 4 provide "1. (1) In the Arbitration Act 1950 (in the Act referred to as 'the principal Act') s21 (statement of case for a decision of the High Court) shall cease to have effect and, without prejudice to the right of appeal conferred by subs(2) below, the High
Court shall not have jurisdiction to set aside or remit an award on an arbitration agreement on the ground of errors of fact or law on the face of the award.

Subject to subs(3) below, an appeal shall lie to the High
Court on any question of law arising out of an award made on an arbitration agreement; and on the determination of such an appeal the High Court may by order - confirm, vary or set aside; or remit the award to the reconsideration of the arbitrator or umpire together with the court's opinion on the question of law which was the subject of the appeal; and where the award is remitted under para (b) above the arbitrator or umpire shall, unless the order otherwise directs, make his award within three months after the date of the order.

An appeal under this section may be brought by any of the parties to the reference - with the consent of all the other parties to the reference; or subject to s3 below, with the leave of the court.

The High Court shall not grant leave under subs(3)(b) above unless it considers that, having regard to all the circumstances, the determination of the question of law concerned COULD
SUBSTANTIALLY AFFECT THE RIGHTS OF ONE OR
MORE OF THE PARTIES TO
THE ARBITRATION AGREEMENT; and the court may make any leave which it gives conditional upon the applicant complying with such conditions as it considers appropriate. (Emphasis mine) 
Subject to subs(6) below, if an award is made and, on an application made by any of the parties to the references, - with the consent of all the other parties to the reference, or subject to s3 below, with the leave of the court, it appears to the High Court that the award does not or does not sufficiently set out the reasons for the award, the court may order the arbitrator or umpire concerned to state the reasons for his award in sufficient detail to enable the court, should an appeal be brought under this section, to consider any question of law arising out of the award.
 
In any case where an award is made without any reason being given, the High Court shall not make an order under subs(5) above unless it is satisfied - that before the award was made one of the parties to the reference gave notice to the arbitrator or umpire concerned that a reasoned award would be required, or that there is some special reason why such a notice was not given.

Unless the High Court gives leave, no appeal shall lie to the Court of Appeal from a decision of the High Court - to grant or refuse leave under subs(3)(b) or (5)(b); or to make or not to make an order under subs(5) above.

No appeal shall lie to the Court of
Appeal from a decision of the High Court on an appeal under this section unless - the High Court or the Court of Appeal gives leave; and it is certified by the High Court that the question of law to which its decision relates either is one of general public importance or is one which for some other special reason should be considered by the Court of Appeal.

Where the award of an arbiter or umpire is varied on appeal, the award as vaned shall have effect (except for the purpose of this section) as if it were the award of the arbitrator or umpire.
Subject to subs(2) and s3 below, on an application to the
High Court made by any of the parties to a reference - with the consent of an arbitrator who has entered on the reference or, if an umpire has entered on the reference, with his consent, or with the consent of all the other parties, the High Court shall have jurisdiction to determine any question of law arising in the course of the reference.
 
The High Court shall not entertain an application under subs(1)(a) above with respect to any question of law unless it is satisfied that - the determination of the application might produce substantial savings in costs to the parties; and the question of law is one in respect of which leave to appeal would be likely to be given under s1(3)(b) above.
 
Unless the High Court gives leave, no appeal shall lie to the Court of Appeal from a decision of the High Court to entertain or not to entertain an application under subs(1)(a) above.

A decision of the High Court under subs(1) above shall be deemed to be a judgment of the court within the meaning of s16 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 (appeals to the Court of Appeal), but no appeal shall lie from such a decision unless - the High Court or the Court of Appeal gives leave; and it is certified by the High Court that the question of law to which its decision relates either is one of general public importance or is one which for some other special reason should be considered by the Court of Appeal.
(Ss1(6A) and 2(2A) were added by s148 of the Supreme Court Act 1981.) "(4) (1) Subject to subs(3) below, if an arbitration award or a question of law arising in the course of a reference relates, in whole or in part, to - a question or claim falling within the
Admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court, or a dispute arising out of a contract of insurance, or a dispute arising out of a commodity contract, an exclusion agreement shall have no effect in relation to the award or question unless either -
the exclusion agreement is entered into after the commencement of the arbitration in which the award is made or, as the case may be, in which the question of law arises, or the award or question relates to a contract which is expressed to be governed by a law other than the law of England and Wales.

In subs1(c) above 'commodity contract' means a contract for the sale of goods regularly dealt with on a commodity market or exchange in England or Wales which is specified for the purposes of this section by an order made by the Secretary of
State; and of a description so specified 
The Secretary of State may by order provide that subs(1) above - shall cease to have effect; or subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order, shall not apply to any exclusion agreement made in relation to an arbitration award of a description so specified; and an order under this subsection may contain such supplementary, incidental and transitional provisions as appear to the Secretary of State to be necessary or expedient.

The power to make an order under subs(2) or subs(3) above shall be exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either
House of Parliament.

In this section 'exclusion agreement' has the same meaning as in s3 above." .
S1(1), (2) and (4) have the effect of limiting challenges to awards based on errors of law (or of fact) on the face of the award to cases where all parties consent, or where leave of the Court is obtained, which requires that the Court be satisfied that the determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties to the arbitration agreement. Subs(6A) and (7) substantially curtailed the right of appeal from the High Court to the Court of Appeal.
The right to have a question of law determined by the High Court during the conduct of a reference was also curtailed. It remained available only where such a determination "might produce substantial savings in costs to the parties" (s2(2)(a)) and also "the question of law is one in respect of which leave to appeal would be likely to be given under s1(3)(b)" (that it could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement).
The provisions to which I have referred were plainly intended to put a stop to appeals on inconsequential matters which in reality had no greater effect than delaying the enforcement of awards, a practise which had become prevalent and was thought by some at least to be endangering London's ability to provide a satisfactory arbitration service to traders and shipowners and charterers. That problem was not unique to arbitrations in London.
The remaining provisions of the English 1979 Act are of no relevance to the problem which I am addressing.
On 16 July 1981 the House of
Lords delivered its decision in the matter reported in [1982 AC 724] as Pioneer Shipping Ltd and Ors versus BTP Tioxide Ltd. The appellant to the House Of Lords was in fact BTP Tioxide Ltd (the charterer) and Pioneer Shipping Ltd, the shipowner, was the respondent. This case is frequently referred to by the name of the vessel involved, which was the NEMA.
The Nema was chartered on 2 November 1978 for seven consecutive voyages to
Sorel in Canada to load titanium slag and carry the cargo back to Europe. The first contemplated voyage was completed and she arrived back at Sorel to take on board the second cargo on 20 June 1979. She was unable to load owing to a strike which had started there some two weeks earlier. By arrangement between the parties, The Nema undertook another voyage for the owners, not for BTP
Tioxide Ltd and the charter was extended for a further seven voyages in the next year. After the completion of that other voyage for the owners, the charterers required the Nema to return to Sorel in case the strike ended but the owners refused. The charter- party contained an arbitration clause providing for arbitration in London. In mid-August 1979 the parties agreed to early arbitration before a single arbitrator. The arbitrator conducted an all day hearing on 26 September 1979 and gave his decision on 28 September 1979 that "the whole of the charterparty contract of November 2 1978 is now frustrated". On 3 October 1979 he handed down his reasons for his award. In those reasons he said he meant only the charter for the 1979 year. The strike in Sorel ended two days later, that is on 5 October 1979. On 2 November 1979
Robert Goff J gave leave to appeal under s1 of the Arbitration Act 1979. The owners appealed to the Court of Appeal which held it had jurisdiction to entertain the appeal but declined to interfere with the Judge's grant of leave. Robert Goff J then heard the appeal and he held that the charterparty had not been frustrated and pursuant to s1(2)(a) of the 1979 Act he ordered the award be varied by substituting a declaration that the charterparty had not been frustrated and/or that the Nema was and had at all material times since 10 August 1979 been obliged to return to Sorel. The owners appealed to the Court of Appeal which allowed their appeal.
The charterers appealed to the
House of Lords which dismissed the appeal.
Lord Roskill, with whom Lds Diplock, Fraser of Tullybelton,
Russell of
Killowen and Keith of Kinkel all agreed, examined in detail the questions involved. Lord Diplock, as well as agreeing with Lord Roskill, took the opportunity of examining the provisions of the 1979 Act and expressed his view as how they should be applied. Each of the others of their Lordships expressly agreed with what Lord Diplock said on that aspect of the appeal. Much of it is particularly relevant to the dispute which I am presently considering.
At p735-6, Lord Diplock said 
My Lords, the particular circumstances in which the parties wanted a quick decision as to where they stood as respects the future employment of the Nema are, no doubt, exceptional. In my view, they are in themselves sufficient to make a grant of leave to appeal from the arbitrator's award under s1 of the Arbitration
Act 1979 an unjudicial exercise of the discretion conferred upon the judge by that section. Such was the view of those who were then the two most senior judges of the Commercial Court and such (on second thoughts) was the view of Lord Denning MR; but the dispute had other characteristics that are likely to recur in other cases and have caused those divergences of views as to the weight that should be given to them in deciding how to exercise that discretion.

As will appear from Lord Roskill's speech, the terms of the charterparty and its addenda that are relevant to the disputed issue of frustration are unique, it is almost inconceivable that they will be found again in any other charter. The same may be said of the events that preceded and led up to the dispute between the parties. If one were seeking to exemplify what is meant by the convenient neologism 'a one-off case' it would be hard to find a better exemplar than the case that is now before your Lordships.
 
Of course the dispute involves some question of law. It is difficult to conceive of a dispute under a charterparty that does not do so. The dispute is likely to be about what the parties have agreed shall be their respective legal rights and obligations in events that have actually happened or, it may occasionally be, in events that it is anticipated may happen. The answer must depend upon the true construction of the agreement between the parties; and in English jurisprudence, as a legacy of the system of trial by juries who might not all be literate, the construction of a written agreement, even between private parties, became classified as a question of law. The object sought to be achieved in construing any commercial contract is to ascertain what were the mutual intentions of the parties as to the legal obligations each assumed by the contractual words in which they (or brokers acting on their behalf) chose to express them; or, perhaps more accurately, what each would have led the other reasonably to assume were the acts that he was promising to do or to refrain from doing by the words in which the promises on his part were expressed. In the case of a 'one-off contract' where the exact combination of words and phrases that fall to be construed has not only never been used before and so did not possess an already established meaning of which each party was entitled to assume the other knew when he entered into the contract, but is also unlikely to be used in future by any other parties, it is not self-evident that an arbitrator or arbitral tribunal chosen by the parties for his or their experience and knowledge of the commercial background and usages of the trade in which the dispute arises, is less competent to ascertain the mutual intentions of the parties than a judge of the Commercial Court, a Court of Appeal of three Lords Justices or even an Appellate
Committee of five Lords of Appeal in Ordinary. A lawyer nurtured in a jurisdiction that did not owe its origin to the common law of England would not regard it as a question of law at all.
This,
I believe, was all that Lord Denning MR meant to convey by his vivid, if somewhat less than tactful phrase. 'On such a clause, the arbitrator is just as likely to be right as the judge - probably more likely' ((1980) QB 547, 564G). Nevertheless, despite the disappearance of juries, literate or illiterate, in civil cases in England, it is far too late to change the technical classification of the ascertainment of the meaning of a written contract between private parties as being 'a question of law' for the purposes of judicial review of awards of arbitrators or decisions of administrative tribunals from which an appeal to a court of justice is restricted by statute to an appeal upon a question of law."
Then at p737-8, he said "My Lords, when contracts are entered into which incorporate standard terms it is in the interests alike of justice and of the conduct of commercial transactions that those standard terms should be construed and treated by arbitrators as giving rise to similar legal rights and obligations in all arbitrations in which the events have given rise to the dispute do not differ from one another in some relevant respect. It is only if parties to commercial contracts can rely upon a uniform construction being given to standard terms that they can prudently incorporate them in their contracts without the need for detailed negotiation or discussion. Such uniform construction of standard terms had been progressively established up to , largely through decisions of the courts upon special cases stated by arbitrators.
In the result English commercial law has achieved a degree of comprehensiveness and certainly that has made it acceptable for adoption as the appropriate proper law to be applied to commercial contracts wherever made by parties of whatever nationality. So, in relation to disputes involving standard terms in commercial contracts an authoritative ruling of the court as to their construction which is binding also upon all arbitrators under the sanction of an appeal from an award of an arbitrator that has resulted from his departing from that ruling performs a useful function that is lacking in that performed by the court in substituting for the opinion of an experienced commercial arbitrator its own opinion as to the application of a 'one-off' clause to the particular facts of a particular case.
It was this useful function that it was the plain intention of the Act of 1979 to preserve by s4, for at least an experimental period during which it would be subject to scrutiny by the
Commercial Court users' Committee to see whether the new provisions of ss1 and 2 relating to leave to appeal from arbitrators' awards and the determinations of preliminary points of law would operate in practice to prevent the continuance of abuses that had become notorious of recent years under the previous system of case stated."
At p739 Lord Diplock turned to a detailed examination of the provisions of the 1979 Act. He began by referring to decisions of Robert Goff J in the instant case and in The Oinoussian Virtue (1981) 1 L1.
Rep 533, in which Goff
J expressed the view that he was unable to find anything in s1 of the 1979 Act "which indicates that, in considering whether or not to give leave to appeal from an arbitrator's award, any limit should be placed upon 'the question of law', except that it must be such that its determination could substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties."
Lord Diplock did not agree with that view because, as he said at 739 "it does not so pay sufficient regard to the general discretion of the High Court to refuse leave absolutely", a discretion conferred by subs3(b). He then said, at 739 "My
Lords, in weighing the rival merits of finality and meticulous legal accuracy there are, in my view, several indications in the
Act itself of a parliamentary intention to give effect to the turn of the tide in favour of finality in arbitral awards (particularly in non-domestic arbitrations of which the instant case is one), at any rate where this does not involve exposing arbitrators to a temptation to depart from 'settled principles of law'. Thus s1(1) removes a former threat to finality by abolishing judicial review (formerly certiorari) for error of law on the face of the award.
S1(3) withdraws the previous power of an arbitrator to accede to a request to state his award in the form of a special case if such request was made by any party to the reference. It is notorious, particularly after the decision of the Court of Appeal in Hafdan
Grieg and Co. A/S versus Sterling
Coal and Navigation Corporation (The
Lysland) [(1973) QB 843], that if such request were made it was virtually impracticable for an arbitrator to refuse it."
I interpolate that in "The Lysland" a Court of Appeal (Lord Denning MR and Megan and Scarman LLJ) allowed an appeal from Kerr J on the ground that since there was a real substantial clear cut point of law as to the true construe of the agreement, the resolution of which was necessary for the determination of the dispute the arbitrators should be ordered to state their award in the form of a special case (see Ld
Denning's reasons at p862). I continue the citation from Lord Diplock's reasons. "Except when all parties to the reference consent, the first part of s1(4) places an absolute bar upon the grant of leave to appeal unless the determination of the disputed point of law would substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the reference; and this, be it noted, even though the point might have arisen under a standard form contract and be of outstanding importance to the trade generally. I find it impossible to infer from the inclusion of a power to impose conditions in the latter part of the same subsection a parliamentary intention that whenever that absolute bar did not operate leave to appeal should be granted, albeit that it might be made subject to conditions.

Section 1(7) is another provision in favour of reaching finality as soon as possible; the stringent conditions imposed upon a further appeal from the judge to the Court of Appeal are clearly adapted from the provisions of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 relating to appeals to the House of Lords in criminal matters - another field of law in which speedy finality is much to be desired. The subsection also draws a significant distinction between a question of law which arises in connection with a 'one-off' case and a question of law of general importance to a substantial section of the commercial community, such as may arise under standard term contracts. I ADD PARENTHETICALLY THAT
IT IS ONE OF THE IRONIES OF THE INSTANT
CASE THAT IF THE JUDGE'S
INITIAL ERROR IN GRANTING LEAVE TO APPEAL TO THE HIGH COURT HAD
NOT BEEN COMPOUNDED BY HIS ALSO
GIVING LEAVE TO CERTIFICATE AND
LEAVE TO APPEAL TO THE COURT OF APPEAL UNDER THIS SUBSECTION (WHICH A FORTIORI IN SUCH A 'ONE-OFF' CASE HE NEVER SHOULD HAVE
DONE), THE OWNERS WOULD HAVE BEEN LEFT WITH A DECISION AGAINST
THEM WHICH, ALTHOUGH IT
IS NOT ONE OF GENERAL PUBLIC IMPORTANCE,
BOTH THE COURT OF APPEAL AND THIS HOUSE HAVE UNANIMOUSLY HELD TO
BE WRONG." (Emphasis mine)
At 742-3 he said "My Lords, in view of the cumulative effect of all these indications of Parliament's intention to promote greater finality in arbitral awards than was being achieved under the previous procedure as it was applied in practice, it would, in my view, defeat the main purpose of the first four sections of the Act if judges when determining whether a case was one in which the new discretion to grant leave to appeal should be exercised in favour of an applicant against objection by any other party to the reference, did not apply much stricter criteria than those stated in The Lysland [(1973) QB 843] which used to be applied in exercising the former discretion to require an arbitrator to state a special case for the opinion of the court.
 
Where, as in the instant case, a question of law involved is the construction of a 'one-off' clause the application of which to the particular facts of the case is an issue in the arbitration, LEAVE SHOULD NOT NORMALLY BE GIVEN UNLESS IT
IS
APPARENT TO THE JUDGE UPON A MERE PERUSAL OF THE REASONED AWARD
ITSELF WITHOUT THE BENEFIT OF ADVERSARIAL ARGUMENT, THAT
THE
MEANING ASCRIBED TO THE CLAUSE BY THE ARBITRATOR IS OBVIOUSLY
WRONG. BUT IF ON SUCH PERSUAL IT APPEARS TO THE JUDGE THAT
IT IS
POSSIBLE THAT ARGUMENT MIGHT PERSUADE HIM, DESPITE FIRST
IMPRESSION TO THE CONTRARY, THAT THE ARBITRATOR MIGHT BE RIGHT,
HE SHOULD NOT GRANT LEAVE; THE PARTIES SHOULD BE LEFT TO DECIDE
FAR BETTER OR FAR WORSE, THE DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL THAT
THEY
HAD CHOSEN TO DECIDE THE MATTER IN THE FIRST INSTANCE. The instant case was clearly one in which there was more than one possible view as to the meaning of the 'one-off' clause as it affected the issue of divisibility. It took two days' argument by counsel before the learned judge to satisfy him that the arbitrator was wrong on this and upon the interdependent question of frustration, four days' argument before the Court of Appeal to convince them that the judge was wrong and the arbitrator right and over three days' argument in trying to persuade this
House to the contrary, even though it was not found necessary to call upon the respondent to address us on the merits. Even apart from the reason, special to this case mentioned at the outset, which led Mocatta J and Donaldson J to conclude that it was a case in which no court would grant leave to appeal from the arbitrator's award, it is in my view typical of the sort of case in which leave to appeal on a question of construction ought not to be granted.

For reasons already sufficiently discussed, rather less strict criteria are in my view appropriate where questions of construction of contracts in standard terms are concerned." (Emphasis mine)
And then at 744 "In deciding how to exercise his discretion whether to give leave to appeal under s1 (2) what the judge should , normally ask himself in this type of arbitration, particularly where the events relied upon are 'one-off' events, is not whether he agrees with the decision reached by the arbitrator, but: DOES IT APPEAR
UPON PERUSAL AT THE AWARD EITHER THAT THE ARBITRATOR MISDIRECTED
HIMSELF IN LAW OR THAT HIS DECISION WAY SUCH THAT NO REASONABLE
ARBITRATOR COULD REACH? While this should, in my view, be the normal practice, there may be cased where the events relied upon as amounting to frustration are not 'one-off' events affecting only the transaction between the particular parties to the arbitration, but events of a general character that affect similar transactions between many other persons engaged in the same kind of commercial activity, the closing of the
Suez Canal, the United
States soya bean embargo, the war between Iraq and Iran, are instances within the last two decades that spring to mind. Where such is the case it is in the interests of legal certainty that there should be some uniformity in the decisions of arbitrators as to the effect, frustrating or otherwise, of such an event upon similar transactions, in order that other traders may be sufficiently certain where they stand as to be able to close their own transactions without recourse to arbitration. In such a case, unless there were prospects of an appeal being brought by consent of all the parties as a test case under s1(3)(a), it might be a proper exercise of the judge's discretion to give leave to appeal in order to express a conclusion as to the frustrating effect of the vent that would afford guidance binding upon the arbitrators in other arbitrations arising out of the same event, if the judge thought that in the particular case in which leave to appeal was sought I the conclusion reached by the arbitrator, although not deserving to be stigmatised as one which no reasonable person could have reached was, in the judge's view, not right. But such was far from being the instant case." (Emphasis mine)
The circumstances in which leave to appeal an arbitrator's award should be refused (and those in which it should be granted) were again consider by the House of Lords in Antaios Compania Naviera SA versus Salen Rederierna AB [(1985) AC 191], Lord Diplock delivered the principal speech. Lord Roskill agreed and added some additional observations. Lord Keith of Kinkel, Lord
Scarman and
Lord Brandon of Oakbrook agreed with each of Lords Diplock and Roskill.
The circumstances leading up to the appeal to the House of Lords are sufficiently stated in the headnote which I reproduce. "The charterers chartered a vessel from the shipowners on 3
November 1978 on a three-year time charter in the New York
Product Exchange form. The charterparty contained a London arbitration clause and disputes which had arisen between the parties were referred to arbitration. One of the main issues in the arbitration was whether the owners were entitled to withdraw the vessel from the service of the charterers on discovering that inaccurate bills of lading had been issued. Cl.5 of the charterparty provided 'on any breach of this charterparty, the owners shall be at liberty to withdraw the vessel ...'. On May 1980 the owners had learned of the inaccuracy of the bills of lading but the vessel was not withdrawn until 20 May.
The arbitrators found, inter alia, that the breach by the charterers was non-repudiatory and that cl.5, properly construed, gave a right of withdrawal only where there was a repudiatory breach. They found further that even if, contrary to that finding, the owners had a right of withdrawal that right had to be exercised within 'a reasonable time', which, in the circumstances, was some two days, and that therefore the right to withdraw had been lost before 20 May 1980. The owners applied pursuant to s1(3)(b) of the Arbitration Act 1979 for leave to appeal against the arbitration award.

Staughton J. dismissed the application on the grounds that although the true construction of cl.5 of the charterparty was a matter of public interest on which there was some measure of uncertainty concerning the true answer, the determination of that issue was immaterial in that it was incapable of affecting the rights of the parties substantially or at all unless the arbitrators were wrong in finding that the owners by their own inactivity lost any right of withdrawal and on that issue the arbitrators were probably right. Subsequently, pursuant to s1(6A) of the
Act, the judge granted the owners leave to appeal to the
Court of Appeal from his refusal to allow an appeal to the High 
Court. On appeal by the owners the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal."
Lord Diplock said "By May 1980 market rates of hire had risen, so it was very much to the interest of the shipowners to withdraw the vessel when the charter was only half-way through its term. This they purported to do on 20 May 1980, the charter being reinstated two days afterwards upon the usual 'without prejudice' terms as to the rate of hire payable until the date of its expiry some 18 months later.
 
There were several disputes between the shipowners and the charterers which were submitted to arbitration under cl.17 of 
NYPE which provides for arbitration in London. The arbitral hearing in the only dispute with which your Lordships are concerned took place in February 1982. It was about the shipowners' right to withdraw the vessel on 20 May 1980. The arbitrator's award was published on 9 July 1982. So far as is relevant to the instant appeal it awarded and declared that the shipowners were not entitled to withdraw the vessel Antaios from the service of the charterers on or about 20 May 1980.
The award was accompanied by reasons that ran to no less than pages, of which 78 were devoted to this issue.

On 30 July 1982 the shipowners applied to the High Court, under s1(3)(b) of the Arbitration Act 1979, for leave to appeal on questions of law arising out of the award. Reduced to a single sentence, the only question of law relied upon as so arising was the true construction of the words 'on any bread of this charter party' in the standard NYPE withdrawal clause.

Leave to appeal to the High Court was refused by Staughton J on November 1982, when he gave, as I think unwisely, reasons for his decision, which take up four columns in [(1983) 2 Ll. Rep.
], 474. A fortnight later, on 19 November 1982, the same learned judge gave leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal [(1983) 2 Ll. Rep. 473], 476 from his own refusal of leave to appeal to the High Court from the arbitrators' award. Again, but as I think in this case less unwisely, he gave reasons for doing so. These will merit examination by your Lordships later.
Pursuant to stick leave, the appeal from Staughton J's decision was heard by the Court of Appeal who, on 8 July 1983 dismissed it by a majority (Sir John Donaldson MR and Fox LJ; Ackner LJ dissenting) [(1983) 1 WLR 1362.] They refused leave to appeal to this House from their decision; so, in the result, at that stage approximately one year after its date, the award, which was in any event only an interim one, became final and conclusive on the issue which it decided.
 
My Lords, the course followed in the proceedings in the Supreme
Court, illustrates the difficulty of preventing counsel instructed in commercial arbitrations of the kinds to which s4 of the Arbitration Act 1979 applies, from indulging (no doubt in the supposed commercial interests of their clients) in delaying tactics, so as to attain a similar result to that which it had been possible to achieve before the passing of the Act of 1979 by using the procedure of demanding that an award be stated in the form of a special; case whenever the contract sued upon raised a question of construction that was arguable, however faint the prospects of success.

Unless judges are prepared to be vigilant in the exercise of the discretions conferred upon them by ss1 and 2 of the
Arbitration Act 1979, including in s1 the new subs (6A) that was added by s148(2) of the Supreme Court Act 1981, they will allow to be frustrated the intention of Parliament, as plainly manifested by changes in procedure that these, statutes introduced, to promote speedy finality in arbitral awards rather than that insistence upon meticulous semantic and syntactical analysis of the words in which business men happen to have chosen to express the bargain made between them, the meaning of which is technically, though hardly commonsensically, classified in English jurisprudence as a pure question of law."
At p 203 Lord Diplock added "In the Court of Appeal [(1983) 1 WLR 1362] it was common ground between counsel for all parties that: because there had been conflicting dicta in cases reported at first instance which indicated the existence of two schools of thought among commercial judges as to whether 'any breach' in the withdrawal clause was confined to repudiatory breaches or embraced all breaches however trivial and whether known to the charterer or not, Staughton J would have been right to give leave to appeal to the High Court under s1(3)(b), irrespective of whether he himself thought that the arbitrators were probably right in their acceptance of the repudiatory breach construction or thought that they were probably wrong. This common ground between counsel shaped the way in which the argument developed in the
Court of Appeal. That it should have been accepted without question illustrates not only the reluctance of the commercial
Bar, to which I have earlier made reference, to abandon the practices and modify those attitudes of mind which had the effect of breeding litigation and delaying finality on arbitral awards to which the Bar had become accustomed before the Act of
Its uncritical acceptance by the majority of the Court of
Appeal illustrates also the need for judicial vigilance to ensure that the Bar does so."
And then, at p 205-6 "In the sole type of case in which leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal under s1(6A) may properly be given the judge ought to give reasons for his decision to grant such appeal so that the Court of Appeal may be informed of the lacuna, uncertainty or unsuitability in the light of changing practices that the judge has perceived in the existing guidelines; moreover since the grant of leave entails also the necessity for the application of Edwards versus Bairstow <case>; [(1956) AC 14] principles by the Court of
Appeal in order to examine whether the judge had acted within the limits of his discretion, the judge should also give the reasons for the way in which he had exercised his discretion.

However, save in the exceptional case in which he does give leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal under s1(6A) because it falls within this limited category, a judge ought not normally to give reasons for a grant or refusal under s1(3)(b) of leave to appeal to the High Court from an arbitral award. He should follow the practice that had been adopted in your Lordships' House ever since a would-be appellant from a judgment of the Court of Appeal was required to petition this House for leave to appeal to it when leave to do so had not been granted by the Court of Appeal itself. It has been the practice of this House at the close of the short oral argument on the petition, to say no more than that the petition is allowed or refused as the case may be.
 
Save in very exceptional circumstances which I find myself unable at present to foresee, I can see no good reason why a commercial judge in disposing of an application under s1(3)(b) should do more than that, and several good reasons why he should not. In the first place, he is not himself deciding at this stage the question of law arising out of the award which usually involves a question of construction of a commercial contract. He is simply deciding whether the case is of a kind that is recognised, under the current guidelines laid down by appellate courts, as suitable to be admitted to appeal. In the second place, it adds to the already excessive volume of reported judicial semantic and syntactical analysis of particular words and phrases appearing in commercial contracts which judges are inveigled to indulge in by the detailed oral arguments which it appears to be current practice to allow on applications under s1(3)(b); whereas all that the judge has to decide on the application is: first, is this dispute, on the one hand, about a one-off clause or event, or, on the other hand, about a standard term or an event which is a common occurrence in the trade or commercial activity concerned? If it is the former, he must then consider: whether the arbitrator was in the judge's view so obviously wrong as to preclude the possibility that he might be right, if it is the latter, he must then consider whether a strong prima facie case has been made out that the arbitrator was wrong? Unless the answer he would give to the question appropriate to the type of case to which the application with which he is concerned is: 'Yes' he should refuse leave to appeal."
Lord Roskill, at pp 208-9 said "One purpose of arbitration, especially in commercial disputes, is the avoidance of delays, traditionally if often unfairly associated with the judicial process. The award of any arbitral tribunal can, it is supposed, be obtained swiftly and simply and without elaboration. Unhappily, the former virtually unrestricted right to demand a special case from arbitral tribunals made these admirable objectives almost impossible of attainment. THE ARBITRAL PROCESS BECAME EVEN MORE PROTRACTED
THAN THE JUDICIAL,
WITH ONE OR SOMETIMES, AS IN COMMODITY TRADE
ARBITRATIONS, TWO EXTRA TIERS OF TRIBUNAL ADDED BELOW THE HIGH
COURT, THE COURT
OF APPEAL AND YOUR LORDSHIPS' HOUSE. THE
RESULTANT ABUSE WAS NOTORIOUS. HENCE THE DEMAND FOR THE ABOLITION
OF THE SPECIAL
CASE SUCCESSFULLY ACCOMPLISHED IN 1979. BUT IF
THE RESTRICTED APPELLATE SYSTEM SUBSTITUTED FOR THE SPECIAL
CASE AND THE EQUALLY
OUTDATED MOTION TO SET ASIDE AN AWARD FOR
ERROR OF LAW ON ITS FACE, IS TO BE OPERATED IN SUCH A WAY AS
TO MAKE APPEALS TO
THE HIGH COURT, AND EVEN BEYOND THE HIGH COURT,
READILY AVAILABLE, NOT ONLY ARE THE WORST FEATURES OF THE SYSTEM
NOW ABOLISHED
RESTORED BUT THE ADDITIONAL, ALBEIT NOT UNRESTRICTED
AUTONOMY, OF ARBITRAL TRIBUNALS WHICH THE ACT OF 1979 WAS
DESIGNED TO
ESTABLISH, SERIOUSLY HAMPERED. Moreover, with all respect to the three arbitrators in the present case, whose lengthy reasons for their award I have read with admiration for their legal learning, if reasons for which the Act of 1979 makes provision are to be given with such elaboration, the very preparation of those reasons must itself defeat the possibility of obtaining speedy arbitral decisions, independently of any question of further delay brought about by a possible appeal or appeals.
In general businessmen are interested in the decision, not in its underlying legal philosophy, however much lawyers may have that wider interest.

It is for these reasons, in addition to those which my noble and learned friend, Lord Diplock, has given that I respectfully endorse every words that he has said as to the need for circumspection as well as brevity in the granting of leave to appeal and for applications for such leave, whether succesful or unsuccessful, to be dealt with as simply and informally as possible." (Emphasis mine)
The [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/) No. 160 of 1984 of this State was assented to on 14 December 1984 and it commenced on that date. It is in the form adopted by the
Standing Committee of Attorneys General in Australia directed to setting up rules and regulations in commercial arbitrations which would be uniform throughout Australia.
The 1984 Act repealed the Arbitration Act 1902 (except with respect to arbitrations commenced before the commencement of the 1984 Act).
The 1984 NSW Act contained the following provisions relevant to the matter which I am now considering "28. Unless a contrary intention is expressed in an arbitration agreement, the award made by the arbitrator or umpire shall, subject to this Act, be final and binding on the parties to the agreement.
Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties to an arbitration agreement, the arbitrator or umpire shall - a) make the award in writing; sign the award, and include in the award a statement of the reasons for making the award.
 
Where an arbitrator or umpire makes an award otherwise than in writing, the arbitrator or umpire shall, upon request by a party within 7 days after the making of the award, give to the party a statement in writing signed by the arbitrator or umpire of the date, the terms of the award and the reasons for making the award.
An award made under an arbitration agreement may, by leave of the Court, be enforced in the same manner as a judgment or order of the Court to the same effect, and where leave is so given, judgment may be entered in terms of the award.
Without prejudice to the right of appeal conferred by subs(2), the Court shall not have jurisdiction to set aside or remit an award on the ground of error of fact or law on the face of the award.

Subject to subs(4), an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court on any question of law arising out of an award.

On the determination of an appeal under subs(2) the Supreme
Court may order - confirm, vary or set aside the award; or remit the award, together with the Supreme Court's opinion on the question of law which was the subject of the appeal, to the arbitrator or umpire for reconsideration or, where a new arbitrator or umpire has been appointed, to that arbitrator or umpire for consideration, and where the award is remitted under para (b) the arbitrator or umpire shall, unless the order otherwise directs, make the award within 3 months after the date of the order.
 
An appeal under subs(2) may be brought by any of the parties to the arbitration agreement with the consent of all the other parties to the arbitration agreement; or subject to s40, with the leave of the Supreme Court.

The Supreme
Court shall not grant leave under subs(4)(b) unless it considers that, having regard to all the circumstances, the determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties to the arbitration agreement; and may make any leave which it grants under subs(4)(b) conditional upon the applicant for that leave complying with such conditions as it considers appropriate.

Where the award of an arbitrator or umpire is varied on an appeal under subs(2), the award as varied shaft have effect (except for the purposes of this section) as if it were the award of the arbitrator or umpire.
Subject to subs(2) of s40, on an application to the supreme Court made by any of the parties to an arbitration agreement - with the consent of an arbitrator who has entered on the reference or, if an umpire has entered on the reference, with the consent of the umpire; or with the consent of all the other parties, the
Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction to determine any question of law arising in the course of the arbitration.

The
Supreme Court shall not entertain an application under subs(1)(a) with respect to any question of law unless it is satisfied that - the determination of the application might produce substantial savings in costs to the parties; and the question of law is one in respect of which leave to appeal would be likely to be granted under s38(4)(b).
Where -
there has been misconduct on the part of an arbitrator or umpire or an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted the proceedings; or the arbitration or award has been improperly procured, the Court may, on the application of a party to the arbitration agreement, set the award aside either wholly or in part.

Where the arbitrator or umpire has misconducted the proceedings by making an award partly in respect of a matter not referred to arbitration pursuant to the arbitration agreement, the Court may set aside that part of the award if it can do so without materially affecting the remaining part of the award.

Where an application is made under this section to set aside an award, the Court may order that any money made payable by the award shall be paid into court or otherwise secured pending the determination of the application.
Subject to s38(1), the Court may remit any matter referred to arbitration by an arbitration agreement together with any directions it thinks proper to the arbitrator or umpire for reconsideration or, where a new arbitrator or umpire has been appointed, to that arbitrator or umpire for consideration." 
This Act was proclaimed to commence on 1 May 1985. That its drafting was influenced by the English 1979 Act is obvious.
The first reported decision in this State which considers the provisions of the 1984 Act, is Qantas Airways Ltd versus Joseland and Gilling [(1986) 6 NSWLR .] Qantas Airways Ltd was the proprietor, Joseland and Gilling were the architects and the builder was Jennings Constructions Pty Ltd.
The building contract was in the standard form of "Agreement and Conditions of Building
Contract" authorised by the Royal Australian
Institute of Architects. The arbitrator appointed to determine a dispute between the proprietor and builder was Reynolds QC, formerly
Mr Justice Reynolds of the Court of Appeal. He was appointed arbitrator by an order, with the consent of the parties, of a judge sitting in the Commercial List of the Common Law Division of the this Court to determine a number of questions of law referred to him.
The ultimate decision of the Court of Appeal (Glass, Priestley, McHugh
JJA) was delivered by McHugh JA. The view taken of the effect of the particular contract is of no consequence for present purposes. McHugh JA concluded by saying at p337, "We are therefore unable to agree with the arbitrator in his approach to the construction of the contract and in his answers to the questions submitted to him.

The present case, in our opinion, is one which requires leave to appeal to given. The form of agreement is in general use in
New South Wales. The arbitrator's decision affects the construction of a number of important clauses in that agreement.
Leave to appeal should be granted and the appeal should be allowed."
However, in the course of addressing whether leave to appeal should be granted, McHugh JA said, at p332, "The next question is whether leave to appeal should be granted.
The builder placed much reliance on the decision of the House of Lords in Pioneer Shipping
Ltd versus BTP Toxide (sic) Ltd [(1982)
AC 724] as indicating that leave to appeal should be granted sparingly."
His Honour then cited passages at pp742-3 which I have earlier set out in this judgment. He then said "We are not convinced that the statements of Lord Diplock, based as they are on a different background, are applicable to s38 of our Act. The matters to which Lord Diplock refers are important factors in determining whether leave should be given. But the exercise of discretion conferred by s38 does not depend on whether the claim that is made out is strong prima facie case or fulfilled the other requirements to which his Lordship refers. It is a discretion to be exercised after considering all the circumstances of the case."
Thus, the law in New South Wales departed at least in emphasis from the law in England, though there are no relevant differences between the provisions of s1 of the
English 1979 Act and s38 of the New South Wales 1984
Act.
On 31 July 1986, the Court of Appeal in England handed down its decision in Aden Refinery Co. Ltd versus Ugland Management Co. Ltd [(1986) 3 WLR 949.] This was a dispute between owners and charterers over a claim for demurrage or alternatively damages for breach of a charterparty.
The contract was said to be in the "Asbatankvoy form", said in the judgment of the Master of the Rolls,
Sir John Donaldson, to be in all material respects identical to the Exxonvoy form under which the entitlement to demurrage was elucidated by principles enunciated in the House of Lords in Meride SPA di Navigazione v
Bulk Royal International Ltd (Laura) Prima [(1982) 1 Ll. Rep 1.] There were three arbitrators described by the Master of the Roll as "three very well known and vastly experienced maritime arbitrators".
Those arbitrators divided in their decision, the majority being in favour of the owners.
The charterers sought leave to appeal under s1(3) of the 1979 English
Act. The Judge who heard that application refused it. The charterers asked the first instance judge for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal but he declined to grant that leave. The charterers then sought to appeal to the
Court of Appeal without leave from both the refusal of leave to appeal to the
High Court under s1(3) of the 1979 Act and the refusal of leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal against that refusal. The Court of Appeal, comprising Sir
John Donaldson MR, Mustill LJ and
Norse LJ., declined to entertain either appeal, but in effect gave reasons which would have required the appeals to be dismissed had they been "entertained".
In the course of his judgment Donaldson MR said, of the discretion to grant leave to appeal from the decision of an arbitrator, at p956 "In The Antaios [(1983) 1 WLR 1362], 1369-70, in this court, I expressed the view that leave to appeal should be granted where it is known that there are differing schools of thought about a question of law of general interest, each of which could claim adherents amongst the judiciary.
My reason for expressing this view was, of course, that the whole purpose of allowing judicial review of commercial awards is to remove doubts about such questions in the general interests of the trades concerned. Lord
Diplock commented, at p 204, that decisions are one thing; dicta are quite another' and to this extent disagreed with me. I, of course, accept the correction, but, giving full effect to it,
I would like to re-affirm my view that where there are conflicting decisions at first instance, a judge should give favourable consideration, in an appropriate case, to giving leave to appeal if but only if he is of the view that it was a proper case for the High Court not only to add another judicial decision, but, having done so, to grant a certificate and leave to appeal to this court under s1(7) of the Act of 1979. It is not in the interests of arbitrators or the commercial community that a situation should be allowed to continue in which there are conflicting decisions, each of which binds all commercial arbitrators.

What was not considered in The Antaios was a situation in which there are no judicial decisions at first instance, but there are conflicting decisions by arbitrators. Since no arbitrator's decision binds any other arbitrator, the same reasoning would apply mutatis mutandis and in my judgment a judge should in such a case give favourable consideration to granting leave to appeal to the High Court, but not necessarily beyond that court, in order that there might be a decision binding all arbitrators and producing uniformity of decision by all arbitrators.
 
In the instant case it is not entirely clear whether there have been conflicting arbitral decisions, although I would myself have construed the statement by the arbitrators that the award 'raises a question upon which it is well known that there is a division of view between London maritime arbitrators', coupled with the plea that it be resolved, as indicating that there had been. I might therefore myself have granted leave to appeal. Indeed, I think that I would probably have done so, because I firmly believe that the Commercial Court exists to serve the interests of its customers AS THOSE CUSTOMERS SEE 
THEM and I should have been extremely reluctant to reject a plea from so well informed a source as these three arbitrators.

That said, the question still remains: did the judge fail to exercise his discretion judicially? The answer must be that there are no reasons for suspecting, and still less for finding, that he did. All that I can say is that I would probably have reached a different decision, but the possibility of differences of opinion is inherent in the exercise of discretionary powers.
Even if, therefore, Mr Eder were right in his submission that he could escape the obstacles raised by s1(6A) of the
Act of and by Lane versus Esdaile [(1891) AC 210], if he could show a failure by the judge to exercise his discretion judicially, I would have dismissed any appeal. But in fact I do not think that these escape routes exist." and Mustill LJ said at p 962 "In favour of the abolition, there were two principal factors.
First, it was held in many quarters that the light of appeal was objectionable in principle. True, some measure of judicial control is inevitable, but it should be kept to a minimum. The right of appeal, so the argument ran, was an unacceptable infringement of the parties' right to submit their dispute to a final decision by the tribunal of their choice. Second, the possibility of an appeal was a source of delay, especially in a case where the matter went to the
Court of Appeal, or even beyond, even where the appeal was brought in good faith.
Experience showed that some unscrupulous respondents exploited the appeal procedure in order to postpone the moment when an adverse award would have to be honoured.
Third, whatever the merits of these objections, there was no doubt that they found favour with a substantial proportion of potential users of the
English arbitral system and deterred them from bringing to this country disputes which would otherwise have come here, to the detriment of English arbitral and the country's financial health.
 
Against this, there were arguments in favour of retaining a right of appeal. In the first place, such a right enables a party who has contracted to have his disputes decided according to English law, to put the matter right if the arbitrator, whether by choice or mistake, decides it in some other way.
Second, the existence of judicial control enables the court to ensure that parties to commercial contracts can be confident that the law will be correctly applied, thus promoting certainty and facilitating the settlement of disputes.
Third, the interests of English commercial law, and hence of the commercial community, require that the law should continue to develop through the means of precedents, stemming from disputes reaching the court on appeal from arbitrators.

I believe that most of those who engaged in the debate preceding the Act of 1979 were willing to accept that there was substance in all of these submissions. The controversy concerned the relative weight which they should be given. In the event, the
Act produced a compromise. It was a compromise which leaned markedly in favour of finality, in three respects: (i) the parties are given, except in the specially reserved cases, the right to contract out of the right of appeal; (ii) in all cases, the appeal cannot be brought without the leave of the court, (iii) the right of onward appeal has been greatly attenuated."
The principles to be applied in granting leave to appeal from the award of an arbitrator were also considered by vice-Chancellor
Sir Nicolas
Browne-Wilkinson and on appeal from him by Lord Donaldson of Lymington MR and
Woolf and Beldam LJJ in Ipswich Borough
Council versus Fisons PLC [(1990) 1 Ch 709.]
That case arose out of an agreement made in 1955 between Ipswich Borough
Council and Fisons PLC whereby the Council made available a site in Ipswich for the construction by Fisons of an office block. Upon the erection of that block, Fisons were to be granted a year lease from 29 September 1955 at a rent of (pounds) 530 pa, plainly simply a ground rent. There were no provisions in the lease for rent reviewing. The lease contained a provision obliging the corporation within 21 years to offer the tenant a lease of an additional 1,400sq yds of land in the vicinity of the land leased for use as a car park for a term to expire concurrently with the principal lease "but otherwise on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed between the
Corporation and the tenant".
By the time at which that provision was to be complied with it had not been fully complied with. In December 1982 the
Council and
Fisons entered into a further agreement which required the Council to offer the tenant a lease of 918 sq yds of land in accordance with clause 25 of the agreement and which contained a provision that "if the tenant does not accept such offer within a period of days then determination of the terms of the new lease shall be referred to an independent expert appointed in default of agreement by the President of the time being of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors who shall receive representations from the parties but whose decision shall be binding and final. The terms so fixed by the independent expert shall be open for acceptance by the tenant for a period of days ...". Thereafter land was offered and differences arose. The parties agreed to refer the matter to arbitration.
It would seem from the report that the arbitrator was appointed by agreement between parties rather than by the
President of the
Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors but in any event that arbitrator, a solicitor, determined that the terms of the lease of the land should be the terms of the lease of the office block, that there should be no rent reviews, and that an expert valuer should determine what rent the parties would have agreed upon at the time of the making of the 1955 agreement and that that should be the rent for the car park area.
The Council applied for leave to appeal asserting that the arbitrator erred in law in determining that the rent payable under the terms of the lease for the car park should be such as would have been agreed between the parties in 1955 as opposed to December 1984 (see p719). The Vice-Chancellor was pressed to refuse eave on the basis of what had been said by their Lordships in The Nema and The Antaios. He said, at p 716 "I have, with considerable hesitation, come to the conclusion that in the present case leave to appeal should be given. The crucial distinction, in my judgment, is between, on the one hand, arbitrations designed to resolve existing disputes arising out of conflicts as to liability for events which have happened in the past and on the other hand, arbitrations or decisions of an expert in a case such as the present, where the function of the expert or arbitrator is to regulate the future relationship of the parties. In the latter type of case it seems to me that the hardship of inflicting a decision which may be erroneous it law on one party is capable of outweighing the loss of speed and certainty. For myself, I think in a case where the subject matter of the arbitration regulate the future property rights of the parties the right approach to the giving of leave to appeal is the same as that which I adopted in the Lucas case [(1986) Ch 500] namely that if, after hearing submissions, the judge is left in real doubt whether the arbitrator was right in, law, leave should be given. That should not be it ken as a charter for ingenious lawyers to think up ingenious points of law with no real merit; I emphasise that what has to exist is a real, not an imaginary or remote doubt.

As I am left in real doubt whether the arbitrator was right, I propose to give leave to appeal in this case. I have given my reasons at length since, in my judgment, there is here a question of principle involved."
The Vice-Chancellor gave leave to Fison PLC to appeal to the
Court of
Appeal. That appeal was heard by the Court comprised of Lord Donaldson of
Lymington MR and Woolf and Beldam LJJ (each of whom simply agreed with the reasons of the Master of the Rolls).
In the course of his judgment, Lord Donaldson MR said at -2 "In enacting ss1(3)(b) and 1(4) of the Act of 1979, Parliament gave the courts no guidance upon how their discretion should be exercised, save that leave to appeal should not be given unless the determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties to the arbitration agreement. In other words, questions of law, however important, should not be referred to the High Court for decision if, as between the immediate parties, the matter was largely academic.

It was left to the House of Lords in its judicial capacity, to supply the guidance which
Parliament had failed to give. In the nature of things this occurred in particular factual matrices, both of which happened to be shipping contracts, a subject matter which over the decades has contributed more than most to the development of the law, both of contract and of arbitration.
However it would, I consider, be a profound error to conclude that their Lordships intended their guidance to be confined to shipping disputes or indeed to the wider category of disputes in respect of which special provision is made in s4 of the Act, i.e. shipping insurance and commodity trade disputes.

In Aden Refinery Co. Ltd v Ugland Management Co. Ltd [(1987) QB ], to which Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C does not appear to have been referred, Mustill LJ at p667, pointed out that in both The Nema and The Antaios there is a clear distinction to be drawn between passages in the speeches which (a) constitute authoritative pronouncements on the spirit in which judges should approach the exercise of the discretionary power under s1(3) and guidelines or illustrations of the way in which, approaching the matter in that spirit, the discretion would be exercised in certain situations which are commonly encountered.

The approach should always be consistent with what Lord
Diplock had described in The Nema [(1982) AC 724] at 739-40, as 'a parliamentary intention to give effect to the turn of the tide in favour of finality in arbitral awards ... where this does not involve exposing arbitrators to a temptation to depart from "settled principles of law".' 
On the other hand the guidelines as again Lord Diplock had said in The Antaios [(1985) AC 191], 200: 'are not intended to be all-embracing or immutable, but subject to adaptation to match changes in practices when these occur or to refinement to meet problems of kinds that were not foreseen, and are not covered by, what was said by this House in The Nema.' 
I regard it as settled law that a decision on whether or no to grant leave to appeal to the High Court should be arrived at after only brief argument. It is not the function of the judge to hear the putative appeal, before deciding whether or not to grant leave. But this still leaves open the question of what test he is to apply.

The distinguishing feature between arbitration and litigation is that, in the former case, the parties have chosen to submit their dispute to a tribunal of their own choice in preference to the courts. In making this choice they may have been influenced by a number of considerations, such as the expertise of the chosen tribunal, privacy, speed, wider rights of representation, flexibility of precedure, improved enforceability in other jurisdictions, cost and many other matters. But the fundamental point is that it was their choice. If, in the light of the award, both parties in effect resile from that choice and wish to seek a decision from the courts on the legal aspects of their dispute, they are free to do so without leave: see s1(3)(a).
But if it is only the party aggrieved by the award who seeks to do so, there is a presumption in favour of finality and thus against granting leave. However, the presumption is neither irrebuttable, nor is it of constant weight. On the other hand it always has some weight. This is inherent in the parliamentary intention to give greater weight of finality than had been the case prior to the passing of the Act of 1979."
And later at p 114 he said "What, as I see it, underlies the philosophy expounded in
The Nema and The Antaios is that there is always a presumption in favour of finality and that, where there is nothing to rebut it, the application should be unceremoniously refused.
Rebuttal must always be based upon at least a suspicion that the arbitrator has gone wrong. Being left in the frame of mind that the arbitrator may or may not have been right - being left in real doubt in that sense - is not sufficient. But the degree of suspicion which is requisite may vary according to the seriousness of the consequences of error to the parties and to a wider public.

The House of Lords' guidelines with regard to one-off contracts, that an obvious case of error should be shown, I think assumed that the effect would also be one-off. This might well be true of the last rent reviews, particularly if the remainder of the lease were relatively short.
It would not, however, be true of earlier rent reviews. There the long term effect on subsequent reviews would be analogous to the effect of decisions on standard terms, the only difference being that the same, rather than different, parties might be affected.

Accordingly it may well be that in most rent review disputes the 'standard terms' approach will be justsified: a strong prima facie case of error should be shown. But 'strong' is an imprecise term and I do not think that the House of
Lords intended that the same degree of strength should be called for in every case.
This is, after all, a matter which Parliament has left to the exercise of judicial discretion. Consistency of approach is important, but it must not negative a discretion based upon the facts of individual cases.
 
So how strong is strong? No meter can be applied or indeed devised. It is a matter of relative values. If the chosen arbitrator is a lawyer and the problem is purely one of construction, the parties must be assumed to have had good reason for relying upon his expertise and the presumption in favour of finality or, to put it the other way round, the strength needed to rebut it will be greater. So too if the dispute really centres upon an issue calling for non-legal expertise, albeit with some underlying question of law, and the chosen arbitrator has that expertise.
But if the chosen arbitrator is not a lawyer and the whole dispute centres upon a difficult question of law, less strength may be required.

Similarly, the degree of strength will be affected by whether the clause in question is one of a class commonly encountered, so that others would benefit from an authoritative decision on its meaning or application, and I see no reason why some account should not be taken of the seriousness of the consequences to the parties of the arbitrator's error, if error there be. But the bottom line must always, I think, be that the judge concludes that there is a more or less strong, but still 'strong', prima facie case that the arbitrator has erred in law.
To adopt any other approach would be to fly in the face of the legislative preference for finality."
Just over a year after the judgment of the UK Court of Appeal in Ipswich
Borough Council versus Fisons PLC was handed down, the NSW Commercial Arbitration
Act No. 100 of 1990 was assented to (on 13 December 1990). The principal amendments are set out in Schedule 1. Schedule 2 introduces a number of amendments for the purposes of uniformity with other similar Acts in
Australia. It is the amendments effected by Schedule 1 which are relevant for present purposes and of those only the amendments effected by Item 6 are directly relevant. The amendments omitted subs5 and 6 of s38 and instead inserted new subss5, 6 and 7.
S38, as it has been since 13 December 1990, now reads as follows: "38. (1) Without prejudice to the right of appeal conferred by subs(2), the Court shall not have jurisdiction to set aside or remit an award on the ground of error of fact or law on the face of the award.

Subject to subs(4), an appeal shall lie to the Supreme
Court on any question of law arising out of an award.

On the determination of an appeal under subs(2) the Supreme 
Court may by order - confirm, vary or set aside the award; or remit the award, together with the Supreme Court's opinion on the question of law which was the subject of the appeal to the arbitrator or umpire for reconsideration or, where a new arbitrator or umpire has been appointed, to that arbitrator or umpire for consideration, and where the award is remitted under para (b) the arbitrator or umpire shall, unless the order otherwise directs, make the award within 3 months after the date of the order.

An appeal under subs(2) may be brought by any of the parties to the arbitration agreement -
with the consent of all the other parties to the arbitration agreement; or (b) subject to s40, with the leave of the
Supreme
Court.
 (S40 deals with arbitration agreements containing an exclusive agreement.) 
The Supreme Court shall not grant leave under subs(4)(b)) unless it considers that: having regard to all the circumstances, the determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to, the arbitration agreement; and there is: a manifest error of law on the face of the award; or strong evidence that the arbitrator or umpire made an error of law and that the determination of the question nay add, or may be likely to add, substantially to the certainly of commercial law.

The Supreme Court may make any leave which is varied under subs(4)(b) subject to the applicant complying with any conditions it condiders appropriate.

Where the award of an arbitrator or umpire is varies on an appeal under subs(2), the award as varied shall have effect (except for the purposes of this section) as if it were the award of the arbitrator or umpire."
Each of The [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) and The Commercial
Arbitration (Amendment) Act 1990 is properly to be regarded as an amending
Act; each was plainly intended, inter alia, to amend the subsisting law in New
South Wales relating to commercial arbitrations. Each is to be construed in accordance with the classical statement of the Barons of the Exchequer in
Heydon's case [(1584) 3 Co. Rep 7a] at 7b "That for the sure and true interpretation of all Statutes in general ... four things are to be discerned and considered -
What as the common law before the making of the Act? (2)
What was the mischief and defect for which the common law did not provide? (3rd) What remedy the Parliament hath resolved and appointed to cure the disease of the Commonwealth. And 
The true reason for the remedy, and then the office of all the
Judges is always to make such construction as shall suppress the mischief, and advance the remedy, and to suppress subtle inventions and evasions for continuance of the mischief and pro privato commodo, and to add force and life to the cure and remedy, according to the true intent of the maker of the
Act, pro bono publico."
I have cited at perhaps wearying length from earlier statutes and judicial decisions so as to illustrate what has been considered to be the "mischief" from time to time, what have been the attempts to cure the problems, and the extent to which "cures" have been unsuccessful or frustrated in whole or in part, so as to form a view of what the Parliament of New South
Wales (and the other legislatives in Australia) must have meant to achieve by the 1990 Amending Act, and to construe it in accordance with that intention.
By 1698 the Parliament in England had found it necessary "for promoting trade and rendring awards of arbitrators more effectual in all cases" for the final determination of controversies referred to them by merchants and traders or others "to legislate to make arbitration agreements enforceable" and to provide that "the parties shall submit to, and finally be concluded by, the arbitration or umpirage which shall be made concerning them by the arbitrators or umpire pursuant to such submission", "unless it shall be made appear on oath to such court, that the arbitrators or umpire misbehaved themselves, and that such award, arbitration or umpirage was procured by corruption or other undue means".
As the New South Wales Law Reform
Commission showed in its Report, in the paragraphs which I have earlier reproduced, the first of those objectives was achieved, but the second was not. As they stated "by the time that Act was repealed (1890) nearly two hundred years of judicial decision had so enlarged the grounds upon which an award might be set aside on summary application that the law as administered bore no resemblance to the Law as enacted".
The 1889 Act was intended, inter alia, to address some of the problems which had become endemic. What it did (apart from addressing situations where an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted himself, or an arbitration or award has been improperly procured) was to empower any referee, arbitrator or umpire at any stage of the proceedings under reference to state a case for the opinion of the Court on any question of law arising in the course of the reference. And more significantly, as it turned out, that Act empowered the
Court to direct the referee, arbitrator or umpire to state such a case.
The 1892 New South Wales
Act contained those same provisions. So did the New South Wales Act.
The proceedings which got to the House of Lords and are reported as
British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company versus Underground Electric
Railway Company of London [1912 AC 673] at .
The 1950 English Act dealt in only one section with the emerging and about to become serious problems. By s21(3) it provided that no appeal shall lie from a decision of the High Court on a case stated by an arbitrator or umpire without the leave of the High Court or of the Court of Appeal. That put but a slight check, as it turned out, on the proliferation of appeals.
 .
By early 1962 Diplock LJ, in the Court of Appeal, deplored he extent to which earlier decisions had gone in holding that the whole of the terms of a contract were incorporated in an award, so as to determine whether there was an error of law involved in an award.
(Giacomo Costa Fu Andrea versus British
Italian Trading Co. Ltd (supra). He asserted that the reading of contracts or other documents into an award (so as to argue error of law) was not to be encouraged or extended. A purely general reference to a contract in an award, he held, does not entitle the Court "to look at the contract and search it in order to see whether there is an error of law".
In the 1960s and 1970s London arbitrations became a major "industry" and earner of foreign exchange. It offered well established principles of contract law, arbitrators who were knowledgeable in the fields of commerce or shipping, which were the principal sources of the arbitrations, and speedy decisions which traders, shipowners and charterers needed to organise or reorganise their affairs.
But the multiplicity of cases asserting errors of law in an award (and of appeals with leave from the decisions of judges at first instance) was becoming seen as a detraction from the utility of the service which London afforded.
Neither Sydney, nor any other city in Australia, saw so much arbitration work. But there was quite a bit of it in Sydney, especially arising out of construction contracts. There was the same problem in principle here, but much fewer instances of it.
The English 1979 Act addressed this problem and sought to minimise it. It withdrew the jurisdiction of the high Court to set aside or remit an award on the ground of errors of fact or law on the face of the award and substituted a right of appeal, but only on questions of law arising out of an award, and only with either the consent of all other parties to the reference (which in practise would rarely be forthcoming) or with the leave of the Court (s1(1), , (3)). But that leave was not to be given unless the determination of that question of law "could substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties to the arbitration agreement". Furthermore, appeals from the judge at first instance thereafter need the leave of the judge at first instance, or of the Court of Appeal.
In addition, the 1979 Act maintained the entitlement of a party to a reference to the Court to determine any question of law arising in the course of the reference, but only if either the arbitrator or umpire, or all the other parties consent and if the High Court is satisfied that the determination of the question (or questions) of law at that stage (1) might produce substantial savings in costs to the parties and that the question of law is in respect of which leave to appeal would be likely to be given under s1(3)(b). Leave cannot be given under s1(3)(b) unless the High Court considers that determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement (s1(4)).
Furthermore, there was to be no appeal to the Court of Appeal from a decision of the High Court without the leave of the High Court (s6A, added in 1981).
The 1979 Act also nullified an exclusion agreement if an award or a question of law arising in the course of a reference related in whole or in part to a question or claim falling within the Admiralty jurisdiction of the
High Court, or to a dispute arising out of a contract of insurance, or out of a commodity contract unless the exclusion agreement was entered into after the commencement of the arbitration or the question relates to a contract expressed to be governed by a law other than the law of England and Wales, provisions obviously directed to maintaining the utility of the arbitration processes available in London for the speedy and expert determination of commercial disputes.
The arbitration involving The Nema was commenced very shortly after the commencement of the 1979 Act (1 August 1979). As I have pointed out the statutory bar to appeal from the Award was stated to be the requirement for leave, and the requirement that leave be not given unless the Court considers that the determination of the question of law could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement.
Lord Diplock's speech pointed out that (a) and (b) above were necessary conditions for the grant of leave, but not sufficient conditions to necessitate the grant of leave. An additional consideration which might and in many cases should weigh heavily against granting leave was the desire of a party for a speedy determination, especially when it involved the use to which, if the shipowner, he may put his vessel, or, on the other hand, the charterer's entitlement to have it voyage for him. One or the other party to a commodity trade would equally desire to know who is entitled to or must pay for the commodity traded. And even apart from such compelling considerations in arbitrations concerning commodity trades and charterparties, there remained the overriding ground of dissatisfaction with arbitral proceedings because of the practice of resorting to judicial intervention (or attempting to do so) where the point in issue could have little effect on the rights of the parties to the arbitration, other than to delay the obtaining by the successful party of the arbitration of the fruits of the award in his favour. Hence Ld Diplock suggested that the statutory express conditions precedent having been satisfied, the Courts discretion should not ordinarily be exercised in favour of an appeal "unless it is apparent to the judge on a mere perusal of the reasoned award itself without the benefit of adversarial argument" that there was an error of law. If not, in Ld Diplock's view the parties must accept the decision of the tribunal which they chose to decide the matter in the first instance. Ld Roskill's views (emphasised in the passage which I have cited earlier in these reasons) were to the same effect and equally strongly stated.
The draftsman of the 1984 New South Wales Act had figuratively speaking a copy of the English 1950 and 1979 Acts in one hand and his pen in his other hand.
S28 of the New South Wales Act is the same in effect and quite similar in language to s16 of the [1950 Act. S33] and (2) of the New South Wales Act is relevantly the same as s1(1)and (2) of the [1979 Act. S38(3)] of the new South Wales Act is plainly modelled on s1(3) of the [1979 Act. S38(4)] of the New South Wales Act is s1(4) of the 1979 Act, almost verbatim. S38(5) of the New South Wales Act is s1(4) of the 1979 Act, verbatim, except that the English Act refers to the
High Court and the New South Wales Act to the Supreme Court. S38(6) is s1(8) of the 1979 Act, again virtually verbatim. S39(1) and (2) of the New South
Wales Act are the same as ss2(1) and (2) of the 1979 Act (except for the adjective in front of "Court" and the numbering of the section under which leave to appeal "would be likely to be granted"). S42 of the New South Wales
Act is plainly modelled on s23 of the 1979 Act. Likewise s43 of the New South
Wales Act is modelled on s22 of the 1979 Act.
In my view it follows from this analysis that the New South Wales
Parliament must have intended the New South Wales Act to be construed in accordance with the reported decisions of the House of Lords and Court of
Appeal upon the equivalent English provisions, including the views I have cited earlier in these reasons.
However, as I have recorded earlier in these reasons, the Court of Appeal thought otherwise in Qantas, though the difference is, I think, one of emphasis because of a perceived difference, the nature of which is not articulated, between the requirements of "consumers" in England and of those in New South Wales.
To some extent the Court of Appeal in England in the Aden Refinery case referred to in the passage I have cited from Ipswich Borough Council, seems to have backed away from the views expressed by Diplock and Roskill LJJ, but only because
Donaldson MR thought that differing views between experienced arbitrators as to specific questions ought to be resolved by the Court in the interest of "consumers", i.e. disputants before an arbitrator.
The decision of the Court of Appeal in Ipswich Borough
Council was handed down on 24 November 1989. I do not know whether it was available to the
Working Group responsible for the drafting of the 1990 amendments to the New
South Wales Act. However, the then New South Wales Attorney General (Mr Dowd) said in his Second
Reading speech of the amendments relevant to the question I am considering "One of the major objectives in this uniform legislation is to minimise judicial supervision and review. If arbitration is to be encouraged as a settlement procedure and not as a dry run before litigation, a more restrictive criterion for the granting of leave is desirable and the parties should be left to accept the decision of the arbitrator whom they have chosen to decide the matter in the first place."
The effect of the present legislation is that an appeal does lie to the
Supreme Court on any question of law arising out of an award provided that all of the parties to the arbitration agreement consent to the bringing of the appeal or he Supreme Court gives leave which it must not do unless it considers that having regard to all the circumstances the determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement AND there is either a manifest error of law on the face of the award OR strong evidence that the arbitrator or umpire made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add or may be likely to add substantially to the certainty of commercial law.
That, it seems to me, restores the legislative embodiment of the principles enunciated in The Nemo and The Antaios by the House of Lords and by the Court of Appeal in particular situations which have arisen except that the legislature here chose to use the adjective manifest to describe the error of the law on the face of the award which of itself would turn the key in the lock against the grant of leave rather than the possibly less stringent adjectives used in the English cases to which I have referred - "Apparent to the judge upon a mere perusal of the reasoned award itself without the benefit of adversarial argument" (Lord Diplock in The Nema). "Are so obviously wrong as to preclude the possibility that (the arbitrator) might be right" (Lord
Diplock in The Antaios).
As I have earlier pointed out the NSW
Law Reform Commission Report suggested the phrase "grossly wrong". That, in my opinion, had it been adopted, may have been construed to mean that the error was substantial. It must have been open to argument as to whether it meant to refer to the ambit of the error rather than the extent of its affect on the award. The drafting of the 1990 Amendment Act, intended to be adopted throughout Australia, has described in more detail what needs to be established to justify an appeal. It is, first, that the determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties to the arbitration. That I take to mean it could have a substantial $ impact where the award is in money or a substantial effect on the rights or obligations of one or more of the parties when the arbitration was as to the existence of those rights or obligations. If that hurdle be overcome, then the qualifications which must also be found are "a manifest error of law on the face of the award" or "strong evidence that the arbitrator or umpire made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add, or may be likely to add, substantially to the certainty of commercial law."
The Macquarie Dictionary defines "manifest" to mean "readily perceived by the eye or the understanding; evident; obvious; apparent; plain" (it of course has other meanings in other contexts). Used in the sense so defined it is derived from the Latin manifestus which Cassell's Latin Dictionary asserts to have been from the Latin "manus" (the hand) and the verb meaning "to strike", so that it meant literally struck with the hand. In English, very clearly felt or understood. If there is such a plainly evident error of law on the face of the award, the Supreme Court has power to grant leave to appeal but it is not obliged so to do.
The grant is still a matter of discretion and conditions may be attached to a grant.
The bar to a grant of leave is also removed if the Supreme Court considers "there is strong evidence that the arbitrator or umpire made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add, or may be likely to add, substantially to the certainty of commercial law". I have been unable to discover where the expression "strong evidence" originated. I start with the assumption that the 1990 amendments were intended to displace the broad discretionary approach advocated by the Court of Appeal in Qantas;
Rogers CJ ComDiv recorded the same belief in Promenade at 192. Next, s28(5)(b)(ii) must, it seems to me, refer to something not so evident as a "manifest error". The reference to "strong evidence" indicates that error on the face of an award is not what is referred to. It can only, it seems to me, be intended to refer to the type of case where, historically, awards had been set aside because material before the arbitrator not referred to in his award showed that his expressed conclusion was wrong, or where there was no evidence supporting a critical finding in or supporting a critical step in the reasoning which led to the award in fact made. Ex hypothesi this would not appear on the face of the award - it requires evidence to indicate what was, or was not, in evidence before the arbitrator.
I need now to examine decisions in this Court on the Act in its amended form to determine whether I am obliged, or I ought, to construe the Commercial
Arbitration
Act 1984-1990 in any way differently from the view expressed in the preceding paragraph of these reasons.
The earliest reported decision in New South Wales which has considered the [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) in its form after the 1990 amendments is the decision of Rogers CJ ComDiv in Promenade Ivestment Pty Ltd versus State of New
South Wales [(1991) 26 NSWLR 184.] His Honour referred to a request in March by the Standing Committee of Attorneys General of Australia to a Working
Group to review the operation of the uniform arbitration legislation throughout Australia. I have not thus far referred to that review, preferring simply to cite what Rogers CJ said about it. In Promenade Investments he said (p 188) "The Working Group reported in February
After pointing out the differences in approach followed by various Australian courts in relation to applications for leave to appeal against awards, it pointed out that one of the major objectives of the uniform legislation was to minimise judicial supervision and review of arbitration. The report went on to point out that 'to hear substantive argument on the merits of the appeal before deciding whether or not to grant leave, would lead to more awards being opened for review than if The Nema guidelines applied and this would detract from the finality of arbitral awards'... The statement by the Working
Party is a reflection of the view originally expressed by Lord Donaldson MR and recently echoed by Dillon LJ in Geogas SA v Trammo Gas Ltd (The Baleares) [(1991) 2 QB 139] Dillon LJ said (at 141; 353) 'The charterers, as they were entitled to, renewed their application to this Court for leave to appeal against the order of Webster J, and the renewed application came before Parker LJ in open court. He adjourned the application to a Full Court of
Appeal. That is how it comes before us. He also directed that the substantive appeal not follow immediately after the hearing of the application for leave, should leave be granted. This is in line with the comment of
Donaldson LJ in Babanaft International
Co SA versus Avant Petroleum Inc [(1982) 1 WLR 871], 881, where he said: "If we are to adopt a similar approach (to that in The Nema) in considering whether to grant leave to appeal from a decision of the High Court, whether given under [s1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s1.html) or under [s2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s2.html), it would be wholly inappropriate to allow the type of prolonged adversarial argument which is usually deployed where the application for leave is to be followed immediately by the hearing of the appeal if leave is granted."' 
The Working
Group considered that if 'arbitration were to be encouraged as a settlement procedure and not as a 'dry run' for litigation, a more restrictive criterion for the granting of leave was desirable than that applied by the Australian courts'.
As a matter of policy, the Working Group agreed with Lord
Diplock's statement in The Nema (at 743) that Me parties should be left to accept, for better or for worse, the decision of the tribunal that they had chosen to decide the matter in the first instance'.

In the result the Working Party recommended that: '[S38(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) be expanded to specify the circumstances in which a court may exercise its discretion under [s38(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) to grant an application for leave to appeal. In particular, [s38(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) should incorporate the guidelines enunciated in The Nema and other relevant authorities with the effect that leave may only be given if an error of law is apparent on the face of an award WITHOUT
HEARING ARGUMENT.' (Emphasis added) 
The Working
Group made a number of recommendations and these were incorporated in the Amendment Act. In particular, the Amendment
Act provided in Schedule 1(6) that s38(5) should be replaced by the following provision: '(5) The Supreme Court shall not grant leave under subs(4)(b) unless it considers that: having regard to all the circumstances, the determination of the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement; and there is: a manifest error of law on the face of the award; or strong evidence that the arbitrator or umpire made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add, or may be likely to add, substantially to the certainty of commercial law'."
At 192, Rogers CJ Com Div commenced his exposition of his views of the effect of s38(5). He said, first, plainly with reference to s38(5)(b)(i) error on the face of the award) "As far as I know this is the first occasion that the provisions of the amended s38(5) require examination. The somewhat unusual phraseology and verbiage of the new s38(5) can only be understood in the light of the legislative and judicial backdrop to the provision. First, the amendment represents an obvious desire to tighten up and further restrict the scope for judicial supervision of arbitral awards. Secondly, it adopts the philosophy of the
English courts that an application for leave should not involve a major and lengthy examination of the award but rather that the argument for grant of leave should be so strong and so apparently, compelling that a fairly rapid examination should disclose that the requirements of the Act have been, satisfied. Thirdly, it is necessary to look at how the former provision was construed and it will be clear why the phraseology was adopted in order to put to rest any doubt that there may have been as to the correct approach to be made to an application for leave.

It is clear that the legislature intended to reject the broad discretionary approach prescribed, by the judgment in Qantas. In my view the legislature further intended to overcome a latent problem in applications for leave which had its genesis in the decision of the English Court of Appeal in Universal Petroleum
Co Ltd versus Handels Und Transport GmbH [(1987) 1 WLR 1178] There the buyers sought to challenge an award on the basis that two specific conclusions of fact could not have been reached by any reasonable arbitrator.
To succeed in this challenge the buyers had to go behind the award and refer, in some detail, to the materials before the arbitrator. The primary judge, and the Court of Appeal, held that affidavit evidence setting out the material before the arbitrator was inadmissible on an application for leave to appeal. The Court of Appeal said (at ; 746, 524): '(i) The reason for the abolition by subs(1) of the appeals and remissions for errors on the face of the award was that this was a necessary part of the new system of filtered appeals, from reasoned awards which was introduced by subss(2), (3), (4) and (5). But for this abolition, it would have been open to unsuccessful parties to arbitrations to apply for the setting aside or remission of all reasoned awards containing any error on their face, and thus to circumvent the filtering system.
The abolition under subs(1) must be seen in this context. It was in no way intended to widen the jurisdiction to set aside or remit. (ii) Under subs(2) appeals are only permitted "on any question of law arising it of an award ...", and "question of law" in subs(4) has the same meaning. The emphasised words are crucial. The question of law must arise "out of (the) award", not out of the arbitration. The emphasised words are entirely consistent with, and preserve, the settled restrictions on challenges to primary findings under the former system. (iii) The power to order further reasons under subs(5) is limited to cases where it appears to the court that "the award does not or does not sufficiently set out the reasons".
In that event the court may order the arbitrator "to state the reasons for his award in sufficient detail to enable the court ... to consider any question of law arising out of the award". We have again emphasised the important words for present purposes.
There is no warrant for any order under this provision unless it is apparent that there are no reasons, or insufficiently detailed reasons, to enable the court to consider a question of law "arising out of the award". But, to take the example of the present case, this was not so here. In the passage which we have quoted from the judgment, Webster J said that there was "a material uncertainty or ambiguity in para 1 of the award". But there is none; at any rate none which arises out of the award.
Such an allegation can only rest on the extrinsic matters of which the judge was told. But these were inadmissible and irrelevant for the purpose of the exercise of any jurisdiction under s1 of the Act of 1979.' 
Similarly in Athens
Cape Naviera SA versus Deutsche
Dampfschiffahrtgesellschaft 'Hansa' 'Aktiengesellschaft' (The 'Barenbels') [(1985) 1 Ll Rep 528.] Robert Goff LJ, giving the judgment of the Court, said (at 532): '... if such an appeal is to be brought, it must in our judgment be based upon material which is contained in the award and reasons of the arbitration tribunal, and cannot be based on extraneous evidence as is done where, for example, it is sought to allege misconduct on the part of an arbitrator. If a party wishes to raise a point on an appeal to the High Court, he should invite the arbitration tribunal to make the necessary findings in the award; if no such findings are made, he can apply to the
Court for an order, under s1(5) of the Act, for further reasons to be given, though he should not expect the court to react enthusiastically to such an application in a case of this kind.
... So the only subject matter which it was proper for the learned
Judge to consider, with regard to the appeal before him on a question of law arising out of the arbitrators' award, was the award itself which of course included the reasons given by the arbitrators for reaching their conclusion. On that material, there was in our judgment no basis for a contention by the buyers that there was no evidence to support any finding of fact by the arbitrators with regard to the nature or effect of the proceedings in Qatar.' 
Of course s1(5) of the English Act has no place in the Australian legislation. Returning to Universal Petroleum, the Court went on to say (at 1194-5; 750; 528): '... In such cases extrinsic evidence is not being used for the purpose of seeking to obtain the reversal of an award by raising questions of law which do not arise out of the award. It is used in order to inform the court about matters with which the arbitrator has ex hypothesi failed to deal, which - in view of the respondents - should lead the court to refuse leave to appeal, and/or to remit under, s1(5)(b) on the ground that leave to appeal and/or remission could in any event not lead to a different outcome from the arbitrator's conclusion, and, could therefore not substantially affect the rights of the parties. As at present advised it therefore seems to us that the reasoning and decision in the The Barenbels [(1985) 1 Ll Rep 528] do not apply to respondents who oppose applications for leave to appeal and/or to remit by seeking to uphold the award."
As Rogers CJ Com Div went on to point out, the Universal Petroeum decision had earlier given rise to problems in this State.
Smart J had followed that decision in Warley Pty Ltd versus Adco Constructions Pty Ltd (1985) 5
BCL 141, remarking, as Rogers CJ ComDiv records at 194: "One area which troubles me is where the arbitrator fails to deal with a substantial point or body of evidence.
I accept that the arbitrator should give reasons for his decisions on all, issues which lead to conclusions on liability or other major matters in dispute on which leave to appeal may subsequently be sought. If he fails to do so, and this omission could substantially affect the rights of the parties, it would be anomalous not to grant leave to appeal on the basis that the terms of the award reveal no error of law. The question of law arises out of the award - it does not deal with a necessary matter.

In construing the Statute the English Court of Appeal focused upon the words 'arising out of an award' and the indications in the Act of the finality which the award is to have. It is not wholly satisfying or sensible that a respondent can support an award by referring to evidence, materials and issues with which the arbitrator did not deal to show that the respondent would have probably won on those there leading to a refusal of leave while an applicant cannot refer to such matters to show that if those matters had been determined he would or may well have won."
Rogers CJ Com Div then added "When the appeal from his Honour's decision came before the Court of Appeal (Warley Pty Ltd versus Adco Constructions Pty Ltd (Court of
Appeal, 30 November 1988, unreported)) it was conceded that there was some evidence to support the finding of the arbitrator so that the court did not have to consider the adoption by Smart J of the approach in Universal. Kirby P said (at 25) hat the question was arguable. The other members of the court did not express any view on the point."
Strictly, what
I have cited from this judgment with reference to s38(5)(b)(ii) is obiter dicta, as the appeal was decided by rejecting any error let alone manifest error in the face of the award. Nonetheless it represents a closely reasoned analysis by a judge with considerable experience in this field.
The Court of Appeal granted Promenade Investments Pty Ltd leave to appeal against the refusal of
Rogers CJ ComDiv to grant it leave to appeal against the award. The Court comprised Mahoney, Meagher and Sheller JJA.
Sheller JA delivered the judgement on the question with which I am concerned and Mahoney and Meagher JJA agreed with him. Sheller JA commenced his examination of whether or not leave to appeal should have been granted by recounting the position which had been reached in England prior to enactment of the 1979 Act, and the decisions upon that Act, emphasising the views on it repeatedly expressed by Lord Diplock, particularly those in The Antaios. He then turned to the New South Wales 1984 Act and the decision in Qantas which he observed had been followed in Victoria. Sheller JA's subsequent examination of the New South Wales Act, was against that background. After referring to the Attorney General's second reading speech, he said "The added requirements of manifest error law on the face of the award or strong evidence that the arbitrator made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add substantially to the certainty of commercial law suggest that the draftsman was seeking to constrain the exercise of court control over arbitral awards in the manner described by the
House of Lords in The Nema. A manifest error of law on the face of the award may be an error which would be apparent to the judge upon a mere perusal of the reasoned award itself without the benefit of adversarial argument. A determination which adds substantially to the certainty of commercial law may be a determination of a question of the construction of a contract in standard terms rather than the construction of a one-off clause. In such a situation, strong evidence that the arbitrator made an error of law may equate with a strong prima facie case that the arbitrator had been wrong in his construction.

In his judgment, Rogers CJ ComDiv (at 188E-189D) referred to the
February report of the Working Group requested by the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General to review the operation of the uniform arbitration legislation. This group recommended that: 'S38(5) be expanded to specify the circumstances in which a
court may exercise its discretion under s38(4) to grant an application for leave to appeal. In particular, s38(5) should incorporate the guidelines enunciated in The Nema and other relevant authorities with the effect that leave may only be given if an error of law is apparent on the face of an award without hearing argument.' 
His Honour concluded (at 195B),
I think with respect, correctly, that the legislature intended to reject the broad discretionary approach prescribed by the judgment in Qantas.

His Honour also referred (at 195B) to what he described as the legislature's intention to overcome a latent problem in applications for leave which had its genesis the decision of the English Court of Appeal in Universal Petroleum
Co. Ltd.
To what extent on an application for leave to appeal can either party go behind the award and refer to the materials before the arbitrator for the purpose of supporting or resisting the application? In concluding that extrinsic material was inadmissible on an application for leave to appeal the Court of Appeal referred to the expression, found also in s38(2), 'arising out of an award'. In the language of Robert Goff LJ in
Athens Cape naviera SA versus Deutsche Dampfshiffartsgesellschaft 'Hansa' Aktiengesellschaft (The 'Barenbels') at 532 '... if such an appeal is to be brought, it must in our judgment be based upon material which is contained in the award and reasons of the arbitration tribunal, and cannot be based on extraneous evidence as is done where, for example, it is sought to allege misconduct on the part of an arbitrator.' 
The Court of Appeal in the Universal Petroleum case accepted, however, that extrinsic evidence could be used not for the purpose of seeking to obtain the reversal of an award by raising questions of law which did tot arise out of it but in order to inform the court about matters with which the arbitrator had ex hypothesi failed to deal, which should lead the court to refuse leave to appeal on the ground that leave to appeal would in any event not lead to a different outcome from the arbitrator's conclusion and could therefore not substantially affect the rights of the parties.
 
In Warley Pty Ltd versus Adco Constructions Pty Ltd, at first instance,
Smart J remarked that it was not wholly satisfying or sensible that a respondent could support an award by referring to evidence, materials and issues with which the arbitrator did not deal to show that the respondent would probably have won on those thereby leading to a refusal of leave while the applicant could not refer to such matters to show that if those matters had been determined he would or may well have won. When the case reached this Court, because it was held that there was no question of law raised, it was unnecessary to determine whether, if there were an error of law, it arose 'out of an award', though Kirby P thought it was arguable that the English approach was too restrictive, certainly in the context of the New South Wales Act. The approach of the
Court of Appeal in the Universal Petroleum case was applied by
Brownie
J in Graham Evans and Co. Pty Ltd versus SPF Formwork Pty Ltd (Brownie J, 9 April 1991, unreported).

This history may explain in part the introduction, as a basis for granting leave, that there be 'strong evidence that the arbitrator ... made at error of law'. But it does not do so in any satisfactory manner since the limitation in subs(2) remains, namely that the appeal lies only on any question of law arising out of an award.' 
There is however no doubt that the width of the discretion described by this Court in the Qantas case has been limited to an extent. I shall return to consider the meaning of the amended s38."
Sheller JA so returned at 225, where he said "Meaning and effect of s38 as amended: 
In applying s38, as amended, a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Act must be preferred to a construction that would not promote that purpose or object: [s33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s33.html) of the [Interpretation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/). Further in the interpretation of the provision, if any material not forming part of the Act is capable of assisting in the ascertainment of the meaning of the provision consideration may be given to that material to determine its meaning if the provision is obscure; [s34(1)(b)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s34.html) of the [Interpretation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/). The expression 'error of law on the face of the award' is one of a type well-known to courts. The award having been examined the question is whether there is apparent (and such is the denotation of the word 'manifest') an error of law. Manifest error' is an expression sometimes used in reference to reasons given by judges or the approach taken by juries: see, eg, [s107(c)(iii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s107.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and the judgments of Kirby P in Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd (at 151) and Otis Elevators Pty Ltd versus Zitis [(1986) 5 NSWLR 171] at
It is used to indicate something evident or obvious rather than arguable: see generally per McHugh JA in Larkin v
Parole
Board [(1987) 10 NSWLR 57] at 70-71. Nothing more is to be learnt from the language used but of course the discretion of the court as to whether or not it will grant leave remains and regard must be had to the requirement of subs(5)(a). The matters referred to by Lord
Diplock in The Nema remain important factors in determining whether leave should be given.

However I have difficulty in defining the significance of an error of law by reference to whether it is apparent to a judge upon a mere perusal of the reasoned award itself without the benefit of adversarial argument. I understand the views expressed that decisions on questions of law should be left to the arbitrator with minimal interference by the courts unless the arbitrator may be establishing an erroneous precedent on a matter of law which may affect other cases between other parties as for example where the question concerns the construction of a contract in standard terms. But the paragraph requires a determination as to whether or not there is a manifest error on the face of the award and I do not see why a judge should be required to do that without adversarial argument. If the judge concludes after argument that there is not such an error of law an application based on this ground fails. If there is such an error of law, a question arises as to whether as a matter of discretion leave should be granted and the point made by Brownie J in Graham Evans and Co. Pty Ltd v
SPF Formwork Pty Lad would, for example, have to be taken into account (at 5): '...if an appellant asserts that an arbitrator committed an error of law, in that the reasons for the award omit any reference to some essential ingredient in the chain of reasoning necessary to support the award, it would be wrong to exclude evidence showing that the matter not mentioned in the arbitrator's reasons was conceded on the hearing of the arbitration. To exclude that evidence would be to convert a correct decision into one which would then be presumed to be incorrect, and would impose upon the arbitration system a need for arbitrators to frame their reasons for making awards with a degree of formality which is quite foreign to the spirit of the Act.' 
There is nothing in my opinion, in the language of the subsection or in any other material, to which consideration can appropriately be given pursuant to the terms of the [Interpretation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) which would allow the judge to proceed to determine the application without hearing argument. However as McHugh JA pointed out 'manifest', in the context of the subsection, which contemplates the grant of leave before an appeal can be pursued, connotes an error of law that is more than arguable. There should, in my opinion, before leave is granted be powerful reasons for considering on a preliminary basis, without any prolonged adversarial argument, that there is on the face of the award an error of law.

Assuming that there is not a manifest error of law on the face of the award it may be argued that there is strong evidence that the arbitrator made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add, or may be likely to add, substantially to the certainty of commercial law. The requirement that the question be one the determination of which may add substantially to the certainty of commercial law indicates that it should be one of wider and greater importance than, for example, the construction of a one-off clause in the context of a particular agreement between the parties. One can discern here the sort of limitation which Lord Diplock had in mind. The expression 'commercial law' should be given no narrow construction. The expression 'strong evidence that the arbitrator ... made an error of law' suggests first what might otherwise be called on the leave application a strong prima facie case and second an error of law not manifest on the face of the award and demonstrable by evidence. The amendment may have been intended to redress in part the balance which Smart
J in Warley's case (at 147) described as not wholly satisfying or sensible and to enable not merely the respondent to support the award by reference to extrinsic material but the applicant to seek leave to reverse it by reference to such material.
However an appeal lies only on a question of law arising out of the award. The reconciliation of subs(2) and subs(5)(b)(ii) must await an appropriate case."
The Court of Appeal had occasion further to consider the New South Wales
Act in Natoli v Walker (unreported) delivered on 5 April 1994. It involved an application under s38(5)(b)(i) (manifest error on the face of the award). The matter came before the Court of Appeal on appeal from Rolfe J who found that there was a "manifest error on the face of the award". The Court comprised
Kirby P, Mahoney and Meagher JJA. Meagher JA dissented from the Court's judgment. A perusal of the quite short judgment of Meagher JA indicates with clarity (to me at least) that the arbitrators did err, and that their error could be discerned from a proper consideration of the building contract (for the alteration and additions to a private dwelling) and the arbitrators' views in their award as to its effect. Nonetheless the majority held that the error was not "manifest".
 .
Kirby P reached his conclusion by stressing the policy behind the [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), that is "to promote the finality of arbitral awards even at the price of denying a party its usual entitlement to the determination of the dispute by a court of law". Kirby P thought that as there were "compelling arguments" as to the construction of the contract adopted by the arbitrators the correct construction was not sufficiently obvious that any other construction was a manifest error.
The twentyseven and a half pages of his judgment explained why in his view any error was not "manifest". He said "When the judge (at first instance) finds no such manifest error, he or she is duty bound to avoid entering into the detail of the case.
What is in issue is a preliminary question. It should not require a great deal of argument. The precondition to curial intervention is the easy demonstration that the primary decision maker was 'clearly wrong'".
Mahoney JA said at the conclusion of his judgment "In addition, if there was an error of law, I do not think it was manifest. It was neither plain in the sense of being obvious nor was it manifest in the sense that there was little or no doubt that error it was."
Earlier in his reasons, Mahoney A had pointed out that rights under a building contract often depended upon how powers under it had been exercised, which was a question of fact, so that factual issues needed to be determined before legal entitlement could be determined. He was of the view that a question of law depending upon a review of findings of fact was "prima facie inappropriate for leave to appeal."
By its further amended summons, filed in Court without objection on the third day of the hearing of these matters, the Commonwealth set out the grounds of appeal which it sought leave to be allowed to argue. I will set them out verbatim and indicate as I go what were the Commonwealth's subsequently desired departures from those grounds. "Ground 1 - Collateral Contract
The Arbitrator determined there was a collateral contract ('the Collateral Contract') made between the Commonwealth and
Codock to the effect that the Commonwealth would allocate to
Codock all refits of the Oberon class submarines during the currency of the TAL (pp7-50 of the Award).
The Commonwealth contends the Arbitrator erred in law in finding the Collateral Contract on the following ground:
The terms of the Collateral Contract as found are inconsistent with:
Clauses 2(2), 2(3), 9 and 12 of the Trading Agreement; and
Clause 1(ii) of the Lease;
Further, the Commonwealth contends the Arbitrator erred in law in finding the Collateral Contract, as the terms of the
Collateral Contract as found are uncertain and incapable of giving rise to enforceable rights or obligations.
Further, the Commonwealth contends that the Arbitrator ought to have held that there was no evidence of reliance by Codock upon the alleged collateral contract.
 
Ground 2 - Implied Term .
The Arbitrator found that there was a term ('the Implied Term') necessarily implicit in Cl.1(ii) of the Lease to the effect that the Commonwealth would allocate to Codock such submarine refits as were required to be done in the future during the currency of the TAL (pp50-53) of the Award).
 The Commonwealth contends the Arbitrator erred in law in finding the Implied Term on the following ground:
On a proper construction of the TAL, the term does not give rise to the implication which the
Arbitrator found to exist; 
Ground 3 - Express Term The Arbitrator determined there was in the Advance Agreement an express term ('the Express Term') which constituted an express promise by the Commonwealth to have the balance of the Oberon submarine refitting programme carried out by Codock (pp 54-60 of the Award).
The Commonwealth contends the Arbitrator erred in law in finding the Express Tenn on the following ground:
The Express Term is insupportable on the proper construction of the Advance Agreement.

Ground 4 - Estoppel
The Arbitrator found that the Commonwealth is estopped from denying that Codock was entitled to receive all Oberon class submarine refits under the Oberon Refit Programme during the currency of the TAL (p91 of the Award).
The Commonwealth contends that the Arbitrator erred in law in making this finding on the following ground:
The Arbitrator misdirected himself in law as to the test for detriment in estoppel (see especially p73 of the Award).
The Arbitrator allowed as a head of allowable detriment the fact that Codock was deprived of the opportunity to engage in unconscientious conduct (see especially p91 of the Award).
The Commonwealth contends that the Arbitrator erred in law in failing to find that there was no evidence of reliance by
Codock on the alleged representation." 
Counsel for the Commonwealth subsequently informed me that para 11 would not be relied upon. 
Ground 5 - Personal Injury Claim
Costs "12. The Arbitrator determined that Codock was entitled to recover as overheads under the TAL all monies paid in respect of workers' common law claims for asbestos-related injuries (pp 190-191 of the
Award).
The Commonwealth contends that the Arbitrator erred in law in making this determination of the following grounds: 
There were no grounds for the
Arbitrator to determine the question on the basis of a continuum of regulation of commercial dealings between the parties.
The Commonwealth maintains that the Arbitrator was obliged to view each trading agreement made between the Commonwealth and
Codock and which governed the nature of their relationship since 1933 as a separate and distinct contract, not as a 'continuum' of dealings; 
Codock had the onus of showing that the personal injury claims for which it sought recompense related to injuries contracted during the currency of the TAL and not contracted in earlier periods when other trading agreements may have applied.
Codock did not discharge this onus; and 'Standard Conditions' also applicable between the parties (being the Commonwealth Department of Local Government and
Administrative Services Standard Conditions for the Determination of the Costs of Contracts - 1984) excluded the recoverability of these personal injury costs because the costs were 'costs which could have been avoided or reduced by the exercise of reasonable standards of skill care and efficiency...'.
 
Ground 6 - Intellectual Property Credit
The Arbitrator rejected the Commonwealth's submission that an amount of $1.1m received by Codock on the ultimate sale of its intellectual property in submarine refitting to Australian
Defence Industries
Ltd should be offset against any damages to be awarded to Codock (pp 198-203 of the Award).
The Commonwealth contends that the Arbitrator erred in law in rejecting the submission on the following ground:
The Arbitrator reversed the onus which properly fell upon
Codock 
Ground 7 - The Quarantine Issue
The Arbitrator rejected a Commonwealth application that any monies awarded to Codock be secured in a trust account or bank account to await the final outcome of the Arbitration (pp 203-227 of the Award).
The Commonwealth contends that the Arbitrator misdirected himself on the Commonwealth's evidence.
Counsel for the Commonwealth subsequently informed me that this ground would not be relied upon in this application.

Ground 8 - The Admission into Evidence of Advice by Mr Sheller QC (as His Hounour then was) and related doucments.
The Arbitrator admitted into evidence an Advice by Mr C.S.C.
Sheller, QC and other related documents. The Commonwealth objected to the admission of these documents.
The Commonwealth contends that the Arbitrator erred in law in admitting the evidence. The documents were used to the prejudice of the Commonwealth during the Arbitration. The
Commonwealth sought to tender a Codock document which indicated
Codock had received legal advice indicating its' commercial case would fail.
The Arbitrator rightly rejected that proposed tender."
Counsel for the Commonwealth subsequently informed me that this ground would not be relied upon.
The "Reasons and Interim Award" of 8 December 1995 was treated by both parties and by myself as though it had been formally tendered. The
Commonwealth tendered without objection a folder entitled "Leave to Appeal
Tender Documents" (it became Ex 2) and two volumes of pages of transcript of proceedings before the Arbitrator (those became Ex 3). Codock tendered two volumes of documents which became Ex I. I was told without objection that all of the documents in Exs 1 and 2 had been tendered before the Arbitrator.
When this matter was given a hearing date directions were given that, inter alia, each party would file and serve an outline of its submissions, the applicant Commonwealth to do so first so that Codock could respond to it.
 .
The Commonwealth in its outline submitted that if at least one manifest error on the face of the award could be demonstrated [(s38(5)(b)(i))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) or if there be strong evidence that the Arbitrator made one error of law [(s38)(5)(b)(i))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) the determination of which may or may be likely to add substantially to the certainty of law, then the gate was open to an appeal on any question of law involved in the award, so long as its determination could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement.
I reject that submission. Take, for example, an arbitration concerning a construction contract, something with which lawyers in this State are likely to be more familiar than arbitrations concerning charterparties or commodity trades. The proprietor, the builder, and one or more subcontractors, are likely to be parties (and on current tendencies probably also the architect and superintendent).
To permit questions of law involving the acts or omissions of one of those possible parties which satisfied the tests in [s38(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) to open the gate to an appeal by any other party on any question of law involved in the award so long only as it could substantially affect the rights of at least one party to the arbitration agreement (not necessarily the putative appellant) would be to reintroduce by a side door many of the perceived shortcomings sought to be cured by the 1990 amendments. Plainly, in my view, those amendments were introduced to restrict appeals to such as satisfied the description in [s38(5)(a)AND](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) s[38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html)(5)(b)(i) or s[38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html)(5)(b)(ii). Furthermore, my power, should I determine to exercise it, is to grant leave which activates [s38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) which provides "Subject to subs(4) an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court on any question of law arising out of an award."
That cannot mean any question which the ingenuity of Counsel can dredge up. It must mean one or more identified questions of law because the Supreme
Court has to be satisfied that the determination of the question(s) of law concerned in the leave application could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement. To put any other construction on [s38(5)(b)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html), or on [s38(5)(b)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) would perpetuate the mischief so much deplored by Ld Diplock and others in England of delaying the enforcement of awards by appeals on aspects of the award of little or no consequence except for the delay involved. It is appropriate that I add at this stage that the Commonwealth in separate proceedings seeks to resist the enforcement of the interim award (which I have indicated is for an amount of over $16m) because, it asserts, Codock is now insolvent (its parent ANI Ltd has obviously been funding its legal costs, which must be huge) so that if the
Commonwealth succeeds in its pollution claim, yet to be determined, it may not recover the full amount of any award from Codock. That is obviously a matter which I must take into account when I come to consider the enforcement application but it does not open the way to appeals on questions of law which themselves do not any of them satisfy the requirements of [s38(5)(b)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) or .
That leads me to deal with what, logically, is the next matter for decision, which is should a judge to whom application is made under [s38(4)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) for leave to appeal hear argument and if so to what extent as to whether the asserted error is manifest on the face of the award [(s38(5)(b)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) or that there is sufficient strong evidence to satisfy [s38(5)(b)(ii).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html)
The English decisions to which I have referred would indicate that the "error", at least when identified by Counsel, must be "apparent" without any, or at least more than quite brief, argument (such as the House of Lords, or the High Court of Australia permits in a leave application). However, the New
South Wales Court of Appeal, in an application for leave to appeal from a refusal of a judge at first instance to grant such leave took the course of examining in considerable detail the various questions of law sought to be argued and expressing views upon their merits (or otherwise). See State of New
South Wales versus Coya (Constructions) Pty
Ltd (4 August 1995 - unreported). That may have been due to a number of reasons - nothing in the judgment suggests any submission to that Court that it should not have done so. I for that reason do not regard it as authority on this question.
But, in
Promenade Investments the Court of Appeal rejected the view that no argument should be permitted, or, more accurately, that an error is not "manifest" unless a judge can discern it as such without the assistance of
Counsel. Sheller JA said (1992) 26 NSWLR at 226 (in that part of his judgment which I earlier set out at length) "There should, in my opinion, before leave is granted be powerful reasons for considering on a preliminary basis, without any prolonged adversarial argument, that there is on the face of the award an error of law."
What is "prolonged"? In the first place the length of argument to be permitted should depend upon the number of asserted errors which an applicant desires to challenge and in respect of each, its complexity. But for myself
I would generally hesitate to label an error as "manifest" if competent Counsel has not disclosed it within half an hour or thereabouts.
I say "generally' because there may in some cases be matters of great complexity to be elucidated before error can be discerned.
The next matter to be considered is the extent to which, if at all, the judge at first instance should give reasons for his grant or refusal of leave to appeal. The view which has been expressed in various of the cases to which
I referred is that it is not his function to do so, beyond identifying the "manifest error of law" [(s38(5)(b)(i))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) or the "error of law" [(s38(5)(b)(ii))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) on which his grant of leave depends, unless of course he determines to grant leave in exercise of the discretion conferred upon him by [s38(4)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html), in which event he would give reasons for that determination.
With those considerations in mind I come, after too much preliminary "observing" some may think in the light of my immediately preceding observations, to consider the "manifest errors" and the "strong evidence" of error asserted by the Commonwealth.
Before turning to the various grounds of appeal which the Commonwealth desires to raise I should set out shortly the broad terms of the relevant contractual and proprietorial relationship between the parties.
I have taken this information from the Award and/or from the documents tendered on this application for leave to appeal.

The Commonwealth owns Cockatoo Island and has done so for many years; certainly for more than 60 years. Likewise Codock has been in existence for more than 60 years, though it has gone through more than one name change. I shall, for convenience, simply refer to it as Codock no matter what its name at the time to which the reference refers. The first "commercial agreement" between them was made on 3 February 1933: it required that a lease of the island be granted to Codock: that lease was not in fact executed until 
February 1935. This agreement related to naval work - repairs and maintenance
I would assume. After the outbreak of World War
Two a further agreement was entered into: it operated in conjunction with the 1935 agreement, but took precedence in the case of any inconsistency. After the end of World War Two there were a number of further agreements, the most recent being a Trading
Agreement and a Lease dated 14 January 1972, but with effect from 1 January .
The parties, and consequently the Arbitrator in his
Award, refer to the agreement as the TAL, and so shall I. The lease is actually Annexure "A" to the Trading Agreement. It is a lease for 21 years of Cockatoo Island together with the shops factories offices and other buildings thereon and dry docks wharves slipways, and floating plant there in (sic) or abutting thereto and the plant equipment and stores described in "Inventory of Commonwealth
Assets at Cockatoo Island as at 30 November 1971". The rent for the first year was $500,000, escalating by CPI increases in subsequent years but reduced by .05% of the income from "commercial work", basically all work except for work performed for the Department of the Navy.
A major part of the work done for the Department of the Navy was the refitting of the Oberon Class submarines to which I referred at the commencement of these reasons. There is not in the TAL a provision which in express terms requires the
Commonwealth to have this work carried out by
Codock at Cockatoo Island. There is, however, in cl.I(ii) of the Lease attached to it a provision for a reduction in annual rent "for the period of any major reduction in the submarine refitting programme of the
Department of the navy which comprises at least one submarine undergoing refit on a continuing basis". Both parties relied heavily on this as supporting dramatically opposite conclusions.
I should add that in the pre-World War Two years and for many years thereafter asbestos was extensively used for insulation in navy vessels. There were in consequence many claims from employees for asbestos related injuries and incapacities. The ultimate liability for the compensation paid or likely to become payable to such employees was also a major matter in issue in the arbitration. There were other fields of dispute, but I can outline them when I come to deal with the Commonwealth's application in respect of them. I have, I think, given a sufficient outline to render the submissions intelligible.
I turn now to Ground I. As the submission indicates, this issue takes up pages of closely reasoned Award.
The Commonwealth's argument proceeds by the following steps. 
There is no express term in the TAL to the effect asserted by
Codock: that is correct. 
Codock relies on a collateral agreement that the Commonwealth would place orders with Codock for the carrying out by Codock of all refits of
Oberon class submarines until the completion of any programme for such refits: that also is correct. But as I shall later indicate that is not the only matter on which Codock relies. 
For a number of reasons which the Arbitrator recounts in detail, the
Commonwealth contended before him, and contends before me, that as a matter of law there cannot have existed any such collateral contract. The Commonwealth relied primarily on the reasons of the High Court in its decision in
Hoytes
Pty Ltd versus Spencer <case>; [(1919) 27 CLR 133], principally in what is said in the judgment of Isaacs J at 139 "A distinct collateral agreement, whether oral or in writing, and whether prior to or contemporaneous with the main agreement, is valid and enforceable even though the main agreement be in writing, provided the two may consistently stand together so that the provisions of the main agreement remain in full force and effect notwithstanding the collateral agreement."
One inconsistency relied upon was Cl.I(ii) of the Lease, which I have earlier referred to. I see no such inconsistency: sending two Oberon class submarines for refit elsewhere than on Cockatoo
Island is not a reduction at all in the submarine refitting programme of the Department of the Navy. It is simply a reallocation of that refitting programme.
Another was cl.2(3) of the Trading Agreement. It provided "The Commonwealth shall pay the
Company for work ordered under this agreement on the price basis specified in each order. It is agreed that the Company will quote for work required as far as possible at fixed or firm prices. Where fixed prices are not able to be negotiated orders may be placed on an incentive price basis or on a cost plus profit basis. Where payment under any order is calculated on a cost plus profit or incentive basis, cost shall not include rent and the profit for work on a cost plus profit basis shall be 5% of the costs of direct labour, direct material, direct expense (including sub-contracts) and overhead. In this clause 'cost' or 'costs' shall mean and shall be the cost as determined in accordance with the Department of
Supply Standard Conditions
Applicable to Contracts on a Cost
Plus Profit Basis as revised from time to time."
Once again, I do not regard this as inconsistent with the term on which
Codock relies. It contemplates a negotiaton to fix a price: if it does, that establishes the price. If the negotiation fails to reach an agreement that part of the clause which follows the second sentence fixes the price.
The
Arbitrator expressed the same opinion. See p45 of his Award. Alternatively, he said, the Arbitration clause in the Trading Agreement could be invoked. That clause to me obviously presupposes that they are in contract one with the other, and that each side will negotiate on that basis. In no way does cl.2(3) indicate one way or the other whether the contract relates to an Oberon class submarine refits.
As the summons indicates, the Commonwealth also contends that cis 2(2), (3), 9 and 12 of the Trading Agreement are inconsistent with the term found by the Arbitrator. No such inconsistency is, in my opinion, manifest on the face of the Award (all four provisions are set out in full in the Award), nor does it appear when these clauses are considered in conjunction with the remaining provisions of the award or with any other material in the evidence to which my attention has been directed. Indeed, the provisions of cls 9 and of the Trading Agreement in my opinion support the Arbitrator's conclusion.
I see no manifest error of law on the face of this part of the Award: nor having looked at the evidentiary material on this aspect to which I was referred in argument do I find evidence, let alone strong evidence, that the
Arbitrator made an error of law. Notwithstanding the argument of Nicholas
Sneddon in his article in [(1978) ALJ 372] that the "rule" cannot be justified, this Court remains bound by what the High Court determined in Hoytes Pty Ltd v
Spencer, so that if the asserted inconsistency was established one hurdle would have been jumped. But the determination of whether the Arbitrator's finding on this question in this Award on contractual provisions the like of which one would hope and expect never to see again, is not likely to add substantially (or at all) to the certainty of commercial law, so that for that reason, even if I thought there was the necessary "strong evidence", I would not be empowered to grant leave to appeal on that question.
Finally, I should add that for the purposes of dealing with this question I have in fact looked at so much of the evidence before the
Arbitrator as
I was referred to. For the avoidance of any doubt I have considered this inconsistency argument as relevant to [s38(5)(b)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) and (ii).
Obviously [s38(5)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) is satisfied but that is not enough.
 
Ground 2 - "The Implied Term"
As is obvious from what I have already recounted, there is not to be found in the TAL any provision expressly promising all of the Oberon class submarine refits to Codock. The Arbitrator deals with this matter at pp7-54 of his Award, to some extent coextensively with the collateral contract issue.
I see no manifest error as is asserted to be found in this part of the
Award. On the contrary, I am of the opinion that the conclusion reached by the
Arbitrator is correct.
One must start with the consideration that the Australian Navy had a fleet of Oberon class submarines (not all of which had been delivered when the
TAL was entered into); that those submarines required extensive regular refits; that there was nowhere in Australia that this work could be done in (or for years after) 1972 other than Cockatoo Island, so that if not done there, the submarines would have had to return to England for refit (see p38 of the Award), and that the Commonwealth conceded that when negotiating the
TAL it was proposing to have all its Oberon class submarines refitted at
Cockatoo Island for the "foreseeable future". The 20 year Trading Agreement and Lease must have been thought to encompass the foreseeable future.
 .
Then there is the Codock letter of 28 October 1971 referred to at p 18 of the Award, the Report which went before the 2 November meeting of the
Defence (Industrial) Committee referred to at p 28 of the Award, the
Commonwealth's "paper" on the lease and trading arrangements to apply to
Cockatoo Island as from 1 January 1972 referred to at p 29 of the Award, the "Minutes" referred to at p34 of the Award, the "Minutes of the 22 November meeting" referred to at pp35-6 of the Award, especially so much thereof as it set out in p36 of the Award, and the "Minutes" of the meeting referred to at p38 of the Award. All of these, in my view, support the implication of this term. Implicit in that view is that they do not furnish strong, or any, evidence of error of law.
 .
The Commonwealth also submitted that cl.9 of the Trading Agreement was inconsistent with the term relied upon by Codock. I do not agree. Cl.9 entitled the Commonwealth to cancel any order it had placed with Codock. If it did so Codock was to cease work and become entitled to be paid "such sums as are fair and reasonable in respect of the loss or damage sustained by Codock" (but not for losses of profit on the work not done). There could be quite a number of reasons why the Commonwealth may want to cancel further refitting work at some particular time - the vessel may be needed elsewhere for some purpose: the refitting of some other submarine might be thought more urgent; some other submarine might have developed a problem needing urgent attention.
Furthermore, it cannot be inferred from a right to cancel a refit underway that the Commonwealth is at liberty to have that or any, let alone all, of its
Oberon class refitting work done elsewhere.
So far from there being a manifest error on this matter on the face of the Award, the material to which the Arbitrator refers indicates to me with conspicuous clarity that the Commonwealth and Codock were negotiating on the common assumption that Codock would do all the Oberon class submarine refits during the 20 years for which the TAL was to endure.
The Arbitrator in my view was manifestly right in this section of his
Award.
 
Ground 3
This asserts first that the
Arbitrator found that in an agreement of 2
September 1987 referred to as the Advance Agreement, there was an express promise by the
Commonwealth to have the balance of the Oberon submarine refitting programme carried out by Codock and that he erred in law in that on the proper construction of that agreement there was no such express promise.
The Arbitrator found that at some time prior to April 1987 the
Commonwealth had decided not to renew Codock's lease of Cockatoo Island on its expiry on 31 December 1992, a decision it announced on 1 April 1987. By that date ANI Ltd had become the parent company of Codock. As would have been surely expected by the Commonwealth negotiations as to what would be the respective parties' rights and obligations for the balance of the term of the
TAL ensued.
Codock relies, in addition to the other matters found in its favour in the Award, on an agreement which the Commonwealth asserts it reached with
Codock and recorded in its letter of 3 July 1987 to Codock, part of which is set out by the Arbitrator at pp55-6 of the Award. The Commonwealth's contention was that for various reasons that letter did not have contractual force (meaning,
I assume, that the "agreement" which it recorded did not have contractual effect). Whether or not it did is initially a question of fact which the Arbitrator has determined adversely to the Commonwealth. That involves no error of law, let alone a manifest error.
Nor does any matter relied upon by the Commonwealth demonstrate to me any evidence, let alone strong evidence, of error of law.
But there were two other letters and person to person discussions on this matter. The other letters were of 15 July 1987 (the parties agreed that the reference at p60 of the Award to a letter of 18 July 1987 was a typing error) and 2 September 1987. They are not set out in the Award, but I was referred to a complete copy of each. The letter of 15 July 1987 confirms the letter of 9
January 1987, with an agreed addition. The letter of 2 September confirms the agreement recorded in the 3 July 1987 letter, and also a detailed agreement in costing subsequently reached. These letters strongly confirm the conclusions reached by the Arbitrator and militate against the
Commonwealth's asserted error of law.
There is no error of law, manifest or otherwise, in the face of this part of the Award, nor do the letters which I have mentioned reveal any evidence, let alone any strong evidence, of error.
 
Ground 4 - Estoppel
The asserted errors are to be found on pp73 and 91 of the Award. But as the Award points out, this question is relevant only if Codock's contractual claims fail. They did not before the Arbitrator, and I have indicated that leave to appeal will not be granted by me from the Arbitrator's decisions on the contractual claims.
Strictly, therefore, a successful appeal by the Commonwealth on this question would not "substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement" [(s38(5)(a))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) so that the Statute forbids the grant of leave to appeal on this asserted error of law.
But it is, for reasons which I shall state, appropriate that I consider this part of the Award independently of the Award on the contract claims.
First, the Arbitrator correctly directed himself as to the relevant legal principles as to what is necessary to found estoppel in pais. He then considered the representations asserted: on that he found facts. He then considered whether in fact Codock relied on the representations which he found to have been made and if it did, did it so rely to its detriment. Again, questions of fact. As to the finding of reliance, he could hardly have found otherwise. Codock had obviously committed itself to the twenty year TAL on a costing basis that assumed all the refit would go to it (rent and overheads were critical to, first, recovery of direct cost and of overhead and secondly to profitability). Codock was in business to make profits, not to spend its shareholders' funds on benefiting the Commonwealth. It committed itself to the subsequent agreements on the same basis, according to the findings of fact in the Award.
Paragraph 10(b) of the proposed Grounds of Appeal asserts an error of law in the Arbitrator's test for detriment in estoppel. The submission put to me was that "detriment" for the purpose of estoppel does not extend to a loss of future earnings. That submission was supported by a reference to a sentence in the judgment of Toohey J in The Commonwealth versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394 at 475, where he simply said "...the consequence of any promissory estoppel is that the Court should enforce the promise only as a means of avoiding detriment and to the extent necessary to achieve that end", and by a passage to the same effect in the judgment of Brennan J in Walton Stores 
Ltd versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] at 423.
It is not self-evident (at least to me) that loss of income from a represented long term contract that a party has geared itself up to perform is not a relevant detriment because some part of that income (probably a fairly small proportion) would have been a profit, rather than a recovery of indirect costs such as fixed rent and depreciation to name simply the most obvious of such indirect or overhead costs.
Nor do I find anything on p91 of the Award that indicates the Arbitrator was finding detriment in that Codock was deprived of the opportunity to engage in unconscionable conduct. What the Arbitrator refers to is a "failure by
Codock to exercise its rights under cl.12 of the Trading Agreement in the 1972
TAL". That cl.12 is in the following terms.
 "12. The Commonwealth and the Company will confer with the object of rearrangement of their joint and respective interests under this agreement and the lease should either party consider that there is a permanent disability to it either by a major permanent change in the Commonwealth's role for the works implicit in clause 2(1) of this agreement or otherwise in the future operation of this agreement and the lease under the present terms."
I cannot discern anything unconscionable in Codock's complying with that obligation. Probably, as is usual in such a context, it would initially overstate its case, as would the Commonwealth, and they would gradually come together.
My conclusion is that no manifest error on the face of this part of the
Award has been demonstrated, nor is there strong (or indeed any) evidence that the Arbitrator made the error of law asserted. And even if there were the proposition that whether or not a finding of estoppel arising from the events catalogued in the section of the Award "may add or may be likely to add substantially to the certainty of commercial law" has only to be articulated to be rejected.
 
Ground 
As I have earlier indicated, asbestos had been present in vessels serviced at Garden Island over a long period. The Arbitrator records at p 146 of the Award that it was present in Commonwealth vessels refitted at Cockatoo
Dockyard up to 1987, and that it was specified for refits until about 1973.
But the claims in question are those made by former employees after the
TAL was entered into. To the extent that such claims were not covered by insurance (and reference of this matter to Arbitration, implies that such claims were at least not all or fully covered) they had to be paid by Codock.
They were an "overhead" expense. So were the legal costs incurred by Codock in respect of these claims, again to the extent that they were not covered by insurance. Apparently there were claims from employees whose employment ceased prior to 31 October 1958, a date prior to which Codock had no or but minimal insurance cover.
As the Award explains, Codock relied upon cl.2(3) and 2(4) of the 1972
Trading Agreement - specifically that payments it was required to make in respect of asbestos claims, when made, were "overhead" which was to be taken into account in "cost plus" contracts, such as submarine refits and would be taken into account for fixing a price for "commercial" (ie non-Navy) work, which would go towards recovery of overheads and thus benefit the Commonwealth because it reduced the overhead to be recovered from Navy work for the
Commonwealth (see Award pp 150-155).
The errors in law which the Commonwealth contends were made (see para (i)(2) and (3) of its Further Amended Summons) are references to the following pages of the Award.
Para 13(i) is dealt with on p
The Commonwealth contention in para (1) may well be correct, but is irrelevant. The costs are incurred when they are paid: the liability may have arisen out of pre 1972 events but that is simply irrelevant.
Para 13(2) is simply wrong.
Para (3) refers to Standard Conditions. Those asserted to be relevant are set out on pp 155-7. They refer to the costs of the litigation,
NOT to any amount awarded. The amounts awarded or agreed to be paid are under the TAL to be considered as overheads not litigation costs. The Arbitrator has expressed his opinion as to how these overheads are to be dealt with on pp 156-166.
There is not any manifest error of law in this part of the Award. The
Arbitrator's view depends upon the effect of many documents, but part of which are set out in full, and in a review of a "continuum" of agreements, each of which is part of the "matrix of facts" to be taken into account in construing the 1972 TAL. Furthermore, there is not strong evidence of any error of law.
The material I have been asked to consider tends, in my view, to negate rather than demonstrate error of law.
But in any event it cannot be said that the resolution of this question may or may be likely to add to the certainty of commercial law. I cannot envisage a clearer example of the genus of "one-off contracts". The parties chose to submit this question not only to arbitration, but to arbitration by one of Her Majesty's Counsel. The Commonwealth in my view must abide by the decision of the Arbitrator on this question.
 
Ground 6 .
This is directed to pp 198-203 of the Award.
In essence it asserts that the sum of $1.1m received by Codock on the sale of its "intellectual property in submarine refitting" to an entity wholly owned by the Commonwealth should be deducted from the loss which Codock otherwise established.
The damages awarded to Codock are set out p 230 of the Award. None of the items is challenged.
The Commonwealth's argument is really that there should be an offset because its wholly owned entity bought something from
Codock which was of no value to Codock after the termination of the refit contract, and that it did so in order better to fit it to carry out the Oberon class submarine refits.
For myself I would have thought that the onus was on the Commonwealth to establish those facts to support the offset which it claims and that it did not satisfy the Arbitrator in that respect (see Award pp 199-202).
But be that as it may, I find no manifest error on the face of the Award in this respect: nor do I find the strong evidence to which [s38(5)(b)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) refers. And in my view the determination of this particular question is quite incapable of adding at all to the certainty of commercial law. In reality it is essentially a question of fact, namely Codock's reason for selling and the purchaser's reason for buying this "intellectual property".
For the foregoing reasons I decline to grant leave to the Commonwealth to appeal on any of the grounds of appeal in the Further Amended Summons which were sought to be relied upon.
Before I part with the Commonwealth's leave to appeal application, I should indicate why it is that having expressed the opinion that reasons ought not be given in an application for leave to appeal beyond asserting that no manifest error or no strong evidence that an error of law has occurred has been demonstrated or produced, as the case may be, I have gone to some length to indicate why I have reached those conclusions.
It is simply because I regard this as an out of the ordinary case. There have, prior to this matter, been at least five applications to this Court, all by the Commonwealth, in the course of this arbitration. I have little doubt that the Commonwealth will seek to appeal from my refusal to grant it leave to appeal. There is an enormous amount of material to be considered - as I have already stated the Award itself is of 234 pages. I have thought that the burden on an overburdened Court of Appeal might be lessened a little if I indicated why I have concluded that what are relied upon as errors of law either are not, or are not such as to justify a grant of leave to appeal.
It follows that the summons for leave to appeal will be dismissed and the Commonwealth ordered to pay the costs of that application.
I turn now to the application in matter No.50256 of 1995, which is
Codock's application to enforce the award in its favour by entering judgment in its favour against the Commonwealth for the amount of the Award plus interest at Supreme
Court rates on part of that amount from 8 December 1995 (the date to which that part of the claim has been calculated by the
Arbitrator).
Codock's argument is simple. It says that in the [Commercial Arbitration
Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) "award" means final or interim award; that it has an interim award and so it seeks leave pursuant to [s33(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s33.html) to enforce that award by entering judgment in terms of that award, i.e. for the amount of the award, and interest to bring the Arbitrator's calculation up to the date of that entry.
That is undoubtedly its entitlement unless the Commonwealth can show reason why it should not be permitted to do so at this stage of but a partial determination of the totality of the disputes between these parties.
 .
The Commonwealth rehearsed its argument before the Arbitrator. He records it, and his view upon it at pp 203-227 of his Award. He rejected so much of it as asserted that he should not bring down an Interim Award in the absence of an undertaking from Codock to have it "quarantined" to await the finalisation of the Arbitration and leave to appeal and if granted appeals in respect of his interim and/or final awards. The "quarantining" desired by the
Commonwealth was payment into an interest bearing bank account to abide the finalisation of the arbitration "or any court process associated therewith".
He also records and rejects the Commonwealth's assertion that one of the matters referred to him as arbitrator was whether or not any award in favour of Codock should be "quarantined" in some such way and finds that there was no agreement between Codock and the Commonwealth for any such quarantining.
I approach the Commonwealth's contention that Codock should not be permitted simply to enter judgment for the amount awarded, thus enabling the enforcement, at this stage, or indeed at all, until the "Pollution Claim" is decided on the basis that the onus is on the Commonwealth to demonstrate an entitlement to a stay of execution for a specific period or until the happening of some event.
The material to which my attention is drawn and on which the
Commonwealth relied to support its assertion that judgment should not be entered in respect of the amount found in the "Interim Award" was as I shall now recount.
On 25 November 1994, Counsel for the Commonwealth said to the arbitrator "MR RAYMENT: That then raises two questions really. One is when it should happen. The other is what should happen. The other is what should happen about the addresses in the commercial case.
Everybody, I think, in the room would know that if you put away the evidence that you have heard in the matter for months and then address on it, with the best will in the world you will have forgotten large parts of it and the preparation of everybody to bring it back to mind would be so much harder.

My clients would be concerned to ensure that when you come to a final award in this case, no final award be given in one part of the case without a final award being given in another part of the case, for obvious financial and other reasons.

Subject to that matter, the convenient course may very well be to go straight into address or almost straight into address after concluding the bout of evidence in the matter. That therefore also effects when we do it. It might be very hard indeed for me to give you any kind of reliable estimate as to how long all of that would take.
I think a view on the other side is it would take about a month."
Then on 31 March 1995, after a discussion with Counsel on the likely length of submissions on the commercial case the following exchange occurred "ARBITRATOR: I only ask so I can see this in relation to the pollution case and how I am likely to fit days in, whether I can largely leave that alone for a while whilst we concentrate on this matter and then come back to it. It causes me no difficulty whatever because I have been required to make the time.

MR RAYMENT: When we originally embarked on this course, there was a notion of inviting you, if you wished, to actually take this part of the case and dispose of it by hearing submissions on both sides and all the evidence, with a view of enabling you to go off and write your award, and indeed publish it, so the parties knew where they were going for the balance of the case.

It just occurs to me that that could have other advantages for the parties to do with possible negotiations that might ever take place between them, if that occurred. But the idea was any award of a monetary nature would be suspended until the other part of the case was dealt with. Is that what you still have in mind? 
ARBITRATOR:
I had in mind this - that I would get as much work done on the resolution of matters in this case as I could before the pollution case started, bearing in mind that to the extent that the credit of any witnesses is impugned here, where the witness is required to come back in the other case, that is something that I would be very wary about. So my intention was to hold off giving final views about matters of conflict in relation to those witnesses until I have heard them entirely, otherwise the principles of hearing the cases together is defeated."
On 22 June 1995 there was a meeting attended by Gary Frederick
Ashton,
Assistant Secretary, Industry Policy and Operations of the Department of
Defence, responsible for providing day to day instructions to the Australian
Government Solicitor in connection with this arbitration and Air Vice Marshall
Tidd with Messrs Reading and Nelson on behalf of Codock. Mr Ashton took notes.
One of them is in the following terms "In closing Mr Reading advanced the proposition that Codock and the Commonwealth should ask Mr West for his decision on the commercial case. This he said would reduce the uncertainty of the situation. He offered that any monies awarded to Codock could be held in trust until the pollution claim was concluded.
ASCIP indicated we would certainly examine the suggestion. ACLOG indicated the proposal at least had some superficial appeal.

The meeting concluded at approximately 11.45am."
A letter dated 11 July 1995 from Codock's solicitors to the Australian
Government Solicitor included a note which relevantly stated "With respect to the commercial case ... (some five or six lines have been blotted out) our client has indicated a willingness to make arrangements to hold any funds recovered until completion of the pollution case". On 15 August 1995 the
Australian Government Solicitor wrote to Codock's solicitors a letter marked "without prejudice" but nonetheless tendered without objection in the application with which I am now dealing. That letter was in the following terms "As you are aware my client has been concerned at the suggestion that Australian National Industries
Limited (ANI) may choose to wind-up Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd (Codock) between delivery of a decision on the commercial aspect and delivery of a decision on the contamination aspect. Indeed, my latest letter to you dated 4 August 1995 asking for an assurance that ANI will not abandon Codock's liabilities remains unanswered.
Whilst I note you have indicated arrangements may be made to 'hold any funds' payable to Codock in the event of an award in its favour in the commercial aspect, my client is prepared to suggest a compromise which deals with both aspects of the
Arbitration.
I am instructed to put the following offer to you for your client's response: a. Codock by way of a contribution to remediation of Cockatoo
Island, will pay to the Commonwealth $1m for remediation including the northern foreshore. The Commonwealth will discontinue its contamination claim against Codock upon agreement to the terms herein, with each party to bear its own costs in the contamination aspect of the arbitration. The full amount will be paid into trust forthwith pending delivery of the Arbitrator's award, which would of course be limited to the commercial aspect, and then to be distributed depending upon which payment requirement, as set out below, prevails. Such appeal rights as may arise in favour of either party concerning the Arbitrator's award remain unaffected.
 b. In the event the Arbitrator delivers a decision which does not specify quantum, and should the parties be unable to agree on quantum, submission be made to the Arbitrator in the usual manner for a decision on quantum.
 c. Failing agreement between the parties, the question of costs payable in the commercial aspect be subject to submission to the
Arbitrator in the usual manner after delivery of the commercial decision.
 d In the event Codock receives an award in its favour in the commercial aspect which requires payment by the Commonwealth in excess of $1m, the payment to be made by the Commonwealth will be discounted by $1m in lieu of Codock making its payment to the
Commonwealth for remediation including the northern foreshore.
 e. In the event Codock does not receive an award in excess of $1m in the commercial aspect, the $1m contribution payable by
Codock for remediation including the northern foreshore will be set-off against any commercial award, with any balance due to the Commonwealth to be paid by Codock within 14 days after agreement between the parties as to the quantum payable pursuant to sub-paragraph 4.b. hereof, or within 14 days after the
Arbitrator's decision on quantum pursuant to sub-paragraph .b.
hereof.
 f. In the event Codock does not receive any award on the commercial aspect, it will pay the $1m contribution for remediation including the northern foreshore to the Commonwealth within 14 days after the Arbitrator's decision on the commercial aspect.
 g. In the event the Commonwealth is entitled to payment of the $1m, or part thereof pursuant to the sub-paragraphs set out above, interest calculated pursuant to the [Supreme Court Act, 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) will be payable by Codock on the amount due to the Commonwealth from the date the parties agree on the quantum pursuant to sub-paragraph 4.b. hereof, or from the date of the Arbitrator's decision on quantum pursuant to sub-paragraph 4.b. hereof.
 h. The parties will use their best endeavours to reach agreement on a joint statement for public release.
 i. With regard to the two (2) costs applications currently being brought by Codock for Enforcement of the Interim Award and the
Application to Review the Decision Granting Leave to Amend,
Codock will agree to discontinue those costs applications and bear its own costs, on the basis that the Commonwealth will forego its entitlement to costs on the Appeal against the Confidentiality 
Orders, including the hearing before Rolfe J the Leave application before the Full Court and the Court of Appeal hearing.
This offer will remain open until 5pm on Friday, 18 August ."
Codock's solicitor responded to that letter on August 1995. After canvassing some of the assertions in the AGS letter, Codock's solicitors ended by saying "Therefore, we are instructed by our client to reject the
Commonwealth's proposals".
On 22 August 1995 the AGS wrote again to Codock's solicitors.
That letter was in the following terms "I refer to the invitation by Mr P Reading of Australian National
Industries Ltd to which you refer in your letter dated 11
July 1995 for the Commonwealth to join your client in consenting to delivery by the Arbitrator of his decision in the commercial case before the pollution case is completed.
As you are aware my client has been concerned at the possibility that ANI may choose to wind-up Cockatoo Dockyard
Pty Ltd (Codock) between delivery of a decision on the commercial case and delivery of a decision on the pollution case, thereby defeating any set-off entitlements.
I have referred your offer to 'make arrangements to hold any funds recovered until completion of the pollution case' to my client. I would understand that reference to reflect an earlier suggestion that any money which may become payable to Codock in consequence of the decision in the commercial case would be held in trust until the Commonwealth's pollution claim against
Codock is completed.
My client has instructed me to accept your invitation to request Mr West QC to hand down his Award in the commercial case as soon as convenient. I suggest that should the decision of
Mr West require payment by the Commonwealth of any sum to Codock in the commercial case, such sum be paid into an interest-bearing bank account to abide finalisation of the arbitration or any court process associated therewith. The bank account may be nominated by you, however the Director of the Sydney Office of the Australian Government Solicitor must be a joint signatory to operate the account with whichever solicitor from your of office you may wish to nominate.
I propose to forward a copy of this letter to Mr West QC tomorrow."
Codock's solicitors responded on the next day and said "We refer to your letter of 22 August 1995 regarding the commercial case.

It would be inappropriate for you to forward a copy of this letter to the Arbitrator before we consent to this course of action. We will not be in a position to do so until we have the opportunity to consider our position and seek instructions from our client. Therefore, do not send a copy of the letter to the
Arbitrator."
Counsel for the parties were again before the Arbitrator on 23 August
On that occasion the Commonwealth's leading Counsel was Mr Burbidge
QC.
The transcript (pp8290-92) record the following "MR BURBIDGE: Mr Arbitrator, in response to that I am instructed to say this: That the Commonwealth is willing for you to, by interim award, hand down your decision in the commercial case as soon as convenient, subject to one matter only, that is, should the decision, should your decision require payment by the
Commonwealth of any sum to Codock in the commercial case, that sum should be paid into an interest bearing bank account to abide finalisation of the arbitration or any Court process associated therewith. The bank account to be nominated by Allen 
Allen and Hemsley, however, the Director of the Sydney office of the Australian Government Solicitor, to be a joint signatory to operate the account with whichever solicitor from Allens they may wish to nominate.

Now, that offer I should make plain is without prejudice to such position as may currently obtain between the parties on that subject. I say no more than that.

Finally, Mr Arbitrator, on that point I would remind you, if I may, that the question of whether you have power to do that, absent consent by the parties, is one on which you have earlier made a determination. Your decision of 21 October includes the statement: 'I should state at the outset that I am satisfied that I have jurisdiction to make an interim award et cetera.' 
Mr Arbitrator, I think the reasons why we put the proviso on the offer are probably fairly clear but.

ARBITRATOR: Is it because Cockatoo is a company without assets.

MR BURBIDGE: Quite. Thank you, that is the precise reason.
It is not completely without assets but it is certainly within the power of another company, if they choose to do so, to wind it up without particular inconvenience to themselves.
 
ARBITRATOR: And it would follow the interest on the account would go with the capital sum in the usual way.

MR BURBIDGE: Yes, that is the intention. Or I should say some other similar arrangement or some other similarly appropriate arrangement.

ARBITRATOR: What I want to get clear is this, Mr Burbidge the offer that is made is conditional and it means therefore the
Commonwealth would not consent to me giving an interim award in the commercial case unless that restriction, or something like it, was made.

The reason I say that, is the fundamental matter I think in that offer is it carries with it a recognition that in terms of the issues between the cases, there is no, or there may be no, reason why I could not, as it were, make an award or give my decision by way of award in the commercial case and to do so without fear of it having then been said that I shouldn't have done that because there are issues arising in the pollution case, going to credibility of witnesses and the like, as to which I have already made a ruling. I just can't put myself in that position.

MR BURBIDGE: Quite. Mr Arbitrator, I think you may safely take it that the offer acknowledges, on behalf of the Commonwealth, that there are no issues of that kind which are inextricably interwoven such that it would be inappropriate for you to do so.

Indeed, I must say my own understanding from something which was said in fairly recent days is that your work on the commercial decision is fairly well advanced. For our own part, we have no difficulty in giving whatever assurances were necessary to clear all obstacles from the path, save the recoverability of our money in the event we ultimately prevail in the contamination case.

That concludes what we had to say, Mr Arbitrator.

ARBITRATOR: Thank you, Mr Burbidge, thank you very much indeed.
Mr Hughes? 
MR HUGHES: That was the reply.

ARBITRATOR: As to the matter which has been raised now? 
MR HUGHES: I have no instructions at the moment which enable me either to accept or reject that offer.
 
MR BURBIDGE: I don't doubt my learned friend will let us know when he does have instructions.

MR HUGHES: In our submission the adjournment application can be disposed of without regard to that factor.

ARBITRATOR: It does mean that regardless, as I understand the position, that I am now free to deal with the commercial case by way of interim award. This is as final as I can make it without making a final award and thereby becoming functus.

MR BURBIDGE: You are free from our perspective. We would say it is within your power for you to do so, with or without the consent of Codock But it would be an odd idea indeed if for
Codock would resist it, we would have thought.

ARBITRATOR: What the Commonwealth is saying is, if I do it I ought to do it on the basis of some safeguard of the kind that has been mentioned or something like it. I could go ahead and do it anyway, is what it comes to.

MR BURBIDGE: Quite."
On 4 September 1995, Codock's solicitors wrote to the AGS. Under the subheading "Interim Award in Commercial Case" that letter stated "We understand the Commonwealth's position is that any interim award should be the subject of a condition that any payment made to our client should be held in an interest-bearing account pending the finalisation of the arbitration proceedings 'and any court proceedings associated therewith.' Our client will not consent to a condition of this sort. We reserve our client's position on whether: the Arbitrator has power to impose such a condition in the absence of consent; or if he has such power, whether such a condition ought to be imposed in the current circumstances of this arbitration.

We suggest that any debate on these issues should be held over until the Arbitrator has advised the parties that he is ready to deliver his interim award on the commercial case, whereupon the matter could be relisted for submissions if necessary."
I repeat the Interim Award was delivered on 8 December 1995.
Finally on this aspect, in the affidavit to which I have referred, sworn by Gary Frederick Ashton, there appears the following paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 which I admitted over Codock's objection on the basis that I would consider their relevance and therefore their admissibility when I came to prepare my reasons for judgment. "6. From about 22 June 1995 to about 11 September 1995 I believed
Codock had offered that if the parties requested the Arbitrator to hand down his decision on the Commercial Case, before the determination of the Pollution Case, then any monies awarded to
Codock would be held in trust pending the outcome of the
Pollution Case.
I believed this on the basis of what Mr Reading said at the meeting of 22 June 1995 and what
Allen Allen and Hemsley said in their letter of 11 July 1995.
If I had thought that Codock was free to seek payment directly to it of any monies awarded in its favour in the Commercial Case prior to the determination of the Pollution Case, I would never have agreed to the Commonwealth asking the Arbitrator to hand down the decision in the Commercial Case, prior to the decision in the Pollution Case. I was especially concerned at the remarks made by Mr Reading, a senior member of AN management and former director of Codock, at the meeting of 22 June 1995 about the note in the last ANI Annual Report. I believed Mr
Reading's remarks meant the following:
ANI when it suited them would wind up Codock;
ANI would take any monies
Codock received from the Commercial case decision and
Codock would not be paying the Commonwealth any monies if the
Commonwealth won the Pollution case."
Similarly, in an affidavit sworn on 22 February 1996, Air Vice Marshall
Till said "7. I believed an award which dealt with both the commercial and pollution claims would be made when the whole arbitration was finalised.
I believed that any monies paid to Codock pursuant to any such interim award might not be available to satisfy a subsequent award for the Commonwealth in its pollution claim. I had particular concern in regard to the Commonwealth's obligations in respect of accountability for public monies.
My concern was based upon the 1995 ANI Annual Report in reference to which Mr Reading had said during the meeting words to the following effect: 'Even if the Commonwealth succeeded in its pollution claim, ANI would wind up Codock.' 
I also believed that ANI would not assume liability on behalf of 
Codock."
The evidence in these two affidavits which I have set out I received on the basis that I would determine its relevance and admissibility in my reasons for judgment. Counsel for Codock did not raise any object to that course and indicated that he did not desire to cross-examine either deponent.
I am of the view that this evidence as to the subjective uncommunicated belief of these two persons is irrelevant: the question is not what they thought the AGS and Counsel for the Commonwealth were agreeing to but what they did in fact agree to.
What I have thus far recorded suffices to require my rejection of the
Commonwealth's application. But if I had had the slightest doubt it would have been removed by that to which I now turn.
As long ago as October 1994 the Arbitrator handed down an Interim
Award that the Commonwealth pay Codock $565,649.43 in respect of a specific claim in the Arbitration. The claim was for $1,032,227.97 less a set off admitted by Codock to be due by it to the Commonwealth of $466,578.54. Codock on the same day wrote requiring payment. On 3 November 1994, no payment having been received, Codock applied to this Court for leave to enforce that interim award by the entry of judgment for the amount of the award. The Commonwealth opposed that application. It relied upon its having ascertained after the award something which it asserted Codock should, for reasons not presently relevant, have made known to it prior to the making of the Award, but did not, namely its financial situation. That situation was then (and it differs now only by reason of its having (I assume) been paid the $565,649.43 plus some interest and its having incurred legal costs of another year or so's arbitrating) that having paid to its parent company a dividend of $28.34m by
October (well prior to the commencement of the Arbitration by a Notice of
Dispute dated 23 December 1992), its accounts as at 30 June showed that its liabilities exceeded its assets by $2,192,546.
Codock's application was heard by Rolfe J on 18 November
His judgment of 23 November 1994 is reported at [(1994) 35 NSWLR 689.] After recording Codock's financial position as at 30 June 1993 he summarised the
Commonwealth's submission (at 699) in the following passage "The significance of this submission is that Mr Einstein was saying, on a worst case basis from the Commonwealth's point of view, the financial position of Codock was such that the arbitrator should not make an interim award because, in essence, any money paid to it would, in all probability, not be recoverable by the Commonwealth if, in due course, it should be found Codock owed money to the Commonwealth. That put the case on as strong a basis as possible. Mr Bennett submitted that if Codock's 1994 financial statements had been available the case could have been buttressed by that further evidence.
However, as I have said, Mr Einstein put the case, as one would expect, at its highest from the Commonwealth's point of view on this aspect and the arbitration dealt with it on that basis.
In the result I do not think the additional financial statement would have made any difference to the force of the submission.
The arbitrator took into account the submission in the terms in which it was put and gave it, so far as his reasons disclose, full weight. He rejected it."
So did Rolfe J. The
Commonwealth, and those representing it, must have been aware of all of that which I have just recorded when they were called upon to consider whether or not the Arbitrator should deliver what he has entitled and I have called his "Interim Award" of 8 December
In reality it is his Final Award on the claim which Codock referred to arbitration under cl.13 of the Trading Agreement of January 1972. What the arbitrator has yet to decide (and to hear before he does) is the pollution case, as it came to be called, which the Commonwealth referred to arbitration. That the arbitrator was hearing the two together, evidence in one being by agreement evidence in the other, could not have prevented him from delivering his Award after the parties had presented all of their evidence (and made all their submission) in the commercial case.
At 30 June 1995 Codock's assets (according to its accounts signed off on September 1995) were $2,758,823 (its claim against the Commonwealth is not brought in as an asset) and its liabilities amounted to $10,125,550, a deficiency of $7,366,727. The liabilities comprised amounts owing to ANI $609,488, amounts owing to related bodies corporate $9,491,062 and amounts owing to other creditors $25,000. The liabilities to ANI and related bodies corporate were substantially incurred in funding the costs of the arbitration.
I should add that neither ANI nor any related body corporate has guaranteed
Codock's liabilities.
The reality of what I am now considering is a repetition of what the
Commonwealth argued unsuccessfully before Rolfe J, namely that the award against it (by now, with interest, over $17m) should stand as security for its pollution claim which in the correspondence to which I have referred it offered to settle for $1m.
I reject the Commonwealth's contention. In my judgment Codock is entitled to immediate entry of judgment in its favour and to all of the rights to enforce that judgment conferred by the general law or by any Statute. I stand the matter over to tomorrow morning at 9.30am so as to afford an opportunity for the parties to agree on the amount for which judgment should be entered, i.e. to bring the interest calculation up to date. If agreement is not reached Codock should have available its own verified recalculation.
The formal orders which
I will then make are 
The Commonwealth's application for leave to appeal against the Award of 8
December 1995 is dismissed and the Commonwealth is ordered to pay Codock's costs of that application. 
I grant leave to Codock to enter judgment against the
Commonwealth in the sum of (the agreed or verified amount) and I order that the Commonwealth pay the costs of Codock of its application for leave to enter that judgment.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/379.html  
