

Regina versus Elli Jane Theophanous [1996] NSWSC 166 (29 May 1996) 
REGINA versus Elli Jane THEOPHANOUS /94 
Wednesday 29 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, BADGERY-PARKER J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In November 1994 the appellant and a co-accused, Harry Arthur Callaghan, were jointly tried before his Honour Judge Christie QC and jury at the Taree District Court, the charge being that they on 30 January 1993 at Taree in the State of New South Wales did supply a prohibited drug, namely cannabis leaf.

The appellant and her co-accused were both represented by the same counsel.
They were both convicted. The co-accused was sentenced to imprisonment for a minimum term of nine months with an additional term of fifteen months. The appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for a minimum term of four months with an additional term of eight months.

An appeal by the co-accused has been abandoned. The appellant appeals against her conviction. The sole ground of appeal that was argued was that the verdict of the jury was unsafe or unsatisfactory.

The Crown case at the trial may be summarised as follows. Two police officers,
Constables Ryan and Van Housted, gave evidence that as a result of information they had received they took up surveillance at a service station at Chatham known as the LA Service Station at about 7.00pm on Saturday 30 January 1993.
At about 7.35pm they observed a gold Ford Falcon sedan registered number
OAV-632 drive into the car park. The appellant was the driver of the vehicle and Callaghan was a passenger in the front seat.

Constable Ryan and Callaghan knew one another personally, and Constable Ryan said that, as the vehicle went past the police vehicle, Callaghan looked at him, appeared to recognise him, and turned to the driver, (the car being driven by the appellant and occupied by Callaghan). The driver, instead of stopping at the service station, drove out of the service station and away down the street.

There was then a pursuit in which the police siren was activated, and the vehicle OAV-632 was stopped outside 40 Oxley Street, Chatham. The police and the appellant and Callaghan alighted from their respective vehicles. The appellant said, "What is wrong, what have I done?". Constable Ryan then saw in the back seat of the vehicle behind the driver's side a white plastic bucket with a lid on it. He opened the back door, pulled the white plastic bucket out, and according to Constable Ryan, lifted the lid.

It was common ground at the trial that inside the bucket were a number of plastic bags containing cannabis leaf. The total quantity was found to be slightly in excess of 416 grams. Constable Ryan asked, "Who owns this".
Callaghan shook his head and said, "Oh no".

In cross-examination of Constable Ryan there was some evidence on the basis of which the jury might have come to the conclusion that Callaghan said "Oh no" before the bucket was opened and its contents revealed. No remarks, and certainly no admissions, were made by the appellant.

Callaghan told the police that he had no idea who owned the cannabis. He told the police, and this turned out to be true, that he had borrowed the vehicle from a neighbour named Dennis Hardy. Hardy and his wife gave evidence that at the time they loaned the vehicle it did not contain any plastic bucket and certainly did not contain any cannabis.

Callaghan said that he was on his way to the LA Service Station to get some cigarettes. The appellant supported that story, saying that they were going out to get some cigarettes and were then on their way to visit Callaghan's mother. Callaghan's statement that he was on his way to the LA Service Station to get some cigarettes would not have done him much good in the eyes of the jury, in the light of the evidence that having spotted the policeman he obviously very quickly changed his mind about calling at the service station.

Both Callaghan and the appellant made unsworn statements at the trial in which they denied any knowledge of the cannabis in the motor vehicle.

It is perhaps unfortunate that a reading of the summing-up indicates, (and this is perhaps not unconnected with the joint representation of the appellant and Callaghan) that the case was put to the jury, on the issue of possession and knowledge of the presence of cannabis in the car, as though it was either both of them or neither of them that was responsible. This may have operated somewhat unfairly towards the appellant.

The point can be illustrated by reading the directions that the learned judge gave to the jury on the issue of possession.
 "I do not think there is anything particularly tricky about the legal concept of possession. The essence of the concept of possession in law is that you, at the relevant time, intentionally have the thing in question in some place where you have, either alone or jointly with some other person or persons, control over it to the exclusion of any other person.
 
In this case, the Crown case is that the two of them picked up the car, that they were in possession, and exclusive possession, of that car for the relevant time; that when they picked up the car, the Crown has led evidence that there was no bucket of marijuana in it. The defence have put to you that there is no evidence led to exclude the possibility that the marijuana bucket was sitting behind the seat at the time that both accused took possession of the car. It was never suggested to either of the owners of the car that they were ever possessed of a bucket of marijuana. Both of them were asked, and specifically the wife was asked whether there was a bucket of marijuana, or any bucket at all in the car when she gave it to them. She said there was nothing in there except some tools in the boot and a sheet or blanket over the back seat.
 
The Crown says that is adequate to exclude the possibility that this marijuana was in the car at the time they took possession of it. Indeed, I must tell you that the evidence of both owners, that is the husband and wife, was not challenged in that regard. " 
His Honour then went on to say, in relation to the appellant and Callaghan: "That they were possessed of the vehicle, you might think - and it is entirely a matter for you - is beyond dispute. They are possessed of a vehicle as and when they pick it up. 
Now as the defence quite rightly says to you, the Crown must show that they had exclusive possession of this marijuana that is in the back of the car.
 .................
 
It is possible, for instance that they could have driven somewhere and pulled up at the local pub for a couple of schooners and gone inside and left the car unlocked in the car park for an hour or two, then gone on to Mum's place and the police stopped them and, of course, there is a bucket of marijuana in the back.
 .........................
 
But as I understand both the Crown case and the defence case, here there is no suggestion that, once they got in the car, they ever left it.
 ................................

So that the Crown says that the accused were in exclusive possession of the
Falcon, and consequently, exclusive possession of the bucket of marijuana from the very time that they picked up the car." 
If when attention is paid to the different positions respectively of Callaghan and the appellant, the evidence takes on a somewhat different complexion.

The case against Callaghan was strengthened by the police evidence as to his conduct at the time the car went to the LA Service Station. It was consistent with that evidence that he instructed the appellant to drive away from the service station and that she simply complied with his instructions. Again, the evidence about the remarks that Callaghan made concerning the white bucket, and the contents of the white bucket, when the police stopped the car, was evidence upon which the jury could have drawn inferences unfavourable to
Callaghan, but it did not constitute evidence upon which inference unfavourable to the appellant could have been drawn.

The essential question for the jury was whether the Crown had established beyond reasonable doubt that the cannabis in the bucket was in the possession of the appellant, at least jointly with Callaghan. In my view, whilst the evidence called by the Crown was such as to give rise to a substantial degree of suspicion in that respect, it fell short of legal proof.

It is true that he relationship of de facto husband and wife that existed between Callaghan and the appellant was a matter that the jury were entitled to take into account, but the evidence does not to my mind exclude the hypothesis, consistent with the innocence of the appellant, that she was driving that vehicle in accordance with the request or instructions of
Callaghan, and without necessarily having knowledge of his purpose, or of what was in the bucket.

It is at least consistent with the evidence in the Crown case, that the bucket and its contents were in the exclusive possession of Callaghan, and that the role of the appellant was merely that of a driver of the vehicle.

In the circumstances I am persuaded by the submissions made by senior counsel for the appellant, that the verdict of the jury was unsafe and should not be allowed to stand. I would propose in those circumstances that the appeal should be allowed, the conviction and sentence should be quashed, and that there should be a verdict and judgment in favour of the appellant.

BADGERY-PARKER J: I agree.

HIDDEN J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as I proposed.

CRIMINAL LAW - UNSAFE VERDICT 
The appellant and a co-accused were convicted of possession of cannabis. The evidence against the co-accused was stronger than that against the appellant. The evidence of the Crown was consistent with the appellant merely being the driver of the vehicle in which the cannabis was found and not being in joint possession of the cannabis - HELD - The verdict was unsafe.

O R D E R S Appeal allowed.
 Conviction and sentence quashed.
 Judgment of acquittal entered.
 * * * 
