

Regina versus Jamieson Matter No Cca 60628/97 [1998] NSWSC 61 (24 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 April 1998 
REGINA versus MATTHEW JAMIESON /97 March 1998 
McInerney J, Studdert J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY J: I will ask Studdert J to deliver the first judgment in this matter. 
STUDDERT J: Matthew Jamieson stood trial in the District Court at Gosford in October 1997 charged with maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm. The jury found him guilty and his Honour Judge Patten sentenced the respondent to a minimum term of fifteen months penal servitude to commence on 15 August 1997 and to expire on 14 November 1998, and an additional term of twenty-one months commencing on 15 November 1998. 
The Director of Public Prosecutions has appealed on the ground the sentence is inadequate. The sentence was imposed on 30 October 1997 and notice of appeal was promptly given on 28 November 1997.

The facts shortly stated are these: the victim of the offence, one Trevor
McIntyre, was attacked by the respondent in the early hours of Saturday 10 May whilst he was in his room at the Broadwater Motel, East Gosford, where the victim lived. Two witnesses called by the Crown actually saw the respondent, although they did not positively identify him, at 2.45 am as they passed the door of the victim's room at the motel, so that their evidence placed the approximate time of the commission of the crime. When those concerned with the victim's well-being entered his bedroom, they found him lying on the floor. Constable Quinn was summoned and he found the victim unconscious, with obvious head injuries.

The wall of the room near the light switch was covered with blood and there were blood splatters on the opposite side of the room where the victim's head was lying, as well as blood splatters on the walls over the side and end of the bed opposite the door into the corridor. The sheet on the bed was heavily bloodstained.

The victim was seriously injured and, indeed, the injuries were regarded as life-threatening. He has apparently no recollection of the attack and has been left with neurological deficits that are regarded as permanent. At the time of the trial he was still undergoing treatment at a rehabilitation centre at St
George Hospital.

The victim of this crime was known by the respondent to be a frail man. The respondent had visited the victim's room in the motel where he lived and where he was attacked on one occasion some time prior to the crime. The respondent had seen his victim again about a week before 10 May 1997 walking in the street. The respondent described Mr McIntyre as being on that occasion in bad shape: "He was real thin and he was weak", and those who were with him were helping him to walk.

No motive was established for the respondent's crime. He had been drinking heavily the day before and acknowledged no recollection of what happened.

The offence was one for which <case> of the Crimes Act provides a maximum penalty of penal servitude for seven years. Viewed objectively, this was a very serious crime, both for the purposes of the section and generally.

The respondent left school at the age of fifteen and acquired no qualifications thereafter. He was unemployed when he committed this crime and, having left school, worked only occasionally as a labourer. Both his parents were recently deceased and he is a single person in a relationship with a young lady, who gave evidence at his trial. The respondent had his twenty- second birthday during the course of the trial.

He had a previous criminal record which includes two convictions for assault.
Those earlier convictions resulted in terms of imprisonment of two months for the earlier offence and three months for the latter offence. The subject offence was committed whilst the respondent was on bail on the charge that later, in May 1997, attracted the prison term of three months. Moreover, the subject offence was also committed whilst the respondent was on a recognizance to be of good behaviour, which recognizance was for a term of two years and which recognizance the respondent had entered into on 27 February 1996.

In his remarks on sentence the learned judge accurately described the assault on Mr McIntyre as being a very savage one resulting in life-threatening injuries.

Addressing the subjective features of the case, the judge observed that the respondent had obviously had a major problem with alcohol and considered that he must have been affected to some extent at least at the time of this attack.
The sentencing judge considered that the respondent was entitled to a degree of leniency on the basis that the element of general deterrence was of less significance because of his age and he also remarked that the community's best interests lay in the respondent's rehabilitation. He thus found special circumstances, thus explaining the mix of minimum term and additional term.

The Crown submitted the sentencing judge fell into error and that the sentence was manifestly inadequate. This was a very savage attack made upon a victim who was presumably lying defenceless in his bed in the middle of the night.
When awake and alert the victim was frail and his mobility was significantly handicapped, as the respondent well knew. Not only were the circumstances of the offence grave in themselves, but the offence was committed whilst the respondent was on recognizance and on bail. The respondent abused the advantage of his liberty given to him in relation to those earlier offences in order to commit this crime.

Plainly, his Honour was influenced to be lenient to the respondent by reason of the respondent's age. However, that particular feature of the case, in my opinion, and with respect to the learned judge, was given undue emphasis and this has led to error.

The respondent is not to be punished for pleading not guilty, but, having done so, he has not expressed any contrition for what he did. It has to be borne in mind this is a Crown appeal, and whilst this Court would not now impose a sentence of the duration that might properly have been imposed by the primary sentencing court, it does seem to me that this sentence is manifestly inadequate and cannot be allowed to stand.

I reach that conclusion notwithstanding what Mr Buddin has put on behalf of the respondent, both in his written submissions and in the oral submissions made to this court.

Mr Buddin has drawn attention to the well-established principle concerning the constraints that apply to Crown appeals. He has also drawn attention to sentencing statistics which have been placed before the Court and he has drawn attention to pronouncements by this court concerning the desirability of heeding such statistics.

I have considered those statistics in relation to this appeal, but I do not find them of assistance in the particular circumstances of this case. It seems to me that this case would have to be regarded, objectively, as being a particularly serious example of the sort of offence to which <case> is directed and there are those aggravating features of it, to which I have drawn attention.

A sentence was required to be imposed which was appropriate, paying proper regard to the objective gravity of what the respondent did. This sentence imposed in the District Court, in my opinion, does not meet that objective.

I therefore conclude that this Court should, notwithstanding all that Mr
Buddin has put to the contrary, interfere, quash the sentence imposed, and re- sentence the respondent.

In doing so, it is appropriate to have regard to the affidavit of Mr Barrow, the solicitor acting for the respondent. It appears from the affidavit of Mr
Barrow that the respondent was assessed by a psychologist, Anna Robilliard, on March 1998. That psychological report highlights the tragedy of a personal nature that the respondent had experienced in losing his father and his mother in rapid succession whilst the respondent was a teenager.

His father was killed in a work-related accident and six months later his mother died of cancer. It would obviously have been the case that these two tragedies would have affected the respondent and he apparently then fell out with his sisters and drifted off into a lifestyle of heavy drinking, and that remained the situation as at the time the subject offences were committed.

The psychologist noted that the respondent expressed a resolve to undergo drug and alcohol education as soon as he settled in the one institution. But, unfortunately, so far in his period spent in custody the respondent has been moved from institution to institution.

Having considered the psychologist's report, however, it is apparent that the respondent has at least recognised that he has a drinking problem and has expressed a resolve to do something about it when he is given a regular placement within the prison system. He is a young man who would benefit from the opportunity of extended supervision when he is eventually released, and it is in the community's interest that he have that supervision. In my opinion, there are special circumstances for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).

I propose in all the circumstances the following orders: 
That the appeal be allowed and that the sentence be quashed; in lieu thereof that the respondent be sentenced to a minimum term of three years penal servitude to commence on 15 August 1997 and to expire on 14 August 2000, and an additional term of two years to commence on 15 August 2000.

I specify 15 August 2000 as being the first date upon which the respondent is to be eligible for release on parole.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by Studdert J, for the reasons which he has advanced. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree. 
McINERNEY J: The orders of the Court therefore will be those proposed by Studdert J. * * * 
