

Re-Car Consolidated Industries (Newcastle) Pty Limited versus Horner Matter No
Ca 40667/96 [1997] NSWSC 425 (23 September 1997) 
Re-Car Consolidated Industries (Newcastle) Pty Limited v Ernest Colin Horner 
CA 40667/96 CC 32117/94 September 1997 
Powell JA, Cole JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Compensation Court - O'Meally J 
FILE NO/S: CA40667/96;CC32117/94 
DELIVERED: 23 September 1997 
HEARING DATE: 25 August 1997 
PARTIES: RE-CAR CONSOLIDATED INDUSTRIES PTY LIMITED versus Ernest Colin HORNER 
JUDGMENT OF: POWELL JA, COLE JA, BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: H G Shore 
Respondent: P R Capelin QC/S B Lowe 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Sparke Helmore 
Respondent: Moroney Rutter & Mantach 
CATCHWORDS: HEARING loss - boilermaker's deafness - due to noise exposure - questions of compensation - Workers Compensation Act 1926 , 1987 - Rodios versus Trefle [(1937) 11 NSW WCR 290] principle applicable and correctly applied by trial judge. Rodios versus Trefle principle not impliedly repealed by amendments to Workers Compensation Act 1926 or 1987 Act. regarding (partial) binaural hearing loss - meaning of "loss" considered. 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 28 
RE-CAR CONSOLIDATED INDUSTRIES (NEWCASTLE) PTY LIMITED v HORNER 
JUDGMENT 
POWELL JA: I agree with Cole JA. 
RE-CAR CONSOLIDATED INDUSTRIES (NEWCASTLE) PTY LIMITED v Coin Ernest HORNER 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: The respondent worker, Colin Ernest Horner, brought proceedings in the Compensation Court of New South Wales seeking compensation pursuant to s.66 and s.67 [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) . The claim was in respect of hearing loss referred to as boilermaker's deafness. It was established by a certificate issued by a medical panel pursuant to a reference in accordance with ss.72 and 131 of the Act that the worker suffered an 8.5% binaural loss of hearing due to noise exposure. It was also determined by the medical panel that as a result of otosclerosis, he had an 85% loss of hearing in his left ear and 40% loss of hearing in his right ear. The parties agreed that such loss constituted a binaural hearing loss of 49% as a result of otosclerosis. 
In the s.66 claim the appellant contended that the appropriate award of compensation was 8.5% of $84,760, being the sum determined in accordance with s.66(1),(2) and the Table to Part 3, Division 4. However the respondent contended that, as the worker had 100% of binaural hearing reduced by 49% resulting from otosclerosis, giving a residual hearing capacity of 51%, the appropriate calculation for his permanent injury in accordance with s.66 was .5% of the residual hearing capacity of 51%, producing a loss of hearing of .67%. This contention was based upon the decision of the Full Court in
Rodios versus Trefle.1 There, Davidson J, with whom Stephen and Owen JJ agreed, said in relation to a claim under s.16 of the 1926 Act: "The section provides for compensation for the loss of sight of one eye, and, in the ordinary use of language, it may be said that in fact an appellant has lost the sight of any eye notwithstanding its original lack of efficiency. It is contended, however, that the generality of the provision is qualified when one considers the definition provided in the section itself of the expression of "loss of". For instance, it is suggested that under the terms of subsection all that may be recovered as compensation where defective sight already existed is a percentage of the full amount equal to the percentage of the diminution of the full efficient use of the sight. It is open to argument that subsection (5) only applies to partial and not to total loss of sight which is covered by the preceding subsection. But in any event, as regards loss of sight, the table contains a footnote applicable to that condition alone. If it has a different meaning to subsection (5) it appears to me that the latter should be excluded from application to loss of sight , whilst, if it were intended merely as a repetition it is most difficult to see why it was ever included. The item in the table preceding that of loss of sight of any eye suggests that subsection (5) does not apply. It refers to loss of sight of one eye with serious diminution of the sight of the other. In such circumstances as those it could hardly be possible to consider questions of degrees of efficiency as it clearly relates to the loss of the sight of one eye as it existed, and diminution in the sight of the other as it existed. It is true that the footnote to the table must be considered in determining the meaning of the section in its applicability to loss of sight, but, as I read it, what it is intended to convey is that where a person with defective sight suffers a partial loss of what he actually had he may claim a percentage of the full amount equal to the percentage of the diminution in what already existed. For instance, assuming that he had only sixty per cent. of efficiency and by the injury that degree was reduced to thirty per cent., he would have suffered a loss of fifty per cent. and could claim that percentage of the full amount in the table."[2] 
O'Meally J upheld the respondent's contention making an award pursuant to s.66 in favour of the respondent in the sum of $14,129.49.

His Honour also awarded the sum of $3,500 in respect of a claim for pain and suffering pursuant to s.67 of the Act.

The appellant by notice of appeal has challenged each of those two findings.
The issues raised on that notice of appeal were thus the correctness of the applicability of the principles enunciated in Rodios versus Trefle to claims in respect of boilermaker's deafness in circumstances where the worker had not suffered a prior industrial injury but did suffer from a hearing deficit at the time of the occurrence or deemed occurrence of the injury compensable pursuant to s.66, and any consequential operation of s.67.

Whilst this was the matter addressed in the appellant's and respondent's written submissions, in oral argument counsel for the appellant sought to raise two new grounds of appeal. They were, first, that no claim for partial binaural hearing loss was contemplated by or permitted under the 1987 Act, or indeed the 1926 Act, and second, that the principle enunciated in Rodios v
Trefle does not apply and has never been applied in relation to a claim for binaural hearing loss. The submission was that, as distinct from there being shown a legislative intention to repeal the application of the Rodios v
Trefle principle in its application to a binaural hearing loss claim, rather there had never been any legislative intention that the principle apply to partial binaural loss hearing claims. A question arose whether the Court should permit those two matters to be argued on appeal, it being accepted that they had not been raised in the court below. Counsel for the appellant indicated that if the Court permitted them to be raised, there was nothing his client wished to put in opposition to an order that, if the appeal succeeded on either ground, his client would bear the costs of the appeal. Senior
Counsel for the respondent did not advance submissions opposing leave being granted to argue those matters, and did not seek an adjournment to address them. The respondent did not seek to advance any prejudice if leave were granted. In those circumstances leave should be granted to the appellant to raise the two additional grounds subject to the filing of an appropriately amended notice of appeal. It is convenient to address those two new grounds in the order advanced.

Critical to the submission that the workers compensation legislation, be it the 1926 or the 1987 Act does not permit a claim for partial binaural hearing loss, is the decision of the High Court in The Commissioner for Railways v
Bain[3]. The judgment of the majority is found in the judgments of Barwick
CJ, and Menzies J with whom Kitto J agreed. Barwick CJ briefly stated the legislative history of worker's claims for compensation for boilermaker's deafness. His Honour did so against the background of a claim by Mr Bain that he was suffering from a 26.3% binaural hearing loss. The Workers Compensation
Commission made an award in his favour equivalent to 26.3% of the amount set out in the column of the Table to s.16 against the lump sum compensation for the injury "loss of hearing of both ears". It is convenient to set forth the legislative history up to the point of Bain's case as found in the Chief
Justice's reasons: "Prior to June 1951 a worker who sustained an injury, whether traumatic or by way of disease, could only have obtained an award of compensation either for a weekly payment or for a lump sum if total or partial incapacity to work had ensued upon the injury or disease.

However, by reason of the amendment to s.16 effected by Act. No.20 of 1951, a worker who suffered traumatic injury in the requisite circumstances, or contracted a compensable disease (being, or resulting in either case in, an "injury" in the first column of the table in s.16), after 27th June 1951 could obtain an award for a lump sum payment under s.16 without total or partial incapacity having resulted.

Upon a worker, suffering from boilermaker's deafness, but not incapacitated thereby, seeking against his current employer a lump sum award after this amendment in respect of that disability, it was held that boilermaker's deafness was neither a disease nor a disease of gradual onset within the meaning of s.7(4) of the Act. It was also held that non-incapacitating boilermaker's deafness which had manifested itself before the passing of the amending Act was not in any case compensable.

The amendment of 1957(No.22 of 1957), effective in April 1957, provided that boilermaker's deafness should be deemed for the purposes of s.7(4) of the Act to be a disease of such a nature as to be contracted by a gradual process.

It was however, decided in 1960 in the case of Coates versus Commissioner for
Railways ..., that none the less, a boilermaker with boilermaker's deafness who had suffered no incapacity could not obtain compensation under s.16 from his current or last employer as for a disease of gradual onset because sub-s(5) of s.16 made resulting incapacity necessary for compensation to be payable by such employer in respect of such a disease.

Later, s.3(1)(c) of Act No. 58 of 1960 inserted the following sub-section into s.16: "(1A) Where an injury mentioned in the first column of the said table is a disease which is of such a nature as to be contracted by a gradual process and which has not resulted in incapacity, such injury shall, for the purpose of determining a worker's right to the amount indicated in the second column of the said table, be deemed to have happened at the time when such worker makes his claim for compensation.

In this sub-section `disease' includes the condition known as `boilermaker's deafness' and any deafness of the like origin ...".

It was after this amendment, but in respect of the full extent of his loss of hearing due to boilermaker's deafness that the respondent brought the present application".[4] 
After considering what was said to be `useful speculations' as to what may have been in the legislature's mind in amending s.16 by inserting ss.(1A), his
Honour addressed the language used by the legislature to determine that intention. The relevant portions of the section being construed were as follows: "Compensation for certain injuries .(1) A worker who has received an injury mentioned in the first column of the table hereunder set forth shall be entitled to receive from his employer by way of compensation for that injury in addition to any other compensation prescribed by this Act, the amount indicated in respect of that injury in the second column of that table. 
Except in respect of an injury to which section 7(4B) applies, where an injury mentioned in the first column of the said table is a disease which is of such a nature as to be contracted by a gradual process and which has not resulted in incapacity, such injury shall, for the purpose of determining a worker's right to the amount indicated in the second column of the said table, be deemed to have happened at the time when such worker makes his claim for compensation. 
In this subsection "disease" includes total or partial loss of sight which is of gradual onset." 
The Table to s.16 headed "nature of injury", contained the following entries: "Loss of sight of both eyes ... $31,000 *Loss of sight of one eye .. $12,850 
Loss of hearing of both ears .. $18,950 
Loss of hearing of one ear ... $ 8,950 *For the partial loss of sight of one eye there shall be payable such percentage of the amount that would be payable for the loss of the sight thereof as is equal to the percentage of the diminution of sight. 
For the partial loss of hearing of one ear there shall be payable such percentage of the amount that would be payable for the total loss of the hearing thereof as is equal to the percentage of the diminution of hearing." 
His Honour held that none of the injuries in the table was a disease "though perhaps, all of them might in some circumstances be the result of a disease".
As s.16(1A) spoke of a "disease of gradual onset", his Honour felt it impossible to construe s.16(1A) literally. His Honour continued: "The amendment therefore provides, it seems to me, that if you find that a worker has suffered, or is suffering, an injury of the kind listed in the first column of the table which is not incapacitating but which is the result of a disease of gradual onset, then that injury shall be deemed to have happened at the time the worker makes his claim for compensation. To take a simple case by way of illustration, where the complete loss of hearing of both ears is the result of boilermaker's deafness, there will be an injury which is the result of a disease of gradual onset because the final paragraph of the amending section makes boilermaker's deafness a disease and, as I would construe the whole sub-section, a disease of a nature to be contracted by a gradual process for the purposes of s.16; and because "loss of hearing of both ears" is an injury appearing in the first column of the table. That loss of hearing of both ears will then be treated as having happened, as it were, at one blow, at the time the worker makes his claim for compensation. The injury which thus becomes compensable is the loss of hearing of both ears; and by reason of s.7(4) his current or last employer becomes liable if the disease - here boilermaker's deafness - was incidental to the employment of a boilermaker."[5] 
Having found that the applicant was entitled "to an award in respect of the condition of his hearing at the date of his application" his Honour addressed an argument based upon the construction of the entries in the Table, and the notes thereto which I have quoted, to the effect that whilst they contemplated the bringing of the claim and the making of an award for a partial loss of hearing to one ear, no such award was contemplated or permitted in respect of partial binaural hearing loss. That argument was based upon the construction of the note to the table attended by the star in the case of sight and the dagger in the case of hearing which, in terms, applied only to loss of sight or hearing in one eye or ear. His Honour said: "He was suffering from partial deafness of each ear and thus could possibly be said to be suffering partial loss of hearing of both ears, but perhaps more accurately, to be suffering from partial loss of hearing in each ear. Was this an injury, or were these injuries mentioned in the first column of the table?
The injuries mentioned in that column of the table which can be said to be relevant are: (a) loss of hearing of both ears; (b) loss of hearing of one ear.

There is a footnote to the table in relation to the loss of hearing of one ear, its connection with the injury set out the first column of the table being indicated by a dagger. This footnote provides that for the partial loss of hearing of one ear there shall be payable such percentage of the amount as would be payable for the total loss of hearing as is equal to the percentage of the diminution of hearing. But partial loss of the hearing of one ear is not expressly set out as an injury in the first column of the table. The described injury is "loss of hearing of one ear", or as the footnote would paraphrase it, "total loss of hearing of one ear".

A question arises as to whether the footnote has the effect of inserting in the table before "loss of hearing of one ear" the words "total or partial" and of amending the relevant amount payable in the second column of the table to read "... or such percentage thereof as there has been loss of hearing in the ear". Though I find some difficulty in so reading the table, I have come to think that that is the meaning to be given to the combination of the statement of the injury in the first column of the table and the footnote which is to be read with it. I am therefore prepared to hold that the injury described in the first column should for presently relevant purposes be treated as being "total or partial loss of hearing in one ear".

However, there is no such footnote in the case of the "loss of hearing of both ears". Sub-section (5) of s.16 provides that for the purpose of the table the expression "loss of" includes the "permanent loss of the efficient use of" and that a percentage of the prescribed amount payable, equal to the percentage of the diminution of the full efficient use, may be awarded in lieu of the full amount. But this provision, designed for the case of injury to a member of the body, is inappropriate and, in my opinion, inapplicable to the case of "loss of hearing". One might speak of the loss of the efficient use of an ear or of both ears but scarcely of the loss of the efficient use of hearing of an ear or of both ears. The item "loss of hearing" is a description of the result of the efficient use of the ear. There is, therefore, in my view, neither an injury described in the first column of the table as "partial loss of hearing of both ears", not can such injury be constructed out of the other provisions of s.16."[6] 
Having referred to the decision in Coates versus Commissioner for Railways[7] his
Honour continued: "Apparently, following the Supreme Court's decision in Coates' Case (1) in , the Commission has continued under the new table the practice which that decision required it to follow under the former table. Thus a percentage loss of binaural hearing is assessed in cases where there is only a partial loss of hearing involving each ear. This, in my opinion, was not justified after the amendment of the description of the items in the table.

In conformity with this practice, the "injury" in this case is expressed in the award of the learned Chairman, as it was in the expert evidence before him, as a percentage loss of the hearing of both ears, as a loss of binaural hearing. I gather from the evidence attached to the case stated that individual percentages of the loss of hearing of each ear were determined and were then combined in some fashion to give a percentage loss of hearing of both ears. It seems to me that this is not the sum of the loss of hearing of each ear but is the product of some computation which gives the resultant loss of hearing of both ears consequential upon the loss of hearing of each ear. It seems to me that because there is no tabled injury "partial loss of hearing of both ears", an award in the terms made by the learned Chairman cannot be supported. But, in my opinion, an award could be made for the partial loss of hearing of each ear because, for the reasons I have given, the relevant injury mentioned in the first column of the table can be treated as "total or partial loss of hearing of one ear". In so deciding I am conscious that the provision for partial loss of hearing of one ear may have been inserted upon the assumption that it would apply only in cases where the hearing of the other ear was unaffected. But the table does not in terms confine the provision as to partial loss of hearing to such a case.

In the result, I am in agreement with the construction placed upon sub-s.(1A) of s.16 by the Full Court and find the reasons given by Walsh J for adopting that construction satisfactory. I realize, as did his Honour, that this construction provides no answer to situations which may yet occur and to some of which reference is made in his judgment. But that is the result of the course adopted by the legislature and those situations must be left to be dealt with if and when they arise. The difficulties which they occasion would not be wholly avoided by the construction for which the appellant contends."[8] 
With the supporting judgments of Kitto and Menzies JJ providing the majority view, Taylor and Windeyer JJ dissenting, the court answered the question in the stated case to the effect that the worker Bain was not entitled to the award made by the Commission being an award for binaural hearing loss but added to that answer: "But there was evidence on which an award could properly be made under s.16 of the Worker's Compensation Act in favour of the applicant in respect of his partial loss of hearing of each ear."[9] 
The matter was remitted to the Commission to be dealt with accordingly.

The appellant contends that the majority view of the High Court in Bain constitutes binding authority that absent a note to a table authorising the award of a proportion of the table sum in respect of loss of hearing of both ears, the 1926 Act did not permit the making of an award in respect of partial binaural hearing loss. That was undoubtedly so immediately following Bain.

However by the Workers' Compensation (Amendment) Act 1966 [10] there was introduced s.16(5A). That subsection provided: "(5A)(a) In this subsection - "Appropriate amount" means the amount of compensation that would, but for this subsection, be payable under this section for an injury being a total loss of sight, of hearing or of a part of the body mentioned in the first column of the said table, as the case may be.
 "Loss of function" means permanent diminution or permanent and total deprivation of sight, of hearing, or of the full efficient use of a part of the body referred to in the said table.
 "Occupational disease" means the condition known as boilermaker's deafness, or any deafness of the like origin; total or partial loss of sight which is of gradual onset; or any disease which is of such a nature as to be contracted by a gradual process.

If a worker, after having on one or more occasions (whether before or after the commencement of the Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act 1966) received or become entitled to receive compensation for an injury (in this section called a "prior injury") being an occupational disease, suffers a further loss of function in respect of the same occupational disease, he shall be deemed to have received a further injury which, except in respect of an injury to which section 7(4B) applies, shall be deemed to have happened at the time when the worker makes a claim for compensation for that further loss of function.

Subject to this subsection, a worker who suffers such a further loss of function as is referred to in paragraph (b) shall be entitled to receive from his employer in respect of that further injury, in addition to any other compensation prescribed by this Act, a percentage, calculated in accordance with paragraph (d), of the appropriate amount indicated in the second column of the said table.

The percentage referred to in paragraph (c) shall be the difference between the total percentage of loss of function, in respect of the relevant occupational disease, from which the worker was suffering immediately after the injury in respect of which the claim is made and - where the worker has had only one prior injury, the percentage of loss of function from which he was suffering, in respect of the relevant occupational disease, immediately after that prior injury; or where the worker has had more than one prior injury, the total percentage of loss of function from which he was suffering, in respect of the relevant occupational disease, immediately after the later or, as the case may be, the latest of those prior injuries.

Where a worker suffers such a further loss of function as is referred to in paragraph (b) he shall not be entitled not receive compensation for that further injury under any provision of this section other than this subsection." 
The respondent to this appeal contended that this was the legislature's response to the decision in Bain and that it was to be construed as permitting a claim in respect of a binaural hearing loss. That was said to flow from the definitions of "appropriate amount", "loss of function", and "occupational disease", coupled with the terms of s.(5A)(b). The use of the expression "diminution" in contradistinction to "total deprivation" in relation to both sight and hearing in the definition of loss of function made clear that partial claims were contemplated, and not just in relation to a partial loss of sight or hearing of one eye or in one ear because the table referred "loss of hearing of both ears". Subsection (b) dealt with "loss of function" not just loss, be it total or partial, of bodily parts.
Boilermaker's deafness was defined to be an "occupational disease" and in respect of such disease the legislature contemplated the possibility of successive claims for additional "loss of functions". It addressed a problem noted by several judges in the High Court and Full Court concerning difficulties of construction in the event of there being successive claims for progressive partial losses. That is addressed in s.s.(c), (d) and (e). Having regard to those subsections the legislature contemplated that a claim could be brought for a percentage "loss of hearing of both ears".

In my view that submission is correct. There is no restriction in the definitions in subsection (5A) to claims only in respect of partial loss of sight or hearing to one eye or of one ear. The table provides for payment of compensation for "loss of hearing of both ears" and s.s.(b) to (e) inclusive make clear that there can be claims for partial "loss of function" in respect of an occupational disease. "Loss of function" is defined to mean partial loss, as the word "diminution" makes clear. In my view the effect of the introduction of s.s.(5A) was, in the case of diminished sight to both eyes or hearing to both ears, to permit a claim pursuant to s.16. Thus, thereafter a claim for partial binaural hearing loss was permissible under the 1926 Act.
Section 2(2) of the Workers' Compensation Amendment Act 1966 provided that s.s.(5A) applied to and in respect of injuries received before as well as to those received after the commencement of the amending Act.

If the above construction be correct, it would be surprising if the legislature intended by enacting the 1987 Act to revert to the position found by the High Court in Bain that there could not be an award for partial binaural hearing loss.

In the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) the relevant items in the Table to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/index.html#p3),
Division 4 are: "Hearing loss: 
Loss of hearing of both ears 
Loss of hearing of one ear".

The [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) introduced a different regime for non-economic loss compensation. Whereas the Act had provided for compensation to be paid to a worker who had received "an injury", Part 3 Division 4 provided for payment of compensation for "loss" mentioned in the Table to that Division resulting from injury. "Loss" was defined in s.65 in the following terms: "(1) In this division: "loss", in relation to a thing, means: the loss of that thing; or the permanent loss of use, or of the efficient use, of that thing.

In this Division, a reference to a loss mentioned in the Table to this
Division includes a reference to: the permanent impairment of the back, neck or pelvis or any other permanent impairment added to the Table; and severe facial disfigurement or severe bodily disfigurement; and permanent brain damage, and a disease mentioned in that Table".

Although counsel for the appellant initially submitted that loss of hearing was a "disease" mentioned in the Table, that submission was withdrawn. It is plain that the reference to "disease" in s.65(2)(d) is a reference to the item in the Table headed: "Disease: 
HIV infection (Human Immunodeficiency Virus infection).

AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome)." 
Section 65(2)(d), s.67A which deals with HIV and AIDS, and the disease entry in the Table which I have quoted were all introduced by the WorkCover
Legislation Amendment Act 1995 [11].

Section 65(4) provides: "For the avoidance of doubt, the interpretation provisions following the Table to this Division form part of the Table and apply to the interpretation of the losses mentioned in the Table. This subsection is taken to have applied from the commencement of this Division." 
Section 67 headed "Compensation for pain and suffering", provides: "(1) A worker who has suffered a loss mentioned in the Table to this Division (or 2 or more or any such losses as a result of the same injury) is entitled to receive from the worker's employer by way of compensation for pain and suffering resulting from the loss or all those losses, in addition to any other compensation under this Act, an amount not exceeding $66,200 ...

The maximum amount of compensation under this section is payable only in a most extreme case and the amount payable in any other case shall be reasonably proportionate to that maximum amount having regard to the degree and duration of pain and suffering and the severity of the loss or losses".

There are qualifying provisions within s.67 restricting payments.

Also introduced by the WorkCover Legislation Amendment Act 1995 was s.67(1A)[12]. That subsection provides: "Because there is a distinction between "injury" and "loss resulting from an injury" (and compensation is payable under this section only for pain and suffering resulting from a loss), the pain and suffering for which compensation is payable under this section does not include pain and suffering that results from the injury but not from the loss".

That subsection emphasises the change of regime from the 1926 Act.

Section 68 addresses "Proportionate loss of use". It provides: "(1) If a loss suffered by a worker consists of the loss of a proportion (but not all) of a thing mentioned in the Table to this Division, a percentage of the compensation payable for the total loss of the thing equal to the percentage lost by the worker is payable as compensation under s.66." 
There was also introduced by the WorkCover Legislation Amendment Act 1995 s.69A[13] that section provides: "69A No compensation for less than 6% hearing loss 
There is no entitlement to compensation under section 66 for a loss of hearing (the present loss) due to boilermaker's deafness if the worker's total hearing loss due to boilermakers is less than 6%. The worker's total hearing loss is the aggregate of the present loss and all previous losses of hearing due to boilermakers deafness.

Once a worker has been paid compensation under section 66 for a loss or further loss of hearing due to boilermakers deafness (whether the compensation was paid before or after the commencement of this section) the worker has no entitlement to compensation under section 66 for any further loss of hearing due to boilermakers deafness unless that further loss is at least 5%. This subsection is capable of applying to a worker on more than one occasion.

The fact that compensation is not payable for a loss or further loss of hearing because of this section does not prevent notice of injury being given or a claim being made in respect of that loss or further loss, and does not affect the operation of section 17 in respect of that loss or further loss (if and when the worker's total hearing loss reaches 6% or that further loss reaches 5%).

An example of the operation of this section is as follows (assume that all hearing losses mentioned are due to boilermakers deafness): 
A worker suffers a hearing loss of 4% (the first hearing loss that the worker has suffered). No compensation is payable under section 66 for the loss because it is less than 6%, though notice of injury can be given or a claim can be made for the hearing loss.

The worker suffers a further hearing loss of 4%, bringing the total loss to 8%. The total loss has now passed the 6% threshold and compensation is payable for the full 8%. Compensation for the initial 4% hearing loss will be payable by the earlier employer if the worker made a claim or gave notice of injury for that initial hearing loss.

The worker suffers a further hearing loss of 4%. The worker is not entitled to compensation for the 4% further loss (because it is less than the % further loss threshold). Again, notice of injury can be given or claim can be made for that further loss even though compensation is not payable for it.

The worker suffers a further hearing loss of 3%. The total further loss has now passed the 5% threshold and compensation is payable for the full 7% further loss. Each time the worker suffers a further loss of hearing after compensation has been paid for any previous loss, no compensation is payable for the further loss until it reaches 5%.

For the purposes of determining the percentage of loss of hearing due to boilermakers deafness, that loss of hearing is to be determined as a proportionate loss of hearing of both ears, even if the loss is in one ear only. The regulations may prescribe a method for calculating the proportionate loss of hearing of both ears.

A legal practitioner or agent who acts for a worker on a claim for compensation for loss of hearing due to boilermakers deafness is not entitled to recover any costs from the worker or the employer in connection with acting on the claim if no compensation is payable on the claim because the worker's total hearing loss due to boilermaker's deafness is less than 6% (even if compensation subsequently becomes payable because the worker's loss of hearing reaches 6% as a result of further hearing loss).

A worker who refuses or fails to submit himself or herself for, or who obstructs, an examination requires under section 129 or 131 in connection with a claim for which no compensation is payable under section 66 because of this section is (for the purposes of that claim) presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary to have no hearing loss due to boilermakers deafness.

A reference in this section and in section 69B to boilermaker's deafness includes a reference to any deafness of similar origin.

For the purposes of the operation of section 71 in relation to compensation for loss of hearing, a reference in that section to compensation that becomes payable under this Division includes a reference to compensation that would have become payable were it not for the operation of this section." 
By cl.106 of Schedule 1 to the WorkCover Legislation Amendment Act 1995 [14] it was provided that s.69A applied to a claim for compensation for loss of hearing made on or after 10 November 1995 even if the injury was received before that date but did not apply to a claim for compensation made or court proceedings commenced prior to that date. It thus had no application to the present claim, but the provisions of s.69A are instructive of the legislature's intention. In particular s.69A(5) makes plain that the legislature intended that a claim for pain and suffering consequent upon a loss due to boilermaker's deafness was to be treated, where the claim was for partial loss, as a proportion of loss of hearing of both ears. That was so even if the loss of hearing was, in truth, in one ear only.

The Table to Part 3, Division 4 in relevant respects remains in the form in which it was enacted. It provides: "COMPENSATION FOR PERMANENT INJURIES 
Nature of Injury 
Percentage of maximum amount payable  
Hearing Loss :  
Loss of hearing of both ears ...   
Loss of hearing of one ear ...   
The Table does not contain footnotes similar to those in the 1926 Act dealing with partial loss of hearing of one ear, or of sight of one eye. Proportionate loss of use is, as I have indicated, addressed in s.68.

The "thing mentioned in the Table" referred to in s.66, in respect of which there may be suffered a loss as contemplated by s.65, being either of that thing or of the permanent or efficient use of that thing, relevant to hearing loss is "hearing of both ears" or "hearing of one ear". The legislature in enacting the concept of "loss" in s.65, and providing for the payment of compensation for pain and suffering flowing from that loss, seems to have had in mind the passage in Barwick CJ's judgment in Bain where his Honour said: "One might speak of the loss of the efficient use of an ear or of both ears but scarcely of the loss of the efficient use of hearing of an ear or both ears. The item "loss of hearing" is a description of the result of the efficient use of the ear."[15] 
Whilst Barwick CJ held that, under the 1926 Act, there was thus no injury resulting in a right to compensation, the legislature has by the 1987 Act provided for payment of compensation not for injury , but for the loss flowing from the injury. "Loss of hearing" in the Table is, as Barwick CJ said, and as the definition in s.65(1)(b) makes clear, loss of the efficient use of one or both ears. Relevantly the "thing" is thus "hearing of both ears" and any loss in that respect, be it total or partial, attracts compensation pursuant to ss.66 or 68.

The appellant's first contention that the legislation under the 1926 Act after the introduction of s.16(5A) did not permit a claim for partial binaural hearing loss should be rejected, as should the submission that the 1987 Act does not permit such a claim.

The second submission was that the principle in Rodios versus Trefle does not apply and has never been applied to a claim for partial binaural hearing loss.
It is important to determine what the so-called "principle" is. The "principle" is that, when calculating compensable loss in respect of a partial loss in respect of an item referred to in the table to s.16 of the 1926 Act, (or the Table to Part 3, Division 4 of the 1987 Act), loss is assessed on the assumption that the available usable faculty prior to the compensable injury is treated as 100% of the faculty for the purposes of calculating a percentage of loss. Thus, as Davidson J said, a worker with a 60% available sight which vision is reduced by injury to 30%, suffers a 50% loss for the purposes of the
Table.

That "principle" is not dependent upon notes to the s.16 Table. It is simply a matter of determining whether the base for the calculation for percentage loss is an assumed 100% available sight or hearing even though the worker pre- injury has, for example, only 60% of sight or hearing, or whether one treats the percentage calculation of loss as grounded in the reality that the worker has pre-injury only 60% available sight or hearing.

I can see no reason why, assuming the 1926 Act permitted a claim for binaural hearing loss, as in my view it did after the introduction of s.16(5A), that principle should not apply to such a claim.

Whether, in fact, it has been applied seems to me to be irrelevant. It would seem that is was applied in the calculation of binaural hearing loss in
Commissioner for Railways versus Coates[16]. The appellant's second submission should be rejected.

The third submission, advanced in the alternative to the first two was that, assuming contrary to the first two submissions that a claim for partial binaural hearing loss was permissible under the 1987 Act, the legislature had indicated an intention that the principle in Rodios versus Trefle should not apply in the calculation of that loss.

I am not able to detect in the 1987 Act as originally enacted any legislative intent that the principle in Rodios versus Trefle not apply to calculation of compensation for partial loss. Section 68 addresses such partial loss but it says nothing concerning the base against which the percentage loss is to be determined. It does not say, for example, that a worker who pre-injury has only 60% binaural hearing which is by boilermaker's deafness reduced to 30% is entitled to only a 30% proportion of compensation payable for total loss, rather than 50%. The matter is simply not addressed.

Although the matter was not argued before us, presumably because s.69A has no application to this claim, my provisional view is that s.69A also does not address the base from which the percentage loss is to be determined. Section
A assumes that the total loss in respect of which compensation is to be paid is due to boilermaker's deafness. Section 69A(5) provides that the "percentage of loss of hearing due to boilermaker's deafness ... is to be determined as a proportionate loss of hearing of both ears...". It does not describe the base from which that proportionate loss is to be calculated. However I prefer to reserve my decision regarding the proper interpretation of s.69A until the matter rises for determination and is the subject of full argument.

Rodios versus Trefle is longstanding authority for the proposition that when calculating a proportionate loss, one regards the industrially useful pre- injury state as though it were 100% of the "thing". The percentage reduction for which compensation is payable pursuant to s.16 and the Table was calculated on that basis. A similar approach to construction of s.16 and the
Table under the 1926 Act was adopted by the Full Court in Bennett versus General
Motors Holden Limited.[17] Jordan CJ with whom Davidson and Halse Rogers JJ agreed said: "It was contended that where the part affected was already defective, and capacity to use it has been only permanently diminished, and not wholly destroyed by the injury, the standard for determining the proportion of the table amount which is payable is the proportion of which the permanent diminution bears to the full capacity of a normal man to use a perfect part, and not that which it bears to the capacity which, before the injury, the particular worker had to use the defective part. I am unable to agree with this contention. If actual or constructive loss of the part occurs, the worker is clearly entitled to receive the table amount however defective the part may have been before the injury. The obvious purpose of sub-s(5) is to confer upon the worker, in the case of the permanent loss of part of the use of an already defective part, a corresponding proportion of the total amount that would have been receivable if the defective part had been totally lost. Thus, if a worker had lost a finger in early infancy or whilst on holiday, and subsequently lost his defective hand as the result of a compensatable injury, he would be entitled to receive ... the whole sum allowed by the table for the loss of a hand. If he permanently lost half the use of his defective hand, he would be entitled to half that sum.

In my opinion, it makes no difference if the finger was lost as the result of a compensatable injury in respect of which full compensation was received under s.16. If the defective hand is subsequently lost, the worker is clearly entitled to the full table amount for the loss of a hand. If the usability of his defective hand is permanently diminished by half, he is entitled to receive half that amount. It is contended that this would enable a worker in effect to receive payment twice over for the same injury. This may be so, but the point is immaterial if the result necessarily flows from the language of the legislature."[18] 
In King versus Hayward[19] the High Court approved of Rodios versus Trefle and
Bennett versus General Motors Holden Limited in upholding an award of 100% of the
Table sum to a worker who, having previously suffered injury depriving him of % of his sight, suffered a further 5% loss. Latham CJ said: "I agree with what was said by Mr Justice Davidson in Rodios versus Trefle when he said that "the table does not make any distinction between eyes of full normal vision and eyes of impaired efficiency". I would add even where that impaired efficiency is due to prior injury. I think also his Honour the Chief
Justice expressed the principle rightly, if I may say so, in relation to another illustration, namely loss of a finger, in the case of Bennett v
General Motors Holden Limited".[20] 
In King versus Hayward, Starke J, after agreeing with the interpretation placed upon the section by Latham CJ said "I can find no answer to the construction which the learned Chief Justice put upon the provisions of the [Workers
Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). They require the attention of the legislature".

There was not, however, any amendment to the Act negating the effect of the
Rodios versus Trefle concept.

In 1963 the Full Court in Coates versus Commissioner for Railways[21] adverted to some problems related to injuries of gradual onset, such as boilermaker's deafness or progressive reduction in sight. In so doing some practical difficulties in addressing claims for compensation in that regard and in applying the "principle of Rodios versus Trefle", which was not then challenged, were addressed. Shortly afterwards in 1966 the legislature introduced sections (5A). Whilst s.s.(5A) addressed the partial loss of function claims it did not explicitly or implicitly render the principle in Rodios versus Trefle inapplicable.

The subsection is not dissimilar to s.71 of the 1987 Act which provides: "71(1) If: compensation has been paid or becomes payable under this Division (or section 16 of the former Act) for a loss, being: the loss of a proportion (but not all) of a thing; and an occupational disease; and the worker suffers a further loss of that thing, compensation is payable under this Division for the further loss, but only the proportion of that further loss of the thing shall be taken into account in calculating the compensation payable.

Any such further losses may be taken into account for the purpose of determining whether compensation is payable for pain and suffering because of the operation of section 67(2).

In this section: "occupational disease" means: loss of hearing due to boilermaker's deafness or any deafness of a similar origin; total or partial loss of sight which is of gradual onset; and any disease which is of such a nature as to be contracted by a gradual process." 
It is to be observed that each of ss.16(5A) of the 1926 Act, and s.71 of the Act address the situation only in relation to two successive compensable injuries. They do not address the circumstance of a second injury diminishing a residue of hearing or sight resulting from a prior non-compensable event.
They thus do not relate to the situation with which this appeal deals. Neither s.16(5A) nor s.71 address the determination of the base in percentage terms from which the percentage loss is to be calculated.

In K B Hutcherson Pty Limited versus Correia[22], the High Court distinguished
Bennett versus General Motors Holden Limited and King versus Hayward as being not applicable to the circumstances of that case. The Court said, in relation to those two cases: "But those were instances of successive injuries, in the first case to an arm and in the second case to an eye. The principle in those situations is clear enough but it has no application in the present case."[23] 
The passage contains no criticism of the enunciation of the principle in
Rodios versus Trefle as adopted in the two authorities referred to.

There thus remains the statement of principle in Rodios versus Trefle, endorsed by the High Court, and unqualified by any of the many amendments to the 1926
Act, or the 1987 Act or amendments thereto. As I can find no legislative intent that the principle of 60 years standing should not apply, in my view
O'Meally J was correct to apply the principle in Rodios versus Trefle in the present case.

The appellant has advanced a number of submissions to the contrary. It contended that there "is no room for the application of the Rodios versus Trefle doctrine to the loss of hearing entries in the Table". This submission is based, in part, upon the provisions of s.17 of the 1987 Act which introduced special provisions related to loss of hearing claims. It specified dates upon which an injury is "deemed to have happened". It is understandable that there should be such provisions in relation to injuries of gradual onset. However the purpose of s.17 would appear to be twofold, first, to fix the date of injury and to specify which of successive employers is to be primarily liable to the worker, and, second, to enable that primarily liable employer to have recourse to earlier employers for contribution. That is the general import of s.17(1). Section 17(2) is a provision which makes clear that the provisions in s.17(1) do apply in relation to the condition known as "boilermaker's deafness", it being determined by the statute that the loss of hearing so occasioned is " deemed to be losses of hearing which are of such a nature as to be caused by a gradual process". Section 17 does not speak of the manner in which the quantum of compensation calculated in relation to a s.66 claim is to be determined. It thus says nothing concerning the application of the Rodios v Trefle.

Second, the respondent relied upon the provisions of s.16(5A) of the 1926 Act, and s.71, which I have previously addressed.

Third, it was contended that because the legislature had by s.70, and the prior s.16(5B), determined the manner in which the effect of presbycusis is to be taken into account, that indicates an intention that the quantum of loss calculated in accordance with ss. 65 and 66 and the Table is to be calculated "as a percentage of the maximum amount from time to time available as the
Table fund, and not otherwise". In my view all s.70 does is determine that some portion of hearing loss in respect of persons over a given age is to be attributed to presbycusis, and indicates how that quantum of loss of hearing is to be determined. It simply diminishes the amount of the hearing loss for which compensation can be claimed.

Fourth, it was contended that the existence of a medical panel system which, in a binding way, determines the amount of hearing loss in percentage terms excludes the operation of the Rodios versus Trefle principle. I do not think that it does. The medical panel system is simply a method of determining through qualified persons and in a binding way the medical issue of extent of loss. It says nothing concerning the manner in which the percentage of loss so determined is to be applied in calculating the quantum of loss. The enactment of the 1987 Act, and subsequent amendments by the legislature with presumed knowledge of the Rodios versus Trefle principle, diminishes the force of this submission.

Finally, it was contended that, by introducing provisions such as s.69A which negates the right to compensation where hearing loss is less than 6%, the legislature has made clear an intention to exclude small claims. Applying the
Rodios versus Trefle principle may, as in this case, enable a multiplication, here a doubling, of the determined factor for hearing loss when calculating the amount of quantum payable in respect of s.66 claim. Thus, implicitly,
Parliament must have intended that the principle no longer apply for to permit it to apply may negate the threshold which s.69A contemplates.

I do not think this submission should be upheld. Section 69A(1) provides: `There is no entitlement to compensation under section 66 for a loss of hearing (the "present loss") due to boilermakers deafness if the worker's total hearing loss due to boilermakers deafness is less than 6%. The worker's "total hearing loss" is the aggregate of the present loss and all previous losses of hearing due to boilermakers deafness." 
It is clear that the section does not address circumstances where the "present loss" is due to both boilermaker's deafness and deafness from other causes.
The section addresses only hearing losses due to boilermaker's deafness which is less than 6%. It thus has no application to the present claim. As I have said, I prefer to reserve my view of the proper interpretation of s.69A.

A similar argument was addressed in relation to s.67. Section 67(2) negates the right to compensation for pain and suffering if the compensation "paid or payable" under s.66 for the loss or all of those losses is less than 10% of the maximum from time to time referred to in s.66(1). It is notable that s.67(2) makes the applicability of the section and thus the right to compensation for pain and suffering dependent upon the amount of compensation paid or payable. It does not make it dependent upon the percentage of loss as determined by the medical board. I do not think it can be implied that, having regard to the extant principle in Rodios versus Trefle, the legislature intended to make a s.67 payment dependent upon a medical certificate. If it did, it did not say so. Conversely, I do not think s.67(2) can be construed so as to indicate a sufficiently clear intention on the part of the legislature to abolish the longstanding concept in Rodios versus Trefle. In legislation such as this with a long history, which has been amended on many occasions, replaced by the 1987 Act, which in turn has been amended on very many occasions, there is little room for a court to seek to determine an intricate intention of
Parliament so as to regulate the construction of otherwise clear words.

The appellant sought leave to argue that Clutha versus Danswan[24], New South
Wales department of Technical & Further Education versus Pitt[25] and Cox versus J
A Crockett Pty Limited[26] were wrongly decided. Each of those cases involved an examination of Note(g) in the interpretation provisions to the Table. That
Note has now been repealed. I see no persuasive reason why this Court should now embark upon a re-examination of those cases. That additional burden can be left until an occasion where it is necessary that it be undertaken.

I would be proposed that the appeal be dismissed with costs.

RE-CAR CONSOLIDATED INDUSTRIES (NEWCASTLE) PTY LIMITED versus Colin Ernest HORNER 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Cole JA  <case>; <case>; [(1965) 112 CLR 246] at -253.
 <case>; [(1965) 112 CLR 246] at -257.
 [6] [(1965) 112 CLE 246] at 258-259.
 <case>; [(1965) 112 CLR 246] at -261.
 <case>; [(1965) 112 CLR 246] at 275.
 [10] No.34 1966.
 [11] Act No.89 of 1995, assented 22 December 1995.
 [12] Act No.89 of 1995, assented to 22 December 1995.
 [13] Clause 30, Schedule 1, Act No. 89 of 1995.
 [14] Act No. 89 of 1995, assented to 22 December 1995.
 <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1995) 183 CLR 50] at 54.
 [24] [(1993) 9 NSW CCR 225.] [25] [(1993) 9 NSW CCR 309.] [26] [(1991) 7 NSW CCR 361.] * * * 
