

Re Rico Pty Ltd Matter No 4673/98 [1998] NSWSC 618 (30 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 December 1998 `RE RICO PTY LTD` `4673/98` `30 November 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a receiver of a company that is now in liquidation for an order under <case> of the Corporations Law. That section permits a receiver of a corporation that has been wound up, with the written approval of the liquidator or the approval of the court, to carry on the corporation's business, either generally or as otherwise specified in the approval. 
Section 420C(3) makes it clear that a receiver who carries on the corporation's business under this section does so as agent of the corporation and in his or her capacity as receiver of the property, and makes clear the consequences of that so far as <case> is concerned.

I will state the relevant facts in a broad brush fashion because that is all that is necessary for present purposes. The corporation concerned owed money to the State Bank, which it could not pay, and on 23 April 1998 that bank appointed the plaintiff receiver and manager. The bank's appointment was made pursuant to a charge of 6 April 1983, which charged all the assets and undertakings of the company in favour of the bank. That charge by cl 25(ii) conferred wide powers on any receiver that was appointed. Following voluntary administration, the company went into liquidation on 31 July 1998 with Mr
Thomas Javorsky becoming the liquidator.

The corporation's principal business is the design and construction of engineering plant and equipment pursuant to a contract with Mt Isa Mines
Limited.

The applicant, as receiver, negotiated a continuing contract with Mt Isa Mines
Limited, which has now been fulfilled and which produced a considerable profit to the corporation. The whole of this profit flowed through to the bank as the secured creditor. The plaintiff now wishes to proceed with a second stage of that contract which will enable the company to continue trading, substantially reduce the shortfall to the secured creditor and allow for the continued employment of thirty employees of the company.

It would seem that there is at the moment no real likelihood of any dividend to the unsecured creditors. Even if attempts by the liquidator to recover preferences are wholly successful, and the proposed second stage of the contract is fulfilled, the great probabilities are that there will be nothing for the unsecured creditors. The second stage will, however, produce considerable benefit to the secured creditor and, incidentally, benefit the employees.

The applicant receiver sought the consent of the liquidator. After some correspondence, the liquidator declined to give his consent. His principal reasons appear to be that the proposed second stage of the contract did nothing for the unsecured creditors, but that the second stage, if it went bad, might result in there being further claims against the fund which the liquidator was administering.

As to this, the riposte was that the receiver has taken out insurance which will almost certainly cover any loss situation and that in any event the unsecured creditors are not likely to be affected.

However, the liquidator stuck to the submission that unless there was a benefit to the unsecured creditors there was no reason for him to give his consent. The liquidator does not appear on this application, but the receiver has, at his request, put before the court the correspondence which clearly shows the liquidator's position.

As far as counsel's research and my own have revealed, there has not been a previous decision on the scope of s 420C. The section came into the Corporations Law as a result of the [Corporate Law Reform Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/clra1992225/), effective from 23 June 1993. The Corporate Law Reform Bill is the result of the Harmer
Report and both that report and the Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill are usually looked at to see the scope of the reform.

Mr Newlinds, for the applicant, has shown me the relevant sections of each and these seem to indicate that s 420C was intended to deal with the problem that the receiver's role as agent of the company ceased on the liquidation and it was necessary to deal with a proper case for the continuation of the receiver's powers.

There is authority for the proposition that the receiver's role as the agent for the company ceases on liquidation; see eg Re Leslie Homes (Aust) Pty
Ltd [(1984) 8 ACLR 1020.] This appears to be the reason for the introduction of the section.

I can see no compelling reason to read the section down in the way in which the liquidator appears to contend. The section appears in Pt 5.2 dealing with receivers and is focussed on the receiver's power, rather than on the orderly liquidation of the company. The power to allow the receiver to carry on is given to the liquidator or the court as equal alternatives, which again points to the fact that the section is not primarily to do with the liquidation. It is more directed to the problem that the chance, if I can call it that, of liquidation has interfered with the proper conduct of the receivership, yet recognises that both the liquidator and the public generally have the right to be involved in the decision as to whether the agency should continue. Part of the process under <case> is to look at the position of the unsecured creditors, but the purpose of the section is not just to benefit the unsecured creditors.

In the present case the unsecured creditors are not, in any practical sense, advantaged or disadvantaged at all by what the applicant seeks to do. There is only a theoretical chance that they will be affected. I can understand the liquidator being concerned about even a theoretical risk, but what the court must do is apply commercial commonsense, rather than worry about theoretical fears.

The application is accordingly one which I consider I should grant.

One point that did concern me is how far the court could take into account the fact that granting the application will keep thirty people in work who otherwise might be unemployed. Were it not for the remarks made by the Court of Appeal on appeal from me in Tellsa Furniture Pty Ltd versus Glendave Nominees
Pty Ltd [(1987) 13 ACLR 64] at 73 and 76, I would have little doubt that this is a relevant matter. I held in that case at first instance, reported as Re
Tellsa Furniture Pty Ltd [(1985) 9 ACLR 869], 876, that whilst there was no guidance in the authorities at that date (1985) as to whether when considering <case> of the Corporations Law one should take into account the hardship on employees, it should be taken into account, but given little weight. The Court of Appeal held it was completely irrelevant.

However, Mr Newlinds has convinced me in the instant case considerations wider than those applying in the Tellsa case come into play and one should take into account the effect on the community generally, including the employees.
It is noteworthy that Austin J in Didovich versus ASIC [(1998) 29 ACSR ]
at 127, seems to have taken a similar view in respect of when a director should be allowed to manage a corporation despite disqualification under <case> of the Corporations Law.

Accordingly, I make an order under <case> of the Corporations Law approving the plaintiff carrying on the business of Rico Pty Ltd, insofar as it is necessary to enter into and carry out that company's obligations in the proposed contract JRG6, being part of PX01, or any modification, amendment or variation thereof, with liberty to apply on 24 hours' notice.
 * * * 
