

R versus Pratten (No 2) [2012] NSWSC 1665 (21 March 2012) 
Last Updated: 29 April 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Jury is discharged  
JUDGMENT CONTINUED
I now continue with the comments I wish to make. Some of the comments are of the nature of preliminary issues and are views rather than a concluded view as to the matters that are before the court. Partly that is the case because on some of these issues I have not been addressed.
The parties will have heard in my discharge of the jury the question of unfairness. I paid particular attention during the course of the earlier remarks to the judgment of the High Court in Dupas, supra, and in particular to the enduring power of the court to ensure a fair trial. If there are allegations of unfairness, even in the way in which the prosecution has acted, or the accused or his counsel have acted, then I would expect that to be raised with the Court and an appropriate application made as a consequence.
It seems to me that it is not a matter that is appropriate for address to the jury, who must deal with the matter on the facts that are before them. If there is an unfairness to the accused in the way in which those facts are adduced, then I want to hear about it, and I do not mean that to be critical of anyone.
I want to hear about it, because if I take the same view, I will address that unfairness and ensure that it does not occur or is relieved. That comment applies to the Crown as much as it does to the accused, but it particularly applies to the accused, because I am mindful of the acknowledged greater capacity of the Crown to marshal forces in prosecution than is usually available to the accused in defending it. Ultimately a matter of unfairness is a matter for the Court, constituted by the Judge, and not a matter for the jury.
The second aspect on which I wish to make comment, again on a preliminary basis (and if the parties want to be heard on this or feel it is necessary for me to make a formal ruling I will do so, but I will do so only if I hear the parties fully and properly on the issue), is the relationship between the AAT proceedings and these proceedings. I preface these remarks with the following hypothetical: let us assume that a taxpayer is earning taxable income, but puts in no tax return and receives no tax assessment. I would suspect, subject to hearing the parties, that such a person, assuming they have received taxable income and assuming you could prove the appropriate intent, could be found guilty of obtaining a financial advantage by deception. It matters not that the ATO has not issued an assessment for that offence to be proved.
Likewise, the nature of the assessment, and whether it is a default assessment, may have little or nothing to do with the determination of any criminal charge of obtaining a financial advantage by dishonest deception or by deception. The foregoing is an extreme case; no one is suggesting it is applicable in these proceedings. The question of the amount of tax to be paid or whether tax should be paid may not be an essential ingredient of this charge of obtaining financial advantage by deception. Having said that, as presently informed, I would say that the fact of a tax assessment and its method of calculation could rationally affect, directly or indirectly, the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue in the proceedings.
I have made clear earlier that I have the distinct impression that the parties are like ships in the night. The Crown has taken the view that it will prosecute this case, and is prosecuting this case, on the basis of a deception, which is the failure to declare, in the personal income tax return of the accused, amounts of money received by the accused, or benefits obtained by the accused, which it says are, in the ordinary sense, income. That is the manner in which the prosecution is proceeding.
As a consequence of the manner in which the Crown has chosen to prosecute the charge, it seems to me that the existence of a tax return is relevant, plainly, or clearly. The fact that an assessment has been issued initially on the basis of information provided by the accused is relevant, and the fact that a subsequent assessment issued, which imposed a greater liability, may also be relevant. Whether it can be excluded for other reasons is another issue with which I do not now need to deal.
Having said that, the proceedings in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (hereinafter, "AAT") do not deal with the same issues with which we are dealing in this trial. The AAT, as I recollect, is put in the same position as the Tax Commissioner, and exercises a discretion, which this Court, and no jury, could ever exercise.
On one view, the existence of the AAT proceedings may not be relevant, but to the extent that it rationally affects the existence of, or the probability of an existence of a hypothesis inconsistent with guilt, it may be relevant.
I have made those comments so that the parties are apprised of my thinking at this stage for the purpose of informing, to the extent they so desire, what it is they wish to say in any proceedings that may arise hereafter.
 
Amendments April 2016 - amended case name in coversheet * * * 
