

NSW Land and Housing Corp versus Green and Anor Matter No 30071/95 [1997] NSWSC (31 October 1997) 
New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation versus Carmen Corinne Green & Anor /95 October 1997 
Graham AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division /95 - NEW SOUTH WALES LAND AND HOUSING CORPORATION V CARMEN CORINNE GREEN & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation, the plaintiff in these proceedings, was constituted by section 6(1) of the Housing Act 1985. Its functions and powers include the acquisition of land for urban development, the development of such land and the control and management of such land (Housing Act 1976 sections 9(2) and 10(1)). It is permitted to exercise its functions in the name of the Department of Housing (Housing Act 1985 section 7(2)). 
On 14 June 1995 the plaintiff lodged an application under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/s68.html) of the [Residential Tenancies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/) as amended in the name of the Department of Housing with the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal of New South Wales, the second defendant, seeking an order terminating a residential tenancy agreement between the plaintiff and Carmen
Corinne Green, the first defendant, in relation to apartment 403/15 Barton
Road, Artarmon.

The Tribunal was constituted by section 80 of the Act and consists of various categories of persons. Whilst legal training is necessary for two such categories, it is not for the third.

Under section 93, proceedings before the Tribunal are to be heard and determined by one member sitting alone. Proceedings before the Tribunal are to be held as in open court (section 93(1)). The Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself on any matter in such manner as it thinks fit (section 93(4)(a)). It is bound to act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case without regard to technicalities or legal forms (section 93(4)(b)). With limited exceptions, the parties before the Tribunal are to have the carriage of their own cases (Section 94).

The Tribunal is empowered to dismiss proceedings which are frivolous or lacking in substance (section 108). The Tribunal is not required to make any note or other record of proceedings before it (section 111(2)) but at the conclusion of proceedings before it, the Tribunal is required to state orally or in writing its reasons for any order or decision made in the proceedings (section 114 (1)). Subject to very limited exceptions, the decisions of the
Tribunal are final and binding on the parties (section 111(1)).

The limited right of appeal conferred by the Act is to be found in section (2) and (8) which provides as follows:- "107. (2) If, in proceedings before it, the 
Tribunal decides a question with respect to a matter of law, a party to be proceedings who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision.
 ...

A reference in this section to a matter of law includes a reference to a matter relating to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal." 
The Tribunal's power to make orders includes a power to make an order for which an application may be made by any person to the Tribunal (section (1)(a)).

Section 68, under which the plaintiff's application in this case was made, forms part of Division 3 of Part 5 of the Act. Part 5 deals with the termination of residential tenancy agreements and Division 3 with the termination of such agreements by the Tribunal.

Various powers of termination are to be found within the Division in sections (2), 68(1), 69(1) and 70(1). In each case the power of termination is coupled with a power to make an order for possession of the relevant residential premises. In every case the power to make an order for possession is preceded by the word "shall" whereas in three out of the four sections conferring a power to terminate a residential tenancy, the power is preceded by the word "may". In the fourth section (section 64(2)), the power is, significantly, preceded by the word "shall", not "may".

One of the critical questions for decision in this case is the meaning of the word "may" in section 68(1). Section 68 provides as follows:- "68. (1) The Tribunal may, on the application by a landlord under a residential tenancy agreement, make an order terminating the agreement if it is satisfied that the tenant has intentionally or recklessly caused or permitted, or is likely intentionally or recklessly to cause or permit: serious damage to the residential premises; or injury to the landlord, the landlord's agent or any person in occupation of or permitted on adjoining or adjacent premises.

If the Tribunal makes an order terminating a residential tenancy agreement under this section, the Tribunal shall also make an order for possession of the residential premises taking effect immediately." 
Section 64, in which the "shall"/"shall" combination is used as opposed to the "may"/"shall" combination in section 68, relevantly provided as follows:- "64. (1) If: a landlord or a tenant gives notice of termination of a residential tenancy agreement under this Part (or Part 3 of Schedule 3); and the tenant fails to deliver up vacant possession of the residential premises on the day specified, the landlord may, not later than 30 days after that day, apply to the Tribunal for an order terminating the agreement and an order for possession of the premises.

The Tribunal shall, on application by a landlord under this section, make an order terminating the agreement if it is satisfied: in the case of a notice given by the landlord on a ground referred to in section 56, 57 or 61 or clause 6, 7, 8, , 10 or 11 of Schedule 3: that the landlord has established the ground; and if the ground is a breach of the residential tenancy agreement, that the breach, in the circumstance of the case, is such as to justify termination of the agreement; that the tenant has seriously or persistently breached the residential tenancy agreement; or that, having considered the circumstance of the case, it is appropriate to do so.
 ...

If the Tribunal makes an order terminating a residential tenancy agreement under this section, the Tribunal shall also make an order for possession of the residential premises specifying the day on which the order takes effect." 
In the instant case, the plaintiff's application to the Tribunal included the following as the reasons for the plaintiff asking for the orders in question:- 
ON SATURDAY 10 JUNE 1995, AT 4.15PM THE TENANT, CARMEN CORINNE GREEN, BROKE
SIX (6) WINDOWS AND YELLED ABUSE AT APT 402/15 BARTON ROAD, ARTARMON, WHEN
REFUSED ACCESS TO THE NEIGHBOURS DWELLING TO USE THEIR TELEPHONE. CARMEN
CORINNE GREEN WAS CHARGED WITH MALICIOUSLY DAMAGING PROPERTY BY LANE COVE
POLICE AND BAIL GRANTED.

ON 11 JUNE 1995 CARMEN CORINNE GREEN DENIED APT 402/15 BARTON ROAD, ARTARMON
QUIET ENJOYMENT OF THEIR PREMISES BY CONTINUING TO BANG ON THEIR DOOR.

THE DEPARTMENT IS FEARFUL CARMEN CORINNE GREEN MAY CAUSE FURTHER MORE SERIOUS
HARM/DAMAGE TO PERSONS OR PROPERTY IF ALLOWED TO REMAIN IN OCCUPATION." 
The Tribunal hearing the application was constituted by one of its members, G
R Keenan Esq.

The proceedings came before the Tribunal on 16 June 1995, 5 July 1995, 24 July and 10 August 1995 on which day Mr Keenan ordered that the application be dismissed.

When announcing his decision Mr Keenan stated orally his reasons for that decision. Under section 114(1) of the Act it was open to him to state his reasons orally or in writing. His obligation was to do so at the conclusion of the proceedings before the Tribunal (section 114(1)).

As it transpires the reasons given by Mr Keenan were not recorded and no official transcript was taken of those reasons. However, the solicitor for the plaintiff, Peter Richard James, made extensive manuscript notes of Mr Keenan's oral reasons and from these notes a rough transcript has been produced which was admitted into evidence without objection.

A couple of months later, well after these proceedings by way of appeal had been instituted, the Tribunal supplied extensive typed reasons for the
Tribunal's decision under the hand of Mr Keenan which were dated 8 November
There is a significant correlation between the reasons so supplied and the transcript provided by Mr James with the assistance of his manuscript notes.

I do not consider the reasons supplied by Mr Keenan and dated 8 November 1995 to constitute the reasons for his decision of 10 August 1995 as required by section 114 of the Act. A number of the expressions used in the reasons of 8
November 1995 are expressed in the past tense which suggests that the reasons which the Tribunal has provided are not the reasons as they were delivered.
For example on page 8 Mr Keenan said:- "On the evidence I formed the view...", "In any event, I was of the view that...", "Accordingly, consideration was then given to section 68(1)(b)...", and "I was satisfied on the evidence... "" 
On page 9 Mr Keenan said:- "I also took into account..." and "I indicated that I would exercise...".

It seems clear to me that this document is not a simple transcription of the reasons as given at the conclusion of the proceedings when the decision was announced. However, the document is in evidence and it seems to me that it can assist in ascertaining what really occurred on 10 August 1995 where the transcript of Mr Keenan's oral reasons as prepared by Mr James is imprecise.

What is clear is that the Tribunal was not satisfied that the case fell within section 68(1)(a) of the Act and, whilst the matter is not in issue, I must say that I agree with this conclusion. Section 68(1)(a) is concerned with serious damages to the premises the subject of the residential tenancy agreement and not other adjacent premises.

It is also clear that the Tribunal was not satisfied that the first defendant was likely intentionally or recklessly to cause or permit future injury within the meaning of section 68(1)(b) of the Act. However, the Tribunal was satisfied that the first defendant had intentionally caused injury to persons in occupation of or permitted on adjoining or adjacent premises, namely, apartment 402, 15 Barton Road, Artarmon.

The plaintiff contends that, notwithstanding the use of the word "may" in section 68(1) the Tribunal was bound to make an order terminating the subject residential tenancy agreement once it was satisfied that the first defendant had intentionally caused injury to the persons mentioned.

As it transpires Mr Keenan took the view that the Tribunal had a discretion as to whether or not an order terminating the agreement should be made and he chose to exercise that discretion favourably to the first defendant.

During part of the hearing before the Tribunal the parties were represented by solicitors and it is clear that both solicitors were in agreement with the proposition that the Tribunal did have a discretion.

The plaintiff submits that as a matter of law the Tribunal had no discretion, that, if it did, the Tribunal paid regard to an extraneous factor in deciding upon the exercise of its discretion and in respect of the extraneous factor it was not fairly or properly raised as an issue in the proceedings. I understand this to mean that there was a failure to comply with a requirement of procedural fairness. Perhaps put another way, the plaintiff is alleging that the Tribunal failed to act according to equity and good conscience in accordance with section 93(4)(b) of the Act.

The alleged extraneous factor said to have been taken into account by the
Tribunal was the Department of Housing's relocation policy in its application to the first defendant.

The policy referred to would appear to have been a policy that when a tenant was in threat of violence such tenant would, subject to availability of premises, be relocated where a request for such relocation was received from the tenant. Evidence to this effect was given by the northern city area manager for the Department of Housing, Unis Goh.

As it transpires the occupants of unit 402, 15 Barton Road, Artarmon,
Namagrior Hyrijaniam and her daughter Armenouhi Haroutonian, were relocated to other premises on 16 June 1995.

There was some suggestion that the first defendant came within the reach of the Department's relocation policy on the basis that she had herself been stalked by a male person who was harassing her. The first defendant did not make a complaint to the police about such a person and her version of the events was not accepted by the Tribunal.

On the question of the exercise of discretion, Mr James's "transcript" derived in part from his contemporaneous handwritten notes included the following:- "... I am satisfied ... to make a finding that she did cause injury to adjoining persons." (The injury as found was mental and psychological injury to the ladies occupying unit 402.) 
In his record of his reasons of 8 November 1995 
Mr Keenan said:- "I was satisfied on the evidence that Ms Haroutonian, Ms Hyrijaniam and Ms
Ayoubdel all suffered to varying degrees, nervous shock as a consequence of Ms
Green's behaviour and actions and that this constituted 'injury' for the purposes of section 68(1)(b)".

These findings, including the Tribunal's decision as to what comes within the reach of the word "injury" in section 68(1)(b), have not been challenged before me.

Mr James's "transcript" in relation to the exercise of discretion continued as follows:- "I am not satisfied to make a finding that she is likely to cause injury to persons in adjoining premises.

As has been pointed out by both legal representatives I have a discretion under this Section. I do not want it thought that I diminish the stress caused by Ms Green's conduct. I do take it into account but that it has occurred once.

I know the Department relocates tenants in these circumstances. The Department of Housing has a special position. I will not make an order terminating the
Residential Tenancies Agreement even though I am satisfied under Section (1)(b). I have heard from Ms Green about relocation. The Department has no record of the matters of harassment or an Application to relocate.

I do not under estimate the difficulties for the officers of the Department in circumstances like this. The Department has a social responsibility and it performs those responsibilities in a proper manner notwithstanding that it involves practical difficulties in these situations. Trying to cater for those people is not easy and creates its own problems. They have a difficult task.
Relocating Ms Green is a difficulty. I have no doubt that they will do what they can as they usually do. In the past the Department has always done that for those people who have these problems.

There has been no allegations of misbehaviour since that incident. Your behaviour since the incident has I assume been acceptable and I expect it to continue to be so. You have difficulties but you must learn to control them." 
In his record of his reasons of 8 November 1995 
Mr Keenan said in relation to the exercise of discretion:- "The legal representatives of both parties agreed that the Tribunal had a discretion as to whether a residential tenancy agreement ought to be terminated under section 68(1). I considered whether there was sufficient evidence that would cause me to be satisfied that Ms Green was `likely intentionally or recklessly to cause or permit [such injury as is referred to in section 68(1)(b)]'. While no-one could every (sic) say with any certainty that it was never `possible' that such an event could not or would not occur in the future I was not satisfied on the evidence that such an event was `likely' to occur. There had been no similar occurrence in the past - indeed, the previous relationship between Ms Haroutonian and Ms Green appears to have been reasonably friendly given that there might have been language difficulties. I noted that Ms Haroutonian and her mother had been relocated to other premises.

I also took into account Ms Green's very sad medical history - both physical and psychological/psychiatric- and the fact that she would have extreme difficulty in affording and coping with the problem of finding accommodation on the private market.

I indicated that I would exercise the discretion available to me under section (1) of the Act in favour of Ms Green and not make the orders sought. I acknowledged that this could cause problems to the Department of Housing and commented that such problems as the Department might perceive to exist as a consequence might be met by having Ms Green relocated to other premises.

In my opinion the word "may" when used in section 68(1) does not mean "shall".
It was the intention of the legislature to confer a discretion on the
Tribunal. It is trite to say that it is the real intention of the legislature that must be ascertained, and that in ascertaining it you begin with the prima facie presumption that permissive or facultative expressions operate according to their ordinary natural meaning. (Ward versus Williams (1955) 92CLR496 at .) 
If it is doubtful in what sense the word "may" is used, the Court must consider whether it would lead to manifest absurdity and repugnance to hold that it conferred a discretion (Macdougall versus Paterson (1851)11CB755 at .) 
There is a general principle that when a statute confers an authority to do a judicial act in a certain case, it is imperative on those so authorised to exercise the authority when the case arises and its exercise is duly applied for by a party interested and having the right to make the application.
(Macdougall versus Paterson at page 773; Jenkins versus The Right Reverend The
Lord Bishop of Oxford [(1880) 5 A.C. 214] at 225. See also Ward versus Williams at p.507).

In New South Wales the legislature intervened as early as 1858 to restrain the development of the notion that permissive words have a compulsive effect (see Vict. No. 12 sec 8). Section 23 of the Interpretation Act 1897 provided as follows:- "23. Wherever in an Act a power is conferred on any officer or person by the word "may," such word shall mean that the power may be exercised, or not, at discretion; but where the word "shall" confers the power, such word shall mean that the power must be exercised." 
The High Court in Ward versus Williams said of this section at page 506:- "The words "at discretion" are strong and, though it may readily be conceded that the section lays down a rule of construction which like other rules of construction will give way to clear indications of a contrary intention, there must be reasons which satisfy the mind that a statute to be construed does not intend that the power it confers should be exercised or not at discretion before it can be held that the power must be exercised on demand, assuming of course the fulfilment of any conditions precedent the statute may lay down." 
Whilst there was in the 1897 statute no express provision dealing with the principle laid down in section 23 yielding to a contrary intention which may be expressed in a statute, this was the approach which the Courts adopted to it (see ex parte McGavin; Re Berne (1945) 46SR58 at 61). In the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) an express provision to that effect is to be found in section 5(2) of the Act.

In the 1987 Act section 9 which takes the place of the former section 23 provides as follows:- "9(1) In any Act or instrument, the word "may", if used to confer a power, indicates that the power may be exercised or not, at discretion.

In any Act or instrument, the word "shall", if used to impose a duty, indicates that the duty must be performed." 
In relation to the question of construction of the word "may" in a statute the
High Court said in Ward versus Williams at page 506:- "In construing a statute conferring a power by permissive or facultative expressions, it is important not to mistake indications or evidences, found in the context or subject matter, of an intention that a right to call for the exercise of the discretion should exist, for indications or evidences of an intension that the officer in whom the power is reposed should be under a duty, upon request and upon fulfilment of the necessary conditions, to do the thing authorised." 
Notwithstanding the general principle referred to in Macdougall v
Paterson" it seems to me that in this case the differential use of the words "may" and "shall" in sections 64(2) and 68(1) coupled with the rule of construction laid down in [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s9.html) of the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) leads to the conclusion that the legislature intended [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s68.html) to confer a discretion on the Tribunal. Its focus upon, inter alia, interference with the rights of neighbours which may be of varying degrees of severity, ranging from minor to serious, supports this view. It is also significant to note that within [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s68.html) itself the legislature has chosen to use both the permissive "may" and the mandatory "shall", clearly indicating, in my view, that in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s68.html) "may" was intended to confer a discretion.

In relation to the exercise by the Tribunal of its discretion, it does not seem to me to have miscarried. The approach which an appellate Court must take is clear. If the judgment complained of depends upon an exercise of judicial discretion, then in an appeal against the exercise of that discretion, it is not enough that the judge constituting the appellate court considers that if he had been in the position of the member of the Tribunal at first instance he would have taken a different course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion.

If the member of the Tribunal has acted upon a wrong principle, if he has allowed extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he has mistaken the facts or if he has not taken into account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate
Court may exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the material for so doing.

If it is not clear how the Tribunal member has reached the result embodied in his Order, but, upon the facts, it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, then the appellate Court may infer that in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law reposed in the Tribunal of first instance.

In such a case, although the nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on the ground that a substantial wrong has in fact occurred (Per Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ in House versus The
King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] at 505; see also Gronow versus Gronow <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR 513] and Minister for Aboriginal Affairs versus Peko-Wallsend Limited <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 24] at 40-41).

What the plaintiff argues in this case is that it was not open to the Tribunal to take into account the Tribunal's relocation policy. I disagree and, in any event, it does not appear to me to have been relevantly taken into account. In relation to matters which may properly be taken into account when a discretion is conferred Mason J, as he then was, said in Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs versus Peko-Wallsend Limited at pages 39-40:- "What factors a decision-maker is bound to consider in making the decision is determined by construction of the statute conferring the discretion. If the statute expressly states the considerations to be taken into account, it will often be necessary for the Court to decide whether those enumerated factors are exhaustive or merely inclusive. If the relevant factors- and in this context I use this expression to refer to the factors which the decision-maker is bound to consider - are not expressly stated, they must be determined by implication from the subject-matter, scope and purpose of the Act. In the context of judicial review on the ground of taking into account irrelevant considerations, this Court has held that, where a statute confers a discretion which in its terms is unconfined, the factors that may be taken into account in the exercise of the discretion are similarly unconfined, except in so far as there may be found in the subject-matter, scope and purpose of the statute some implied limitation on the factors to which the decision-maker may legitimately have regard: See Reg. versus Australian Broadcasting Tribunal;
Ex parte 2HD Pty. Limited, adopting the earlier formulations of Dixon J in Swan Hill Corporation versus Bradbury, and Water Conservation and
Irrigation Commission versus Browning. By analogy, where the ground of review is that a relevant consideration has not been taken into account and the discretion is unconfined by the terms of the statute, the court will not find that the decision-maker is bound to take a particular matter into account unless an implication that he is bound to do so is to be found in the subject- matter, scope and purpose of the Act." 
In this case, where injury and likely future injury to neighbours is a matter required to be considered under section 68(1), then a relocation policy of the landlord which may spare specific neighbours from likely future injury is a matter which, in the exercise of the Tribunal's discretion, it could properly take into account.

In any event, I am unable to conclude that such a policy in its application to the first defendant was taken into account in the exercise by Mr Keenan of his discretion under section 68(1). What he does appear to have taken into account, in the context of a finding that the first defendant was unlikely to re-offend, was the stress which the first defendant's conduct caused to
Namagrior Hyrijaniam and Armenouhi Haroutonian, that they had been relocated and that the first defendant's conduct was an isolated occurrence. He may also have had regard to the first defendant's unfortunate medical history.

I am not satisfied that Mr Keenan had regard to a policy which may have applied to the first defendant if she had been harassed and stalked and which may have led to her relocation. If he had taken such a matter into account one might have expected him to conclude that his discretion should be exercised in the plaintiff's favour on the basis that the first defendant would be otherwise protected by the application of the policy.

In my opinion the remarks of Mr Keenan which followed the announcement of his decision on the manner in which he proposed to exercise his discretion were in the nature of "throw away" lies.

As to whether the issue of the plaintiff's relocation policy was fairly raised as an issue in the proceedings before the Tribunal I consider that it had been. Miss Goh from the Department gave evidence of it and it can hardly have taken the plaintiff by surprise. The relocation of the occupants of apartment was clearly effected because of that policy.

In all the circumstances the appeal will be dismissed. I order that the decision of the Tribunal be affirmed and order the plaintiff to pay the first defendant's costs.
 * * * 
