

Regina versus Gieselmann Matter No Cca 60692/95 [1998] NSWSC 316 (13 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
REGINA versus MELISSA GIESELMANN 
CCA 60692/95 July 1998 
Mason P, Wood CJ at CL, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: SUPREME COURT - STUDDERT J 
FILE NO/S: CCA 60692/95 
DELIVERED: 13 JULY 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 29 APRIL 1998 
PARTIES: R V MELISSA GIESELMANN 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P; WOOD CJ AT CL; SPERLING J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: S R NORRISH QC 
Respondent:C K MAXWELL QC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: ARDEN ASSOCIATES 
Respondent: S E O'CONNOR (THE CROWN) 
CATCHWORDS: 
Criminal Law - murder - sentence - principles - protection of community - parity of sentence of co-offender - relevance to sentencing 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 18 
R versus Melissa GIESELMANN 
Criminal Law - murder - sentence - principles - protection of community - parity of sentence of co-offender - relevance to sentencing - whether sentence manifestly excessive 
Melissa Gieselmann, the applicant, was convicted on a charge of murdering
Neena Bisen, who was her custodian at the Bankstown Youth Refuge. Her plea of guilty to manslaughter on the ground of diminished responsibility had been rejected by the Crown. Studdert J sentenced the applicant to imprisonment for eighteen years. The applicant was aged fifteen years eight months at the date of the offence. An identical sentence was imposed upon co-offender Kylie
Sherwood, who was aged 17 years and two months at the date of the offence.

The sentencing judge characterised the crime as a vicious and senseless killing with an objective gravity demanding a lengthy sentence. In sentencing the applicant, the judge had regard to the age of the offender, her unhappy and unfortunate upbringing, and her mental state. Consideration was also given to the factors of protection of society and the potential dangerousness of the offender.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: 
No error of principle had affected the sentence imposed.

Proper regard was taken of the differences between the two offenders by the sentencing judge. Taking into consideration the younger age of the applicant and absence of prior criminal history, the parity of sentences was amply justified by the significantly greater part played by the applicant in the planning and instigation of the murder.

The evidence which the judge accepted about the applicant suffering a more severe abnormality of mind did not demand more favourable treatment. Such a factor cuts both ways, as it also requires the judge to take particular care in considering the issue of protection of society.

Engert [(1985) 84 A Crim R 67], applied. 
Consideration of circumstances in which leave to appeal will be granted where an earlier appeal had already been brought against conviction without any challenge to sentence.

ORDERS
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal dismissed.

R versus Melissa GIESELMANN 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: The applicant seeks leave to appeal against a sentence for murder imposed by Studdert J. 
The applicant had been indicted on a charge of murdering Neena Bisen on 13
June 1994 at the Bankstown Youth Refuge. Her plea of guilty to manslaughter on the ground of diminished responsibility was not accepted by the Crown.

In a carefully reasoned judgment, Studdert J imposed a total sentence of eighteen years penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of twelve years six months commencing on 14 June 1994 and expiring on 13 December 2006; and an additional term of five years six months commencing on 14 December 2006 and expiring on 13 June 2012. He specified 14 December 2006 as the first date upon which the prisoner is to be eligible for release on parole. The applicant was aged 15 years and eight months at the date of the offence and 17 years and one month at the date of sentencing. The learned judge ordered that the minimum term be served in a detention centre until the prisoner reached the age of 21 years.

An identical sentence was imposed upon a co-offender Kylie Sherwood.

The sentencing judge characterised the crime as a vicious and senseless killing with an objective gravity demanding a lengthy sentence. The following description, taken from his Honour's reasons, amply justifies this summary: "The victim was a youth worker attached to the Bankstown Youth Refuge and when the murder was committed the offenders were residing at that refuge. The evidence established that at the date of the murder there were six young people in residence, three young men and three young women including the prisoners. During the course of the evening on which the crime was committed, both before and after dinner, these residents had discussions about robbing
Mrs Bisen and there was discussion as to who would drive the van when they made their escape. However, the discussion was treated as being in jest, at least by some of the residents, but not, as events transpired, by these offenders.

Rodney Russell, one of the young residents, gave an account of the planning that took place. He said the notion of robbing Mrs Bisen was first proposed by
Melissa Gieselmann in the backyard of the residence before dinner. Then after dinner the subject was further discussed, and Gieselmann talked of hitting Mrs
Bisen and tying her up. Gieselmann brought three knives into the living room, and asked Rodney Russell and Kylie Sherwood which one they should use. The largest of the three knives was selected. At Gieselmann's suggestion, cord was cut from electrical appliances to tie the unfortunate victim up, and
Gieselmann told Rodney to cut the cord off the blue phone, which he did.
Gieselmann told Rodney to grab Mrs Bisen when she was in the loungeroom, but he made only a half-hearted attempt and let her go, he said because he knew what he was doing was wrong. Rodney said that Mrs Bisen then took him into the office where his behaviour was discussed and Mrs Bisen accepted his apology.
He proceeded then towards his room and it was then, at about 10.00pm, that the prisoners assaulted Mrs Bisen.

I am satisfied that together they first stabbed her in the back, each of them holding the knife to do so, and they then proceeded with her along the hallway to a position outside the office where there was a struggle. Gieselmann was seen holding the knife in the hall and before that one of the residents, David
Fratus, saw Gieselmann with it. The two young women then forced Mrs Bisen into the office and closed the door before participating in the savage attack which caused her death. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that each offender did what she did in that office intending to kill the deceased.

Mrs Bisen was stabbed altogether fourteen times, and in addition she sustained a number of small superficial cuts. One of the wounds penetrated the abdominal cavity, and the front wall of the lung, and entered the aorta. Two other wounds penetrated the liver, one cut into the breast bone, another cut through the seventh rib, another through the fifth rib, and the wounds were considered by Dr Bradhurst, who conducted the post mortem examination, to be consistent with the application of moderate to severe force. The wound in the back, presumably being the wound first sustained, penetrated to a depth of 140 mm. I am satisfied that each of these young women used the knife, and that each of them inflicted a number of wounds. Not content with wounding their victim, the young women acted together to strangle her, using Sherwood's blouse to do so. Mrs Bisen died from the effects of the stab wounds and from asphyxia due to strangulation.

Objectively then the circumstances of this murder were extemely grave." 
The learned judge also set out an extract from the applicant's ERISP interview, which he described as chilling listening and viewing. In answer to question 15, the applicant said: "... I went in Kylie's room with the knife and I said, `Hey, you know, you hold it with me', and she goes, `Yeah, all right'. And we were going to wait in the room for her, then changed our minds and we went out to the back and stabbed her in the back but the knife bended so, you know. And then we threatened her and she put up a bit of a struggle on the way to the office and - and then everyone was looking at us, the residents, so we locked them out of the room and she had - she had three kids but, you know, it didn't bother us, you know. `Cause she just like really pissed me off, you know, so me and Kylie started to, like, strangle her and stuff but then like I couldn't hold me hand over her mouth so she just goes `Stuff this', and she stabbed her. And she stabbed her a couple of times and I think she dropped the knife and went out.
And she was still moving so I stabbed her more and kicked her a few times." 
Later the following information was conveyed: "Q51 Can you tell me exactly what occurred in that room? 
A We told her to sit down and she sat down on the corner chair and we told her we wouldn't hurt her if she listened to us and did what we said. And she didn't listen, kinda think, and that really got me angry `cause like she wasn't taking us seriously. She was like just saying, `Oh, give me the knife and go in your bedroom', and it's like - as if you wouldn't take a resident seriously especially when there's two that are very angry and have a knife. It's just really stupid, you know. So, what we did is like she started going for the phone and at that time I think Kylie went to get the bag or something and I yelled out to her, `cause she was trying to ring - ring the police or someone. So, I ripped out the phone and I started tackling her and hitting her and then Kylie ran in and - with the scarf kinda ripped material from the pillowcase thing and we started to strangle her.

Q52 How did you try and strangle her? 
A We wrapped the cloth around her neck and I held her head down while Kylie was pulling it.

Q56 How many times did you stab her? 
A I dunno, I guess round about seven times, six.

Q57 And what was she doing whilst she was being stabbed? 
A Nothing, she just laid there and I had my hand over her mouth.

Q58 Did she say anything immediately prior to when she was stabbed? 
A No, she didn't even make a sound.

Q59 Why did you do this? 
A Like, she just really pissed me off kinda thing. It's just - I don't - I don't - like, it's hard to explain. Like, just in there, I wanted the money, I want a lot of things, you know, and it's just her making me do all those things and, you know, it just really pissed me off. And the way she ran off - went off at Rodney and sent everyone to bed, I just got sick of it, so I just did it." 
His Honour correctly observed that the Court was bound to act upon the jury's rejection of the issue of diminished responsibility within the meaning of s23B. This involved rejection of the contention that the applicant was suffering from such abnormality of mind as substantially to impair her mental responsibility for what she had done. Nevertheless, it did not follow from the verdict that the psychiatric evidence led at the trial was to be ignored. The sentencing judge acknowledged that he was bound to consider it and to make "an assessment as to whether it mitigated criminality". It will be seen that such assessment was carefully made.

The judge addressed the subjective features of the applicant's case in a manner which is beyond challenge and which the learned senior counsel for the applicant did not directly challenge.

The age of the applicant was noted as a very important subjective circumstance, particularly considering the matter of rehabilitation. There was no prior criminal record. His Honour was "acutely conscious" of the importance of paying proper regard to the age of the offender. Indeed, near the close of his remarks he made it plain that the sentences imposed were less than they would have been had the offenders not been so young when they committed the awful deed.

The learned judge made findings about the unhappy and unfortunate upbringing of the applicant. Her life story is extremely sad. She was deprived of a stable family upbringing. Her parents had separated shortly after her birth.
Her father drank excessively and was a poor provider for his several children, and her mother had little contact with the applicant at key times in her life.
The applicant had suffered physical and emotional abuse. The applicant had taken to alcohol and drugs and had lived in a series of refuges. There were episodes of self-mutilation and sexual assault.

Not surprisingly this background had a significant effect on the applicant's personal development. Dr Westmore regarded her as suffering from a severe personality disorder of a borderline type. While it left her "in control of her actions" and aware of the difference between right and wrong, her "moral control was absent" and this resulted in "an uncaring attitude". This diagnosis was accepted. It was corroborated by the opinions of Dr Haliburn and
Professor Bashir. The submission that the judge did not properly assess the evidence relating to the applicant's mental state has no substance.

Careful consideration was also given to the factors of protection of society and the potential dangerousness of the offender. Citing R versus Garforth (NSWCCA, unreported, 23 May 1994) and R versus Twala (NSWCCA, unreported, 4
November 1994) the judge observed that these two factors (discussed in Veen v The Queen (No 2) [(1988) 164 CLR 165)] may be taken into account in determining what weight ought properly to be given to favourable subjective features which might otherwise attract leniency.

Evidence was given in the sentencing proceedings as to whether the applicant would represent a danger to the community following her release. There was a fairly sharp divergence in views between the pessimistic forecast of Dr
Westmore and the more optimistic one of Professor Bashir. The latter paid particular reference to expressions of remorse, a factor that had impressed the Reverend Christine Gyllies, a chaplain, who also gave evidence.

In considering the significance of the evidence touching on whether the applicant would remain a danger to others in the future by reason of her mental disorder, and for how long in the future, the learned judge reminded himself that the Crown must prove this matter beyond reasonable doubt. He then cited, with apparent approval, the evidence of Dr Westmore at the trial that the condition from which the applicant was suffering was one from which she could be expected to recover in her late twenties or early thirties. He found that, provided the applicant continued with her regime of treatment, any risk of harm to others attendant upon her mental disorder would lessen and perhaps disappear altogether over the next 12 years or so.

In Engert [(1985) 84 A Crim R 67] at Gleeson CJ said this: "Persons suffering from mental disorders frequently come into collision with the criminal justice system. Sentencing such persons commonly confronts judicial officers with the need to make a sensitive discretionary decision.
Sentencing is essentially a discretionary exercise requiring consideration of the extremely variable facts and circumstances of individual cases and the application of those facts and circumstances to the principles laid down by statute or established by the common law. The principles to be applied in sentencing are in turn developed by reference to the purposes of criminal punishment. Those purposes were set by the High Court in Veen (No 2) <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 465] at 476; <case>; [33 A Crim R 230] at 237-238 as follows: `... protection of society, deterrence of the offender and of others who might be tempted to offend, retribution and reform.' 
A moment's consideration will show that the interplay of the considerations relevant to sentencing may be complex and on occasion even intricate. In a given case, facts which point in one direction in relation to one of the considerations to be taken into account may point in a different direction in relation to some other consideration. For example, in the case of a particular offender, an aspect of the case which might mean that deterrence of others is of lesser importance, might, at the same time, mean that the protection of society is of greater importance. That was the particular problem being examined by the court in the case of Veen (No 2). Again, in a particular case, a feature which lessens what might otherwise be the importance of general deterrence, might, at the same time increase the importance of deterrence of the offender.

It is therefore erroneous in principle to approach the law of sentencing as though automatic consequences follow from the presence or absence of particular factual circumstances. In every case, what is called for is the making of a discretionary decision in the light of the circumstances of the individual case, and in the light of the purposes to be served by the sentencing exercise." 
Allen J and Sully J agreed with these remarks.

These remarks are peculiarly apt to the difficult task facing the learned judge in the present matter.

In essence, Studdert J was faced with the sentencing of: a young offender suffering from a severe personality disorder which: had some effect upon her "moral control" and resulted in an uncaring attitude for her victim; and meant that the offender remained a danger to others in the future; who had committed murder with intent to kill (albeit that such intent was not found to have existed long before the first knife attack); in circumstances attracting the principles of general deterrence having regard inter alia to the victim's role as a custodian.

Senior counsel for the applicant raised a number of challenges.

Parity of sentence of co-offender 
Citing Lowe versus The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 295] counsel submitted that the equivalent sentence imposed upon
Sherwood represented an effective disparity because proper regard was not taken of differences between the two offenders. At the time of the offence the applicant was 15 years and eight months, compared to Sherwood's 17 years and two months. The applicant had no prior criminal history, compared to
Sherwood's convictions for assault and dishonesty. And the applicant's abnormality of mind was found to be more severe than that of Sherwood. The learned judge also said that the applicant's co-offender was "more in touch with reality".

These matters do not establish error. The judge was aware of each point of difference. He recognised the need to observe the parity principles. Indeed, he wrestled with the submission advanced on behalf of the co-offender that she should receive a lesser sentence having regard to factors in her favour.
He was entitled to find, as he did, that Sherwood's criminal record was of no determinative force. The applicant played a significantly greater part in the planning and instigation of the enterprise which involved the senseless killing of Mrs Bisen. It was the applicant's idea to rob the deceased. She talked of hitting her and tying her up. She brought knives into the dining room. She arranged to have cord available to tie the victim up. This greater level of criminality amply justifies the parity of sentences imposed.

The evidence which the judge accepted about the applicant suffering a more severe abnormality of mind did not demand more favourable treatment. As the passage quoted from Engert makes plain, it cut both ways because it was a factor indicative of the need for the particular care taken by the judge in considering the issue of protection of society. See also Veen (No 2) at -7.

Assessment of mental condition and age, referable to objective gravity of offence 
Counsel accepted that the judge fell into no error in his assessment of the applicant's age and mental state as subjective matters touching the sentencing task. However, it was contended that these factors required separate consideration in the context of the objective seriousness of the particular offence. This submission raises a highly artificial distinction that leads nowhere in the present case. The judge fully appreciated the age and mental state of the applicant. Nothing in the evidence suggested that her abnormality of mind had changed between the time of offence and her assessment for sentencing purposes. Intent to kill and other matters relevant to objective seriousness of the particular offence were properly addressed in that context.

Sentence otherwise manifestly excessive 
I would reject this submission in the light of the matters discussed in the judgment, which I have summarised above.

I would add that this was a case where it was proper to have regard to the principle of general deterrence, tempered as it was with consideration of the favourable subjective features. Residents of a youth refuge must recognise that the courts will view with the utmost seriousness a violent assault (here the intentional killing) of a supporting worker placed in a quasi-custodial position.

A warning 
In 1996 the applicant appealed to this Court against her conviction. The appeal was confined to one ground, that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory. Not surprisingly there was an extensive traversing of the evidence and the submissions at trial. The arguments were considered at length in reserved judgments by a Court comprising Mahoney P, Sully J and Dunford J.

There was no appeal against sentence. Now, in 1998, the issue of sentence is raised for the first time. This has involved the preparation of fresh appeal papers, new counsel and three further judges. The evidence has been considered in detail. No reason has been offered to explain why the applicant and her legal advisers have chosen to split the matter this way.

Despite this, the applicant's age and the length of sentence she has yet to serve have made it appropriate to permit the application to be dealt with on its merits. Other applicants should not presume that leave to appeal against sentence will be forthcoming in similar circumstances.

I propose that leave to appeal be granted and that the appeal should be dismissed.

Regina versus Melissa GIESELMANN 
JUDGMENT 
WOOD CJ at CL: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of Mason, P. I agree with his reasons and the orders he proposes. 
R versus Melissa GIESELMANN 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: I agree with Mason P. * * * 
