

Regina versus Currie Matter No Cca 60179/95 [1997] NSWSC 534 (31 October 1997) 
Regina versus Desmond Jeffrey Currie /95 October 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL, Smart J, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against Conviction and Application for Leave to Appeal Against Severity of Sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60179/95 
DELIVERED: Friday, 31 October 1997 
HEARING DATE: Monday, 2 June 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Desmond Jeffrey CURRIE 
JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, BRUCE J 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: P Segal * Respondent: MC Marien 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: -- * Respondent: SE O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: SEXUAL ASSAULT - RECORDED INTERVIEW - FAIRNESS TO ACCUSED - ABSENCE OF LIAISON OFFICER - RIGHT TO DISMISS COUNSEL 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO. OF PAGES: 24 
REGINA versus Desmond Jeffrey CURRIE 
HEADNOTE 
C was convicted of 5 acts of penile penetration of the vagina, 1 act of digital penetration of the anus and 2 acts of oral intercourse without consent.

The complainant, H, a 19 year old woman, had been alone and asleep in her flat when she awoke at about 4 am to find C, whom she did not know, in her bedroom.
When she asked him what he was doing there C said he was an acquaintance of a man who had been in H's flat earlier. He said he had been at a night spot with the acquaintance and had arranged to meet him at her flat. H and C smoked some marijuana together and he asked her if she had a boyfriend. She replied incorrectly that she did. H's evidence was that soon afterwards C offered her money for sex. She declined, telling him to leave and opening the door. C shut the door, turned off the lights and when H tried to re-open the door C grabbed a kitchen knife. He forced her into the bedroom with the knife at her throat and told her to make no noise. She said "if you are going to do this, please use a condom". He did so. Afterwards C fell asleep and H escaped, crying and screaming, onto the street. A neighbour, V, found her and she told him not to call the police. She phoned her ex-boyfriend, JHJ instead. JHJ and his flatmate found C still in H's bed asleep with a condom over his penis. A fight ensued and C escaped out the window. V later found C in his garage. C asked to use the telephone and V declined, calling the police.

In his police interview, C denied having had sex with H. He said he had gone to the flat with friends to smoke marijuana which they said could be bought there. He could not name his companions. He said he had slept on the lounge room floor fully clothed and his shirt had come off during the altercation with JHJ. Later, he admitted in Court that he had engaged in sex with H but said she had initiated it. He had lied about the sex because of his wife.

C told police he had drunk a large amount of alcohol up until 3.00 to 3.30 am and had smoked a substantial amount of marijuana at H's flat at about 4 am. He had been hit on the head during the altercation at about 7 am and later received medical treatment. His recorded interview began at 12.50 pm. He had not had a drink for about 9 hours and was not adversely affected by alcohol, drugs or his injuries in the police interview.

HELD: 
It was not unfair to admit the recorded interview.

The absence of an Aboriginal Liaison Officer during the interview was not a valid objection to its admission into evidence. The admissibility of all police interviews in NSW is governed by the rules of fairness. It will be relevant if the accused is disadvantaged or unable to look after his own interests. C was not in that position and was not oppressed.

Counsel's failure to follow C's instructions to attack the credibility of the complainant as a drug dealer and to put to the jury that she had been suffering from a hallucinatory reaction to smoking marijuana did not result in a miscarriage. There was no evidence of a hallucinatory state and it was within counsel's discretion whether to attack the credibility of the complainant on the basis of drugs as it could well have worked against the accused to do so and was not the issue.

A disagreement between counsel and accused over whether one juror should be challenged does not amount to a miscarriage of justice.

After having told the jury that each count is to be considered separately, the judge's direction that "it seems to me, though that either the accused is guilty of all the charges or not guilty of all the charges" was not improper.
The direction reflected the practical realities, given the evidence and the way in which the trial was fought.

In the circumstances, counsel's failure to tell the accused that he could dismiss her did not amount to a miscarriage.

The verdict was not unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The sentence of a minimum term of 4 years and an additional term of 3 years was not excessive.

ORDERS:
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence; appeal against sentence dismissed.

REGINA versus Desmond Jeffrey CURRIE 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J, for the reasons which he has given. 
REGINA versus Desmond Jeffrey CURRIE 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Desmond Jeffrey Currie appeals against his conviction on 8 counts of having sexual intercourse with the complainant without her consent and knowing that she was not consenting and threatening to inflict actual bodily harm upon her by means of a knife. 
All counts arose out of an incident which occurred about 4 am on 14 January
The sexual intercourse alleged included 5 acts of penile penetration of the vagina, 1 act of digital penetration of the anus and 2 acts of oral intercourse.

The prosecution evidence could be summarised as follows. The complainant was a year old girl living in a small flat in Tweed Heads. She had a couple of
Aboriginal girls from Coffs Harbour staying with her but they had gone out for the night. They did not have a key so the complainant left some large windows open through which they could enter. The complainant went to bed about 11 pm to 11.30 pm. It was a hot night so she slept on top of the bed clothes. She wore a sarong from her waist down. Her torso was bare.

About 4 am she awoke to find a man in her bedroom. She asked him what he was doing and tried to cover herself with a shirt. He told her that he was a friend of Janine or Janelle who was C's girlfriend. C was the appellant's brother in law. The complainant remembered somebody called C and some other people being at the flat on an earlier day. The appellant told the complainant that they had been to The Playroom, a night spot, and that they had arranged to meet at her flat. He asked if the others were there to which she replied "no". The complainant was keen to get dressed. The appellant was paying her close attention. She edged past him to the bathroom where she put the shirt on. He waited for her outside the bathroom door. She came out of the bathroom and put the light on in the living room which, at one end, contained a kitchenette and a washing machine.

He packed some marijuana in a cone which was placed in a "billy". He offered her a smoke and she accepted. She had one and a half cones with him. It was estimated that he had about five cones. He asked her if she had a boyfriend and she replied, incorrectly, "yes". In response to his enquiry she said that she was not aboriginal but white. She felt uncomfortable with this stranger but she continued to talk with him. There was some discussion about some missing money. He half suggested that he might have taken it. She asked for the return of the money if he had taken it and he replied "No, I'll give you fifty dollars for sex." She said "I'm not that sort of person, I'm not like that" and he replied "I'll give you a hundred and fifty dollars, no, I'll give you two hundred dollars for sex". She said "I'm not like that, go away if you're going to harass me, I'm going to ask you to leave." He promised to be good. She opened the one door to the flat and said "it's light enough, I'd like to leave the door open". He came over, closed the door and switched the lights off. She went to re-open it. The appellant grabbed a knife, held it to her throat, put his arm around her, saying "right we're going to do this, come into your room, don't scream, don't make any noise." She started crying and said "please don't do this" but he led her into the bedroom with the knife at her throat. She said "if you're going to do this, please use a condom" and he agreed. Standing very close to her with the knife, he said, "let's go to the bed". He told her to get on the bed and take her clothes off. With trembling fingers she took off the sarong. She undid the buttons on her shirt and removed her pants. He put the condom on, still holding the knife. She asked him to put the knife down on the table as the knife scared her. He put the knife beside him on the bed. The various acts of vaginal penile penetration, digital anal penetration and fellatio occurred. During the rape proceedings the appellant had trouble with the first condom and he asked for and was given another one. It is unnecessary to relate the details of the various acts. Upon their conclusion the appellant went to sleep. When he appeared sound asleep she jumped up, grabbed a dress and fled. She went to a friend's flat but no- one answered. She was very upset, crying out and screaming and a neighbour who knew her called out to her and went out to see her in the street. It was about .30 am (Daylight Saving Time - DST). She said, "There is a guy in my house, he's got a knife, he just raped me." 
Mr V took the complainant inside his house. He asked if she wanted to call the police and she replied that the appellant had told her not to call the police.
She added that it was too much trouble. She used the telephone to contact a friend. She spoke to JHJ, her former boyfriend. It was about 6.50 am (DST).
She told him that there was a man in her house with a knife. He put the telephone down, pulled his nunchakas (2 pieces of wood joined by a chain) off the wall and ran down to the complainant's flat. His flatmate, JAG, followed.
JHJ found the appellant lying on the complainant's bed with his pants around his ankles, a condom over his penis, and not wearing his shirt. It was about .55 am. (DST) 
JAG had located the complainant and called out. JHJ joined them and on verifying with her that the appellant had raped her he returned to her flat.
JAG took her to the flat of JHJ and himself. After a short time JAG and their other flatmate, KA arrived. Access was gained to the complainant's flat. The appellant was still lying on the complainant's bed asleep. There was a knife on the floor about halfway down the bed and right next to it. It was a kitchen knife with a brown plastic handle.

JHJ woke the appellant and accused him of raping the complainant. The appellant replied that he had not done anything and had come there with C. The appellant reached down for the knife. JHJ struck the appellant across the left hand side of his head with the nunchakas, as JHJ was scared for his life. The appellant grabbed for the nunchakas and actually got hold of them. JHJ ripped them out the appellant's hands. Punches were thrown in the struggle and JHJ was grabbing the appellant and trying to hold him. JHJ grabbed the appellant and threw him out the window. The appellant landed on the grass. The appellant managed to avoid JAG and KA and escaped. JHJ dialled the emergency police number. A police officer told him to grab the complainant and bring her back down to her flat. JHJ did so. The police arrived at the flat. The appellant was found, arrested and taken back to the flat in one of the police cars. He got out and when the complainant saw him she became hysterical and asked why the police had brought him back.

After the appellant had escaped he was noticed by Mr V shortly after 7 am walking in Boundary Lane. The appellant ducked behind some bushes.
Within about 5 minutes Mr V heard a noise in his garage. On investigation he found the appellant. Mr V declined the appellant's request to use his telephone to contact the appellant's wife and told the appellant to get out.
Mr V re-entered his house and telephoned the police. They came to his home and he showed them where the appellant had gone. As Mr V spoke to the police officers the appellant reappeared and Mr V pointed him out to the police officers. When the appellant saw Mr V and the police the appellant turned around. The police left in pursuit.

JAG and KA gave evidence supporting the evidence of JHJ. Each saw the appellant lying naked on the bed with a condom on his penis. JAG thought the appellant's trousers were around the appellant's ankles while KA thought that they were around the appellant's knees. They gave evidence of the complainant's distressed condition. JAG picked up the knife from the floor next to the bed and gave it to KA who put it in the dirt outside the flat. JAG gave evidence of the fight between JHJ and the appellant and the latter's escape. JAG chased him but lost him. KA did not see any fighting until the appellant came out the window.

A number of police officers gave evidence about the complainant being in a distressed condition in the period 7.30 am to 8.00 am and subsequently. She became so agitated when she saw the appellant that the police had to remove him. They also spoke of the kitchen knife with blood on it. The appellant told
Constable O'Brien that he had gone with a male companion at the Playroom to this home and that they had a few cones together. Then he went to sleep on the couch. When he woke up, a man whom he did not know, was attacking him. The appellant complained about the injuries which he had received.

At the Tweed Heads Police Station Det Sgt Bryant advised the appellant that he was the person suspected of sexually assaulting the complainant in Boundary
Street, Tweed Heads earlier that morning. The appellant insisted that he had done nothing wrong but had been assaulted while asleep on the lounge. When asked if he had had sex at the flats he had replied "No way man. I just went there for a session. I had five cones and went to sleep." He adhered to this story in his recorded interview, stating that the next thing he knew after having the five cones and going to sleep was being assaulted. He ran up the road and asked some people to telephone his wife to come and collect him.

The appellant told the police that he and two fellows (casual companions from the Play- room) went to the flat where he believed "dope" was sold. The two fellows knocked on the door of the flat and they walked in when the complainant, the only girl there, opened the door. The four of them smoked marijuana. He said that he expected to find two aboriginal girls there. He denied that the complainant was sleeping and that he entered the bedroom and stood near her. He denied any subsequent assault.

One of the appellant's difficulties was that he was not able to name either of his alleged companions. He had initially nominated C as one of them but it was established that C was elsewhere. C had been with the appellant at the
Playroom but on leaving went elsewhere.

The appellant denied having intercourse with the complainant and denied being asked to use, and using, a condom. He stated that he was only in her bedroom while they had their session and that he slept on the lounge room floor. He denied that he was sleeping in the complainant's bedroom when he was disturbed. He said that he had all his clothes on but as he fled the men grabbed at his shirt which came off. It did not appear to be damaged.

In his unsworn statement to the Court, the appellant listed what he had drunk on 13 January 1994. It was a great deal of intoxicating liquor. A man at the
Playroom apparently found out or knew where a "score" could be obtained. The appellant offered to drive him there. The man got his friend. The appellant was directed to the flat. He remained in the car while the other two men went to the flat and held a conversation at the door. They motioned to the appellant to come over. He did. As he arrived at the front door he was handed two marijuana sticks. He started "mulling up". He obtained a billy from the car while she provided the cone.

He said that the other men and the complainant had two or three cones and that he had a couple of cones. He went out to the lounge room and lay on the floor.
After a period the two men woke him up and one asked him to take them to Palm
Beach on the Gold Coast. The appellant replied that he could not take them.
The other man offered to drive the first man to Palm Beach and return to
Coolangatta. They took his car keys and left and he fell asleep. He woke up, the girl offered him a place in her bed rather than sleeping on the floor and he accepted the offer. As he tried to go to sleep she started feeling him in a sexual fashion. She offered him some cones and he had one. She renewed feeling him. She had a condom. As intercourse was occurring the condom broke. While she obtained another condom he had another cone. Intercourse resumed. He went to sleep on her bed. His next recollection was of being assaulted and escaping. He concluded by stating that everything in the police interview was true "but for the sexual part because of my missus". He denied taking a knife and having sexual intercourse without her consent.

The appellant's wife confirmed that he had gone to the Playroom with C and that while C returned home about 3.30 am in a drunken state, her husband was not with C. C told her that the appellant was still at the Playroom playing pool. She received a telephone call to collect her husband. When she arrived she found that he was in police custody. His set of car keys could not be located. A spare set was obtained and she drove the car from an area in
Boundary Street near the flat to her home.

On the evidence the appellant faced a formidable Crown case. His explanations were not easy to accept and conducting his defence was difficult. I turn now to the grounds of appeal.

Incorrect Admission of Recorded Interview and Transcript: 
This has two aspects. The appellant contends that the judge erred in admitting the recorded interview and the transcript and that his counsel failed to effectively object to their admission.

I have viewed and heard the whole of the interview. While the appellant spoke with a drawl, his answers to the questions were to the point and coherent. On some occasions he added material. He seemed controlled and composed. He asserted his innocence. Furthermore, he told the jury that except for the part about not having had sex with the complainant what he told the police in the recorded interview was true. His explanation for not admitting sexual intercourse was because of his wife. She was waiting for him to come home.
However, there were other differences between what he said to the jury and what he said in his recorded interview. In the latter, his statement as to what he had drunk revealed a much smaller intake of intoxicating liquor than that listed in his statement to the jury.

The appellant told us that he was unfit to be interviewed because he was drunk, stoned and had been bashed on the head.

Liquor had not been consumed by the appellant since he left the Playroom somewhere between 3 am and 3.30 am. He entered the flat about 4 am (DST). The complainant was seen in the street in a distressed condition about 6.30 am . The appellant avoided and fled from his attackers about 7 am (DST) or perhaps a little later. About 7.15 am to 7.20 am (DST) the police were notified. The Queensland police arrived first, followed by the New South Wales police at 7.30 am. One side of Boundary Street is in New South Wales and the other side is in Queensland. One Queensland police officer who spoke with the appellant and accompanied him in a police vehicle said of the appellant, "He appeared to be not affected by alcohol but maybe a bit hung over, he didn't appear to be grossly affected by alcohol" and "Oh, he smelt, a few things, alcohol might have been one of them". A second Queensland police officer detected a smell of alcohol but no other smell. He thought that the appellant was moderately affected by alcohol as his speech was "a bit stuttered, slurred".

Det Sgt Bryant spoke to the appellant after about 8.30 am at the Tweed Heads
Police Station. Det Bryant said that there was a strong smell of alcohol and a strong smell of body odour. He thought that the appellant was moderately affected by alcohol at that stage. The affectation by alcohol had ceased by the time the recorded interview started about 12.50 pm. At that time the appellant had not had a drink for about 9 hours.

A doctor attended the police station about 9 am, examined the appellant's wounds and took a blood sample. The doctor noticed that the appellant had a cut below his left eye and an abrasion behind his left ear. The doctor arranged for the appellant to be taken to Tweed Heads Public Hospital for further medical treatment. The analyst found that the appellant's blood had an alcohol reading of 0.086 but as the blood sample was not properly sealed the reading could be inaccurate. He also found that the only drug in the appellant's blood was cannabis and that there was reading of one of its ingredients, `Delta-9-THC' acid, of 0.044 milligrams per litre of blood. There was no evidence as to what that meant.

At the trial counsel for the appellant did not object to the admission of the recorded interview in evidence. There was no basis for doing so. While the appellant was moderately affected by liquor at about 8.30 to 9 am, the recorded interview did not begin until about 12.45 to 12.50 pm. By that stage the appellant appeared sober. Nor did he appear to be adversely affected by drugs or his injuries so that he could not fairly be asked questions. The appellant's counsel had no basis on which to attack the recorded interview.
Any attack on a voir dire before the judge must have failed and any attack before a jury would have failed and been counter-productive. The appellant denied the offences alleged and said that what he said to the police was true except about not having consensual sex.

The appellant submitted that the recorded interview should not have been admitted because there was no Aboriginal Liaison Officer present. We were told that it is the practice in Queensland for such officers to be present at police interviews with aborigines involving serious crimes. This has not been the practice in New South Wales where reliance is placed upon the rules of fairness which govern the admissibility of all police interviews. Obviously, if a person is disadvantaged or unable to look after his own interests that will be critical. The appellant was not disadvantaged and was able to look after his own interests as the recorded interview demonstrated. The appellant was not oppressed.

In his affidavit of 28 November 1996 the appellant said that Det Bryant refused his requests to speak with his wife and members of his family. He felt confused and disoriented and in discomfort. The appellant said that Det Bryant had answered his request for an Aboriginal Liaison Officer to see him by saying that the officer was not available. The appellant said that he was unsure as to his rights and felt a sense of despair. There was no one whom he knew or trusted to whom he could talk. Det Bryant mentioned legal assistance to him after the interview.

None of this was raised at the trial. Nor does it appear that counsel was told this. In any event the appellant did not seem overawed or oppressed during the interview. Nor did he suggest at the trial that what he said was untrue except in one respect. There were some other discrepancies which raised doubts as to his truthfulness. He maintained his innocence. The admission of the recorded interview resulted in no miscarriage of justice.

There is no substance in the complaint that the judge should not have allowed the transcript of the record of interview to go to the jury. The judge was right for the reasons which he gave in his judgment of 6 February 1995.
Further at p 211 of the trial transcript he explained to the jury that the transcript of the recorded interview was to be used as an aide-memoire in 2 ways. First to help them follow what was said in the video tape itself and, second, to help them go to a particular part of the video tape quickly rather than having to play the tape until they came to the particular part which they wanted.

Counsel's Failure to Follow Instructions: 
The appellant complained that his counsel had not followed his instructions and attacked the credibility of the complainant as a drug dealer, dealing heavily in marijuana, and hiding evidence from the police, including marijuana and drug utensils and equipment. He further complained that his counsel had not followed his instructions and established (or endeavoured to establish) that the complainant's behaviour was induced by an hallucinatory reaction to smoking marijuana, possibly connected with a sense of guilt and shame at being unfaithful to her estranged boyfriend. Counsel failed, contrary to his instructions, to obtain expert evidence that the complainant was or could have been suffering from a hallucinatory reaction. The appellant said that he also instructed counsel to look into the girl's mental state and any prior history of mental disorder. He told this court that the complainant was the initiator of their sexual intercourse.

The appellant stated that his counsel advised him not to attack the complainant because it would work against him. It was not relevant whether she was a drug dealer. Counsel declined to attack her drug dealing character as it would go against him. Counsel advised that if this were done the appellant's criminal record may emerge. The appellant said that he replied that he did not care if the court looked at his record as he had no convictions for sexual assault. As at 14 January 1994 the appellant had a lengthy record going back to 1980 for many dishonesty offences including break enter and steal, numerous driving offences, possess prohibited drug and malicious damage. There were some 37 entries, many of which contained a number of offences. There was no prior offence of sexual assault.

The appellant's instructions were far fetched. There was no evidence of an hallucinatory reaction or any material to justify the retention of an expert witness. The complainant was seen in a tearful and distressed state as soon as she could escape from the flat, that is, within 1 to 2 hours after the assault. Thereafter she was seen by the police and examined by a doctor at the
Tweed Heads District Hospital, who wrote of the complainant "she was very upset, agitated and at times tearful, however there was no evidence of trauma in the vaginal area or mouth. There were no obvious physical injuries at time of examination. I could find no evidence to support, positively or negatively, that sexual assault had taken place." Her statement contains no reference to any reaction which could be described as hallucinatory. The lady doctor was of mature years and held, additionally, a Diploma in Obstetrics. It is unlikely that she would not have recorded any unusual condition apparent on examination.

The complainant in her evidence in chief spoke of smoking marijuana. She claimed that he had a billy and offered her a smoke. She had about 11/2 smokes in the flat. She denied that she supplied the marijuana. She denied that she got the marijuana out and packed it.

Counsel did not cross examine the complainant about removing or hiding marijuana and drug utensils from the police. There was the complainant's denial that she had any marijuana in the flat on the occasion in question and her admission that she had a cone for use in her home and used it to smoke marijuana. It emerged in evidence that the complainant did not want the police called when she spoke to Mr V. It was obvious from other material that she used marijuana. A jury would have inferred that this was the reason she wanted to speak to her ex boyfriend rather than calling the police. Calling the police was taken out of her hands. Counsel, having unsuccessfully sought to establish that she supplied the marijuana, was in no position to prudently take the matter further. The appellant said that he had never been to the flat before and had never met the complainant previously. The appellant could neither identify nor produce his two companions. Prudent counsel conducting the appellant's defence would have been reluctant to expose the appellant's record.

The appellant has asserted that he instructed his counsel to put to the police that they had not carried out an even handed investigation. They had failed to search the flat thoroughly for marijuana and did not even believe him that they had smoked marijuana. The appellant stated that counsel advised him against criticising or attacking the police. Several of the police officers stated that they had not seen any marijuana or items used for smoking cannabis. The crime scene officer made an extensive examination of the flat.
He said that during the course of the investigations he made a search for items which were used for smoking cannabis and found none.

It was within counsel's discretion whether to pursue this matter. Counsel had little material to use and had to be careful that it did not appear that the appellant was attempting to avoid the issue of sexual assault by attacking the complainant and the Crown over some drug issues of a relatively minor kind. It is hard to see how this would have helped the accused. The reverse would have been the case.

The appellant has stated that he showed Det Bryant at the police station the very long fingernails which he had on the fingers and thumbs of both his hands. The appellant stated that he also told his barrister about this and asked that it be raised at his trial. He believed that the length of his fingernails would have produced scratching if his fingers had been inserted in the complainant's anus. On medical examination no marks were found.

This could fairly be described as such a "lightweight point" as not to merit attention. Prudent counsel would look for something more substantial. Counsel could have prudently taken the view that it would be unwise to cross examine the lady doctor given the terms of her statement. Apart from noting the distress of the complainant, there were no other findings which supported the
Crown case.

The appellant complained that he told his counsel that he did not want a particular potential juror but she advised him against challenging that juror.
The appellant did not know how many jurors had been challenged. A disagreement over whether one particular juror should be challenged does not amount to a miscarriage.

These matters, either alone, or in combination, do not amount to a miscarriage.

Sending Transcript of the Complainant's Evidence to Jury 
The applicant complained that the judge had let the jury have a copy of the transcript of the complainant's statement. The jury asked for it on the third day of the trial (transcript p. 146). Counsel indicated that they had no objection (p 147) to the jury being given her evidence. The jury was given her evidence including the cross examination. There is no merit in this complaint.

Failure to Tell Jury it Could Return Different Verdicts on Different Charges 
The judge identified each of the eight charges and how each fitted into a short but torrid sequence of alleged sexual activity on the appellant's part (SU 4). The judge explained the elements of the offences in an unexceptional way. He directed the jury that the Crown case depended very much on the complainant's evidence. He then reviewed the evidence relating it to each charge, read the accused's statement and summarised his wife's evidence.

At SU 40-41 the judge said: "I have told you a couple of times now, there are eight charges and they have to be considered separately. Having said that, it seems to me, though, that either the accused is guilty of all of the charges or not guilty of all of the charges. It is really not the sort of case where there is any common ground as to some charges and not others. The Crown and the accused are diametrically opposed as to whether these incidents occurred as Miss H said. I say that because it would be a wrong approach to find him guilty of some but not guilty of others in some sort of compromise.

It comes down to this: either Miss H is telling the absolute truth about this incident, or she is not. I hasten to remind you it is not a matter of choosing which you prefer - her version or that of the accused. In order to find the accused guilty, you must be satisfied beyond any reasonable doubt that Miss H has told you the absolute truth about these sexual assaults; about her not consenting; about his threatening her with the knife and so on. If you are not satisfied to that degree, you must find the accused not guilty." 
Objection was taken to this direction both at the trial and in this Court. It was contended that it would have been possible for the jury to be satisfied as to some counts and not others. They may not have been satisfied that all the acts occurred. There was a short pause between the second and third acts while he changed his condom and there was a further pause after the sixth act when he began to get sleepy and she asked him if he was asleep. Then, the seventh and eighth acts occurred. It was one episode with the pauses being short and helping to punctuate the various acts making them easier to remember.

It was the appellant's case that none of the acts happened as described, that the complainant initiated sexual contact and that the intercourse which happened was consensual. Counsel for the appellant submitted to the jury that if the appellant had entered the flat and behaved as she suggested by blocking her path, waiting outside the bathroom in a threatening situation she would not have smoked marijuana with him. Counsel emphasised that there was not a mark on the complainant and that the appellant showed some consideration by wearing a condom. Counsel contended that the complainant had embellished her story and fabricated her evidence and that the major Crown witnesses were friends of the complainant and had some motive to be on her side. She did not want to telephone the police but her friends. Counsel contended that the explanation for the missing car keys was that he had given them to one of the men as he suggested.

Counsel had pointed out that the appellant had always maintained that he never had any knife and that the knife allegedly used had never been analysed. (It was unsuitable for fingerprinting and it was hard to determine what analysis, if any, could usefully be done.) The appellant answered the police questions and asserted his innocence.

The appellant's attack was directed at the credibility of the complainant.
There was no one else present besides the appellant and the complainant at the time of the alleged sexual assault. The appellant's difficulty was that the evidence from the time the complainant fled the flat until the appellant was arrested and charged pointed so strongly to the appellant's guilt. The direction that the jury had to be satisfied beyond any reasonable doubt that the complainant had told them the absolute truth about the sexual assaults, about her not consenting, about the appellant threatening her with the knife and so on was very favourable to the accused. By their verdicts the jury were so satisfied. The course taken by the judge reflected the practical realities, given the evidence and the way in which the trial was fought. The judge's directions occasioned no miscarriage of justice.

Failure to Tell Accused of his Right to Dismiss Counsel 
The accused complained that the trial became counsel's trial because she did what she thought was best and not what he wanted.

The accused stated that when he and counsel were having disagreements as to the conduct of the trial she should have advised him that he was entitled to dismiss her. She did not do so. He said that he was unaware that he could dismiss her. He thought that he had to keep her for the trial. We were told that there was an instructing solicitor. So far as I can tell counsel did consult with the appellant during the trial and there were reasonable grounds for the advice which she gave and the steps which she took. It does not appear that the appellant told her that he had lost confidence in her or took any other step which would indicate that she should return the brief or cease acting for him.

There is no substance in this complainant.

Unsafe and Unsatisfactory Verdict 
From my earlier summary of the evidence it is apparent that this ground is without merit. The complainant's evidence was cogent, she fled as soon as she could, she was distressed, she made a prompt complaint and the appellant was found by 3 men naked on her bed shortly thereafter. He initially denied intercourse. Subsequently, he said that there had been consensual intercourse.
The appellant did not give evidence and was unable to explain satisfactorily the objective facts and some of his earlier statements to the police. He proffered an explanation as to why he denied having sexual intercourse. Nor could he identify or locate the two men he met at the Playroom. The judge directed the jury adequately on the law, related the law to the facts and the facts to each count. He discussed the evidence in some detail and went to some pains to put the accused's case. The summing up was fair.

My examination of the evidence leads me to the conclusions that any verdict other than guilty would have been surprising.

The appeal against conviction must be dismissed.

Sentence 
The appellant also sought leave to appeal against the severity of his sentence comprising a minimum term of 4 years and an additional term of 3 years. The judge's lengthy and detailed remarks on sentence reveal that he gave the question of sentence careful consideration. He made no error of law or fact.
The offence was a serious one involving uninvited entry to the complainant's home in the early hours of the morning, threatening her with a knife and raping her. The judge said, correctly, that it was difficult to find any mitigating features in the objective facts. The judge found that alcohol and smoking marijuana were significant features of the entire incident. The judge accepted that the offence was one which was out of character for him. The appellant's record does not entitle him to leniency.

The judge had regard, amongst other things to the appellant's deprived background, the attempts which he had made to overcome this, his musical gifts which may lead to a musical career and his strong ties with his wife and family. The judge was concerned that a lengthy period in gaol would disrupt these. The judge also had regard to the special factors which affect the sentencing of Aboriginal offenders. After a thoughtful review of the subjective features the judge correctly felt constrained by the gravity of the offence.

The sentence is not manifestly excessive. No basis exists for interfering with the sentence. While I would grant leave to appeal against the sentence, I would dismiss the appeal.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence; appeal against sentence dismissed.

REGINA versus Desmond Jeffrey CURRIE 
JUDGMENT 
BRUCE J: I agree with the orders of Smart J for the reasons which he has given.
 * * * 
