

Regina versus Simpson Matter No 60736/96 [1997] NSWSC 514 (27 October 1997) 
Regina versus Allen Martin Simpson /96 October 1997 
Newman J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus Allen Martin SIMPSON 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I will ask Barr J to deliver the first judgment. 
BARR J: This is an application by Allen John Martin Simpson for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him by Acting Judge Stewart of Queen's Counsel on 26 November 1996. For the offence of armed robbery his Honour imposed a fixed term of three years penal servitude. For the offence of aggravated armed robbery his Honour imposed a sentence of six and a half years penal servitude cumulative upon the fixed term, comprising a minimum term of three and a half years and an additional term of three years. For stealing a motor vehicle his Honour imposed a fixed term of two years penal servitude concurrent with the second sentence. 
The total effect of sentence was nine and a half years penal servitude with a minimum term of six and a half years and an additional term of three years.

The facts of the first offence are as follows: on 15 December 1995 Mrs Kathie
Lovell, her family and friends were having a picnic in Centennial Park to celebrate the seventh birthday anniversary of her son, Joel. Fourteen children and numerous adults were present.

The applicant, then aged twenty one years and nine months, went up to Mrs
Lovell and asked to borrow her video camera. Mrs Lovell declined. The applicant produced a screwdriver and threatened to stab Mrs Lovell with it unless she gave him the camera. A struggle took place and the applicant snatched from Mrs Lovell's grasp a handbag belonging to another member of the group. He ran to a motor vehicle and got away.

Mrs Lovell was put in great fear. Joel was seriously affected by the robbery.
He became ill and lost weight. He developed ulcers in his mouth. He became fearful and regressed to childish habits he had grown out of years before.

Mrs Lovell suffered mental anguish as well.

One week later the applicant and two others held up the branch office of a bank in Sydney and robbed the bank of more than $15,000. One of them was armed with a sawn off shotgun.

During the day the applicant and a seventeen year old youth entered the bank to observe the layout of the branch. Later on the three entered the branch.
The eldest of the three robbers was brandishing the shotgun.

The applicant and his companion leapt over the counter and admitted the armed man to the place behind the counter where the cash was kept.

It was not only the suddenness of the attack that gave the robbers the advantage over the branch staff and members of the public who were present.
Threats were issued in no uncertain terms to the effect that anyone who got in the robbers' way would be shot. Those present were terrified and lay on the floor as directed.

The applicant and his companions escaped by the use of a car they had stolen for the purpose. That was the third charge.

The applicant pleaded not guilty of the first charge but guilty of an alternative charge of robbery without the use of the screwdriver. The jury were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about the screwdriver and convicted him.

The applicant pleaded not guilty to the bank robbery and car theft. The jury convicted him.

The applicant was twenty two years and eight months old when sentenced. He had an extensive record for robbery and other offences of violence and dishonesty, including escaping from lawful custody, dating from 1987 when he was thirteen years old. He had served several gaol terms and was on parole at the time of these offences.

He had been out of gaol only five weeks when he held up Mrs Lovell.

He was arrested for these offences on 28 December 1995 but was held to serve a sentence on another matter until 9 April 1996. His Honour ordered the first sentence to begin on that day.

The applicant will become eligible for release on parole on 8 October 2002 and his effective sentence will expire on 8 October 2005.

It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the total effect of sentence was excessive in the view of the applicant's youth, his physical disability, his efforts towards rehabilitation and the difficulty he would have in rehabilitating himself because of his classification as an escapee, because of his prior custodial history, the accumulation of the sentences on the one that expired on 9 April 1996 and by reference to sentences imposed on the youth who accompanied the applicant in the bank robbery.

Counsel for the applicant referred first to a Community Corrections Service report, dated 21 April 1992, written about the applicant when he was eighteen years old, and compared it with Department of Corrective Services reports written in November 1996. Counsel referred also to the evidence given before his Honour by Ms Walker, Probation and Parole Service, by the applicant himself and by his mother and to his Honour's remarks that the applicant appeared for the first time to be trying to help himself.

It was submitted that all these matters should have weighed against considerations of deterrence.

His Honour referred to all those matters in a detailed and careful judgment and, no doubt, gave them the weight he considered they merited. They had to be set against the unfavourable features of the case objective and subjective.

First there was the very serious nature of the attacks themselves, which were of a kind his Honour noted to be prevalent in the community. They were committed whilst the applicant was on parole.

He had a troublesome history of serious offences. Subjectively he was without remorse, denying that he had used the screwdriver in the attack on Mrs Lovell.

Although there was some evidence that the applicant was beginning to show signs of helping himself, his Honour was reserved about fully accepting it.

In these circumstances, his Honour's approach was, in my opinion, reasonable.

Ultimately, I think counsel's submission comes down to one that a nine and a half year term was too long for the offences. I disagree. It was incumbent upon his Honour to impose sentences, among other things, which were calculated to deter persons generally and the applicant himself from committing such offences.

The applicant is no longer a youth. He was twenty one years and nine months old when he committed these offences and was, especially in view of his serious criminal record, not entitled to the special consideration which attend the sentencing of children and young persons.

Then it was submitted that his Honour did not have regard to the totality of the applicant's criminality. In my opinion, it is clear from his Honour's remarks that he did.

His Honour referred to a number of cases, in respect of which his Honour said the principles were well known and which included R versus Petrinovich and
R versus Standford, unreported decisions of this Court delivered on 18
September 1990 and 23 November 1993 respectively. Both deal with the principle of totality of criminality in sentencing.

His Honour referred in terms to the "overall" sentence that he intended to impose.

The length of the effect of total sentence itself shows, to my mind, that his
Honour took the principles into account.

Then it was submitted that the sentences imposed on the applicant were too long by comparison with those imposed by another Judge on the seventeen year old who had robbed the bank with the applicant. His Honour was aware of those sentences and referred to them.

The seventeen year old offender was sentenced to a six year term of penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of three years and an additional term of three years, for the robbery and ten other offences of like nature. Thirty one other matters were taken into account.

So it was submitted by counsel for the applicant that the criminality contemplated by those sentences was at least as great and probably greater than the criminality embraced by the matters now under consideration.

But, in my opinion, any superficial disparity disappears when the circumstances of the other offender are examined. He was seventeen years old at the time of the offences and entitled to be afforded the special consideration appropriate to persons of that age.

He pleaded guilty to all charges and the sentencing Judge accepted that he was contrite. He had real prospects of rehabilitation, which were noted by the sentencing Judge.

These features individually and in combination showed that he was not an appropriate subject for comparison.

In my opinion, this applicant could have no justifiable sense of grievance by comparing his sentences with the sentences imposed upon the seventeen year old.

A further submission was made that his Honour did not have proper regard to the fact the applicant would serve his sentence harder because he had been specially classified as an escapee and he would be subject, because of the policy of this Government as put into effect by the Department of Corrective
Services, to a more rigorous regime.

The fact of the matter is that escapees will, because of the effect of that policy, serve their sentences harder, but it seems to me inappropriate for the
Court to reduce sentences on that account.

Then it was said that his Honour failed to have sufficient regard to the physical disability of the applicant.

On the occasion of the escape from local custody he went to a place where he could obtain heroin and took an overdose. He lay unconscious in such a condition that he cut off the blood supply to muscles in an arm and leg and damaged tissue had to be surgically removed.

He suffers pain as a result and attends a hospital for the management of it.

There appears to have been no other evidence before his Honour as to the effect of those injuries on the applicant.

It does not appear to this Court that because of the matters I have mentioned he will find it more difficult to serve his sentence.

His Honour referred to these matters and took them into account.

In my opinion, none of the matters raised in argument by counsel for the applicant discloses error on the part of the sentencing Judge.

I would grant leave to appeal because of the seriousness of the offences, but
I would dismiss the appeal.

NEWMAN J: I agree. The orders of the court will be as proposed by Barr J. * * * 
