

Cairncross versus Anderson t/as ERA Legal (No 3) [2016] NSWSC 1478 (18 October )

Last Updated: 18 October 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
The defendants, Daren Anderson trading as ERA Legal and Gallande Pty
Limited trading as ERA Legal, must pay the costs of the plaintiff, Ms Tiffany
Cairncross, of the motion on the ordinary basis.  
Catchwords: 
COSTS - application for indemnity costs - notice of motion founded on advocate's immunity - whether motion so lacking in merit as to call for indemnity costs  
Cases Cited: 
Attwells versus Jackson Lalic Lawyers Pty Limited [(2016) 90 ALJR 572] 
Cairncross versus Anderson t/as ERA Legal (No 2) <case> 
Chaina versus Alvaro Homes Pty Ltd <case> 
General Steel Industries Inc. versus Commissioner for Railways  <case>; <case>; [(1988) 81 ALR 397]  
Texts Cited: 
G E Dal Pont, Law of Costs, (3rd ed 2013, LexisNexis Butterworths)  
Category: 
Costs  
Parties: 
Tiffany Cairncross (Plaintiff/Respondent) 
Daren Anderson trading as ERA Legal (First Defendant/ First Applicant) 
Gallande Pty Limited trading as ERA Legal (Second Defendant/ Second Applicant)  
Representation: 
Counsel: 
N J Owens (Applicants) 
M Henry (Respondent)  
Solicitors: 
Yeldham Price O'Brien Lusk (Applicants) 
Shine Lawyers (Respondent)  
File Number(s): /163787  
JUDGMENT 
Introduction 
At the conclusion of my substantive judgment dismissing a notice of motion brought by the defendant, ERA Legal, founded on the advocate's immunity, I reserved the question of costs, and invited written submissions from both parties: see [52] of Cairncross versus Anderson t/as ERA Legal (No 2) <case> Counsel for each party duly provided me with very helpful written submissions, and both of them made it clear that they were content for me to determine the question of costs in Chambers.

Submissions
Senior counsel for Ms Cairncross, the plaintiff, submitted that the motion of the defendant had never possessed reasonable prospects of success. It was submitted that, if there had ever been a question about that, it was laid to rest when the judgment of the High Court of Australia in Attwells versus Jackson Lalic Lawyers Pty Limited [(2016) 90 ALJR 572], senior counsel submitted that I would make the exceptional order that the losing party on the motion should pay indemnity costs with regard to the entirety of it.
In the alternative, it was said that I would make such an order with regard to costs incurred after the date of the promulgation of Attwells.
Counsel for the defendant submitted that the motion was reasonably arguable and diligently prosecuted. He submitted that there was no basis upon which I could find that the motion was disputing indisputable facts, or brought for an ulterior purpose of the defendant.

Determination
Turning to my determination, it is certainly true that, in the ultimate, the motion did not find favour with me. But I do not come to the conclusion that it was so devoid of legal merit as to warrant the exceptional remedy of indemnity costs. In particular, the breadth of the immunity was and is to a degree contestable.
As well as that, I think it possible that judicial minds may reasonably differ about the approach I adopted to the question left open at [61] of the judgment of the plurality in Attwells, as referred to at [40] of my judgment.
Separately, I accept the proposition of the defendant that the motion featured no futile dispute about incontrovertible facts: see General Steel Industries Inc. versus Commissioner for Railways  <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] at 401.
Indemnity costs are an exceptional remedy that should, in my opinion, be used sparingly, see G E Dal Pont, Law of Costs, (3rd ed 2013, LexisNexis Butterworths) at 541. In the circumstances of this case, I am not persuaded that there should be departure from the "default position" of the losing party on the motion paying the costs of the victorious party on the ordinary basis.

Order
For those reasons, I make the following order: * (1) The defendants, Daren Anderson trading as ERA Legal and Gallande Pty Limited trading as ERA Legal, must pay the costs of the plaintiff, Ms Tiffany Cairncross, of the motion on the ordinary basis.
 * * * 
