

The Honourable Justice James Roland Tomson Wood, Royal Commissioner v
Charles Joseph Staunton No. 30031/95 [1995] NSWSC 45 (19 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION
DUNFORD J
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 8:6:1995 #ADD 19:9:1995
ORDER
That the defendant be committed to prison until further order; I reserve liberty to either party to apply and I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of these proceedings.
JUDGE1
DUNFORD J:  Charles Joseph Staunton has been brought before the court on a reference from the Royal Commissioner of the Royal Commission into the New
South Wales Police Service (the Commission) on a charge of contempt of such
Commission in failing to answer a number of questions when directed by the
Royal Commissioner to do so.
On 13 May 1994 His Excellency, the Governor of New South Wales appointed the Honourable James Roland Tomson Wood, a Judge of this Court, as Royal
Commissioner of the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service and, accordingly, the [Royal Commissions Act 1923](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/), (the Act) particularly
Division 2 of [Part 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/index.html#p2) (ss [15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/index.html#p15) to [18D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/index.html#p18d) inclusive), as supplemented by the Royal
Commissions (Police Service Act) 1994 applies.
The Act provides in <case> that a witness before the Commission shall not be excused from answering any question on the ground that the answer may criminate or tend to criminate him or on any other ground unless the answer is given unwillingly. Section 18 provides that the Commissioner shall have all the powers vested in this Court or any Judge thereof in relation to compelling witnesses to answer questions which the Commissioner deems to be relevant to the inquiry, whilst <case> provides that a person is guilty of contempt of the
Commission if he does or omits to do anything which would, if the Commission were the Supreme Court, be contempt of that Court or if the person disobeys any order or summons made or issued by the Commissioner.
Section 18B, so far as is relevant, provides as follows: "18B. (1) A contempt of a commission may be punished in accordance with this section.

The commissioner may present to the Supreme Court a certificate setting out the details which the commissioner considers constitute the contempt.

If the commissioner presents such a certificate to the
Supreme Court: the Supreme Court shall thereupon inquire into the alleged contempt; and after hearing any witnesses who may be produced against or on behalf of the person charged with the contempt, and after hearing any statement that may be offered in defence, the Supreme Court (if satisfied that the person is guilty of the contempt) may punish or take steps for the punishment of the person in like manner and to the like extent as if the person had committed that contempt in or in relation to proceedings in the Supreme Court; and the provisions of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and the rules of court of the Supreme Court shall, with any necessary adaptations, apply and extend accordingly.
 
Such a certificate is prima facie evidence of the matters certified..."
By section 12 of the 1994 Act a witness is entitled to take a general objection in which case any answers given by him are deemed to be given unwillingly, so that they cannot be used against him in any civil or criminal proceedings.
The history of the matter, It appears from the certificate furnished by the
Commissioner pursuant to <case>, is that on 29 May 1995 the defendant was served with a summons requiring him to attend at the
Commission to give evidence. On 1 June he appeared and entered the witness box and was sworn to tell the truth. He then took a general objection pursuant to <case> of the 1994
Act and the Commissioner declared that all answers given by him would be taken as given under objection pursuant to that section. He then answered some general questions relating to personal matters and his previous employment as a New South Wales police officer. He was asked a further question which he declined to answer and the Commissioner directed him to answer, but the defendant again indicated that he refused to answer that question. He was then given the opportunity to consult with his counsel, which he did. On resumption, his counsel indicated to the Commissioner that her client had instructed her that he was maintaining his refusal to answer the question.
Counsel assisting the Commissioner and the Commissioner then asked the defendant a number of further questions, some of which he refused to answer.
The Commissioner then directed that he be taken into custody and required him to show cause why he should not be dealt with for contempt of Commission, but through his counsel he declined to offer any additional material or place any matters before the Commissioner, whereupon the Commissioner referred the matter to this Court pursuant to <case> and furnished the relevant certificate.
The questions which the defendant was asked and which he refused to answer were as follows: * Who are the friends that you have today that you met while you were a police officer? * Who are police officers, yes.
 * Mr Staunton, you have current friends and associates who are police officers? * Will you please name any current friend or associate that you have who is a serving member of the New South Wales
Police
Service? * Do you have a personal friendship with a police officer by the name of Gary Spencer? * Do you have a personal friendship or association with a police officer by the name of Trevor Haken? * Do you have an association with a person known as Bill
Bayeh, also known as Bill Michael? * Have you ever received from any member of the New South
Wales Police
Service confidential information? * Have you ever sought confidential information from any member of the New South Wales
Police Service? * Have you ever been asked by anybody to pay a bribe to a member of the New South Wales Police Service? * Have you ever been asked since you've been a private inquiry agent to pass any money to a police officer? * Have you ever passed any money to a serving member of the
New South Wales Police Service since your termination from the New South
Wales Police Service? * Have you ever been asked on behalf of any client or clients to arrange for favours to be given in relation to charges pending against that client? * While a private inquiry agent, have you ever asked any police officer to provide information to you which might be accessed from the New South Wales Police intelligence collection? * Have you ever sought information from the police database from serving members of the New South Wales Police Service, since you have left the Police Service yourself? * Have you ever been provided with statements or material from prosecution briefs by police officers, in circumstances where you believed you were not lawfully entitled to receive the material you were provided? * Have you ever agreed with civilians to assist them in the deliberate perversion of the course of justice?
On the matter coming before me as Duty Judge in the Common Law Division last week, I first raised the question of whether it was appropriate for me to deal with it or whether it was properly a matter for the Court of Appeal pursuant to <case>(i), [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). It was suggested that it would be appropriate for me to deal with it pursuant to [s 48(4)(a)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s48.html) as contempt of the Court sitting in a Division, but I expressed the view that it was not contempt of a Judge sitting in a Division.
In due course reference was made to the Supreme Court Rules Pt 12 r 6 and Sch H which assign matters arising under s 18B of the Act to the Administrative Law Division. As I am the Judge who regularly deals with urgent applications in that Division, I directed the proceedings to be deemed to have been commenced in that Division and I proceeded with the hearing. On the following day a summons intituled in the
Administrative Law Division was filed in Court.
No evidence or defence was adduced on behalf of the defendant to the charge of contempt and his counsel indicated that he did not wish to say anything by way of defence. I therefore accepted the evidence in the certificate, found that the defendant was guilty of contempt of the Commission and adjourned the matter to the following day for evidence and submissions on penalty, and I directed that the defendant be detained in custody in the meantime.
On the following day evidence was adduced and submissions made in relation to penalty and I reserved my decision, the defendant again being detained in custody. I now proceed to give my determination on penalty mid the reasons therefor.
The defendant has sworn an affidavit in which he said, inter alia: "2. The evidence I gave before the Royal Commission on
Thursday, 1 June to the effect that I do not have any information concerning corruption in the New South Wales Police
Force was the truth.
I also confirm that I have never made arrangements with police so that police might act corruptly to assist any client of mine. I also confirm that I have not been involved in the procuring of false statements to be used in connection with Court proceedings nor have I agreed with police officers to assist them in the deliberate perversion of the course of justice.....
In the course of my professional career as a licensed private investigator I have come into possession of information from a number of sources (including directly from my clients) and this information I have been able to gather after instructions given to me by clients and by making enquiries on their behalf I do not consider that I have the right to divulge that information or to answer any questions that may lead directly or indirectly to divulging of that information or the sources from which it was obtained. Furthermore, I do not believe I have the right to identify my clients or persons I may have spoken to on their behalf. It is my belief that the questions directed to me by Mr
Agius and by the Royal Commissioner, would have the potential to compromise my ongoing relationships with clients and breach the confidentiality reposed in me."
In cross-examination he said that if he was again called upon by the
Commissioner to answer such questions he proposed not to do so. It was conceded by his counsel that the matters in his affidavit were no defence and that he was bound in law to answer the questions; but she submitted that his belief that he should not answer such questions, although mistaken, was genuinely held, and that I should deal with him leniently on that account.
However, I am satisfied that this is not a mistaken belief genuinely held, but merely a false excuse which he knows to be false, and which he is using in a rather blatant attempt to avoid giving answers which may implicate his associates and/or himself in corruption or other criminal activities. If he genuinely, though mistakenly, believed that he had a duty of confidentiality to his so-called clients, I would have expected him, when faced with the threat of gaol, to have sought release from those clients of such duty of confidentiality, but in cross-examination he admitted he has not done so.
My view that his reasons for not answering are not genuine is confirmed by a comparison of the questions which he has answered with those which he has refused to answer. He gave a number of answers constituting simple denials of wrong doing, but once a question was asked which invited the naming of another person or which might be seen as preliminary to the naming of another person he refused to answer. These questions generally did not ask him who his current clients were but asked who were his current friends whom he had met whilst a police officer and whether he had a personal friendship, as opposed to a client relationship, with named police officers et cetera. By way of example, I draw attention to a particular question which he refused to answer, namely: "Have you ever passed any money to a serving member of the
New South Wales Police Service since your termination from the New South Wales Police Service?"
If the answer to that question had been "no", no question of so-called confidential information concerning the identity of his client could have arisen; but an answer "yes" would have undoubtedly led to further questions which may have gone to the core of the Commission's terms of reference including questions relating to corrupt and/or illegal activity on the part of the defendant and/or others including, possibly, his so-called clients.
I therefore consider his contempt to be wilful and contumacious, and designed to frustrate the work of the Commission which has been set up in the public interest to identify and recommend ways of eliminating or reducing corruption in the New South Wales Police Service. It amounts to a public defiance of the Commission and calls into play the penal or disciplinary jurisdiction to deal with criminal contempt: Australian Meat Industry
Employees Union versus Mudginberri Station Pty Ltd [(1986) 160 CLR 98] at 108. There can be no doubt but that the defendant's conduct was deliberate and that he knew what he proposed to do might (indeed perhaps would) expose him to penalties: Director of Public Prosecutions versus Chidiac [(1991) 25 NSWLR 372.] If a number of witnesses before the Commission took the same view the Commission would be reduced to a toothless farce. As Moffitt
P said in relation to another Royal Commission in Thelander versus Woodward [(1981) 1 NSWLR 644] at 646: "Where appropriate, the sanctions of contempt and a charge under <case> should be pursued with vigour and expedition.
Indeed unless this is done an inquiry is at risk of becoming a lame one, which does not reach out to the leaders or the central planning of crime," and in Von Doussa versus Owens (No 3) [(1982) 31 SASR 116], a case of a witness refusing to answer questions before an Inspector conducting an investigation under the Security Industry (SA)
Code, King CJ at pp 117 to 118 said: "The effectiveness of the administration of justice depends upon compliance by witnesses with the legal obligation to answer relevant questions. This is so whether the proceedings are in a court of law or before some other tribunal or authority which Parliament has empowered to compel answers."
Even, if contrary to my findings, the defendant had originally believed he had some justification for refusing to answer, that can no longer be the case. He had legal advice before he went to the Commission, the Commissioner made it quite clear when he first refused to answer questions that he had no legal right to refuse as he did and the possible consequences if he persisted in such refusal, and then granted him an adjournment so that he could further consult with his counsel and, finally, before me his counsel has quite rightly conceded on his behalf that his purported reason for not answering is no answer at all.
In considering an appropriate penalty the main considerations must be coercion, punishment and the deterrence of others, particularly those who may find themselves in a similar position before the Commission.
Ms Fullerton, the defendant's counsel, has submitted that the objectives of punishment and the deterrence of others would be met by imposing a determinate sentence of imprisonment, and has drawn my attention to a number of cases dealing with witnesses who have refused to give answers in criminal trials: eg Registrar of the Court of Appeal versus Gilby (Court of Appeal August ), Registrar of the Court of Appeal versus Raad (Court of Appeal 9 June 1992),
Independent Commission Against Corruption v Aristodemou (Grove J 14 December ), Independent Commission Against Corruption versus Cornwall (No 2) (Abadee J 8
September 1993) and the sentences imposed in those cases, and also to the fact that if prosecuted not for contempt but for the statutory offence provided by s 20 of the Act the maximum penalty that could be imposed would be a fine of $400.
In the cases of Gilby and Raad and also in the case of Registrar of the
Court of Appeal versus Maniam (No 2) [(1992) 26 NSWLR 309] the relevant trials had been completed so there was no point in imposing an indeterminate term of imprisonment, and so fixed terms were imposed or in Maniam's case, a substantial fine. In the case of Aristodemou, by the time he was dealt with he had returned to the Independent Commission Against Corruption and agreed to answer questions but he was still fined.
On the other hand in the case of Von Doussa versus Owens, the witness refusing to answer questions, a committal to prison for an indefinite term was imposed and on an application for discharge, which was unsuccessful (reported in [31
SASR 111] at 118) King CJ said: "The Court must do what it can to prevail upon the applicant to see the matter in a clearer light and to comply with his legal obligation."
Similarly an indefinite term was imposed by the High Court in James v
Cowan in re
Botten <case>; [(1928) 42 CLR 305], a case of a senior public servant refusing to produce documents in his possession pursuant to a subpoena, albeit at ministerial direction.
Independent Commission Against Corruption versus Cornwall (No 2) related to a journalist who refused to answer questions as to the source of a story she had written, and in doing so she claimed to be upholding a set of principles promulgated by the Media
Entertainment and Arts Alliance described as a "Code of Ethics" one of which was: "In all circumstances they shall respect all confidences received in the course of their calling":
See Independent Commission Against Corruption versus Cornwall (No 1) [(1993) ALR 97] at 119, 125. She had also said she would continue to refuse to answer questions even if sent to gaol, and Abadee J in that case accepted that a realistic assessment of the situation was that she would adhere to her stated intention and a committal for an indefinite duration would not achieve its object of compelling her to answer. Accordingly he imposed a fixed term of imprisonment which, in the light of various subjective features, he suspended on terms.
It has been submitted that in view of this defendant's avowed intention to maintain his present attitude notwithstanding these proceedings and their consequences, I should, as Abadee J did in the Cornwall case, be satisfied that coercion is not going to be effective and, accordingly, impose a fixed determinate sentence for punitive purposes rather than an indeterminate one for coercive purposes.
I reject the submission for a number of reasons:
Firstly, it is early days yet and although the defendant says he will not change his attitude, I am by no means satisfied his resolve will not weaken, particularly after some time in prison. Secondly, as I have found, he is not seeking to defend a principle in which he genuinely though mistakenly believes, as was the case with Ms Cornwall, but seeking to protect wrong-doers, possibly including himself Thirdly, there are probably a number of other witnesses to be called before the Commission who may find themselves in a position similar to the defendant, and it is essential that a clear message be sent to them of their obligation to answer questions and that such obligation cannot be avoided by mere payment of a tariff by way of imprisonment or fine: (Von Doussa versus Owens, supra at 118 quoting
Mitchell J at [(1982) 30 SASR 399).] This is particularly so where there is a perception that some serving police may attempt to frustrate the Commission by sticking together and maintaining a wall of silence. Finally, another factor which may produce a change of heart on the part of the defendant is if the persons whom he is refusing to name are in the meantime named to the Commission by others.
The Court's primary object at this stage is to persuade the defendant to comply with his legal obligation and answer questions.
Whilst, with respect, not necessarily agreeing with everything said by
Abadee J in Cornwall's case, that case is in my view further distinguishable from the present in that Ms Cornwall was refusing to reveal sources of information and there was no suggestion that she may herself have been involved in criminal activities of any kind or that she had direct personal knowledge of such activities by others, whereas the nature of the questions so far asked in the present case suggests that the defendant may be alleged to himself have been involved in corrupt or other criminal conduct.
For these reasons I regard a fixed order for a term of imprisonment or other penalty is inappropriate at this stage and I am satisfied the defendant should be committed to prison until further order. Depending on his future course of conduct, the time will come when it will be appropriate to order his discharge or to fix a determinate term or other penalty. He is, in a sense, his own gaoler; he can secure his release at any time by purging his contempt and answering all questions asked or to be asked of him by the Commissioner.
I therefore find the defendant guilty of contempt of the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service in that on 1 June 1995 he refused to answer questions which the Royal Commissioner deemed to be relevant to such inquiry. I order that the defendant be committed to prison until further order; I reserve liberty to either party to apply and I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of these proceedings.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/45.html  
