

Regina versus Little Matter No 72294/98 [1998] NSWSC 744 (16 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus STEPHEN HENRY LITTLE /98 July 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) (Non-publication order made) 
HIS HONOUR: Application is made for bail by Stephen Little who stands charged with 71 counts of offences against boys said to constitute a pattern of paedophilic activity spanning a period of some 14 years from 1975 to 1989. 
Those charges are very serious. They include 30 counts of intercourse with males aged as young as the range 10 to 18, including acts of fellatio and anal penetration. Because of the change in the legislation applicable over this period, there will be a most complex indictment containing a number of offences of different legal elements which will need to be explained to a jury. At present, it is proposed that the 71 counts proceed at one trial. He has been committed for trial and that trial has been scheduled for 15 February
The Crown estimates the length of the trial is two months. That may be an erroneous estimate in the sense that one would expect there to be a number of pre-trial applications and issues arising at the trial that might well extend it considerably beyond that if all of the seven complainants were to give evidence of all of the matters referred to, and if there were to be a defence case. There is likely to be a defence case because the applicant is pleading not guilty.

The Crown case will be proved by the evidence of the seven complainants, by some degree of corroboration such as might be available as to the surrounding circumstances though not as to the individual acts charged, and by reliance on evidence similar to that referred to by the High Court in Hoch v. The
Queen <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 292], now referred to in the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), as evidence of tendency or coincidence.

In three of the cases of individual complainants what appears to be alleged are courses of conduct, and indeed in the case of at least one complainant the relevant counts are representative counts.

It is alleged also that these offences were committed by the applicant as part of a particular circle of associates, one at least of whom has similarly been charged with using the same premises.

It is notorious that there has been a Royal Commission into these matters, and that persons have been arrested in circumstances in which their trials will be attended by great publicity. Consequently, that trial date may or may not be adhered to.

It is also notorious that persons charged with the offences with which this applicant stands charged are at risk inside the gaol system, and outside. It is also notorious that within the gaol system it is possible, if one wishes, to obtain protection of greater or lesser variety depending on one's willingness to undergo almost the entire period of one's time awaiting trial in solitary confinement.

I take all those matters into account. I take into account the applicant's evidence that he has developed a reliance upon religion, that he is now celibate and Buddhist as matters that, particularly in the context of the culture post-Royal Commission, would indicate a lack of likelihood for the commission of further offences whilst on bail. Nonetheless, it has to be accepted that on the face of this material the Crown case, even if not on all of the 71 counts but on a most substantial proportion of those counts, is likely to result in a conviction with extremely lengthy custodial sentences.
It seems to me from what I have heard today that that is a matter that may well not have been appreciated by the applicant when he, as I find he did, voluntarily surrendered himself for return to Australia to face the charges.
Indeed, I am prepared to infer that the applicant in no way expected that there would be the degree of risk, both within the gaol system and without, that he might experience while waiting for these charges, or that he might experience after sentence.

The applicant has complained of assaults in gaol for which he has received medical treatment. He said that he is never relaxed, never unafraid. He has pointed to prison officers laughing, though not directly at his predicament but, at the facts in relation to his matter. He feels a sense of menace from other prisoners. He is detained on remand in some form of protection with some other prisoners. The evidence does not allow me to conclude whether that is because of some failure on the part of the Corrective Services establishment, or because he has failed to obtain protection that is otherwise available, or whether that is all the protection that that department, acting properly, considers is appropriate to his circumstances.

He has within the community his brother as a relative. It is not asserted that he has, other than through his family, his brother's family, close ties by way of assets within the community or matters of such sort.

When he left Australia in 1996, it is contended by the prosecution, he did so aware that police were looking for him. The applicant asserts that he left
Australia for work reasons. I do not accept that. I consider that his leaving
Australia in 1996 in the context of the events that were then occurring and in the context of a world wide hunt for persons, one at least of whom was known to be part of the circle it is alleged he was part of, could not be found to be solely for work reasons.

Nonetheless, he voluntarily surrendered himself. But, taking all those matters into account, in my view bail should be refused, notwithstanding the entirely creditable evidence of his brother who has given evidence of his willingness to do all that he could to protect the applicant. I appreciate the length of time before the matter can come to trial, but in my view I am not able to conclude that, were the applicant to be granted bail, he would not be under such pressures in the light of the possible sentence, in the light of the risks at which he could be placed inside of the gaol system should he be convicted, and outside the gaol system at the hands of those who might be minded to do him harm, that he would attend his trial. I must leave the question of his safety in the hands of the Department of Corrective Services.

I regret that bail must be refused.
 * * * 
