

Schiliro versus Cara Matter No 10968/93 [1997] NSWSC 602 (3 December 1997) 
Schiliro versus Cara trading as Cara & Company /93 December 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /93 - Schiliro versus Cara trading as Cara & Company 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 19 March 1993. The process propounds a claim for damages founded on alleged professional negligence. 
The defendant is a solicitor who was retained to act on behalf of the plaintiff in and about the purchase of certain real property situated at
Brookvale. The plaintiff alleges that he acted on advice received from the defendant and purchased the real property in the names of his three children on the basis that the children were to hold the property in trust for him.

Paragraph 12 of the Statement of Claim alleges breach of the retainer.
Paragraph 13 alleges breach of duty. Paragraph 14 alleges the suffering of loss and damage and contains Particulars of Damage.

In substance, the alleged breach relates to a failure to take all reasonable and necessary steps to protect the interests of the plaintiff in and about the establishment and documentation of the trusts.

The Particulars of Damage are, inter alia, as follows:- "(i) In 1992 the Plaintiff was involved in Family Law proceedings against his wife Venero Schiliro in respect of the division of the property of the marriage.

Due to the failure of the Defendant to properly effect and evidence the said trusts referred to herein, the Plaintiff was forced to enter into a disadvantageous settlement of the said proceedings.

Loss of opportunity to redevelop the said properties to take advantage of their light industrial zoning.

The difference between the current value of the properties and the amount to be paid by him pursuant to Orders of the Family Court of Australia." 
A Subpoena to produce documents has been served on Messrs Gadens Ridgeway.
This firm acted for the plaintiff in connection with the Family Law proceedings which produced the settlement which is referred to in paragraph 14 of the Statement of Claim.

The Subpoena required the production of documentation relating to:- "(a) Gadens Ridgeway engagement and conduct of proceedings between the plaintiff and others in Suit No. SY10528 of 1989 in the Family Court of
Australia, 
Gadens Ridgeway acting for the plaintiff subsequent to the making of orders on or about 25 September 1992 in those proceedings, and proceedings by the plaintiff against Gadens Ridgeway in the Family Court of Australia leading to judgment by the Honourable Justice Graham on 8
September 1994." (See paragraph 2 of the plaintiff's affidavit sworn on 16 October 1997) 
The Court has been informed that Gadens Ridgeway holds some three boxes of documentation. A claim for privilege is made in respect of the contents of one of the boxes.

The plaintiff says that the contents of this box comprise the following:- "(i) Briefs to counsel in respect of matters (a) and (b) referred to in paragraph 2 above including particularly a brief to counsel in respect of these proceedings between me and the defendant in which advice was sought and matters referred to counsel for advice.

Correspondence with counsel being Messrs R. Harding and I. Serisier in the proceedings lettered (a) and (b) in paragraph 2 above.

Notes apparently made by solicitors and counsel of instructions given by me in the proceedings lettered (a) and (b) in paragraph 2 above.

Drafts of documents, particularly in proceedings letter (a) in paragraph above which said drafts were not subsequently filed in the Family Court but formed the basis of documents which with amendments were filed in the Family
Court.

Correspondence with one Hallett who acted as an intermediary for me in the proceedings and gave instructions to Gadens Ridgeway on my behalf in the proceedings referred to above being proceedings in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 2 above.

Correspondence with accountants concerning the financial position and my financial arrangements relevant to the proceedings referred to in sub- paragraph (a) and (b) of paragraph 2 above." (See paragraph 6 of the said affidavit) 
On 18 November 1997, the defendant filed a Notice of Motion. The Court was told that relief was sought pursuant to Part 36 rule 13 of the Supreme Court
Rules. The defendant seeks access to documentation which is the subject of a claim of privilege.

Part 36 is headed, "Evidence: General". Rule 13 is headed, "Privilege". On my reading of this provision, it does not empower the Court to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff in this case.

There is no issue between the parties that the Court has jurisdiction to make the order sought by the defendant in this case. The Court has ample powers to deal with questions of privilege.

Indeed, questions of privilege arising when by subpoena the Court orders the production of documents are routinely dealt with by registrars of this Court.
The relevant rules dealing with subpoenas are to be found in Part 37.
Registrars have an unrestricted power in relation to those rules.

I have digressed to mention these matters because of the misconception presented by the parties that it was necessary for a Master to deal with this application. This view was apparently erroneously founded on the fact that a registrar does not have any jurisdiction pursuant to Part 36 rule 13. In my view, the present application should have been litigated before a registrar of this Court.

It is not disputed that the box contains documents that may be normally the subject of a legitimate claim for legal professional privilege. The dispute between the parties is whether or not there has been an imputed waiver of that privilege.

The contention of imputed waiver is said to arise by reason of the circumstances of the proceedings which have been brought by the plaintiff. The
Court has been referred to a number of authorities (including Benecke v
National Australia Bank [(1993) 35 NSWLR 110] and
Goldberg & Anor versus Ng & Ors <case>; [(1995) 185 CLR 83.] The defendant accepts the onus of demonstrating an entitlement to the order sought.

In opposing the application, the plaintiff has drawn attention to orders made by the Family Court in relation to the manner of distribution of the net proceeds of sale of the real property at Brookvale.

I have had regard to this material. However, it seems to me that, in approaching the present problem, attention must be directed towards the issues which the parties have chosen to agitate in these proceedings.

Before proceeding further, I should mention one difficulty which emerged shortly after the commencement of the hearing. This was the difficulty in framing the relief to which the defendant was entitled, if the circumstances of the case attracted an imputed waiver of privilege.

The only description of the documentation available to the Court is that which has been provided by the plaintiff. The description identifies various categories of documentation. The description is expressed in broad terms and relates to a retainer both prior to and subsequent to the time of the making of the relevant orders in the Family Court.

The best that the Court can do is express a view as to whether or not the described documentation may contain material which is relevant to these proceedings and have a potential to be the subject of imputed waiver. It cannot identify the documents which satisfy those requirements.

The difficulty was accepted by the parties and the Court was merely asked to make a decision in general terms on the question of waiver. It was contemplated that steps could thereafter be taken which may lead to an identification of the documentation which was the subject of waived privilege.

The waiver is one which is imputed by operation of law. The circumstances in which it will be imputed cannot be precisely defined in advance. It is a question which ultimately falls to be resolved by reference to the requirements of fairness in all the circumstances of the particular case (Goldberg at pp 95-96).

In this case, the plaintiff contends that the failure of the defendant to properly effect and evidence the trusts relating to the real property forced him to enter into a disadvantageous settlement of the Family Court proceedings against his wife and so suffer loss and damage.

The material indicates that there will be issues concerning whether or not the plaintiff was forced to enter into a disadvantageous settlement of the Family
Court proceedings and whether or not any such state of affairs was related to breach of contract or duty on the part of the defendant.

It seems to me that confidential documentation created in respect of the
Family Court proceedings may contain material that is relevant to issues in these proceedings. In the circumstances of this case, I consider that there is potential unfairness if the plaintiff is allowed to maintain his claim for privilege in respect of relevant material. Fairness requires access to the material for the purpose of enabling the defendant to meet the plaintiff's allegations. The holder of the privilege should not be able to abuse it (Attorney-General For The Northern Territory versus Maurice & Ors <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 475] at 487-488).

In the light of the nebulous material that is before me, it is not possible to be anymore expansive. Perhaps, the best that I can do is to stand the Notice of Motion over generally with liberty to apply. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion to date.
 * * * 
