

Tu versus Fresh Farm Produce Pty Ltd Matter No 21235/96 [1997] NSWSC 549 (7
November 1997) 
Thuc Anh Tu by her tutor Jennifer Au versus Fresh Farm Produce Pty Ltd /96 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - Thuc Anh Tu by her tutor Jennifer Au v Fresh Farm Produce Pty Limited 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 7 May 1987, the plaintiff suffered injury during the course of her employment with the defendant when she was working on a "brush" machine. The defendant then occupied premises at 15 Wentworth Road, Homebush. The defendant left those premises on or about 30 June 1987. The "brush" machine was scrapped at the time of the change of premises. 
These proceedings were commenced by Ordinary Statement of Claim filed on 22
July 1987 in the District Court. The process propounded a claim for damages.
It alleged a cause of action founded on negligence.

In September 1996, the plaintiff made application to the Court for leave to file an Amended Statement of Claim. For present purposes, the relevant amendment was the addition of a cause of action founded on breach of statutory duty (the Factories, Shops and Industries Act, 1962).

The application was opposed. It was heard by Registrar Irwin. The Registrar made his decision on 14 July 1997. The short reasons for his decision are recorded in the Transcript of the Court proceedings that took place on that day. Leave was granted to make the proposed amendment.

The defendant has sought a review of that decision. The review was conducted on 24 October 1997.

The leave was sought and granted pursuant to Part 20 rule 4(5) of the Supreme
Court Rules. Rule 4 has the heading "Statutes of limitation". The relevant provisions of rule 4 are as follows:- (1) Where any relevant period of limitation expires after the date of filing of a statement of claim and after that expiry an application is made under rule 1 for leave to amend the statement of claim by making the amendment mentioned in any of subrules (3), (4) and (5), the Court may in the circumstances mentioned in that subrule make an order giving leave accordingly, nothwithstanding that that period has expired.

Where a plaintiff, in his statement of claim, makes a claim for relief on a cause of action arising out of any facts, the Court may order that he have leave to make an amendment having the effect of adding or substituting a new cause of action arising out of the same or substantially the same facts and a claim for relief on that new cause of action.

An amendment made pursuant to an order made under this rule shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, relate back to the date of filing the statement of claim.

Whilst the Transcript may give rise to some conjecture as to the reasons which led the Registrar to his decision, the parties were in no doubt as to the question agitated before him. Although there had been substantial delay in the making of the application and little was offered to explain that delay, these matters were not put in issue before the Registrar. Accordingly, I put them aside. There is no dispute that the rule empowered the Registrar to make the order granting leave (it is common ground that the circumstances mentioned in subrule (5) were present). The challenge is to the manner in which he exercised the discretion conferred by the subrule. The only matter that has been agitated is that of prejudice.

The defendant contends that there was an onus on the plaintiff to demonstrate that the proposed amendment would not occasion prejudice to the defendant. The defendant says that this onus has not been discharged by the plaintiff. It is said that, in his exercise of the discretion, the Registrar failed to take these matters into account.

In support of its submission, the defendant relies on what was said in
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] and what was said by the Court of Appeal in BHP Steel (AIS)
Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (unreported, 7 March 1997). Specific reference was made to observations of McHugh J in Taylor at p 872. His
Honour had observed that an applicant for an extension of a limitation period "has the positive burden of demonstrating that the justice of the case requires that extension".

It is trite to observe that the plaintiff's application is not for an extension of an expired limitation period. It is an application for relief by way of amendment pursuant to a rule which operates in circumstances, inter alia, where "any relevant period of limitation expires after the date of filing of a statement of claim", and the application for leave to amend is made after that expiry. The new cause of action must arise out of the same or substantially the same facts. Further, it is clear that an applicant seeking relief pursuant to subrule (5) bears the onus of demonstrating to the Court an entitlement to the order sought. The question of prejudice may be a relevant consideration in determining whether or not the onus has been discharged. The
Court looks to the relevant circumstances and has regard to the serving of justice between the parties.

The prejudice relied on by the defendant is the changing of premises and the scrapping of the "brush" machine which took place on or about 30 June 1987.
These events took place shortly after the accident and prior to the filing of the Ordinary Statement of Claim.

It should be added that the material relied on by the defendant is sparse. It is not said that the premises have ceased to exist or are otherwise not available for inspection. It is not said that there are no similar machines available for inspection. It is a case where it is not disputed that the new cause of action arose out of the same or substantially the same facts.

In my view, it cannot be said that the delay in the making of the application for leave to amend has occasioned prejudice to the defendant. If a different view be taken, there is no "prejudice of a significant kind" (see Taylor at p 873 and Commonwealth of Australia versus McLean (Court of Appeal, unreported, July 1997)).

In my view, in the light of the only issue agitated before the Registrar, the onus of demonstrating an entitlement to the order sought by the plaintiff was discharged. I am not satisfied that any basis has been shown for disturbing the order made by the Registrar.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion filed on 7 August 1997. The defendant is to pay the costs of that Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
