

The Video Training Co P/L versus Appleton [1996] NSWSC 248 (2 July 1996) 
The Video Training Co. Pty. Limited v. Appleton /95; CC 2600/94 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Priestley JA, Powell JA, Waddell AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Workers Compensation - Assessment and amount of compensation - Lump sum payment for permanent injuries - Lump sum payment for pain and suffering - Worker previously injured - Injuries before and after commencement of 1987 Act - Assessment of subsequent injury - Impairment of back.
 [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html);
Table to [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/index.html#p3)
Div 4 note (g); Sch 6 [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/index.html#p6) cl. 6.

Ex Tempore/Reserved: Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Powell JA.
 
POWELL JA: In this appeal from a judgment delivered, and award made, by Moroney A-CCJ in the Compensation Court on 16th December 1994, the Appellant sought to raise for determination two matters, they being: - whether, in the light of the observations of Kirby P in Clutha Limited v. Danswan 1, and of what was described as "the principle against `double dipping'" (see, for example, National Insurance Co. of New Zealand Limited v. Espagne 2; Adams v. Ascot Iron Foundry Pty. Limited 3; Haines v.
Bendall 4; Manser v. Spry 5; Harris v. Commercial Minerals Limited;
Harris v. Aqual Pty. Limited 6), the present case may be distinguished from
NSW Department of Technical and Further Education v. Pitt 7; in the event that the Court were of the view that this case may not relevantly be distinguished from NSW Department of Technical and Further
Education v. Pitt 8 whether the Court ought to follow the decision in that case.

Although the Appellant's submissions addressed each of these two questions - the submissions in relation to the second question including a reference to the decisions of this Court in NSW Baptist Nursing Homes Trust v. Bingham and Glebe Rowing Club v. Pride 10 - at the conclusion of those submissions the Court indicated (Transcript p.10) that it was not disposed to grant leave for further argument on the question, and, that being so, that the
Court ought to continue to follow the decision in NSW Department of
Technical and Further Education v. Pitt 11.

The facts which ultimately gave rise to the application with which Moroney
A-CCJ was concerned to deal fall within a comparatively short compass. In outline, they are as follow.

In March 1987, when she was not quite 40 years of age, the Respondent suffered a compensable injury when in the employ of an organisation apparently known as
Collins Olympic Australia. Although the detail is by no means clear it would appear that the injury was one to the lumbar spine resulting from a lifting episode. In the following year, the Respondent brought proceedings in the
Compensation Court (File No. CR774/88), in which proceedings she was later to consent to her employer's liability in respect of weekly payments being redeemed (Workers Compensation Act 1926 s.15) for $8,000.00 - it is to be remembered that the "Table of Maims" contained in s.16 of the Workers
Compensation Act 1926 made no provision for the awarding of lump sum compensation in respect of injuries to the back.

Meantime, on 21st April 1987, the Respondent was involved in a motor accident, as a result of which she sustained injuries to the cervical and lumbar spine with some radiating pain and effect to the right arm and the right leg. The injuries were not sustained in circumstances which entitled the Respondent to compensation pursuant to the provisions of the Workers Compensation Act 1926.
That, however, was of no consequence in the event, as the circumstances appear to have been such that the Respondent was able to, and in fact did, bring
District Court proceedings to recover damages as the result of her injuries.

Those proceedings appear later to have been referred to arbitration pursuant to the provisions of the [Arbitration (Civil Actions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/aaa1983261/), of the [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) ss.63,
A and of the [District Court Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/dcr1973236/) [Pt
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/dcr1973236/index.html#p51a), the Arbitrator later - in January 1992 - bringing in an award in favour of the
Respondent in the sum of $68,000.00. In the absence of detailed evidence as to the evidence which was placed before the Arbitrator, it is quite impossible to know - or even guess at - the manner in which that award might have been made up - all that one can say is that it would appear as if the evidence given by the Respondent included evidence as to pain not dissimilar to the evidence which the Respondent was later to give on the hearing before Moroney A-CCJ.

Meantime, on 30 June 1987, the provisions - or substantially the whole of them - of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) had come into operation.

On 1st March 1990, the Respondent was involved in yet another motor accident in which she sustained injuries, those injuries apparently being to the cervical spine and lumbar spine with radiating effect to the right arm and the right leg. Although the circumstances in which the motor accident occurred were not such as to entitle the Respondent to recover compensation pursuant to the provisions of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), that, again, was a matter of no moment in the event.

The Respondent was later to commence proceedings in the District Court seeking to recover damages in respect of her injuries, those proceedings being, in their turn, referred to arbitration, that arbitration being conducted together with the arbitration in respect of the Respondent's claim for damages arising out of the April 1987 motor accident. In that arbitration the Arbitrator appears to have made an award of $12,000.00 in favour of the Respondent.
Again, in the absence of detailed evidence as to the evidence which was placed before the Arbitrator, it is not possible to know - nor either to guess at - the manner in which that amount was made up - as was the case in relation to the Respondent's claim for damages in respect of the April 1987 accident, all one can say is that it appears that the Respondent's evidence included evidence as to pain not dissimilar to the evidence which she was to give on the hearing before Moroney A-CCJ.

On 5th November 1990, the Respondent commenced employment with a company known as Focal Communications Pty. Limited, which company is said to have "merged" with the Respondent on 1st July 1991. At the time of that "merger", the
Respondent was offered and accepted a position with the Appellant.

On 17th February 1992 the Respondent sustained further injury when she fell, the circumstances in which she fell being such as to render the Respondent's injuries compensable under the provisions of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). The
Respondent's immediate complaints were of bruising of the left shin, left wrist and left leg and also of the lower back together with pain in those regions with associated pain and also pain on the left side of the neck. The
Respondent appears to have been taken by ambulance to hospital following the fall and X-rays were taken and the Respondent provided with a surgical collar following which she went home and rested.

Two weeks later the Respondent appears to have suffered symptoms of sciatica and of parasthesia, following which her general practitioner referred her to an orthopaedic surgeon Dr. Bannister. At the time of the Respondent being examined by Dr. Bannister in early March 1992 he recorded her as complaining of sharp pain in her neck with symptoms radiating down into the left shoulder; of pain into the right shoulder; of headaches in the apical area; of sharp pain in the sub-occipital area; of pain over the front of her shins and over the lower sternum extending down into the upper abdominal area. Dr. Bannister appears to have arranged for the Respondent to be admitted to hospital for traction between 15th and 20th March 1992 during which time she remained on both cervical and lumbar traction. Following the Respondent's discharge from hospital, Dr. Bannister referred her for assessment of her spinal function which assessment, so it seems, confirmed a 25% permanent impairment of the back and a 15% permanent impairment of the neck.

Dr. Bannister saw the Respondent again on 12th May 1992 when she complained of similar symptoms to those previously recorded but without any improvement. Dr.
Bannister records complaints of pain in the back with sharp pain radiating into the right leg; of intermittent pain radiating into the left leg; of pain also radiating into the sacrum and right ankle, of pain in the neck with a painful range of cervical spinal movements and of tightness in both legs. Dr.
Bannister concluded his report at the time with the following opinion: - "Mrs. Appleton has been under my care previously with low back pain as a result of a motor vehicle accident together with pain in her neck. However, I would assess that her pain level is much more severe as the result of her fall than previously.
 
She has had a severe aggravation of her previous back condition with probable new pathology as a result of her fall. She has a severe disability and is unfit to do any form of heavy work. She could not pull or push heavy loads or do any form of repetitive bending work. There is a very real possibility that she may have to consider surgery as the result of her injury. I am pessimistic about early recovery." 
The Respondent appears to have been unable to resume work until 29th June 1992. However, on that day, she was unable to complete a day's work and was sent home. Thereafter, and until the hearing - to which I shall shortly refer - before Moroney A-CCJ the Respondent was unable to follow any form of gainful employment. The Respondent was paid weekly compensation until the 9th July 1992, following which her employment was terminated on 13th July 1992.

The Respondent appears to have been examined by Dr. Ronald Rivett, an orthopaedic physician, who had previously examined her in relation to her claim for damages arising out of the April 1987 and March 1990 motor accidents, in August 1992. In a report which he wrote following that examination, Dr. Rivett said: - "OPINION. Clinically the cervical spine is much the same as it was when I examined it in December 1991, but the X-rays show increased degenerative changes since 1987, and indeed since 1990.
 
There are continuing myogenic headaches arising in the suboccipital muscles, and there is right shoulder girdle muscle reaction, together with cicipital and suprespinatus tendonitis. There is continuing evidence of right C6 nerve root irritation.
 
The patient's back is stiffer than previously, and she now has some right sided sensory deficit and wasting suggestive of radiculopathy consistent with an aggravated lumbar disc lesion. This would probably be mainly at the L4-5 level. This condition was apparently aggravated by the fall in February 1992, but is again settling down.
 
My impression is that that fall has aggravated Mrs. Appleton's symptoms, and retarded her previous improvement. There is no evidence of any functional features.
 
I estimate a deficit in the efficient use of the cervical spine of 33%, the lumbar spine 23%, the right lower limb above knee 5% and below knee 5%. The deficit in the lower limb is entirely due to the 1992 aggravation.
 
Mrs. Appleton is unfit for heavy work, postural strains on the neck, excessive use of the upper limbs, and excessive walking." 
The Respondent appears then to have been referred to Dr. Segelov, a neurosurgeon, whom she first saw on 21st September 1992. Although the evidence is anything but clear, it would appear (Appeal Book 26, 62) that, at the time, Dr. Segelov discussed with the Respondent the question of neurological surgery on her neck. 
Thereafter, in early October 1992, the Respondent awoke with spontaneous and disabling symptoms apparently involving muscle spasms and pain in the lower back and both legs. The Respondent was then conveyed to the Royal North Shore
Hospital by ambulance where she was detained until the next day, following which Dr. Segelov arranged for her admission to the Masonic Hospital for bed rest. After the Respondent's discharge from the Masonic Hospital, Dr. Segelov, in November 1992, administered a nerve block and arranged for an MRI scan.
Thereafter, on 13th January 1993, the Respondent was again admitted to hospital, where Dr. Segelov, so it seems, carried out a fusion operation and the Respondent was detained in hospital for 10 days. It would also seem that, at some later time, the Respondent was readmitted to hospital where Dr.
Segelov performed some procedure involving the occipital nerve and the
Respondent was detained in hospital for a further 5 days.

At some time which is not revealed by the evidence, there was filed on behalf of the Respondent, in matter No. 4123 of 1993 in the Compensation Court, an
Application for Determination. In a further Amended Application apparently filed in early December 1993, the nature of the Respondent's injury was described as "aggravation of injury to the lower back, injury to the neck, lower back pain with radiation to the legs, injury to the right arm and right leg", the compensation claimed being weekly compensation, lump sum compensation pursuant to the provisions of [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html), compensation for pain and suffering pursuant to s.67 and s.[60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s60.html) expenses. However, it would appear that, when that Application for
Determination came on for hearing before Moroney CCJ on 14 February 1994, the claims for lump sum compensation pursuant to [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and for compensation for pain and suffering pursuant to s.67 were deleted from the application.

Meantime, the Respondent had again been examined by Dr. Rivett in November
In a report which he prepared at the time, Dr. Rivett recorded the following opinion: - "OPINION. There are continuing strains involving all three regions of the spine and the sacro-iliac joints. There is muscle reaction, probably including myofascial scarring, in the right shoulder girdle, and neuromuscular headaches are arising in the suboccipital muscles in association with the cervical problems. There is right bicipital and supraspinatus tendonitis at the shoulder. A functional hypoalgesia is affecting the right forequarter, and although this may be masking some segmental sensory changes, there are no other clear indications of neurological involvement. However with symptoms radiating to the thumb, it is possible that some C6 nerve root irritation is continuing.
 
There is slight wasting in the right calf and there is sensory changes approximating to the L5 and [S1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s1.html) distribution in the main. There are also possibly some effects from the three degenerated lumbar discs, causing intermittent nerve root irritation.
 
There is slight stiffness in the neck, probably in part due to the fusion operation.
 
Overall, the above conditions are consistent with the history previous given. In my opinion the main present disability in the cervical and lumbar regions is consistent with the fall of February 1992. There are certainly some contributions from the car accidents in 1987 and 1990, and possibly also from a lumbar strain earlier in 1987. From my examination of Mrs. Appleton prior to her fall in 1992, I feel that her lumbar condition is almost entirely due to that fall. There was however a moderate amount of cervical strain present at that examination, and I am unable to quantify the percentage of her present disability which may be attributable to that fall as against the previous car accidents.
 
There is a present impairment of the neck of 45%, and of the back of 34%. There is loss of efficient use of the right upper limb at or above elbow of 15%, and loss of efficient use of the right lower limb at or above knee of 5%. There is doubtless some slight continuing contribution to the neck symptoms from the operation itself. It is perhaps too early to declare the cervical percentage permanent, and it is also probably too soon after the fall in 1992 to be dogmatic about the percentage in the lumbar spine. However it is certain that an appreciable percentage impairment will continue in both these regions on a permanent basis. Review in 12 months would of course give a more reliable figure based on the expected stability of the conditions at that time.
 
I would regard Mrs. Appleton as at present and in the foreseeable future totally unfit for her previous jobs of commercial traveller or internal sales representative, and unfit for any driving, desk work etc." 
In the Judgment which he was to deliver on 14th February 1994, Moroney CCJ said: - "The applicant, I am satisfied, received the injury alleged in the application for determination on 17 February 1992.
 
At that time the appellant, I am satisfied, was partially incapacitated in the physical sense for work as a result of the combined effects of a previous work injury and previous motor vehicle injuries.
 
Despite this partial incapacity in the physical sense the applicant was exercising an economic capacity and was earning in the vicinity of $506 per week in her occupation with the respondent.
 
As a result of the fall which she suffered on 17 February 1992 I am satisfied, on the medical evidence in this matter, particularly that of Dr. John Segelov, as contained in the last paragraph of his report of 8 June 1993, and in the last paragraph of his earlier report of 27 October 1992, and to a lesser extent, the views of Dr. Rivette in the applicant's case, as I say, I am satisfied that the incapacity set up by the fall, being an aggravtion of the earlier conditions in the applicant's lumbar and cervical spine was heightened and that it has continued to the present time, and in saying that I have not overlooked the views of Drs. Cant and Nield in the respondent's case, but it seems to me to be perfectly clear, on the medical evidence that what I have just said is the case, and indeed it would be against all reason really to find otherwise.
 
This lady who appeared to me to be a truthful lady and told me of the heightening of her disabilities following this fall and the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Before the fall she was at work earning $506 per week; since the fall she has not been able to exercise that previous economic capacity.
 
I thus will find the injury as alleged and I find the worker partially incapacitated as a result of it from 11 July 1992 to date, except for the period from 13 January 1993 to 6 May 1993 when the applicant underwent surgery at the hands of Dr. Segelov and was totally incapacitated." following which his Honour made a formal award for the payment of weekly compensation from the 11th July 1992 to 12th January 1993 on the basis of partial incapacity, from 13th January 1993 to 6th May 1993 on the basis of total incapacity, and from 7th May 1993 and continuing on the basis of partial incapacity. His Honour also made an award for [s.60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s60.html) expenses and ordered the Appellant to pay the Respondent's costs. 
Although it is not entirely clear that this was so, it appears probable that, on 2nd March 1994, there was filed on behalf of the Respondent, in matter No.
 of 1994 of the Compensation Court, an Application for Determination. In an Amended Application for Determination filed on 21 July 1994, the nature of the Respondent's injury was described as "aggravation of injury to the lower back, injury to the neck, lower back pain with radiation to the legs, injury to the right arm and right leg" the particulars of compensation claimed being lump sum compensation pursuant to [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) in respect of permanent impairment of the neck, of permanent impairment of the lower back, of loss of the efficient use of the right arm and of loss of the efficient use of the right leg, together with compensation for pain and suffering pursuant to s.67 and s.[60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s60.html) expenses.

Before the Respondent's second Application came on for hearing, she was examined by Dr. Segelov in April 1994 and by Dr. Rivett in May 1994. In the report which he prepared at the time, Dr. Segelov concluded: - "The condition of this patient does not appear to have changed significantly since I last reported to you on 02/12/93. There is still no clear evidence of focal nerve root pressure for which further surgery would be required. in view of the history of this patient and the surgery required I would regard her as permanently limited in respect of lifting or working above head height, or for sitting for her head forwards for lengthy periods. The patient is permanently unfit for her previous employment particularly because of the driving involved. The degree of disability appears to be as set out in my report dated 02/12/93, that the patient has a permanent impairment of her neck of the order of 30%, one quarter of which appears to be due to the injuries in 1987, one quarter to the injury in 1990, and one half to the injury in 1992. The patient also has permanent loss of efficient use of the right upper limb above and below the elbow each of 10%, with similar proportions in respect of causation. There is also permanent loss of efficient use of the left lower limb below the knee of 10%, again with similar proportions in respect of causation." while in the report which he prepared at the time, Dr. Rivett recorded the following opinion: - "OPINION: The lower cervical spinal strain is much the same as previously. myofascial scarring and surgical scarring in the right suboccipital region is leading to headaches. There is right shoulder girdle muscle strain and myofascial scarring, with triggers in the infraspinatus which are referring pain and paraesthesiae into the right upper limb. I am fairly sure there is no significant neurological component to the cervical problem.
 
There is also possibly a lumbar disc lesion causing right sided nerve root irritation, although no gross lesion was detected in the CT scan and MRI.
 
The findings are consistent with the fall in February 1992 and the car accident in 1987 and 1990. There would seem to be little contribution from the back strain in 1987, although the car accident a month later makes it virtually impossible to be sure of this.
 
There is impairment of the neck of 39%. I consider that 80% of this figure is due to the fall of 1992 and 20% due to the car accidents.
 
There is impairment of the back of 24%, of which I consider 90% due to the fall in February 1992 and 10% due to the car accidents, possibly with a slight contribution by the 1987 lifting strain.
 
There is loss of use of the right upper limb of 5%, due to the same causes and apportionment as the back problem.
 
As there have been many ups and downs, and complication by several injuries, it is difficult to put a permanent figure on the percentages but particularly as the worst injury appears to have been in February 1992. However it would seem that fairly substantial percentages in virtually all these areas are likely to prove permanent. These figures would not be far removed from those given above." 
Although the Respondent was examined by a number of doctors on behalf of the Appellant, all of whom gave evidence or provided reports to the contrary of those provided by Drs. Segelov and Rivett, it is clear that Moroney A-CCJ accepted the assessments of Drs. Segelov and Rivett and that the Appellant concedes that his Honour was entitled to prefer their evidence and reports to those tendered on behalf of the Appellant. This being so it is not necessary to record any of the detail of that other evidence or those other reports.

The Respondent's Application came for hearing before Moroney A-CCJ, as, following his earlier retirement, his Honour had by then become, on 5th
October 1994. In the course of the Judgment which he was to deliver on 16th
December 1994, his Honour said (inter alia): - "I must apply the principles of NSW Department of Technical & Further Education v. Pitt, [9 NSWCCR 309], as more recently confirmed in J.A. Crockett Pty. Limited v. Cox CA 26 October 1994. Those particular decisions have particular reference to my assessment of the impairments alleged to the back and neck.
 
In relation to the losses, I must apply the principles of Rodios v. Trefle (1937) WCR 285. It is not a case where the principles of Clutha Limited v. Danswan [9 NSWCR 225] have any application for in respect of the one work injury, the first injury abovementioned, there is no evidence of any identifiable loss to either the arm or the leg as alleged to result from the injury of 17 February 1992.
 
If, in the end result, the decision smacks of double dipping on the part of the applicant or unjust enrichment, so be it. I must follow the abovementioned precedents.
 
The claim for permanent impairment of the back as a result of the injury of 17 February 1992" ..........
 
The determination of this claim for permanent back impairment 
I am satisfied to accept the applicant's evidence and Dr. Rivett's evidence that the applicant does have permanent impairment of the back. I prefer Dr.Rivett's evidence to that of Dr. Nield. I am also persuaded to accept Dr. Rivett's assessment of 24% such impairment.
 
Despite the fact that some impairment was obviously in existence prior to 17 February 1992 as Dr. Rivett, for example, opines, applying the dicta of Pitt and Cox abovementioned, I feel I am constrained to find that the 24% permanent impairment of the back results from the injury of 17 February 1992 and I do so.
 
There will be an award in favour of the applicant in the sum of $17,770 (to the nearest dollar) pursuant to [section 66.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) 
The claim for permanent impairment of the neck ...........
 
I am persuaded to accept the treating surgeon's evidence, that is, Dr. Segelov's evidence and for the same reasons as given in respect of the assessment of the back impairment, applying Pitt and Cox, I find the applicant has, as a result of the injury of 17 February 1992, 30% permanent impairment of the neck.
 
I award the applicant the sum of $14,808 pursuant to [section 66.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) 
The claim for permanent loss of use of the right arm above the elbow.
 
All of the evidence has been discussed. I intend to prefer and accept Dr. Segelov's evidence and his method of assessment. Applying then the provisions of Rodios v. Trefle [1937] WCR 285, I find the applicant has 5.26% such permanent loss as a result of the injury of 17 February 1992.
 
I award the applicant $5,193 (to the nearest dollar) pursuant to [section 66.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) 
The claim for permanent loss of use of the right leg below the knee 
Again, all of the evidence has been reviewed. Again, I prefer and accept Dr. J. Segelov's evidence and method of assessment. Again, applying the principles of Rodios abovementioned, I find the applicant has 5.26% such loss as a result of the injury of 17 February 1992.
 
I award the applicant $4,544 (to the nearest dollar) pursuant to [section 66.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) 
Interest will be payable on all the [section 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) payments from 17 February 1992 to date at the rate of 8%.
 
The claim for pain and suffering pursuant to section 67 
Here, I feel I must be cautious in the interests of justice. I must make the award for the applicant's pain and suffering resulting from the injury of 17 February 1992. It is clearly the case that, but within one month of the date of this injury, the applicant gave evidence of ongoing pain and symptomatology in respect of the back, neck and right arm in the District Court proceedings.
 
I note, however, the applicant's evidence given in these proceedings, particularly that given on 5 October 1994. It is the case the applicant has had pain and suffering, and distress, particularly in relation to her neck, since this injury of 17 February 1992. She has had surgery to her neck and all that that involves. I note her evidence as to the disruption of her life.
 
Taking all of those things into consideration then and having regard to `a most extreme case', I award the applicant the sum of $16,000 pursuant to section 67. I apportion that one half to the past and one half to the future.
 
Interest will be payable on the sum of $8,000 from 17 February 1992 to date at the rate of 4%." 
In the Notice of Appeal which was filed on 27th January 1995 the Appellant raised the following (inter alia) grounds of appeal: - "1. His Honour erred in law in awarding the respondent worker lump sum compensation under [Section 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) to the full extent of the losses assessed by the respondent worker's medical practitioners.
 . His Honour erred in law in not apportioning the respondent worker's loss in accordance with the opinions of the medical practitioners.
 . His Honour erred in law in not distinguishing the application of Note (g) to the Table for Compensation for Permanent Injuries from the particular circumstances of the respondent worker's claims history." and sought the following (inter alia) Orders: - "2. An order that the award of His Honour Judge Moroney of 18 October 1994 (sic) be set aside.
 . In the alternative, an order that the matter be remitted to the Compensation Court of New South Wales to be determined in accordance with law." 
When the appeal came on for hearing, Mr. J.D. Hislop Q.C. appeared with Mr. N. T. Robson for the Appellant while Mr. P. Webb Q.C. appeared with Mr. A.P. Monaghan for the Respondent.

Although, as I have earlier recorded, the Appellant sought to have the whole of the award made by Moroney A-CCJ set aside, on the hearing of the appeal no submission was made as to that part of the award which related to the loss of efficient use of the right arm and right leg, nor was any separate submission directed to that part of the award which related to compensation for pain and suffering, Mr. Hislop apparently accepting (Transcript pp. 1,2) that, unless the award, insofar as it related to lump sum compensation for the permanent impairment of the neck and back, be set aside, no ground for attacking the award for compensation for pain and suffering would be available to him.

The submissions which Mr. Hislop sought to advance in respect of the award for lump sum compensation for the permanent impairment of the neck and back are well encapsulated in the following part of his written submissions: - "8. The appellant contends that His honour erred in making awards in favour of the respondent under [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) on the basis of the full percentage impairments and losses which he found ultimately to be present, and should have discounted all of them for the effects of the injuries pre-dating 17 February, 1992. It is submitted that that discount should have been no less than one-half for all four areas, as assessed by Dr. Segelov. Although that doctor was silent as to the back, it is submitted that Dr. Rivett's assessment of 10% pre-existing impairment there is totally unrealistic in the light of the evidence.
 
Grounds . Moroney, CCJ acknowledged at 114 J that his decision smacked of `double dipping'. That a person should receive double compensation is contrary to basic principles of compensation. See, e.g. Adams v. Ascot Iron Foundry Pty. Ltd. [(1968) NSWR 305] at 311.28-31. It is submitted that the Court will avoid any such result unless clearly compelled to do otherwise.
 . At 114 D, Moroney, CCJ refers to Clutha Ltd. v. Danswan [9 NSWCCR 225.] His Honour appears to have had in mind the words of Kirby P (as His Honour then was) at 230 E: - `Of course, in some cases it will be perfectly possible to differentiate, by medical evidence addressed precisely to the issue, the loss resulting from a pre-1987 injury and a loss resulting from an injury received after the commencement of that Act. In such a case Schedule 6 Part 6, Clause 6 will not apply. The worker will be entitled only to the loss resulting from the injury received after the commencement of the new Statute.' 
It is submitted that, at least in cases such as the present where it is perfectly possible to differentiate by medical evidence addressed precisely to the issue the losses resulting from the earlier injuries from that resulting from the subject injury, the respondent should be awarded no more than the percentage loss caused by the injury for which compensation is claimed." 
With respect, I am unable to accept the submission which Mr. Hislop has advanced in respect of this part of the case. 
I am prepared to accept that, when a Court comes to assess compensatory damages, whether in actions of tort or contract, the settled principle is that the injured party should receive compensation in a sum which so far as money can do will put that party in the same position as he or she would have been in if the contract had been performed or the tort had not been committed (Haines v. Bendall 12) and that, cognate with that principle, is the rule that a plaintiff cannot recover more than he or she has lost (Parry v.
Cleaver 13). Further, in the absence of argument to the contrary, I am prepared to assume that, when a court is called upon to determine the amount of workers compensation to be awarded to an injured worker, similar principles will apply. But, even if one accepts that settled principle, and the cognate rule to which I have referred, it does not follow that that principle and rule apply to cases such as the present, and still less does it follow that the appeal must be upheld.

That this should be so is made clear in the following passage in the Judgment of Walsh JA (as his Honour then was) in Adams v. Ascot Iron Foundry Pty.
Limited 14) to which reference was made in the joint judgment of the High
Court in Manser v. Spry 15: - "This leaves for my consideration three questions. Two of these may be stated thus: 
Was the learned trial judge in error in rejecting evidence of the receipt by the respondent of benefits under the Workers Compensation (Silicosis) Act 1942 as amended? ...
 ..........
 
The first question is a difficult one upon which I think it is not possible to accept either of the opposing contentions with any great confidence in the correctness of doing so. A worker who has suffered incapacity from exposure to silica dust may receive benefits under the Act. There can be no doubt that, if he does receive such benefits in respect of a condition found in the action to have been brought about by the defendant's wrongdoing, then the economic loss which the plaintiff has suffered through the destruction, or the diminution of his earning capacity as a result of that wrongdoing, is in fact reduced. Therefore, if `the dominant rule' is that the wrongdoer is liable only for such damages as, by reason of his wrongdoing, the plaintiff sustained, and if in consequence `matters occurring after an injury that in fact mitigate its consequences are ordinarily to be taken into account in assessing damage' (see Espagne's case ((1961) <case>; [105 CLR 569] at 589), then, to allow the plaintiff to recover damages in full from the defendant for his incapacity and also to retain all the benefits under the Act is a departure from the dominant rule. But to say that does not solve the problem, since, in relation to a variety of benefits, it has been accepted that the benefit is irrelevant to the assessment of the damages which the wrongdoer must pay. The problem is, of course, whether or not this is such a case.
 
Here, the benefit is obtained under the statute from the fund which is constituted under it. In such a case, according to the judgment of Windeyer J. in Espagne's case ((1961) <case>; [105, CLR 569] at pp. 599-600), `the decisive consideration is, not whether the benefit was received in consequence of, or as a result of the injury, but what was its character'. That is to be determined `by the intent of the person conferring the benefit'. This is to say, in such a case as the present one, it is to be determined by the intention disclosed by the Act. `The test is by purpose rather than by cause.' 
According by Dixon CJ, in the same case, in order to decide whether or not advantages accruing to the injured plaintiff are to be taken into account in reduction of damages, one looks to see whether they have the distinguishing characteristic which he described in the following words: `Yet they have this distinguishing characteristic, namely, they are conferred on him not only independently of the existence in him of a right of redress against others but so that they may be enjoyed by him although he may enforce that right: they are the product of a disposition in his favour intended for his enjoyment and not provided in relief of any liability in others fully to compensate him'. Again, the test is one of the intention with which `the disposition in his favour' is made.
 
The difficulty lies in ascertaining the relevant intention from an Act, which does not expressly declare any intention one way or the other. The difficulty, like that to which Dixon CJ referred in a different connection in Maxwell v. Murphy ((1957) 96 LR 261 at p.266), is in attempting to extract from the Act an actual meaning or intention with reference to the question which has to be resolved. The question may be one to which the Parliament or the draftsman of the Act did not in fact advert at all. Nevertheless, if it is possible to do so, it is necessary to extract from the Act indications of what was intended. If one cannot find any real indications pointing one way or the other, or if one finds indications both ways which are evenly balanced, it may be that the question must then be resolved by taking the view that the dominant rule to which I referred above should operate." 
In its joint judgment in Manser v. Spry 16 the High Court, after referring to certain, by now, well known passages in the Judgments of Dixon CJ and of Windeyer J in National Insurance Co. of New Zealand Limited v. Espagne 17, continued: - "To ascertain whether a statutory benefit possesses the `distinguishing characteristic' that it is to be enjoyed independently of, and cumulatively upon, the right to damages, the court must endeavour to discover the intention of the legislature.
 
There are three possible indicia of a relevant legislative intention: the financial source of the benefit, the presence of a provision which requires a repayment of a statutory benefit out of the damages awarded or paid and the nature of the benefit. If a scheme for provision of a benefit be funded by contributions made by employers and employee-beneficiaries as a kind of insurance against misfortune, the principle in Bradburn versus Great Western Railway Co ((1874) <case>; [LR 10 Ex 1)] indicates that the benefit is to be enjoyed by a beneficiary who encounters the misfortune without reduction of the damages to which he or she is otherwise entitled. That view has been taken of benefits paid under contributory pension schemes created under statute. If statute provides that a particular benefit is to be repaid out of damages, there is a clear indication that that benefit is not to go in reduction of the tortfeasor's liability. When such a provision relates only to one or some of the benefits provided under the statute, the non-repayable character of the other benefits may imply, according to the context, either that the legislature intended that the receipt and retention of the benefit should n not be taken into account in the assessment of damages or that it had no such intention. Whether an implication of such a legislative intention should be drawn depends largely on the nature of the benefit. Gibbs CJ said in Redding v. Lee ((1983) 151 CLR at 125): - `If the statute expressly provides (as some statutes relating to workers' compensation have done) that a plaintiff who has recovered damages shall repay the amount of the benefit it will be clear that the receipt of the benefit must be disregarded in the assessment. In many cases, however, the statute under which the benefit is provided will give no assistance of this kind. Then it will be necessary to consider closely the nature of the benefit itself. The conclusion that the benefit is intended for the plaintiff personally and not in reduction of the damages may more readily be drawn when it is seen that the receipt of the benefit is not dependent on the loss of wages or earning capacity ... for which the plaintiff claims damages (cf Parry versus Cleaver [1970] AC at 42, per Lord Wilberforce) and is not intended to replace the lost wages or remedy the loss of earning capacity.' 
Finally, if all indicia of intent fail, the `settled principle governing the assessment of compensatory damages' which the majority stated in Haines v. Bendall must be applied." 
The interpretation which, in Clutha Limited v. Danswan 18 and NSW Department of Technical and Further Education v. Pitt 19, this Court has placed upon the relevant provisions of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), which interpretation has been applied in such cases as J.A. Crockett Pty. Limited v. Cox 20 and Wilkes v. State Rail Authority of NSW 21, in the former of which cases leave to reargue the correctness of the Court's decision in NSW Department of Technical and Further Education v. Pitt 22 was refused, in my view, leaves no room for the operation, in a case such as this is, of the settled principle and cognate rule which Mr. Hislop has sought to pray in aid of the Appellant's case in this appeal. 
Nor do the observations of Kirby P in Clutha Limited v. Danswan, upon which Mr. Hislop has sought to rely, provide him with any comfort. Although it would be sufficient to record that neither Meagher JA nor Cripps JA joined in the observations of Kirby P, it is not without point to observe that immediately preceding those observations Kirby P had said: - "Assuming, however, that the proper interpretation of what Moroney CCJ decided was that the worker had a loss of the kind mentioned in the Table to the 1987 Act and that this resulted both from an injury received before and after the commencement of that Act, there is no doubt that clause 6 of Part 6 of Schedule 6 to the 1987 Act deems that loss to have resulted from the injury received after the commencement of the 1987 Act in its entirety.
 
This may be artificial. But this area of the law is full of artificial distinctions and applications. A similar protest of artificiality was voiced in 1940 in Bennett v. General Motors Holdens Ltd <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 117] I would give the same reply once again." and that, immediately following upon those observations, his Honour had continued: "No other provision of the Act, including the transitional provisions, was pointed to by either party to relieve the employer of the consequence of this possibly unjust result. The injustice is highlighted if, as I would believe, there is no authority in the Compensation Court to order or provide for the deduction of compensation already paid under section 16 of the 1926 Act in respect of the loss resulting from the injury received before the commencement of the 1987 Act." 
For these reasons I propose that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
WADDELL AJA: I agree with Powell JA.
 * * * 
