

Wallace versus Stanford Nos Ca 40247/91 and Ed 2831/89 [1995] NSWSC 121 (1
November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
MAHONEY(1), HANDLEY(2) AND SHELLER(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 9 December #DATE 29:6:1995 #ADD 18:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    M R Errington 
Solicitor for the Appellant:   Heather
McKinnon 
Counsel for the Respondent:   P Brereton 
Solicitor for the Respondent:  Finlaysons
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
MAHONEY JA:  This appeal, and the implications of the submissions made, raise issues of some importance to those who are, or have been, living in a de facto relationship.
Ms Wallace and Mr Stanford began an association in 1967 when each of them was married. They lived together from September 1973 to August 1987, a period of nearly fourteen years. They then separated.
Nothing turns upon the circumstances of their separation.
Apart from the adjustment of a bank account, a matter not in issue, it is unlikely that, on their separation any significant order would have been made under the De Facto Relationships Act 1984 for one or other of them. Subject to what I shall say, Ms Wallace did not make contributions to the financial resources of the parties or their welfare significantly greater or significantly less than those made by Mr Stanford.
Essentially, the present claim arises because, towards the end of their relationship, Mr Stanford's mother died and left him some land at Macksville.
Ms Wallace's claim, insofar as it is now relevant, has been that, because of the Act, she is entitled to half or some other proportion of the value of that property.
THE FACTS:
At the trial, the parties differed as to a number of things that had happened during their relationship. Each gave evidence before the Master. He made findings which, in some respects, departed from what one or other of them had said. It is in my opinion proper that the Court, on appeal, adhere to and give appropriate regard to what the Master found. Mr Errington, for Ms
Wallace, informed the Court that no challenge was made to any finding of fact made by the Master.
 .
The findings of the Master dealt with the course of their relationship, their lifestyle, and their assets.
When they first became associated, each was married. Their respective marriages broke up. When, in September 1973, they commenced to live together, they lived in a rented flat at Nambucca Heads; they lived there for about half of the period of their relationship. For the second half, they lived on a sixty-nine hectare rural property at Wirrimbi Road, Macksville, owned by Mr
Stanford's parents. The parents lived in the original house on the property.
With their consent, Mr Stanford, in 1980, commenced to build another house on the property.
He did the building himself, with the help of his father, his uncle and such sub-contractors as it was necessary to engage. The plaintiff was involved in the activity. Her involvement was, as I infer the Master to have found, less than that of Mr Stanford. "She did some fetching, carrying and holding, she generally assisted the workmen as they went about the task of building the house".
The parties moved into the new house in 1980 and lived there until the death of Mrs Stanford in September 1984. In 1987 they parted and
Mr Stanford went to live in the house that had been occupied by his late parents. Ms
Wallace remained where she was. At the time of the separation, Mr Stanford was about forty-seven years old and Ms Wallace about forty-four.
There was one child of the relationship, a son. He has lived with Ms
Wallace.
Their lifestyle together was not luxurious. Mr Stanford had worked as an employee in an RSL Club at Nambucca Heads. He tried unsuccessfully to earn a living from farming his parents' property. He then worked in an abattoir and as a farrier. He continued in ordinary employment of this kind to the time of the trial. He gave his earnings to Ms Wallace to pay the household expenses.
Such surplus as there was was banked by Ms Wallace in a bank account.
The Master made findings in relation to their lifestyle as follows: "When the parties moved to the Wirrimbi Road property the plaintiff's evidence is that she raised between 1980 and the separation in 1987 about fourteen poddy calves which were sold.
She used also milk any cows that were on the property. These could be up to seven in number. The plaintiff also, for a short while looked after the pigs that were on the property. She used to muck out their stalls every morning and occasionally in the evening. She also sometimes went with the defendant when he went about his task of shoeing horses. She also occasionally chopped wood and did those tasks around the farm which were necessary.
She washed, ironed, cooked and cleaned for the defendant and the child of their union and the defendant could say nothing against the way the plaintiff looked after them whilst they were living together. One area of acrimony between the parties was that for a period of twelve months, prior to their moving into the property at Wirrimbi Road the plaintiff failed to pay the $10 per week set aside for rent. She used this money to gamble on the poker machines at the local club. The defendant also complained that the plaintiff drank to excess but there was no evidence put before me upon which I would make a finding that this in any way was sufficiently serious to affect the plaintiff's contribution to the relationship or to affect her in the way she looked after the defendant and their son."
After the separation the plaintiff lived on in the house rent free.
The Master dealt with the assets which the parties had and the contributions which each made to them. He found: "The plaintiff's contribution to the relationship was that she brought into the relationship the sum of $400 of her own money. She worked around the farm and raised some poddy calves which the evidence suggests were sold for about $6,000. She also assisted in the building of the house which the parties occupied and worked in the fields albeit in a small way. She looked after the plaintiff (sic) and their son and she housekept. Prior to entering into a de facto relationship with the defendant the plaintiff worked. She was prevented from continuing work by the defendant. She was thus precluded from contributing to the assets of the parties through no fault of her own. Against this the plaintiff appropriated for her own use the rent money for a period of one year. She was totally supported by the defendant and she has resided rent free for the past three and a one half years in the home which was formerly occupied by the parties but owned by the defendant.

In my view the recognition and contribution which the plaintiff has received out of the relationship is not sufficient to reflect the contribution which she has made to the relationship.
It is possible to get an idea of the fruits of the relationship.
The plaintiff who it would seem did the banking, had accumulated in her account in 1986 the sum of a little over $20,000. This sum was accumulated as a result of the savings of the parties from the defendant's salary and from monies contributed from the sale of the poddy calves and other activities of the plaintiff around the farm. In September 1986 the sum of $20,000 was drawn from this account for the purpose of discharging the charge over the property pursuant to the will of the defendant's mother.
Given that each party to the relationship contributed to this sum it is not unreasonable to assess the plaintiff's share of the fruits of the relationship in September 1986 as $10,000."
The land apart, neither party has significant assets. The plaintiff receives unemployment benefits and is caring for the son.
The defendant Mr
Stanford owns a tractor, some farm machinery and equipment, some stock and a
Holden utility. No great value can be attributed to them. Other than that he has no assets. He is, as the Master found, "employed locally, as he has been throughout the period of the relationship between the parties".
The land left to Mr Stanford is available for subdivision if such may be undertaken in the area. The Master found it to have been valued in 1989 at $175,000 and "recently at $300,000". On the appeal, it was assumed to be worth some $300,000. As the Master said, when left to Mr Stanford it was subject to a charge to pay $10,000 to each of his sister and brother. That amount has been paid.
The Act envisages the consideration by the Court of, inter alia, "the contributions ... made by either of the de facto partners to the welfare of the other de facto partner or to the welfare of the family constituted by the partners ...": <case>(b). In Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 27 NSWLR 728] at 732, I examined the meaning of this provision. At 732-733 I said: "It is, of course, possible to determine what has been done by one party for the welfare of the other and to assess the extent to which the welfare of the other has been forwarded by it. But, in my opinion, the assessment of 'the contributions' made by one party is not one sided; it cannot have been the intention of the legislature that what one party has done for the other is to be considered - and rewarded - in isolation.
Regard must be had to what that party has received in return.
Special cases apart, what is contemplated by the provision is, therefore, that it is the balance of the contributions of the one over those of the other which is to be taken into account in determining what justice and equity require the court to do. At least, in deciding what 'to it seems just and equitable', the contributions of each side are to be had regard to.
I do not mean by this that what is involved is merely the weighing of the quantum of the benefits; it may be that quality also is to be weighed. But, in the end, it is, I think, the balance between the contributions of each which is or, at least, the contributions of each which are to be taken into account.
But such a balance is not to be determined by the number of lawns mowed or dishes washed. The process is to an extent normative.
And that leads to the examination of the assumptions underlying the section and the process it requires to be undertaken."
It has not been suggested, I think, that in considering the balance of contributions between the parties, the balance lies heavily on one side or the other. Mr Stanford provided and supported the house; Ms Wallace ran it. His wages provided their only substantive income. It is, I think, sufficient to conclude that, if such a balance is to be struck, it would not justify a significant order.
I have referred to the finding of the Master and his conclusion that "the recognition and contribution which the plaintiff has received out of the relationship is not sufficient to reflect the contribution which she has made to the relationship". Accordingly, he awarded her $30,000. He arrived at this sum by concluding that Ms Wallace was entitled to have $10,000 representing her share of the bank account; the whole of the bank account $20,000 was used to discharge the charges on the land and she was entitled to credit for her half.
The Master then said: "The property on which the Charge was discharged was valued two years later at $175,000 and recently at $300,000. Using the appreciation of the value of the property as a guide and taking into account that $10,000 of the plaintiff's money was used in 1986 to remove the charge and taking into consideration that the plaintiff was also prevented from working by the defendant it is appropriate to assess the plaintiff's contribution in the sum of $30,000.
This sum recognises the plaintiff's contribution both financially and non-financially to the relationship. In order to meet this commitment the defendant ought not to be dispossessed of his real property which is the only asset that he has." .
Therefore, the bank account apart, he awarded Ms Wallace $20,000. He did this in some way, inter alia, because, between the time when it was left to Mr
Stanford and the time of the trial, it had "appreciated" in value. I find difficulty in understanding the relevance of an increase part of which took place after they had separated. But when he made the order the Master did not have the benefit of the decision of this Court in Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 27
NSWLR 728.]
THE ISSUES:
The plaintiff is not content with the order made. As I have indicated, her claim is to half or at least a substantial part of the value of the property. If she be entitled to have such an award, it is necessary to examine the principles upon which, as she claims, it should be made. It is necessary to determine how far and on what ground a party to a former de facto relationship may claim benefit from an asset which has come to the other by death or otherwise in a way to which the claimant party has, as such, made no contribution.
These issues are of importance. There are, as the Court may know, many people who live in a de facto relationship. Insofar as it may be relevant, it appears that there were in New South Wales, in 1984, some 116,200 people in such a relationship: see Hansard, 17 October 1984, p 2001. The material published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics suggests that in 1982 there were some 168,000 de facto couples in Australia and in 1992 some 344,000.
Of those who cohabit rather than marry, some do so from choice; they prefer to cohabit rather than to marry. (I shall, for brevity, describe the de facto relationship by the neutral term "cohabit", to distinguish it from the relationship of marriage). Some do so because legally they cannot marry. There was a time when the law did not recognise cohabitation; it saw cohabitation as involving illegality or irregularity and refused to provide for the incidents of it. This is no longer the law: see formerly Ayerst versus Jenkins (1873) LR 16
Eq 275; see now Seidler v
Schallhofer [(1982) 2 NSWLR 80] and the cases there referred to. The law recognises that parties may choose to cohabit rather than to many. It is in the process of spelling out, by legislation and through judicial decisions, what are the rights and obligations of those who choose to cohabit.
That is what is involved in the present appeal.
The courts have, in recent years, examined the rights which may arise from the fact that parties have cohabited or, at least, from what is apt to occur in such a relationship. They have, principally through the mechanism of constructive trust and equitable charge, formulated or at least articulated the rights which such a relationship may create.
It was long settled that a constructive trust would be imposed upon the owner of property only if, in the relevant sense, the conscience of an equity judge would otherwise be disturbed: see, eg, Allen versus Snyder [(1977) 2 NSWLR 685] ("in order to satisfy the demands of justice and good conscience": at 702). As conventionally understood, "inequitable" in this context involved default, and default of a substantial nature.
As recent decisions of the High Court have shown, the conscience of the equity judge has become more easily shocked; less is now required to satisfy the conventional test than formerly was the case.
By this I mean that facts which in earlier times would not have been sufficient to warrant the imposition on the owner of a property of a trust or charge in favour of another are now more readily accepted as being so. In Muschinski versus Dodds <case>; [(1985) 160 CLR 583]; facts have been held to require the imposition of a trust or charge which, I think, would not have done so twenty years before.
It is relevant for present purposes to refer briefly to the basis on which these developments are based. In Baumgartner Mason
CJ, Wilson and Deane
JJ, in their joint judgment, held that property which the man had acquired with his own money and by a mortgage for the repayment of which he was solely liable was held upon trust for him and the woman with whom he had lived. He had, on acquisition of it stipulated to her that it was his and not hers and had refused her proposal that it be acquired and owned jointly: at 140.
The court held that despite this it was inequitable for him to refuse to accept that she had an interest in it. The court rejected in terms the view that "a constructive trust will be imposed in accordance with idiosyncratic notions of what is just and fair": CLR at 148. But it concluded that for him to hold the property for himself was "unconscionable" because "the parties pooled their earnings with a view to meeting all the expenses and outgoings arising from their living together as a family" and that that required in equity that the land be similarly held. See generally at 146-149.
Two things may be said in this regard. First, the circumstances which led the High Court to conclude that property acquired and intended to be held separately must be held jointly may arguably remove many of the reasons seen by the Law Reform Commission of New South Wales as requiring the enactment of the De Facto Relationships
Act 1984. The Law Reform Commission's Report was, of course, prepared prior to the decision in Baumgartner.
Second, and more significant, the decision has implications potentially large in respect of the ownership of property within the marriage relationship.
It was the pooling of earnings which, as the court held, required the imposition of joint ownership upon the man's property. It saw the pooling as requiring this presumably because of the trust, affection or the like incident to the relationship of cohabitation.
But however that be, the pooling of earnings is no less unusual, and trust affection and the like at least no less, in the context of marriage. And what applies to a home may apply to a car, or other investments made during the marriage. The extent to which this decision and the basis of it will require the imposition of joint ownership of matrimonial property remains to be determined.
 .
However, in this appeal the Court is not concerned directly with such implications. It is concerned with the extent of the power which has been given to the courts by the legislature by the De Facto Relationships Act. It is concerned with the circumstances in which a court may order one party to a cohabitation, or former cohabitation, to adjust the ownership of property or, as it is assumed, to pay money to the other. Statute apart, no such power existed. Under the general law, a man who cohabited with a woman had no right to require that, on separation, she pay money to him: or vice versa. In 1984 the legislature made such a provision. It is necessary to determine the extent to which a woman or a man is at risk when, for whatever reason, she or he terminates a cohabitation.
 .
THE EXTENT OF THE STATUTORY POWER:
The Act empowers a de facto partner "to apply to a court for an order under this Part for the adjustment of interests with respect to the property of the de facto partners or either of them ...": <case>. (I put aside questions of maintenance and analogous payments). The court is required, as far as practicable, to make "such orders as will finally determine the financial relationships between the de facto partners and avoid further proceedings between them": <case>.
The power here relied upon is contained in <case> which provides: "20. (1)
On an application by a de facto partner for an order under this Part to adjust interests with respect to the property of the de facto partners or either of them, a court may make such order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property as to it seems just and equitable having regard to: the financial and non-financial contributions made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of the de facto partners to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the partners or either of them or to the financial resources of the partners or either of them; and the contributions, including any contributions made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, made by either of the de facto partners to the welfare of the other de facto partner or to the welfare of the family constituted by the partners and one or more of the following, namely: a child of the partners; a child accepted by the partners or either of them into the household of the partners, whether or not the child is a child of either of the partners.

A court may make an order under subsection (1) in respect of property whether or not it has declared the tide or rights of a de facto partner in respect of the property."
It is the extent of the power given by <case> which is primarily in question.
The essential difference between the parties is whether, in determining what "to it seems just and equitable", the court may have regard only to the "contributions" referred to in pars (a) and (b) or whether it may have regard also to other and wider considerations. Mr Stanford has submitted the former;
Ms Wallace has, in this appeal, suggested that the court can have regard to considerations beyond those specified in the section.
In Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 27 NSWLR 728], I indicated my views in relation to relevant aspects of the operation of <case>. I referred, inter alia, to the significance of such words as "adjusting the interests of the partners in the property ...." I shall not repeat what I there said.
The function of the court under <case> is, of course, to order such adjustment of the interests of the parties in the relevant property as to it seems just and equitable. But what is just and equitable will depend upon or at least be influenced by the considerations to which the court may have regard in making such a determination. Were the power of the court conditioned only by what to the court seemed just and equitable without more, the considerations which it could take into account would be at large: they would be constrained only by the principles referred to in, eg, O'Sullivan versus Farrer <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 210.] But the Parliament, in <case>, conditioned the court's power by the words "having regard to ..." the two kinds of considerations ("contributions") referred to in pars (a) and (b). It is important, in this case and generally, to determine how this provision affects the power which the court has to take property from one partner and to give it to another.
The plaintiff's claim is, as I have said, that "having regard to ..." is equivalent to "having regard to ..." the relevant contributions and to anything else which would otherwise be taken into account by the court in deciding what to it seems just and equitable. The defendant's contention is that "having regard to ..." limits the considerations to which the court may have regard to the two kinds of "contributions" there referred to. It is by reference to such contributions that the justice and equity of the orders must be judged.
In my opinion the correct approach to <case> lies closer to the submissions of the defendant than to those of the plaintiff. I think that the power given by <case> is not at large. There are at least three matters which support this view of the section.
The first is the terms of the legislation.
The terms of <case> are plain.
"Having regard to" the two considerations specified ordinarily means having regard to them, not to them and others. It is proper to adopt the plain meaning of those terms unless there be some indication in the legislation that the Parliament had an intention different to that disclosed by the plain meaning of the terms: see generally Metal Manufacturers Ltd versus Lewis [(1988) 13
NSWLR 315] at 325-326 and the cases there referred to. There are no doubt cases in which words such as "having regard to" have been construed as indicating one only of the considerations relevant to the exercise of the power and not as indicating that that consideration is the sole or the governing consideration. Those cases are cases in which it has been possible to infer, from the terms of the legislation in its context, that the Parliament had an intention other than that appearing from the use of the term "having regard to". In my opinion no such intention is apparent in the present case.
To find such a different or expanded intention, it would, in my respectful opinion, be necessary for the court to attribute to the legislation a wide view of the way in which, on termination, the property rights of the parties to a de facto relationship are to be adjusted. There is no indication of such an expanded view in the terms of the legislation. If it is to be found, it must therefore be found in what the court sees as the context of the legislation, the mischief to be dealt with by it, and the social necessities which arise from and are to be dealt with because of the break up of a de facto relationship.
I am conscious of the mischief to which the legislation was directed. The view was adopted by the legislature that the law regulating the property rights of de facto partners did not provide adequately for what should be the position between them. Views have differed as to whether the law was such: some of the relevant considerations were referred to in cases such as
Baumgartner versus Baumgartner. But it is to be accepted that the New South Wales
Parliament considered the law to be, to an extent, inadequate.
But the difference between the parties in this appeal lies in what was the remedy which the Parliament chose to deal with that mischief and the extent of it.
The necessity carefully to consider this question has been referred to in a number of cases. In Metal Manufacturers Ltd versus Lewis [(1988) 13 NSWLR 315] at -326 I said: "But it was argued that to construe <case> in this way is to defeat the policy and purpose of the section and that the section should therefore be given a different interpretation. I do not think that that argument should be accepted.

The fact that policy or purpose may be referred to in the construction of legislation is no new insight. The use of it dates back at least 400 years to Heydon's Case [(1584) 3 Co Rep a]; 76 ER 637 and 'the mischief, 'the remedy' and 'the true reason of the remedy' there referred to. But experience has shown that policy and purpose, as aids to construction, must be dealt with with care. It is not by accident that judges of eminence have suggested that policy and public policy are to be used with caution: see, eg, MP Metals Pty Ltd versus Federal
Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1968) 117 CLR 631] at -278; <case>; [60 WN 170] at 171-172 per Jordan CJ. There are reasons for it. The views of judges on such matters may differ widely: see the wellknown observations on public policy in Mogul
Steamship Co Ltd versus McGregor Gow and Co [(1892) AC 25] at 500 and 507. Even where the policy or purpose of the legislation is clear judges may differ as to what follows from it and how the policy or purpose operates in the individual case. The danger that a judge may see a policy or purpose behind legislation for reasons which are idiosyncratic has been referred to: see
Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th ed, vol 44, par (4) at 555.

But to see the key to the meaning of a section in the policy or purpose of the legislation is, in my opinion, to take a less than sophisticated view of the art of the parliamentary draftsmen. In many cases, the interpretation of a provision is difficult, not because the policy or purpose of the legislation is not clear, but because the section is directed, not simply to effecting that policy or purpose, but to achieving a compromise between it and other considerations. In the present case, the evil and the remedy are clear. The draftsmen sought to prevent the improper incurring of debts and to do so by imposing criminal and civil liability on relevant directors. The difficulty that arises in the interpretation of s (2) arises because, having the mischief and the remedy clear, the draftsman had to determine the 'true reason' of the remedy chosen, that is, how far he should apply it without infringing the rights of otherwise innocent directors. I do not think that policy or purpose are of assistance in determining whether a director should be responsible for all debts incurred by his managing director or only for those to which he has given a particular authority or consent."
In the present case, the remedy chosen was not the grant to the court of an unrestricted power to take property from one and give it to another; it was, in my opinion, a more restricted power conditioned by the "contributions" referred to in pars (a) and (b).
That leads to the second reason why, in my opinion, the power is of the more restricted nature. The Act was enacted upon the basis of a model prepared by the New South Wales Law Reform Commission following the Law Reform
Commission Report No 36 of 1983. It has long been settled that, where legislation results from - at least, where it is drawn from - a report of a
Law Reform Authority, the court construing the legislation may have regard to the terms of the Law Reform Commission Report. The present Act is such an Act.
In my opinion it is clear from the Report that the restricted remedy was that proposed by the Commission.
The Commission saw the law as inadequate.
It then considered the remedies to be proposed. It identified four remedies or models for legislation: see pars 5.41 et seq of the
Report. It rejected the equating of de facto relationships with marriage: par 5.42; the grant of relief upon proof of dependence: par 5.58; and the "equating" of "de facto relationships and marriages for certain purposes": par 5.61. It saw the fourth model as requiring the legislature "to examine specific areas of law to determine whether there are injustices or significant anomalies and, if so, what remedial action should be taken": par 5.65. It expressed its view that the injustice or inadequacy of the existing law: "arises from the concentration of existing law on the common intention of the parties and on direct financial contributions to the acquisition of assets. Specifically, the law fails to give sufficient recognition to two kinds of contribution to a de facto relationship: indirect financial and non-financial contributions by one partner to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of assets, such as contributions to the family's household expenses which assist the other partner to acquire assets in his or her own name; and financial and non-financial contributions by one partner to the welfare of the other partner or to the children of the relationship, including contributions made in the capacity of homemaker and parent.": par .43.
The Report then recommended that the court be entitled to take into account "a wide range of contributions, by either party, to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of assets and to the welfare of the other partner or the family generally" and specified the contributions "to be taken into account" as being contributions of the kind referred to in <case>(a) and (b).
It then said: "Paragraphs (a) and (b), taken together, ensure that a wide range of contributions will be taken into account by a court in determining the appropriate order to make with respect to property. The contributions that the court may consider include: direct financial contributions to the acquisition or improvement of property; physical labour in connection with the home or a business; payments towards household expenses; assistance in increasing the earning capacity of the other party (for example, supporting that party while he or she undertakes a course); the provision of housekeeping or nursing services; and contributions in the form of caring for children.": par 7.44-6.
In my opinion, therefore, the effect which the Law Reform Commission saw the proposed legislation to have was one involving the "adjusting (of) the interests of the partners in the property" to the extent that the contributions so made by the parties made it just and equitable to readjust them.

That leads to the third matter to which I have referred, namely, the significance, for the purpose of the construction of <case>, of the fact that the Act embodies the determination of the Parliament of the extent to which the existing mischief was to be adjusted and the manner in which that was to be done. The recognition of the existence of the mischief detailed in the Law
Reform Commission's
Report required the Parliament, in the adjustment of that mischief, to make a social evaluation of and a judgment between competing claims. As the Report 'indicated, under the then existing law one party to a de facto relationship owned property; the other claimed that he or she should have that property or a benefit from it. The then existing law did not support the latter claim. The purpose of the Act was, for reasons which were social rather than legal, to provide a basis upon which the Court could take the property from the one and give it to the other. Equally important, it involved a judgment by the Parliament as to what would (and correspondingly what would not) justify that being done.
In the construction of legislation, particularly social legislation, the
Court can and should recognise the realities of the process of legislation. A parliament may legally effect the claim of one interest group and ignore the claim of the other. If it does so, it may attract media interest and electoral disapproval. It may therefore adopt a compromise between the two. The Court is not to attribute to the Parliament an intention which the precise terms of the legislation suggest it would not have. At least, the Court should not attribute to Parliament an intention which it is unlikely that publicly it would espouse. If the legislature had given to the courts - the Supreme Court and the Local Court - an unrestricted discretion to transfer property from a woman to a man or vice versa, it might well have met with significant criticism: at least, it may have feared that it would have done so. What the legislature did was to adopt the accommodation proposed by the Report, namely, the grant of a discretionary power but limited to the considerations referred to in <case>.
It is in my respectful opinion important that the Court, in the exercise of the power given, give effect according to its terms to the social judgment which <case> embodies. That social judgment may or may not accord with the views of some. But that cannot change the way in which the Court should exercise the power given to it. It has been said that courts can and will change the law: that is not in doubt: see the references detailed in
Ballina Shire Council v
Ringland [(1994) 33 NSWLR 680] at 731. In a sense, what the courts can do is measured by what they do. The extent of the changes which courts may effect are illustrated by, inter alia, the Mabo (No 2) case  <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 477.]
But, in my respectful opinion, there are limits: it is proper that there be such. What is here in question is the construction of social legislation; the Court is not dealing with the common law or expounding the terms of a written constitution. A judge or a court may be of the opinion that the social values embodied in instant legislation are wrong; the judge or even the court may believe that they are so wrong as, for example, to contravene fundamental rights. The courts have developed techniques for dealing with cases which go so far. A court may refuse to accept that the Parliament intends such a contravention of fundamental rights unless the Parliament has stated its intention explicitly or beyond doubt: see Balog versus Independent Commission
Against Corruption <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 625] at -373. It may ensure that the powers granted are not, by its construction, extended beyond the strict limits of the terms of the legislation: cf generally John Fairfax and Sons Ltd versus Cojuangco <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 346] And it may, by the terms of its judgment, make clear what it is that the Parliament has done and the seriousness of it. But in the end, the
Court must give effect to the intention of the Parliament as expressed in the legislation; it must do faithfully and in accordance with the terms of it. An attempt to limit the powers of Parliament by reference to, eg, natural justice or other considerations will involve an attempt to change the balance of legal power between the legislature and the judiciary: see Building Construction
Employees and Builders' Labourers Federation of New South Wales versus Minister for
Industrial Relations [(1986) 7 NSWLR 372] at 3 72-373.
It follows from this that, in determining whether an order should be made and what that order should be, the
Court is, in the sense to which I shall refer, constrained by what have been the "contributions" of the parties and the balance between them. The term "contributions" has the meaning to which I have referred: it extends not merely to financial and non-financial contributions to property but to the more general contributions referred to in s 20(1)(b). It is those contributions and their contribution to the property or financial resources of the parties and to their welfare to which consideration is limited. It is upon this basis that the Court is to determine what is just and equitable in the particular case.
WHAT ORDER SHOULD BE MADE?
In the present case - and cases generally under the Act - four things at least require consideration: what have been the contributions of each party; what is the balance between those contributions what account is to be taken of property to which one or the other has not, in the sense here relevant, contributed; and what, in the light of these, is just and equitable.
The actual contributions of Ms Wallace and Mr Stanford have been referred to in what I have said as to the Master's findings. In this case the relationship between the parties was essentially a domestic relationship of an ordinary kind; it was a relationship of the kind expected between persons living where they lived and in the manner they lived. Apart from the matters to which I have referred, there was nothing which would differentiate it from an ordinary relationship of this kind. This is not a case in which, eg, there were special or unusual contributions. What
Mr Stanford did was what he might be expected to do in such a relationship: he worked at one or two jobs at a time, he derived income, he made that available for the support of both of them and their child, and he attended to the ordinary domestic tasks outside the house and on the property. He went beyond this in that he it was who essentially constructed the house in which they came to live and that, it may be inferred, contributed to "the partnership property".
What Ms Wallace did was equally, in this sense, what might ordinarily be expected in such a relationship. She cared for the family, she did not work outside the house. The extent to which the fact that she worked only at home and not outside it was a "contribution" is not clear. Whether, if she had worked, eg, in employment, she would have contributed more or less to the "welfare" of the parties than if she did not so work does not appear.
But, as the Master, recorded, she gave up an opportunity to work.
As I have indicated, in Dwyer versus Kaljo, I said that "...
the assessment of 'the contributions' made by one party is not one sided; it cannot have been the intention of the legislature that what one party has done for the other is to be considered - and rewarded - in isolation. Regard must be had to what that party has received in return." In a normal domestic relationship, the contribution of the one or the other is not to be treated as inherently the greater. It was at one time thought, perhaps, that the contribution of the wage earner should be treated as the greater because he/she did work, derived money from it, and used that money to pay for the necessities of both.
Alternatively, the fact that a woman has a child or cares for the house is not inherently of greater weight as a contribution than that of a wage earner.
There are, for the purposes of the Act, no stereotypes. Each case must be assessed on its own facts.
But the question remains: how does one measure, the one against the other, the contribution of a wage earner and a home maker. It is tempting to conclude that the Act is intended to operate upon the assumption that, in an ordinary relationship, there is no balance of "contributions", one over the other.
But to make that assumption and to apply it in every case would produce results which could not have been intended. It would be curious if, where the woman's income was $500,000 per annum, and she acquired property from the use of the surplus of it which was available, the contributions of the man as housekeeper were to warrant the same "adjustment" of that property as it would warrant where her income had been only $50,000 per annum. What is to be borne in mind is that the remedy chosen by the legislation was one based, in the sense to which I have referred, on "contributions". The property of one is to be "adjusted" to the extent and only to the extent war-ranted by (the balance of) their respective contributions.
Each case is to be considered on its own facts. It is, I think, sufficient for the decision of this appeal to conclude, as I do, that it has not been shown that, on the facts, the balance of contribution lies in favour of Ms Wallace.
I am conscious of the finding made by the Master in this regard. The bank account aside, I do not understand the basis on which that finding was made.
It was made prior to the decision of this Court in Dwyer versus Kaljo. It is not merely a finding of fact but an evaluation. In the circumstances, I do not think that this Court should be bound by it. However, as the findings of fact have been accepted and Mr Stanford has not appealed, I shall accept, to the extent of it, this finding.
I come now to one of the central issues of principle in the present appeal, namely, what account is to be taken of the property inherited by Mr
Stanford. In my opinion, Ms Wallace is not entitled to have, or to have value from, that property merely because
Mr Stanford acquired it. The matter may be tested by an example. Assume that a woman has, by a lottery win, acquired $1 million the day before or the day after separation from a de facto relationship: what, if any, account is to be taken of that fact? There is, in such a case, no contribution to that sum by the other party to the relationship. (I put aside special cases, eg, joint ownership of the money used to buy the lottery ticket or joint ownership of the ticket). Accordingly, the Court may order part of the woman's winnings to go to the man's benefit only if the fact that she has those winnings makes it "just and equitable" to give part of them to him. In my opinion, the fact that she has such moneys is not as such, a ground for making an order which otherwise the Court would not have made. The winnings are a windfall which has no relationship to the exercise of the Court's discretion.
This does not mean that the fact that a woman is, when the order comes to be made, richer rather than poorer cannot affect the order to be made. In some cases it may. Thus, one party may deserve to have an order but no order can be made because the other party has no property which can be "adjusted" to provide it. The Court may determine not to do what would be futile.
The fact that one or both of the parties is rich may affect the order that is made in other ways or for other reasons. Dwyer versus Kaljo was such a case.
The man was very rich. He provided for the woman a rich man's home, an expensive lifestyle, and expensive gifts. She, with the assistance of servants, managed the household. The contributions made by her were seen by the majority of the Court to exceed his. Her contributions were, in the relevant sense, "welfare" contributions. They were, apparently, seen to exceed his to the extent that a large sum was necessary to "adjust" their property interests. The basis on which this was calculated is not, in my respectful opinion, clear. But at least it appears that the award was calculated on the basis that the contribution to the welfare of a rich man of what his "partner" does in keeping house for him is greater than that of a person in a less wealthy relationship. If that decision is to be followed, it may be necessary to see, in some cases, a rich lifestyle as different from a poor one. It may be that, in doing what is just and equitable, that is to be taken into account.
In the present context, what is a just and equitable order? As I have said, it is the significance to be given to the land which Mr Stanford inherited which is the determining factor. To an extent, this case differs from the lottery case to which I have referred. Before the land passed to Mr
Stanford by the death of his mother, both parties had some relationship to it.
Mr Stanford had built the house on the land. They had lived in the house and he had tried to make a living by working the land. She had done what the
Master indicated. Insofar as what was done by them contributed to the value of the land, that occurred, in my opinion, more because of his "contribution" than hers. Insofar as there was a change in value, it was, perhaps, not because of the contribution of either but because of the zoning of the land for subdivision.
It remains, in the end, that Mr Stanford owned the land for some two or three years at the end of the relationship. If there be contributions involved, his was greater than hers. Accordingly, she may have the benefit of the fact that he succeeded to the land only if, contributions apart, the Court may hold it just and equitable that she benefit from it. In my opinion, to transfer to her a substantial benefit from the land would be to benefit her by virtue of a consideration other than that which, under the legislation, has been accepted as relevant. If the benefit is not given because of, or because of the balance of, her "contributions" then it is given for another reason. To say that it is given as part of the process of determining what is just and equitable is, in my respectful opinion, merely to say that in determining what is just and equitable, the Court shall have regard to matters other than those specified in the section.
For the reasons to which I have referred, this goes beyond what the statute has authorised.
Mr Stanford has not cross-appealed.
Accordingly, in my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE2
HANDLEY JA:  The appellant Esmerelda Wallace and the respondent Brian
Stanford had a de facto relationship which lasted thirteen years from
September 1973 to August 1987. He was thirty three when it began and she was thirty. They lived together in a rented flat at Nambucca Heads until 1980.
Both had previously been married and their marriages broke up about the same time, perhaps because they had been having an intimate relationship since .
In 1972 the respondent, his parents, his wife and their two children moved to Macksville where his parents bought a sixty nine hectare property.
Early the following year the respondent's wife left taking their two children with her.
The appellant's marriage broke up towards the end of 1972. Her husband left taking their son with him and her other son by an earlier de facto relationship went to stay with her mother. Not long before September 1973 the appellant and respondent "agreed to live together permanently" and she left
Sydney to join him at Nambucca Heads. In March 1974 Charles, their only child, was born.
The appellant had worked in unskilled and semi-skilled jobs in Sydney but she did not seek employment after the de facto relationship commenced. The
Master found that the respondent did not "allow" her to work because he wanted her to look after "the house", the baby and himself. He first worked for the
RSL Club at Nambucca Heads but after some years resigned and attempted to earn a living from farming on his parent's property. After eight months or so it became apparent that his income from farming would not be sufficient and he took a job at the abattoirs near Macksville. He also worked as a farrier after hours visiting properties and shoeing horses.
The respondent's parents lived in an old weatherboard house on their property. Early in 1980 the respondent commenced to build a house and farm outbuildings on this property. According to the respondent he did this because his father had had a stroke. The construction of the house was a family affair, work being done by the respondent, his father, his uncle and subcontractors. The appellant was also involved, going to the site with the respondent, and as the Master found, "she did some fetching, carrying and holding, she generally assisted the workmen as they went about the task of building the house".
The respondent's father died in September 1980 and shortly afterwards the parties moved into the new house which was "a shell" and over the next two years much work was done to make it more presentable.
The mother as the surviving joint tenant became sole owner of the property. The appellant alleged that the respondent had an equitable interest from the time of its purchase but the Master did not accept this. The appellant did not claim that the respondent had an equitable interest because of the construction of the house. His parents knew that the house was being built and it seems that they encouraged him in this. There is every reason for concluding that their encouragement, or at least their knowledge and acquiescence resulted in the respondent acquiring a substantial equity in the property on the principles applied in Dillwyn versus Llewelyn (1862) De G F and J 517 <case>; [(45 ER 1285)], Plimmer v The Mayor of Wellington (1884) 9 Ap Cas 699 and Chalmers versus Pardoe [(1963) 1
WLR 677 (PC).] However this claim was not made either at first instance or in this Court, and it must be ignored.
The parties lived in the new house until the death of the respondent's mother in September 1984. She left the property to her son in her will charged with payments of $10,000 to his surviving brother and sister. The property was transmitted in July 1985 and the legacies were paid in
September 1986. There is no evidence of the price the parents paid for the property in 1972. In 1988 it was valued at $175,000 and at the trial in April 1991 it was agreed to be worth $300,000. The 1988 valuation (38) suggests that the new house had increased the overall value by about $30,000.
The parties separated in August 1987, the respondent remaining in the old house. The appellant lived in the new house rent free and she and the son were still there at the time of the trial. In the meantime the respondent had been paying $20 per week for the maintenance of the son.
The Master found that the appellant had no assets, other than personal effects, and that she was dependent on unemployment benefits. The respondent had the property worth $300,000, a tractor said to have been recently purchased for $16,000, other farming plant, livestock and a Holden utility. He was also in full time employment.
Between 1980 and 1987 the parties had run cows and pigs on the property, raised and sold poddy calves and grown some crops. The appellant had an account with the State Bank in which she kept their savings. In September 1986 $20,400 was withdrawn from this account to pay the legacies to the respondent's brother and sister.
In May 1989 the appellant commenced proceedings under the De Facto
Relationships Act for a property adjustment order. The Master found:- "The plaintiff's contribution ... was that she brought ...
$400 of her own money. She worked around the farm and raised some poddy calves which ... were sold for about $6000. She also assisted in the building of the house ... and worked in the fields albeit in a small way. She looked after the and their son and she housekept. Prior to entering into a de facto relationship with the defendant the plaintiff worked.
She was prevented from continuing work by the defendant. She was thus precluded from contributing to the assets of the parties through no fault of her own ...
She was totally supported by the defendant..."
He found that the parties had been equally entitled to the moneys in the bank. He took into account the plaintiff's interest in these moneys, their use for payment of the legacies, and the increase in the value of the property after 1988. He said that $30,000 "recognises the plaintiff's contribution both financially and non-financially to the relationship". He ordered the defendant to pay this sum in a year's time without interest and made no order as to costs.
The plaintiff appealed challenging the order as manifestly inadequate.
Her counsel acknowledged that it was made in the exercise of a judicial discretion and that he must bring her case within the principles in House v
The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499.] His submission was that the order was so low that it was "simply" or "manifestly" inadequate and that this Court was therefore entitled to interfere. The appellant's submission is encapsulated in the result of the Master's order. At the end of a de facto relationship which lasted thirteen years and resulted in the birth of a son, the plaintiff had $30,000 while the defendant had real estate worth $270,000 net, a motor vehicle, farming plant and livestock. The plaintiff received less than ten per cent of their combined assets.
In my opinion this disparity in itself bespeaks error. In fairness to the Master it should be pointed out that his decision predates the decisions of this Court in Black versus Black [(1991) 15 Fam LR 109]
The power invoked by the appellant is that conferred by <case> which provides that:- "... a court may make such order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property as to it seems just and equitable having regard to - the financial and non-financial contributions made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of the de facto partners to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the partners or either of them or to the financial resources of the partners or either of them; and the contributions, including any contributions made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, made by either of the de facto partners to the welfare of the other ... or to the welfare of the family constituted by the partners and... - a child of the partners;"
In Black versus Black at 117 Clarke JA speaking for the Court said:- "It is established that the contributions referred to in s 20(1)(b) ... should be recognised in a substantial and not a token way and that the purpose of the subsection is to give recognition to the position of a woman who, by her attention to the home and children, frees her partner to earn income and acquire assets."
In my opinion <case> does not establish a hierarchy and subordinate the personal contributions in par (b) to the proprietary and financial contributions in par (a). I would apply to this provision the comment of Kitto
J in Rathborne versus Abel [(1964) 38 ALJR 293] at 301:- "... regard is to be had to all the matters listed; there is no justification for an assumption that (they) ...
are arranged in order of importance."
See also per Barwick CJ at 299 ("There is no hierarchy in these matters"). In Williamson v Williamson [(1992) 15 Fam LR 739] at 746 Cohen J said;- "The judgment of the majority in Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 15 Fam
LR 645] makes it clear, although it does not say it in so many words, that the section should be read so as to insert after the words "having regard to" the further words "but not limited to". The emphasis is to be on what is just and equitable".
The view that the direction in <case> to have "regard to" the matters in paras (a) and (b) does not exclude other considerations relevant to the making of a just and equitable order is supported by much authority on the meaning of similar provisions. In Perry versus Wright [(1908) 1 KB 441] at 458 Fletcher Moulton
LJ referring to a provision that "regard may be had to" certain matters said that these were "to be a guide not a fetter". In McDermott versus Owners of SS
Tintoretto [(1909) 2 KB 704] at 710 CozensHardy MR said that a direction that "regard shall be had" to certain matters "means only that ... (they) must not be overlooked. It is for the ... judge, in the exercise of his discretion to say how this is to be worked out". See also per Farwell
LJ at 712. In Newport
BC versus Monmouthshire CC [(1947) AC 520] at 534 Viscount Simon said:- "... the arbitrator's task under the statute is to fix 'such sum as seems equitable' and ...
his duty ... is not necessarily to be governed by exact calculations so much as to exercise a broad judgment under the rule that 'regard shall be had' to the matters mentioned. He is to arrive at what he judges to be an equitable figure, and this primary consideration ... controls any arithmetical conclusion which he does not deem to be fair and reasonable".

In Palser versus Grinling [(1948) AC 291] at 314-315 he said:- "... it is of the utmost importance to observe that the section directs that 'regard shall be had' to the value to the tenant, and not that the value to such tenant is to govern the calculation absolutely. In the recent case of
Newport B.C. versus Monmouthshire C.C.... I pointed out that such a direction called for the exercise of a broad judgment ...
In the present case the direction that regard is to be had to the value to the tenant i.e. that such value must not be overlooked but must be suitably allowed for, is made clear ... Other factors have to be duly weighed and allowed for".
 .
In Rathborne versus Abel (above) Kitto J said at 301:- "... it is 'in determining the fair rent' that the Board is required to have regard to the matters mentioned. The determination of the fair rent is recognised as the Board's essential preoccupation, and a duty to have regard to the specified matters is prescribed only as a means to that end ... plainly the provision that the listed matters are to be regarded does not imply that nothing else may be regarded."
See also Reg versus Hunt Ex parte
Sean Investments <case>; [(1979) 180 CLR 322] at 329.
A statutory direction to have regard to certain matters may be construed as requiring the decisionmaker to do no more than consider whether "any and if so what weight" should be given "to the particular fact or circumstance". See
Rathborne versus Abel at 295 per Barwick CJ. In other cases a different construction may be warranted. Thus in Reg versus Hunt Ex parte Sean Investments at 329 Mason J said:- "When subsection (7) directs the Permanent Head to 'have regard to' the costs, it requires him to take those costs into account and to give weight to them as a fundamental element in making his determination."
This passage was applied by Gibbs CJ in The Queen versus Toohey Ex parte
Meneling Station <case>; [(1982) 158 CLR 327] at 333 and the same view of the legislation there in question was taken by Mason J at 338 ("... ensures that this factor will become a central element..."). See also Wilson versus Wilson (No ) (1994) FLC 81, 193 at 81, 199-81201 per Moss J.
In my opinion <case> requires the matters mentioned in pars (a) and (b) to be given weight as "fundamental elements" in the determination of what is just and equitable, and "as a means to that end" but the Court is not confined to those matters. I would therefore confirm the view implicit in the majority decision in Dwyer versus Kaljo, which was not challenged, that the Court's "essential" duty under <case> is to make an order that is just and equitable.
Cf Rathborne versus Abel at 301 per Kitto J (above).
The Master appears to have approached his task by assessing "the fruits of the relationship" which he thought were of the order of $20,000, the plaintiff's contribution being half. He took into account the increase in the value of the property since 1988 and the fact that the plaintiff, in deference to the defendant's wishes, had not undertaken paid employment and awarded her $30,000. It is apparent therefore that the Master substantially ignored the defendant's inheritance because it was not "a fruit of the relationship".
Counsel for the respondent supported this approach.
In my opinion the Master misdirected himself. Although the respondent received his inheritance in 1984 the parties had enjoyed de facto possession of most of the property from September 1980 and had retained the profits of their farming and grazing activities.
The appellant helped the respondent's mother by attending to her needs and taking her shopping and to the doctor.
During the week the respondent could not help because he was working. The construction of their home on the property and the help given to the mother in the last years of her life strengthened the respondent's claim on his mother's bounty which she recognised by leaving him the property. To an appreciable extent therefore, the inheritance was a fruit of the relationship. Moreover the parties' savings were used to pay off the legacies and thus complete the respondent's title.
In any event the defendant's ownership of the property was not an irrelevant consideration and its acquisition by inheritance did not make it so. What is important is the partners' de facto possession after 1980 and their activities on the property. They built on it, lived on it, and worked it. During those years the plaintiff <case> of living depended to a significant extent on their rent free occupation. A just and equitable order under s 20(1) must take this into account.
The Family Court has considered the approach it should adopt, when adjusting property interests, to assets owned by a spouse prior to marriage.
In Crawford versus Crawford (1979) FLC 78407 at 78411-2 the Full Court said:- "... counsel argued that the amount of the husband's original contribution of capital should be extrapolated proportionately to the inflationary growth of the real estate. This may be a persuasive argument if the marriage had been of short duration.
However it was of a comparatively long duration - something in excess of nineteen years. In our view the longer ... the period of cohabitation the less weight need be given to the initial contribution of capital by either spouse at the beginning of a marriage ... The contribution of assets by each party to the marriage is always ... a factor to be taken into account, but we see the significance of the initial contribution gradually diminishing with the passing of the years."
This passage was approved by another Full Court in White versus White (1982)
FLC 77362. The same approach should also be taken in relation to property owned before or acquired by inheritance during a de facto relationship, and this is implicit in Dwyer versus Kaljo. By way of example, I would instance the case of a grazier with a valuable property who entered into what became a lengthy de facto relationship with a woman who occupied herself in domestic duties but enjoyed a comfortable lifestyle based on her partner's income from the property.
There may be "no fruits of the relationship" such as those identified by the Master in this case but in my view a nominal order in favour of such a woman would not meet the justice and equity of her case. The lifestyle she had enjoyed during the relationship would warrant a substantial order in her favour.
The view that no substantial order should be made where it could be said that the woman's personal and domestic contributions are balanced by the man's personal contributions devalues to zero the weight to be given to her contributions within par (b). In every happy relationship the contributions of each partner to the other's personal welfare will be approximately equal, but this does not mean that the Court should ignore a woman's personal and domestic contributions unless in some way they exceeded those of her partner.
Black versus Black is a unanimous decision of this Court which decided that the contributions of a woman who chooses the role of housewife and mother in a de facto relationship must be recognised under this Act "in a substantial way". This requires the Court to recognise her unpaid domestic duties during her partner's paid working hours as a contribution of significant value for the purposes of this Act. Moreover in Singer versus Berghouse <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 201] at , 213 the High Court recently emphasised the relevance of this principle in the context of the [Family Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/). The majority there said:- "As recent cases in this Court have made plain it is important that the courts do not disregard or discount the non-financial contributions made to the property and finances of the parties to a marriage or marriage like relationship, such as the contributions made by parties as home-makers and parents, which are not directly productive of a monetary return".
Moreover such contributions by a woman will often have an opportunity cost measured by the earnings she otherwise would have received. This opportunity cost will form part of her reliance interest arising from the relationship which was referred to in Dwyer versus Kaljo. In addition such a woman will also have an expectation interest built up during the relationship based on the standard of living she enjoyed while it continued. The Act provides for a no fault regime for adjusting the property rights of de facto partners after their relationship has come to an end and regardless of why it did so.
The expectation interest that I sought to identify in Dwyer versus Kaljo was not based on a continuance of the relationship in the future but upon its existence in the past. To my mind it is neither just nor equitable in the statutory sense for a woman at the end of a thirteen year de facto relationship, having secured an order under the Act in her favour, to be left with less than ten per cent of the combined assets of the parties. While the relationship subsisted both partners shared in the de facto enjoyment of their combined assets regardless of the legal or beneficial title. When a relationship comes to an end a partner, such as the appellant, who had enjoyed benefits for many years from her partner's property has, in my view, a legitimate expectation that she will receive a fair share of what, in a practical sense, has been "theirs" and hence "hers" during the relationship.
The parties had lived on and derived profits from farming and grazing the
Macksville property since 1980. The respondent's inheritance of this property in 1984 was not, in my view, a windfall which should be seen as extraneous to the relationship but rather the natural and foreseeable accretion to the prior possession and enjoyment of the parties. The parties continued to live on and derive profits from the property as before and the property remained "theirs" in this sense although the respondent now had the full title. This approach is applicable not only in cases such as Dwyer versus Kaljo where one of the partners is very wealthy but also in cases such as the present where the parties' assets were modest but owned exclusively by the man.
In my opinion the Master erred in confining his attention to "the fruits of the relationship" as identified by him. Such an approach, which was rejected by the majority in Dwyer versus Kaljo, treats <case> as limited to the awarding of compensation for money or money's worth contributed by one partner to the property of the other. His approach was also contrary to Black versus Black because he treated the appellant's contributions within par (b) as being of little significance.
These contributions of course were not in any sense a fruit of the relationship but were rather a cost of that relationship to the appellant.
The respondent wanted the appellant to stay at home and so valued her personal and domestic contributions during working hours as worth more than the wages she might otherwise have earned. By assessing the appellant's relevant contributions at only $10,000 the Master must have given practically no weight to her personal and domestic contributions or lost earnings although he said that he took these matters into account.
I am therefore satisfied that the Court is entitled to interfere and set aside the Master's order. On a reassessment I would order the respondent to pay the appellant $100,000. The appellant's rent free occupation of the newer house is not a reason for reducing the order but is a reason for not backdating the running of interest.
The appellant should have her costs of the trial and of the appeal. I would propose the following orders:-
Appeal allowed with costs.

Set aside the Master's order and substitute an order that the respondent pay the appellant the sum of $100,000, such sum to be charged on the respondent's Wirrimbi Road property being the land comprised in the certificates of title
Volume 14430 Folio 180, Volume 5468 Folio 91, Volume Folio 181, Volume 13012 Folio 31 and Volume 13900
Folio 41.
 
Interest shall run on the sum of $30,000 from 11 April, and on $70,000 from 1 November, 1995 at Supreme Court rates, credit to be given to the respondent for any sums paid under the Master's order.

The respondent is to pay the appellant's costs of the trial.

The respondent is to have a certificate under the
Suitors Fund Act in respect of the costs of the appeal.
JUDGE3
SHELLER JA: I have had the benefit of reading the judgments prepared by
Mahoney and Handley JJA.
I agree for the reasons given by Mahoney JA that the appeal should be dismissed with costs. It is, accordingly, unnecessary for me to express any concluded view about the majority decision of the Court in
Dwyer versus Kaljo [(1992) 27 NSWLR 728.] Special leave to appeal to the High Court was refused and no party in this appeal sought to re-argue the correctness of the decision.
I should say, however, that, with respect, I have difficulty with the conclusion expressed by Handley JA at 744 that the power under s20 of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984 to make a just order authorises orders to remedy any injustice the applicant would otherwise suffer because of his or her reasonable reliance on the relationship or his or her reasonable expectations from the relationship.
These doubts spring from the more limited power described in the section when compared with [s79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s79.html) of the [Family Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (see Black versus Black [(1991) 15 FamLR 109] at 113) and the choice of language in the section which derives or accords with the United Kingdom Law Commission
Report on Financial
Provision in Matrimonial Proceedings (1968-69) para 69 directed to the law's inability to correct the imbalance which may be found to exist in property rights as between husband and wife; Pettitt versus Pettitt <case>; [(1970)
AC 777] at 811. The emphasis is on adjusting the interest of the partners having regard to their contributions related either to their property or welfare. On its face the section seems to have nothing to do with compensating one partner for the consequences of the failure of the relationship. If such compensation is covered by the section, justice and equity, it seems to me, would require a balancing of the loss suffered by each party not just one.
However this is not the occasion to do more than express the difficulties
I feel about the matter.
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/121.html  
