

Regina versus Herrera Matter No Cca 60630/96 [1997] NSWSC 235 (6 June 1997) 
Regina versus Navia Mercedes Daza HERRERA /96 June 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL, Smart J, Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Mitchelmore DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60630 of 1996 
HEARING DATE/S: 6 June 1997 
DELIVERED: 6 June 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Navia Mercedes Daza HERRERA 
JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, GROVE J 
COUNSEL: 
APPLICANT - In person 
RESPONDENT - T Game SC with M Wigney 
SOLICITORS: 
APPLICANT - 
RESPONDENT - Solicitor for Cwth Director of Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Imposition on the Commonwealth - receipt of social service benefits - non-custodial sentence not appropriate. 
No. of pages: 7 
Regina versus Navia Mercedes Daza HERRERA 
HUNT CJ AT CL: The applicant (Navia Mercedes Daza Herrera) seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed upon her following her conviction by a District Court jury on eleven counts of imposition upon the Commonwealth. In accordance with [s 4K(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s4k.html) of the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/), Judge Mitchelmore imposed a single penalty of imprisonment for two years and three months, but with a non-parole period of fifteen months. Pursuant to [s 21B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s21b.html) of the same Act, the applicant was ordered to make reparation to the Commonwealth for the full amount involved in the charges. 
The impositions related to the applicant's receipt of social security benefits to which she was not entitled, totalling $90,073. She received benefits in three different names at various times over a period of seven years. She was only entitled to receive them in one of her names. She claimed that she was entitled to receive them in two of the names and denied that she had received them in the third name. The Crown case was an extraordinarily strong one. She has expressed no contrition, even after conviction, for those offences.

The applicant had a prior criminal record, including three convictions for stealing. Some of the present offences were committed whilst subject to a bond as a condition of a deferred sentence for the stealing offences. This had been substituted for a sentence of imprisonment for three months in the Local
Court. It was accompanied by an order that compensation of $19,160 be paid.
The judge took into account the length of time over which the offences were committed, their lack of spontaneity and the large sum of money involved. He noted the lack of contrition. He referred to the many statements of this Court that general deterrence is of great importance in relation to social security frauds.

The judge also took into account the reports from a psychiatrist and a psychologist that the applicant was suffering from an anxiety disorder with depression and severe emotional upsets, and the traumatic childhood to which she referred in the histories given to those examining her. Of particular importance was the fate of her four year old son, for whom she was the sole carer. The judge had evidence before him that the child was being well looked after by a friend of the applicant, but that the arrangement may not be available for the whole time that the applicant would be in custody. He considered and rejected the submission that she should be given the benefit of periodic detention.

The applicant has appeared unrepresented. In her Notice of Appeal and in a written submission, the applicant has expressed specific concern about her son, about where he will be living, his health (as he suffers from asthma and a foot problem) and the effects which her incarceration is having upon him.
She says that she has no family to help her through her sentence, which she says is a heavy one.

This Court does not usually allow fresh evidence on appeal, but we have permitted the applicant to tell us, informally, of what has happened since the sentence was imposed. The boy's father (who had previously mistreated him) has now threatened to abduct him. He is an unsuitable person to be in contact with the son, and is bad mouthing her to him. The boy's godparents have sought, or are seeking, an order that they be given custody of the boy and have alleged that the applicant is an unsuitable person to have his custody. There are medical certificates which show that, as may be expected, the boy has reacted badly to the applicant's incarceration, that he has behavioural problems, and he has suffered from depression. There are problems in relation to the boy visiting the applicant in custody. The applicant has also expanded upon the difficulties which she has had in the past. Her daughter, who is much older than her son, has got herself into some trouble.

The applicant asks us to substitute a non-custodial sentence (or one which is not full-time custodial), such as home detention, so as to permit her to litigate these claims for custody of the child and to ensure that the father does not abduct him. Alternatively, she asks us to fix a shorter non-parole period. Alternatively again, the applicant asks us to move her to what is described as a transitional centre at Parramatta where prisoners are permitted to have their children with them.

Dealing first with the last alternative, this Court has no power to direct the
Department of Corrective Services in relation to classification or administrative matters. Returning then to the primary point, it is necessary to explain to the applicant, who is unrepresented, that this Court does not impose its own sentence in place of that imposed in the District Court unless error has first been established. Such error may be established if it is shown that the judge misunderstood the law which he had to apply, or that he gave consideration to some matter which he should not have, or failed to consider some matter which he should have. Judges have a very wide sentencing discretion, and this Court will not interfere with that discretion simply because it would have imposed a different sentence itself.

It is necessary, therefore, to look at the sentence which was imposed to see whether any error is demonstrated either as to the total sentence or as to the non-parole period. As to the psychiatric and psychological evidence, there is nothing in that material to suggest that the applicant did not have a full understanding of the authority and requirements of the law which is attributed to the ordinary adult individual's intellectual capacities. To all appearances from the reports and from the proceedings, the applicant acted with knowledge of what she was doing and with knowledge of the gravity of her actions. She was cross-examined for a substantial time, and there is nothing in her evidence to suggest otherwise. She is described by the judge as an intelligent woman. There is therefore nothing in her mental state which would require less emphasis to be given to general deterrence.[1] 
General deterrence is of the prime importance in these cases. This Court has made it very clear that, in the case of a fraud such as this upon the social security system, a custodial sentence is to be imposed unless there exist very special circumstances justifying some lesser order. The rationale stated for that rule is that the offence is easy to commit but difficult to detect, it is widespread, and the introduction of more checks upon applicants for social security would cause delays in the payment of benefits and therefore hardship to those whose need is urgent. It also reflects a concern for the additional burden upon all taxpayers who shoulder the heavy burden of providing the funds for the social security system to operate and the even heavier burden created by the widespread abuse to it by offences such as these. The rule is not based upon the fact that many of the offences are perpetrated for motives of greed rather than need. Both types are widespread. They are equally difficult to detect. If the offence is based upon a perceived need, a custodial sentence must be expected except in very special circumstances. If the offence is based on greed, the custodial sentence will be longer.[2] There was no submission made in the present case that those offences were from need rather than greed.
Nor would I accept it if it were made.

A custodial sentence was therefore inevitable in the present case. There are no very special circumstances justifying anything less. The effect of the applicant's incarceration upon her son does not amount to such a circumstance in this case. [Section
A(2)(p)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16a.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) requires the judge to take into account the probable effect that any sentence under consideration would have upon the prisoner's family or dependents. That provision does no more than reflect the common law,[3] which says that hardship to the prisoner's family operates in mitigation only where it is sufficiently extreme, beyond the sort of hardship which inevitably results to a family when a parent is incarcerated, to warrant a non-custodial sentence.[4] The additional material put before this Court does not take the matter any further, unfortunate though it may be.

I see no error made by the judge in this case either in the length of the total sentence or in the non-parole period. In my view, the sentence imposed by Judge Mitchelmore was a very appropriate one - one substantially less than would have been appropriate had there not been the subjective circumstances which the judge took into account. It should not be overlooked that, by the operation of [s
K(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s4k.html) and <case>, the maximum sentence applicable in this case was imprisonment for twentytwo years.

There is a complicating factor in the present case to which reference should be made. The applicant was called up in relation to the breach of her bond on the stealing charges as a condition of the deferred sentence imposed, such breach being constituted by the present offences. No money has ever been paid in compensation. A fixed term of imprisonment was imposed recently by Judge
O'Reilly QC in the District Court for the stealing charges for ten months and nineteen days. Its length was no doubt governed by the fact the applicant's non-parole period which she is presently serving in relation to the present offences expires on 5 December 1997. The fixed term expires on 17 April 1998 - effectively about four and a half months after the non-parole period expires.
That is longer than the original term of three months imposed in the Local
Court. Whatever the explanation may be, no appeal lies to this Court from that sentence.

Nevertheless, if I were minded to uphold the appeal in relation to the present sentence, I have no doubt that the Court of Appeal would have power to intervene in relation to this second sentence in a way which would permit the applicant's success in this appeal to become effective after she had served some part of the fixed term imposed by the District Court.

In my opinion, however, the present appeal cannot succeed on its own merits, and that complication therefore disappears.

I propose that leave to appeal be granted but the appeal be dismissed.

SMART J: I agree. 
GROVE J: I also agree. 
HUNT CJ at CL: The orders of the Court are as I have proposed. [1] The authorities are collected in Regina versus Dean William Wright (CCA, 28
February, 1997, unreported) at 4-5.
 [2] The authorities are collected in Regina versus Jennifer Rose Purdon (CCA, March 1997, unreported) at 4-5, 7-8.
 [3] Regina versus Sinclair [(1990) 51 A Crim R 418] at -431.
 [4] Regina versus Boyle [(1987) 34 A Crim R 202] at -206; Regina versus T [(1990) 47 A Crim R 29] at ; Regina versus Sinclair (at 430-431); Regina versus Alexander [(1994) 78 A
Crim R 141] at 145.
 * * * 
