

Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Goater [2016] NSWSC 216 (11 March 2016) 
Last Updated: 14 March 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Under r 42.7 I order that the costs payable under order 3(b) made by the
Court of Appeal on 7th November 2014 are payable forthwith.  
The plaintiff pay the defendant costs of this application on the ordinary basis after they have been agreed or assessed.  
Catchwords: 
PROCEDURE - Costs - Interlocutory proceedings - departure from general rule that costs follow event - appropriateness to order otherwise 
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - judgments and orders - whether jurisdiction to make costs order of Court of Appeal to be payable forthwith  
JUDGMENT
The defendants apply for an order that the costs ordered in their favour by order 3(b) made by the Court of Appeal (Goater versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia  <case> on 7 November 2014 be payable forthwith.
It is relevant to briefly set out the procedural history of this matter. This case first came before Davies J of the Common Law Division upon the application of Mr and Mrs Goater to set aside a default judgment for possession (Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Goater  <case> For reasons that it is not necessary to set out, this application was dismissed, with no order as to costs.
Mr and Mrs Goater appealed from this decision. While the application for leave to appeal was still pending, a further application came before Ward JA in the referrals list seeking a stay of the sale of the two properties which were the subject of the first instance decision of Davies J. Ward JA dismissed the application for an injunction, but ordered that Mr and Mrs Goater liaise with the registry for an expedited hearing of the application for leave to appeal, and that the Commonwealth Bank ('the bank') to give notice in writing 7 days prior to any proposed entry into contract of sale in respect of either of the properties: Goater versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case> at <case>.
Leave to appeal was granted and the appeal allowed: Goater versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case> Basten, and Gleeson JJA and Sackville AJA set aside the orders of Davies J, substituting the following orders: ... 3. (a) set aside the default judgment entered on 7 March 2014;  order that the plaintiff Bank pay the defendants' costs in the Common
Law Division, and  otherwise dismiss the defendants' notice of motion of 13 May 2014...

Order 3 (b) that is the subject of the present application.
Mr and Mrs Goater made a further application for the costs of the appeal on an indemnity basis. This application was refused, and Mr and Mrs Goater were ordered to pay the Bank's costs of that application: Goater versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia (No 2)  <case> at <case>.
The proceedings are pending in the possessions list, with a date yet to be fixed for hearing. This is partly due to Mr and Mrs Goater successfully applying to remove related District Court proceedings to this Court.

The issues for determination
Two key issues emerged in argument. The first is whether a judge of the Common Law Division has power to vary an order made by the Court of Appeal. And the second is whether the discretion to order costs of an interlocutory application be paid forthwith under r 42.7 [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) has been engaged.
Mr Kaufmann of Counsel for the plaintiff argued that it is not within the power of this Division to vary the order for costs. Mr Kaufmann argues that the substituted orders, including order 3 (b), are orders of the Court of Appeal, not the Common Law Division. Mr Kaufmann advanced the argument that an application to vary a costs order should be made to the court originating that order and the proper forum for this application is the Court of Appeal, not this Division. In making this argument Mr Kaufmann referred to the decision of Stevenson J in Agricultural & Rural Finance Pty Ltd versus Atkinson  <case> at <case>.
There is support for this position in the decision of the High Court Australia in Wishart versus Frazer  <case>; [64 CLR 470]
Key to this decision of Wishart versus Frazer was the inconsistent effect granting prohibition would involve. Dixon J, as he then was, said on this point that: " It is not denied that the order of the Court of Quarter Sessions was within its jurisdiction and was validly made. While it stands it is a judicial declaration by a competent court exercising Federal jurisdiction establishing the order of the magistrate and preventing its being called into question. If this court made an order setting aside the conviction, there would be two inconsistent judicial orders in operation at the same time, that of the Court of Quarter Sessions confirming the conviction and that of this court discharging it." (at 482)
Mr Hill eventually accepted that the order as to costs is an order of Court of Appeal. However he argues that this case is not of the type discussed above by Dixon J, as the order sought does not have the effect of creating inconsistency. The orders sought, in the words of Mr Hill, are not directed towards 'substantively altering the Court of Appeal decision, we are simply today dealing with your jurisdiction to make subsidiary orders following on from that.' (Transcript 25/02/16 12: 31-33). In support of his argument Mr Hill relies on the decision of Short versus Crawley (No. 45)  <case>, where White J found at [33] that: "a gross sum costs order is a supplemental order that makes more specific provision for the implementation of the earlier costs order by providing an alternative mode of enforcing it, that does not alter the substantive relief given by the previous costs order, and falls within the narrow class of exceptions to the principle that when proceedings have been disposed of by a final order they are at an end."
Mr Hill argues that because the order sought by his application does not substantially alter the original order, similar reasoning should apply and that I have power, under [s 98](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) to make the order. Mr Hill said this consideration distinguished this case from Agricultural & Rural Finance Pty Ltd versus Atkinson.
Mr Kaufmann joins issue: the order sought is not simply a subsidiary or consequential order, but rather it constitutes a variance of that order and therefore should be a matter for the Court of Appeal.

Decision on the first issue
In light of Wishart versus Frazer, I accept Mr Kaufmann's submission that order 3 (b) is an order of the Court of Appeal. However I am not convinced that it therefore follows that I am not, for this reason alone, without power to make the order sought. [Section 98](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) makes clear that the Court's power as to costs is a broad power. This is not a situation where the order sought would lead to a situation of inconsistency which underpins the principle in Wishart versus Frazer. Neither is it sufficiently analogous to Agricultural & Rural Finance Pty Ltd versus Atkinson, where what was sought was a variation in the nature of the costs order, namely to provide a security for costs in lieu of the full amount: at [23]. What is sought by Mr and Mrs Goater is only that the order as to costs be payable forthwith. As such a payment is to be paid at some point in time by The Bank to Mr and Mrs Goater, to make an order that it is payable sooner rather than later is not a variation in the substance of the order.
In coming to this conclusion, I am bolstered by the consideration that, under r 42.7, the Court may 'order otherwise' without restriction as to when such an order is made, or by a condition that it may only be made by the judge who made the original order (Showtime Touring Group Pty Ltd versus Mosley Touring Inc <case>; <case> Bathurst CJ, McColl JA at [33] and Bergin CJ in Eq at [34] agreeing). By necessary legal effect, the orders of the Court of Appeal remitted the whole proceedings which had previously merged in the default judgment, to the Common Law Division for determination. The costs order, which is the subject of the application is an order made in those proceedings. It may not be open to a judge of this division to vary the substance of it but by parity of reasoning with Short versus Crowley at [45] and by application of the principle established by Showtime Touring Group, I am empowered by [s 98](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html) and r 42.7 to make a 'supplemental order that makes more specific provision for the implementation' of the costs order made by the Court of Appeal.

Decision on the second issue
The question then is whether I should make the order sought. [Section 98](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) empowers me to make orders as to costs at any stage of the proceedings. Ordinarily, as set out in r 42. 7 of the Uniform Procedure Rules 2005, costs in respect of interlocutory proceedings such as the one sought 'do not become payable until the conclusion of the proceedings' unless the court orders otherwise. I repeat, the court may order otherwise, without limitation as to when such an order is made, or by a condition that it may only be made by the judge who made the original order.
There are numerous grounds on which the court may order otherwise. Mr Hill made arguments on several grounds: first, the discrete nature of the interlocutory application which he submits does not bear upon the substantive issues which are the subject of the proceedings; secondly, the matter is not yet listed for hearing, and so will not be finalised for some time; thirdly, he relied on the financial disparity between the parties, specifically that the defendants were individuals and the plaintiff a major Australian bank; and fourthly, he submitted that the conduct of Mr and Mrs Goater in the proceedings was blameless. In contrast, he pointed to what he said was unreasonable conduct on the part of the Bank but he resiled from relying upon that last consideration as justifying the order.
While I am not persuaded of the correctness of the final argument, the first three have merit. On the question of discreteness, there is authority for the appropriateness of such an order in situations, such as a security for costs order, where the subject of the application is discrete and separate from the substantive issues: Jazabas Pty Ltd versus Haddad  <case> On this point, Mr Kaufmann argued that on the argument of Mr Hill, every motion would be distinct, and further that the orders bear upon issues still in contention, namely whether the bank is entitled to judgment possession.
Further there is authority for the appropriateness of the order sought in the situation where there will be delay in the finalisation of proceedings, particularly in the situation where one of the parties is impecunious: Fiduciary Ltd versus Morningstar Research Pty Ltd <case>; Royal Australian Naval Reserve Rifle Club Inc versus NSW Rifle Association Inc <case>
I have been informed by Counsel that this matter is currently in the list, and has not been assigned a date for hearing. There will likely therefore be the passage of some time before the substantive proceedings are concluded. Mr Hill made submissions as to the impecunious situation of Mr and Mrs Goater, which was not challenged by Mr Kaufmann. As the scenario of the Bank being unable to pay costs should the judgment be in the favour of Mr and Mrs Goater is so unlikely as to be considered fanciful, Mr Kaufman submits that this is not a danger that needs be protected against. He further argues that the delays in proceedings are largely due to the conduct of Mr and Mrs Goater, and could not be said to be due to the actions of the Bank.
This point flows onto the final argument of Mr Hill, namely the financial disparity between the parties. Here Mr Hill relies upon the decision of Traderight Pty Ltd versus Bank of Queensland Ltd (No 2) <case> at <case>, where the Court made the order because of the bank's superior financial position, which made it better able to bear the ongoing burden of litigation. Mr Kaufmann distinguished this case on the grounds that it concerned a claim against the bank, and hence there was no potential for a financial shortfall should the cost orders be payable prior to the completion of the substantive proceedings. He submitted that should the case be decided in favour of the Bank in this case, the value of the security is insufficient to cover the debt. And Mr and Mrs Goater have already had the benefit of a loan being advanced to them. To make the orders 'payable forthwith' would put the bank further out of pocket if it won.
Having consideration to the arguments of Counsel, I am convinced by the argument that the order sought should be granted. While I accept that the delay was in part due to the conduct of Mr and Mrs Goater, considerations of fairness balance heavily against the significance of this consideration. Despite their part in the delay, Mr and Mrs Goater are likely to suffer from the delay in the finalisation of the proceedings. I am further aware that their representation is on a 'speculative basis'. From this, I infer that they are unable to put their solicitor in funds to fight the litigation. There is significant financial inequality between the parties, with the Bank being well placed to financially support extended proceedings, which cannot be similarly said of Mr and Mrs Goater. I am satisfied that the application to set aside the default judgment is sufficiently discrete to justify an order that the costs be payable forthwith. The impecuniosity of Mr and Mrs Goater might stultify the proceedings if the order is not made.
I order that: * (1) Under r 42.7 I order that the costs payable under order 3(b) made by the Court of Appeal on 7th November 2014 are payable forthwith.
* (2) The plaintiff pay the defendant costs of this application on the ordinary basis after they have been agreed or assessed.
 *
 * * * 
