

Regina versus W J Kennedy [1996] NSWSC 551 (15 November 1996) 
REGINA versus WILLIAM JAMES KENNEDY /96 
FRIDAY 15 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, JAMES J, ADAMS AJ 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Adams AJ to give the first judgment.

ADAMS AJ: The applicant was arraigned in the Sydney District Court on 12 December 1995 upon two charges arising out of events at the Australia Hotel Broadway in Sydney on 13 October 1994. He was charged with assaulting one Shane David Ross who was the barman/duty manager of the hotel (the second count) and maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm upon Patrick Ross Heffernan, who was a customer of the hotel (the first count).

The trial took three days. The applicant was acquitted of the charge of assault but convicted of the charge of maliciously causing grievous bodily harm. He was sentenced on 13 March 1996 to a term of four years penal servitude comprising a minimum term of twelve months imprisonment from 14
December 1995 and an additional term of three years, his Honour the learned trial Judge having been satisfied of the presence of special circumstances within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/).

The applicant filed his application for leave to appeal on 11 June 1996 explaining the delay in the following terms:- "I did not appear before because I was waiting for the outcome of the DPP appeal." 
There is no indication of what the so-called "DPP appeal" relates to. The
Director has not appealed to this Court. Even if there was such an appeal, it could only concern sentence. The applicant has appealed against both conviction and sentence. It is difficult, therefore, to understand why any potential appeal by the Director of Public Prosecutions should have led this applicant to delay his own application to appeal. Leave will, at all events, not be granted if there is no merit in the proposed appeal. In the light of the possibility of confusion by the applicant concerning procedures, it is desirable to consider the merits of the proposed grounds.

The proposed grounds of appeal are stated as follows:-
The three witnesses purged (presumably "perjured") themselves.
Plus provocation which was not put to the jury; and
Psycho (I assume "psychiatric") Assessment Certificate as of injuries, which were not present at the trial which is a significant factor in my conviction.
Severity.

The applicant's written submissions, so far as it presently material, states (
I have corrected spelling and added some punctuation in an attempt to assist clarity): - "Had the medical evidence been obtained early it would have been present in front of a jury there, as would have supported the evidence on my behalf. And had the law as it is written been directed accordingly on these grounds. And evidence of a police officer which verbally was taken within 5 minutes 900 words were accurately written down afterwards. I can prove this to be false and fabricated." 
Whilst it is difficult to elicit from this material the precise character of the applicant's complaints, the thrust of them is clear enough from a consideration of the evidence called in the trial to which I now turn.

The Crown case, in substance, was that following a fight between the applicant and Mr Ross (giving rise to the charge of which he was acquitted) which occurred outside the hotel, and whilst the applicant was still outside, presumably gathering his wits, Mr Ross, a Mr O'Brien (the publican) and a Mr
Heffernan became involved in a struggle with a Ms Zalitis (the applicant's de facto wife) whilst attempting to remove her from the hotel, where she had been abusive and violent and that, when the applicant observed this, he re-entered the hotel and kicked Mr Heffernan in the face, breaking his jaw.

The Crown called Mr Ross, Mr Heffernan and Mr O'Brien to give evidence of the sequence of events, together with two investigating police officers and the doctor who examined and treated Mr Heffernan's injuries. The applicant gave evidence in his defence and called Ms Zalitis and her sister, a Ms Kennedy. In substance, the issue in respect of both charges was whether the applicant had acted in self defence or defence of another, although, as may perhaps not be surprising, all the protagonists gave somewhat different accounts of the fighting and the surrounding events.

The first ground of appeal relates, as it seems to me, to the evidence of
Messrs Ross, Heffernan (relating to both counts) and O'Brien (relating to the first count). They were extensively cross-examined by counsel on the applicant's behalf. The defence case was somewhat more brief but it appears to me adequately presented by counsel for the applicant. The evidence was briefly but adequately outlined in his directions to the jury by the learned trial
Judge. It should be noted that the trial took only three days. Counsel for the defence sought no re-direction.

The jury was quite able to assess the credibility and reliability of the witnesses. The fact the applicant was acquitted of the assault charge indicated a not unsympathetic attitude towards him but it does not follow that the jury's verdict in that regard meant that they should have disbelieved the evidence of Messrs Ross and Heffernan in relation to the first count, which took place in quite different circumstances and was supported in significant respects by Mr O'Brien.

I take it that the applicant's first ground of appeal, to which he averted in slightly different terms in his submissions in this Court today, amounts to an assertion that where the evidence of the Crown witnesses differed from that of the defence witnesses, the latter should have been preferred. There can be no doubt that this case was put to the jury by his counsel and, as I have mentioned, the jury were sufficiently directed about the factual issues by the learned trial Judge. The questions of fact raised by the various accounts fell squarely within the jury's province to determine. The jury had the considerable advantage over this Court of observing the demeanour of the witnesses. There is nothing in the material before this Court that suggests in the slightest degree that the jury did not correctly weigh the evidence or that their verdict of guilt on the first count was not adequately supported by the evidence. This ground of appeal has no merit. Accordingly, leave to appeal out of time in respect of it should be refused.

Ground of appeal 2 relates to provocation. Of course, provocation is not a defence to a charge of maliciously causing grievous bodily harm. The applicant's evidence was that he did not know if he kicked Mr Heffernan, although I note in this Court he seems to accept that he did cause injury to
Mr Heffernan. He says that he saw her being manhandled by three men trying "to shuffle her through the doorway but whatever means was possible", that he thought that "she was going to get gang banged or something", that he "just got a rush in me head from when I seen the situation" and was "just outraged from the doorway from when I seen I just ran in to stop it, to break it up, get them off Kelly... I got to them, it's hard to explain because I sort of like I wasn't thinking, I just went in and tried to attack them in whatever means to get Kelly loose of the situation". He has said in this Court that he thought he did what most people would have done and that if the same situation arose he would do it again.

His Honour directed the jury generally in respect of self-defence and added, in respect of this count:- "In considering the claim by the accused that he was acting in self-defence of his partner, the question to be asked and answered is this: Did the accused believe on reasonable grounds that it was necessary to do what he did in defence of his partner? If he had that belief, and had reasonable ground for it, or if you the jury are left in reasonable doubt about the matter, then the accused is entitled to an acquittal. On the other hand, if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did not believe that it was necessary to do what he did in self defence, or in defence I should say of his partner, or if you accept that he may have had that belief but you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he did not have reasonable grounds for holding that belief, then the claim of self defence fails.

Of course, as I have said before, you will remember that you will have regard to the circumstances as the accused genuinely regarded them to be at the time, and you will remember that it is a matter for the Crown to disprove self- defence. It is not a matter for the accused to prove it. And of course you will... bear in mind ... (the) only sensible (way) to approach this question of self defence (is) in a practical manner and giving due weight to the situation in which the accused found his wife and himself at the relevant time as circumstances which may have afforded a little opportunity for calm deliberation and assessment of the appropriate response to any actual or threatened attack on the person of his de facto spouse...

What the accused says... as I understand it is this. That he came in through the door some 20 feet ... away from where this incident ultimately occurred, so he came in from the street, and looking down he says he saw his de facto on the ground or with these men around her. Now he had not seen what was going on, but he knew that he had been in a fight outside and it had taken him some time, he said some minutes, to get himself together again. There had been the argument in the hotel before, but he said he came out and he thought when he saw this that she might have been going to be gang banged. Well, that is a matter for you. You will bear in mind that this was about 10 o'clock in the hotel in the Broadway...there were other people there apparently at the time looking at the football, or the football was on, some people in the bar.
Whether you think in those circumstances he was acting reasonably, if you accept the evidence of Ross, and he is the only direct person who saw it, who said he just rushed up and kicked ... Mr Heffernan".

In my opinion, these directions were sufficient to bring to the jury's attention the appellant's case as to his reasons for attacking Mr Heffernan.
The mere fact that the term "provocation" was not used is not a basis for criticism. Indeed, had his Honour used the term, it may well have had the effect of confusing the jury and introducing a completely false issue into the case. Unfortunately, however, his Honour's directions as to the onus of proof concerning the elements of self-defence did evince some confusion:- "It is not suggested that the accused was in the bar at the time, he was outside, but they were just trying to get her out of the premises and in those circumstances are you satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he did have in those circumstances that belief, or did he not have reasonable grounds for holding that belief in the circumstances? It is entirely a matter for you, the view you take of the witnesses involved. But that is the issue here in this particular charge." 
It is clear that this direction was completely wrong, since there was no onus on the applicant to establish, to any standard of proof, that he believed on reasonable ground that it was necessary to do what he did in defence of Ms
Zalitis. If there was a real risk that the jury might have thought that this was the test or, if they did not think this was the test, that they were confused about the onus of proof, the conviction could not stand. His Honour added immediately after the passage that I have quoted:- "In those circumstances has the Crown satisfied you beyond reasonable doubt that in those circumstances that he did not believe on reasonable grounds, or you were not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt. You have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did not believe that it was necessary to do what he did in self-defence, or if you accept that he may have had the belief, but you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he did not have reasonable grounds for holding that belief, the claim of self-defence fails.
It is entirely a matter for you on the evidence." 
Although it seems the confusion set out in the previous passage continued for a time, eventually the matter was put correctly The passage smacks of evident confusion of expression, with his Honour obviously correcting himself and in the result giving the jury a clear, unambiguous and accurate statement of the law which is in line with a previous statement of the applicable principle that I have also set out above. I consider that this is how the jury would have perceived it. I am fortified in this view by the consideration that counsel for the defence did not seek a redirection. Accordingly, there is no merit in this ground of appeal and I would refuse leave to extend time to permit it to be agitated in this Court.

The third ground of appeal refers to a "Psycho Assessment Certificate". The only document capable of falling within this description is the psychiatric report of Dr Carne, the visiting psychiatrist at Long Bay Gaol that was dated January 1996 and resulted from a single consultation on 28 December 1995.
The applicant has confirmed in this Court today that this is indeed a document to which he was referring in his notice seeking leave to appeal. However, the applicant considerably over-stated the conclusion which the doctor came to and which was stated in his report which was as follows:- "In my opinion (the applicant's judgment) and his ability to control his impulses would have been impaired at the time that these events took place as a result of concussion and intoxication".

In his evidence before the jury, the applicant had said that he was drinking for most of the afternoon in question before he went to the Australia Hotel, where he drank more beer. He described himself as "pretty intoxicated to an extent where I still had my faculties to a certain extent with me". He said, when describing the first fight, that he was hit on the back of the head with reasonable force sufficient to cause him to fall forward and grab the barman, that he was then punched in the face repeatedly and that "I let go of him and the punches stopped and I got me bearings and got back to my feet". He said that he felt disorientated at first but after a short time "Not fully but pretty much" recovered his bearings. He never suggested that at the time of the alleged assault on Mr Heffernan he did not know what he was doing. Indeed in this Court he has submitted that he did know what he was doing although he did not intend to cause the injury to Mr Heffernan and he said, as I have already mentioned, that he would do it again if faced with the same situation.
In cross-examination he did not suggest either that he did not know what he was doing. The Crown, however, did not take issue with his evidence of disorientation. The Prosecutor did not suggest that the applicant had a clear head or was not affected by liquor, or that his judgment was unimpaired.

It is clear that the defence had ample opportunity to obtain medical evidence as to the likely effect on the applicant of his drinking and injury. However, having regard to the requirement that the acts of self defence be reasonably proportionate to the threat and the conflict of evidence between the Crown and the defence witnesses, there were powerful tactical considerations that militated against the defence seeking to tender medical evidence which could well have strengthened criticism of the applicant's reliability as a witness.
This evidence is not "fresh" in the sense that it was not reasonably available to the defence to adduce at the trial. It raises no doubt as to the applicant's guilt and I am satisfied that there is no likelihood that its reception would have led to a different verdict (See Mickelberg versus The
Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259).] 
The last matter raised by the applicant concerns evidence given by a police officer of a conversation he had with him. The only conversation capable of fitting the description in the applicant's written argument is that given in evidence by a Constable George. However, it is not 900 words long or anything like that length. The conversation allegedly occurred between the applicant and the officer late in the evening after the applicant's de facto had been arrested by police. The officer said that she wrote it in her notebook five to ten minutes after it occurred and that she believed at the time that she had done so "word for word". The only significance of the conversation was that the applicant admitted kicking the victim in the head. Since his evidence was that he did not know whether he had done so or not, he was not really in a position to deny Mr Ross' evidence that he did. The admission gave some support to the Crown case in the sense that, of course, it corroborated Mr
Ross and indicated that the applicant knew what he was doing. However, in the context of the whole of the evidence about this count, the evidence of admission did not loom large. Constable George was cross-examined competently by counsel for the defence and the applicant gave controverting evidence. The question of whose evidence should be accepted was left to the jury, who had the advantage of observing the witnesses give the evidence.

The applicant claims that he can "prove this evidence to be false and fabricated" but has not attempted to adduce any such evidence. There is no merit in this ground and leave should be refused to extend time to raise it in this Court.

The applicant also seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence.
As I have already mentioned, his Honour imposed a sentence of four years penal servitude comprising a minimal term of twelve months and an additional term of three years, having found special circumstances that justified the departure from the statutory ratio specified by [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). He was thirty-four years of age at the date of sentence. His record includes assault occasioning actual bodily harm (2), assault, assaulting an officer in the execution of his duty and using an instrument with intent to prevent lawful apprehension, breaking, entering and stealing (2) and larceny. He was on parole at the time of the offence, having been released from custody in respect of a sentence for an offence of violence only some two months previously. The only mitigation was that he was somewhat confused at the time with impaired judgment and ability to resist impulse as a result of his drinking and previous blows to the head. The injury to Mr Heffernan caused considerable pain and discomfort and necessitated major surgery from which he had still not entirely recovered at the date of the trial and he may well never completely recover.

The maximum term of imprisonment for this offence is seven years. In my opinion, far from being overly severe, his Honour measured out to this applicant a considerable degree of leniency.

The applicant has raised in this Court the question of the custody of his daughter and says that the mother has ceased to care for her. This is a matter which has arisen since sentence and, as I understand the authorities, is not a matter which this Court should have regard to. However, in the light of the history in this case and the serious nature of the offence, I do not consider that that matter should lead to any change in the sentence which was imposed by his Honour, the learned sentencing Judge. Accordingly, this application ought also, in my opinion, fail. I propose, however, that time served whilst on appeal should count.

GLEESON CJ: I agree with the order proposed by Adams AJ and his Honour's reasons for that order. I would only add the following brief observation which concerns the matter of what was said to be confusion that arose in the course of his Honour's directions as to onus of proof. I refer to a passage quoted by Adams AJ and beginning with the words "It is not suggested that the accused was at the bar at the time".

Whilst I am content to dispose of the matter on the basis expressed by Adams
AJ in his reasons for judgment, I would add the following. We are in this appeal working from an unrevised transcript of the summing-up of the learned
Judge. I note that the terms of the passage quoted would be perfectly unexceptional if the word "not" was inserted between the word "did" and "have" in line 4 of the quotation; or if, alternatively, the word "did" was altered to read "did not". I would note that if the word "not" was inserted, as I have mentioned, that would not only make the direction unexceptional; it would also make it consistent with what his Honour said immediately before and immediately afterwards.

That leads me to wonder whether or not the simple explanation of the problem might be that there is, in this respect, a defect in the transcript.
Alternatively, it is possible that we are dealing with a mere slip of the tongue on the part of the trial Judge. However that may be, for the reasons expressed by Adams AJ, I have no doubt that the overall impression given to the jury from the whole of the summing-up was one which was in accordance with the law.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of Adams AJ.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be that the appeal is dismissed. Time spent by the applicant whilst on appeal in custody should be taken into account.
 * * * 
