

D and D Glass Pty Limited versus Hawke Agencies Pty Limited; Hawke Agencies Pty
Limited versus Thyssen Haniel Logistics (Australia) Pty Limited Matter Nos 12476/97 [1998] NSWSC 1015 (16 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
D & D GLASS PTY LIMITED versus HAWKE AGENCIES PTY LIMITED 
HAWKE AGENCIES PTY LIMITED versus THYSSEN HANIEL LOGISTICS (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED /97 /97 April 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are two proceedings by way of case stated brought in this court and heard together for convenience, although not consolidated. Both stated cases were brought from the decision of Magistrate McDonald sitting in the Local Court Civil Claims Jurisdiction in two proceedings heard together, again as a matter of convenience and not by way of consolidation, in that court. 
The proceedings in each case involved common questions of fact and law. The first set of proceedings were proceedings between Hawke Agencies Pty. Limited and D & D Glass Pty. Limited in which the learned magistrate gave a verdict for the plaintiff in an amount of $11,615.04 together with interest to be assessed by the registrar, making no order for costs in that action. On the cross-claim in those proceedings the magistrate gave a verdict for the cross- defendant, that is, the plaintiff in the principal proceedings, and ordered the cross plaintiff, that is the defendant in the principal proceedings, to pay the cross-defendant's costs. There was a third party action in respect of which no order was made.

In the second set of proceedings which were between Thyssen Haniel Logistics
Pty. Limited and Hawke Agencies Pty. Limited, the learned magistrate gave a verdict for the defendant in the sum of $11,615.04 together with interest and made certain orders for costs.

Shortly, the facts as stated by the learned magistrate in the stated case in proceedings 12476 of 1997 in this court are set out below:- "(i) Thyssen Haniel Logistics Pty. Limited ('Thyssen') was a carrier tasked by a distributor, Hawke Agencies Pty. Limited ('Hawke') to transport sheets of glass from Hamburg to Sydney.

The shipment of glass had been ordered by the customer, D & D Glass
Pty. Limited ('D & D Glass') and because of an urgent requirement of the ultimate customer in Melbourne the glass was to be transported by air, an unusual, if not unheard of, method of transportation in the glass industry.

The glass was special in that it had been cast in Czechoslovakia rather than rolled and had been crated in Czechoslovakia.

The consignment of glass duly travelled from Hamburg to Sydney via
Singapore by air and was unloaded from a Qantas aircraft in Sydney. It then travelled by road to Melbourne.

When the glass arrived in Melbourne it was found to be smashed and completely unusable.

There were two actions. In the first (81234/94) the carrier Thyssen sued the distributor, Hawke for the cost of the carriage which Hawke had refused to pay. In the second action (89/1995) the distributor (Hawke) had sued the customer (D & D Glass) for the carriage costs if it was found to be liable to Thyssen in the other action. D & D Glass had cross-claimed against
Hawke alleging that the delivered glass was of unmerchantable quality and alleging a failure of consideration.

The crates of glass should have been transported upright.

The crates of glass emerged from the Qantas cargo area in the horizontal position on 4 August 1994. They were large crates which could not be placed horizontal or raised to vertical without the help of machinery.
 when the crates emerged they were in the control of Qantas and were on a conveyor belt. They moved along a conveyor belt and were then picked up by a forklift by a Qantas employee and placed on a truck.

There was no positive evidence that the glass was broken when it emerged horizontal from Qantas. The only positive evidence of breakage was when it was uncrated in Melbourne.

The glass was picked up from Qantas in Sydney by a Mr. Graham Rogers, a driver for Laytons, a road haulier arranged by D & D Glass.

Mr. Rogers was instructed by Mr. Hawke (of Hawke) that the crate was not to be accepted from Qantas if it was not in the vertical position.

Mr. Rogers was later instructed by his employers that they understood that the crate contained glass blocks and could be safely transported lying flat on the back of his truck.

Mr. Rogers then accepted delivery of the crate and it was loaded flat onto the back of his truck.

The crate was then taken to the Sydney depot of Mr. Rogers' employer transferred in some unspecified way to the rear of another truck and driven to
Melbourne arriving there still lying flat.

When the crate was unpacked in Melbourne the glass sheets were found to be completely broken and unusable.

The distributor (Hawke) then failed to pay to the carrier (Thyssen) the cost of carriage claiming that the completely broken and unusable condition of the glass sheets when they arrived in Melbourne was caused by negligence or a complete failure of consideration on the part of the carrier (Thyssen)." 
The facts in proceedings number 12919 of 1997 as set out in the stated case also appear below:- "(1) Thyssen Haniel Logistics Pty. Limited ('Thyssen') was a carrier requested by a distributor, Hawke Agencies Pty. Limited ('Hawke') to transport sheets of glass from Hamburg to Sydney.

The shipment of glass had been ordered by the customer, D & D Glass
Pty. Limited ('D & D Glass') and because of an urgent requirement of the ultimate customer in Melbourne the glass was to be transported by air, an unusual, if not unheard of, method of transport in the glass industry.

The glass was special in that it had been cast in Czechoslovakia rather than rolled and had been crated in Czechoslovakia.

The consignment of glass duly travelled from Hamburg to Sydney via
Singapore by air and was unloaded from a Qantas aircraft in Sydney.
 (sic) There were two actions. In the first (81234/94) the carrier Thyssen sued the distributor, Hawke for the cost of the carriage which Hawke had refused to pay. D & D Glass had cross claimed against Hawke alleging that the delivered glass was of unmerchantable quality and alleging a failure of consideration.

The crates of glass should have been transported upright. All evidence from anyone in the glass industry was in concert that glass sheets should always be carried in a vertical position.

The crates of glass emerged from the Qantas cargo area in a horizontal position on 4 August 1994. They were large crates which could not be put horizontal or raised to vertical without the help of machinery.

When the crates emerged they were in the control of Qantas and were on a conveyor belt. They moved along a conveyor belt and were then picked up by a forklift by Qantas and placed on a truck.

There was no positive evidence that the glass was broken when it emerged horizontal from Qantas. The only positive evidence of breakage was when it was uncrated in Melbourne.

The glass was picked up from Qantas in Sydney by a Mr. Graham Rogers, a driver for Laytons, a road haulier arranged by D & D Glass.

Mr. Rogers was instructed by Mr. Hawke (of Hawke) that the crate was not to be accepted from Qantas if it was not in the vertical position.

Mr. Rogers was later instructed by his employers that they understood that the crate contained glass blocks and could be safely transported lying flat on the back of his truck.

Mr. Rogers accepted delivery of the crate and it was loaded flat on to the back of his truck.

The crate was then taken to the Sydney depot of Mr. Rogers' employer, transferred in some unspecified way to the rear of another truck and driven to
Melbourne arriving there still lying flat.

When the crate was unpacked in Melbourne the glass sheets were found to be completely broken and unusable.

The defendant (Hawke) then failed to pay to the plaintiff (Thyssen) the cost of carriage claiming that the completely broken and unusable condition of the glass sheets when they arrived in Melbourne was caused by negligence or a complete failure of consideration on the part of the plaintiff (Thyssen)." 
It is trite law that on an appeal by way of a stated case it is for this court to find the question to be determined expressed as the question in the stated case and is required to determine it on the material which is to be found between the four corners of the stated case itself. Nonetheless, since it became apparent during the hearing of the matter that the questions as drafted in the stated case might not precisely reflect the true issues which the parties wished to expose to the court, there was in argument a free-ranging discussion concerning what had happened before the magistrate procedurally, and reference was made, primarily for the purpose of seeking to avoid ambiguities or misstatements, to the parties' contentions as to the nature of the evidence before the magistrate.

In the upshot, that has mattered not at all. The real question at issue in the stated case number 12476 of 1997 has been conceded by the parties to be determinative of the fate of both stated cases, and upon analysis in discussion, that question has really come down to whether it was incumbent upon the magistrate in the state of the evidence before her to conclude that a quantity of commercial glass imported from Czechoslovakia for specialist building purposes was unusably damaged on its arrival in Sydney and delivery to Mr. Rogers (who picked up the glass on behalf of the defendant, D & D
Glass Pty. Limited).

To put the matter in context, it seems quite clear that on the arrival of the glass in Melbourne it was so damaged as to be unusable, and indeed it appears to be common ground that its condition was such that a contract for its sale or delivery would have totally failed for want of consideration.

The issue was whether, from that condition at that time, it was incumbent on the magistrate to draw the conclusion that the glass was at the relevant point of time back from Melbourne in that unusable condition.

This inference, it was argued, had to be drawn in the context of evidence from expert witnesses who expressed the opinion that opportunities had existed prior to Melbourne for the glass to come into that condition, at any time prior to arrival not only at Melbourne but also at Sydney, and earlier, and that there was a probability, indeed it has been put by counsel, a high probability, that the glass would have been so damaged between Sydney and
Melbourne.

It is clear from an examination of the magistrate's grounds of determination that the magistrate was unwilling to draw the conclusion that the glass had been broken in any particular leg of its travels. Indeed, the magistrate sets out in the stated case in the grounds of determination:- "3(i) As there was no specific evidence as to where the glass was broken, except that it arrived in a broken state in Melbourne, I was asked to infer from the evidence of its mode of transportation the likely leg of its travels in which it was probably broken.

I considered that the defendant herein could only succeed if it could be established, on the balance of probability, that the glass sheets were completely broken and unusable when the crate was delivered into the possession of Mr. Rogers acting on behalf of D & D Glass at the Qantas base in Sydney on 4 August 1994.

I found there was no evidence available as to the actual manner in which the glass was transported from Europe to the Qantas base in Sydney.

The only evidence available as to the probable condition of the glass sheets at the Qantas base was the inference to be drawn from the expert evidence of Mr. Khadiwhala (for D & D Glass) and Mr. Rowlands (for Hawke) both experts agreed:- glass sheets cannot be safely transported other than in the vertical position; and the crate in question was not constructed to be transported in the horizontal position.

Mr. Khadiwhala expressed some doubt about the crate and its labelling in general. Mr. Rowlands gave evidence:- that he had personal knowledge of the factory from which the crate was sent and he believed it would be unthinkable for the experienced people at that establishment not to pack the glass adequately and ensure it commenced its journey in the correct, vertical position; and that if the glass in the crate had been substantially damages there would have been a characteristic 'jingling' noise clearly audible from the crate.

Mr. Rogers, the only witness in a position to give evidence as to the condition of the glass when it was loaded onto his truck did not mention and was not asked by any party about hearing such 'jingling' noise.

Both experts agreed that no form of crating would have been sufficient for the glass sheets to withstand the pressures of being transported from
Sydney to Melbourne lying flat on the tray of the truck." 
But further particularly, the magistrate concluded:- 
I found clear evidence that the state of the glass when it arrived in
Melbourne was consistent with the type of damage sheet glass would be expected to suffer from being transported flat on the back of a truck.

On the evidence it was reasonable, I found, to infer that the glass sheets may have suffered some damage prior to their being accepted by Mr.
Rogers but I did not find that the weight of such evidence was sufficient to establish on the balance of probability that the glass sheets were, at that time, completely broken and unusable.

As I found that there was not sufficient evidence to establish that when the glass was accepted by Mr. Rogers, on behalf of D & D Glass, it was already completely broken and unusable, and noting that the damage found in
Melbourne was consistent with the manner of transportation undertaken after the glass came into the possession of D & D Glass. I found that there had not been negligence or a total failure of consideration established on the part of the plaintiff (Hawke)." 
It has been urged on behalf of the plaintiff in an argument put powerfully, orally, and in short written submissions by its counsel, that the magistrate fell into error of law by failing to conclude that the glass sheets had been damaged prior to the acceptance by Mr. Rogers.

In support of that argument, in particular it was put that the magistrate's conclusion that, "On the evidence it was reasonable, I found, to infer that the glass sheets may have suffered some damage prior to their being accepted by Mr. Rogers, but I did not find that the weight of such evidence was such to establish on the balance of probability that the glass sheets were at that time completely broken and unusable" was a finding that the glass sheets were broken when they were accepted by Mr. Rogers.

That is not what the magistrate has said in the stated case, nor can I accept, notwithstanding the discussion, that that is what the magistrate meant.

The magistrate held that there was not sufficient evidence to establish that when the glass was accepted by Mr. Rogers it was already completely broken and unusable and specifically turned her attention to that question in the context of the earlier finding. Further, she uses the language of probability. Even if it be the case that it was highly probable that the glass could have been damaged in the way for which the plaintiff contends, it is simply the fact that the magistrate did not make the finding that it was.

The errors of law that are attributed to the magistrate in the stated case after discussion boil down to one proposition, and that is that the magistrate erred in failing to make the finding I have referred to above.

It is conceded that in the circumstances I need not concern myself with the contended error numbered (vi).

The argument that has been put was summarised in written submissions by the parties. The written submissions of the plaintiff concede that the only express finding of fact by the magistrate in respect of breakage was that the glass was broken when it was opened in Melbourne. That concession has to be understood, however, as meaning that the only finding based on direct evidence was to that effect. It was conceded that the magistrate had held that there was not enough evidence for her to find that the breakage had occurred in or before Sydney, but that again has to be understood in the context that that was the basis of the magistrate's reason for declining to find that the breakage had occurred in or before Sydney.

There has been some argument about who bore the onus. The case was conducted before the magistrate below and before me upon the basis that it was the plaintiff who bore the onus in the circumstances to establish the total failure of consideration at the time of delivery of the glass. In that regard it is simply the fact that the magistrate was not satisfied to the requisite standard, or at all, of that matter, even if there was evidence of probability.

The recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Alan v. Kerr & Anor (Court of Appeal, unreported 25 May 1995: No. 40691 of 1994) in which that court sat on appeal from a judgment of this court when dealing with a case stated from the Local Court, looked at the jurisdiction of this court and the nature of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/) mode of review.
In particular, his Honour Powell, J., in his judgment at page 8, paragraph 18 and onwards, turned to a consideration of the form of the stated case therein and the nature of an appeal by way of case stated. In particular, his Honour said:- "As will be apparent from what I have earlier recorded, this court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law, and only such questions of law as are submitted to it. The principles to be borne in mind, and the rules to be applied in cases in which an appellate tribunal has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law, were collected and discussed by Jordan, CJ.
In The Australian Gaslight Company v. Valuer General (1940) 40 SR 126 at -138. For present purposes, it is sufficient to record that those principles, and those rules, include the following:-
A finding of fact by a tribunal of fact cannot be disturbed:- if them is evidence capable of supporting the finding of fact; or if the facts inferred by the Tribunal, upon which the finding of fact is based, are capable of supporting its finding, and there is evidence capable of supporting its inferences.
Such a finding can only be disturbed:- if them is no evidence to support a finding of fact; or if them is no evidence to support the facts inferred by it; or if the facts inferred by it and supported by evidence are incapable of justifying the finding of fact based upon those inferences; or if it has misdirected itself in law.

Thus, if the ultimate question to be determined is whether or not the facts necessarily fall within the description of a word or phase (sic) in a statute, or necessarily outside that description, a contrary decision is wrong in law." 
Further, it is clear when considering the question of that degree of satisfaction to which a Tribunal of fact must come before it makes a finding, that there needs to be an affirmative satisfaction rather than simply evidence of the likelihood of that occurrence. The distinction has been considerably discussed, and most notably by Dixon, J. (as he then was) in Briginshaw v.
Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] at 361-362.

I find myself confronted with a problem since I had grave difficulty ascertaining whether there is any question of law here. I have concluded that there is not. Indeed, for the very matters raised by Powell, J. in the balance of his judgment, and because of what was put in the passage to which I have been taken in the written submissions for the respondent Hawke Agencies, from
MacPhee v. S. Bennett Limited [(1935) 52 WN 8] at , appearing from the judgment of Glass, J. at p.155 in the report of
Azzopardi v. Tasman UEB Industries [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139:-] "The question whether there is any evidence of a particular fact is also a question of law. ... But if there is evidence of the fact, the question whether that evidence ought to be accepted in whole or in part, or ought to be accepted as sufficient to establish the fact, is itself a question of fact and not a question of law, unless, of course, there is some law which provides that the particular evidence, when given, is to be taken to establish the facts. If a tribunal which has exclusive jurisdiction to determine facts decides that it does not accept the evidence tendered as establishing a particular fact, it's decision, apart from the exceptional case which I have just mentioned, is conclusive. In that case the party upon whom the burden of proving the fact lies must fail. There is no rule of law that such a tribunal must believe the evidence, because it is all one way. It can accept all, or some, or none of it." 
It appears to me that no question of law has been raised by a contention that the magistrate failed to conclude that the glass was broken at the relevant time in Sydney.

There is no rule of law absent any requirement by statute or otherwise that the magistrate, on reasoning backwards, had to accept a state of probability that the glass had been broken as representing the certainty or the fact.

In those circumstances the passage from Powell, J.'s judgment is peculiarly apposite. Whether the magistrate's decision arose because of a guarded reluctance to accept as fact that which was not actually perceived or not, it was nonetheless open to her. There were competing hypotheses, but the evidence did not allow the magistrate in her view, or compel her, to select that for which the plaintiff contended, as either the only hypothesis or the hypothesis she accepted was correct.

In those circumstances it appears to me that I must dismiss the plaintiff's summons. There has been no argument but that the plaintiff should on that summons pay the defendant's costs, and therefore I order the plaintiff to do so.

On the other stated case, I was informed that this was filed on a "protective basis" lest the plaintiff should succeed on its stated case. It has been urged on me that I should excise a discretion, which it is contended that I have, that I should make an order against the plaintiff on the first stated case by way of costs. The proceedings were not consolidated. That stated case was only brought by the defendant to the first stated case to guard against the prospect that the plaintiff might succeed. It has occasioned no additional length of time in hearing, and one would have expected little additional costs except by way of the preparation of the written material in the proceedings generally. The actions were not consolidated before the magistrate, though I am informed they could have been. Had that been so, one stated case could have been used to resolve all issues if it had been necessary. In effect, one issue is all that is required to be examined, and it has been dealt with in a way which would indicate that little, if any, additional cost has been occasioned.

There are, however, costs as between the parties to that stated case, and it seems to me that Thyssen Haniel, who is the defendant to that stated case, has been brought here in circumstances in which that defendant is entitled to its costs.

I am, however, unwilling to make any order in respect of the costs of those proceedings against the plaintiff in the other proceedings, and decline to do so.

I make orders in accordance with the short minutes of order handed up by counsel and dated 16 April 1998 which I initial and place with the papers.
 * * * 
