

Regina versus M A Zayat [1996] NSWSC 562 (22 November 1996) 
REGINA V Mohammed Ali ZAYAT /96 
FRIDAY 22 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
MAHONEY P, SMART J, DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Mohammed Ali Zayat seeks leave to appeal against the severity of a fixed term of imprisonment of five years for importing not less than the traffickable quantity of heroin. The relevant amount was 223.6 grams gross. The purity was 74 per cent, yielding a net weight of about 165 grams. Mr Zayat did not plead guilty at the committal proceedings, but he did plead guilty on arraignment and, as the Judge found, at an early stage.

The facts are set out at some length in the statement of facts and the Judge's
Remarks on Sentence. In brief, on 1 July 1995 the applicant departed Australia for Lebanon and on 9 July 1995 returned to Australia. On 16 July he was admitted to hospital with a stomach complaint. Neither the applicant, nor the family, told the hospital what the problem was. On 14 August 1995 he regurgitated a rubber package, which was found to contain heroin. X-rays revealed a number of similar packages still within the applicant's stomach and intestines. On 17 August 1995 doctors operated upon the applicant and removed fifty similar intact and ruptured packages. On 23 August 1995 the applicant, on being interviewed by the police, stated that his son-in-law Fadi Adziyat had paid for his trip to Lebanon so that he could bring back drugs, for which he would be paid $10,000. In Lebanon he stayed with Fadi's brother, Munza, and swallowed seventy-five to eighty capsules. The Judge proceeded to sentence the applicant upon the basis that he had imported about 165 grams of pure heroin.

On any view of this case, it was an extremely bad one. The facts show that extensive efforts were made to avoid detection by swallowing the large number of packages. Even when the problems arose, the reason for the ill-health was not disclosed to the hospital, necessitating considerable use of the community's resources.

At the hearing of the appeal, counsel for the applicant departed from the written submissions to a substantial extent and reframed the applicant's case.
It was submitted that the Judge had made two errors. The first error was that the initial starting point of twelve years taken by the judge was too high.
His approach is exemplified in this passage from his judgment: "In both a general and particular way, I have had regard to the scheme of the Commonwealth Crimes Act, with regard to sentencing, and have, as I said, taken all of the relevant provisions into account as best I am able. It seems to me that, in the light of all of those matters, and in the light of what was said by Hunt, CJ at CL in Warfield, at page 207, a sentence in the order of 12 years imprisonment would have been appropriate. But it is necessary for me to make allowance for the absence in the state of remissions on non-parole periods.

Therefore, taking account of what may inelegantly be regarded as a one-third- off rule of thumb, the sentence that this offender should receive in the ordinary course of events is a sentence of eight years.

It seems to me, however, that on the view of the facts most favourable to the prisoner, it would serve no practical benefit whatsoever, either for him or for the community, if I were to fix a non-parole period, or to order a release on recognisance. My reasons include his age and family circumstances, his failure to evince true remorse, the fact that he has been on an invalid pension for about 15 years, and also the certainty that, having served some time in prison he would not, on his release, turn to the authorities and inform on anyone who had been associated with him in the whole affair. To expect that he would do this would, on his version of the whole saga, be an expectation that in some years he will inform on his daughter's husband. The likelihood of this ever happening is so fanciful as to warrant it being dismissed from contemplation.

In the upshot, I have come to the view that in lieu of an eight year sentence involving a non-parole period, followed by a period serving the balance of the sentence back in the community, he should serve a period of five years in full time custody. This is, in round terms, 20 per cent of the maximum prison term for this offence.

I have decided to fix the term at five years and not more because there will be no second phase of sentence for him to look forward to whilst serving out the full time custody, with the prospect of serving the balance of an eight year term back with his family and in the community on parole or on recognisance." 
The applicant submitted that when dealing with traffickable quantities, a distinction had to be drawn between substantial quantities and lesser or middling quantities. Counsel pointed out that in both Ferrer-Esis , [55 A Crim R 231] and Warfield [(1994) 34 NSWLR 200] at 207 substantial quantities were involved. Counsel contrasted those decisions with the decision in DPP versus El Karhani [(1990) 21 NSWLR 370], where the quantity was 447 grams of pure heroin. The point of the contrast was, in counsel's submission, that with substantial quantities the starting point was of the order of twelve to sixteen years, whereas with small to middling quantities the range was in the order of seven to twelve years.

Traffickable quantities usually cover quite a range. While the question of quantity is always an important consideration, I prefer the approach, which has regard to the whole of the circumstances, in assessing the criminality involved. I have earlier indicated why I regard it as a very bad case. Having regard to the circumstances of this case, the Judge did not err in selecting a starting point of twelve years.

Because of the provisions of the Commonwealth Crimes Act and the lack of remissions in this State the judge reduced the effective starting point from twelve years to eight years. The second alleged error was that his Honour's order did not involve the fixing of a non parole period. It was submitted that the course taken by his Honour was not justified by section 19AB of the Act.
His Honour considered the question of a non parole period and took the view that, having regard to the age and family circumstances of the applicant, he would, upon his release, go back into the large family circle and receive considerable support there.

His Honour indicated other factors. There is much to be said for the view that in a case such as this, the most effective way of readjusting for a man such as Mr Zayat was to return to the support of a large family circle.

It was submitted that the applicant had lost the opportunity for parole. The preferable view of the Judge's Remarks on Sentence is that he was indicating that he would fix a non parole period of five years in any event and, in view of the circumstances which he outlined, it was inappropriate to fix a parole period.

Counsel emphasised that if a fixed term equated to a non parole period, this should be clearly and explicitly stated. The Commonwealth, in its written submissions, suggested that his Honour's remarks were not entirely clear. My view is that they are sufficiently clear to conclude that his Honour was equating a non parole period to the period of the fixed term which he imposed.

As I am of the view that, allowing for all the subjective circumstances a non parole period of five years is correct. I would not favour increasing the sentence of the applicant to include a period of parole; that is, to extend the sentence overall. Mr Sides submitted that if we came to a view along the lines which I have indicated, the appropriate course would be to dismiss the appeal, and that is the order which I propose.

MAHONEY P: I agree.

The sentencing Judge, I think, was seeking to follow the indications given by this Court in Regina versus Warfield, particularly at page 207. Mr Sides' submissions may, I think, oversimplified, be seen as two. First, that this case is not a Warfield case. Second, if it is, then the procedure there stated was not followed.

As to the thrust of the first submission, I am of the opinion that notwithstanding the differences in absolute quantities of drug, this is a case comparable to the Warfield case. For myself, I think the attempt to compare case by case by measuring quantity against quantity and items of that kind is a mistaken approach. I would, with respect, reinforce what was said in the Warfield case at page 207 by Hunt CJ at CL, when he said, at page
D: "In any event, it is quite wrong to compare the sentence under challenge directly with that imposed upon another offender (who is not a co-offender) simply because the two offenders may have similar characteristics and may have committed similar crimes. What must be looked at is whether the challenged sentence is within the range appropriate to the objective gravity of the particular offence and to the subjective circumstances of the particular offender, and not whether it is more severe or more lenient than some other sentence (other than that of a co-offender) which merely forms part of that range: R v. Morgan [(1993) 70 A Crim R 368] at ; R versus Salameh (Court of Criminal Appeal, 9 June 1994, unreported) at -4." 
I think the Court is concerned with principles and with ranges, not with details. I appreciate that Mr Sides' submissions in relation to details were directed to showing that this was a class of case different from
Warfield. If I conclude, as I do, that it is not, then I would reiterate what Hunt CJ at CL there said. I do not think it has used the range there indicated.

As to the thrust of the second submission, I think it is clear that the sentencing Judge thought eight years was a correct sentence. He saw his role to be, in an ordinary case, to fix within an eight year sentence a non parole period. He concluded, for the reasons he gave there, that a period of parole would serve no useful purpose. It would, as he said "serve no practical benefit whatsoever".

He then had to determine what he should do. In the circumstances he took the course simply of fixing a sentence of five years, and not one of eight years, with a non parole period of five years, upon the stated expectation that at the end of five years the applicant would be given parole. In these circumstances, it may be that the Judge was right or wrong. I am not convinced he was procedurally wrong but, if he was wrong, then, as Mr Sides has submitted, this Court should not increase the sentence by adding a period in which parole might be ordered, but should simply dismiss the appeal so that he has the benefit of the five year sentence.

I agree with the observations of Smart J in this regard and with the orders he proposes.

DUNFORD J: I also agree.

The sentencing court's power to decline to fix a non-parole period, or make a recognisance release order, in sentencing federal offences is contained in s.19AB, [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/), where the grounds on which the court may decline to do so are described as "the nature and circumstances of the offence or offences concerned" and "the antecedents of the person".

His Honour's reasons for declining to fix a non-parole period in this case related to a number of other matters set out in his Remarks on Sentence. I would like to reserve for another day and hear fuller argument on whether or not it is permissible for a sentencing judge to decline to fix a non parole period in respect of federal offenders for reasons other than those specifically mentioned in the section, and compare Sentencing Act 1918 , s.6(2).

But, in any event, there are a number of reasons why the courts generally fix non parole periods or minimum and additional terms, as the case may be. One of these reasons is that it is thought, that generally, after a lengthy period of full-time imprisonment, resettlement into civilian life is facilitated by a period of supervised parole. This may not apply, of course, in all cases but, in my view, irrespective of the requirements of any restrictions that there may be in s.19AB I would regard it as desirable, as a general rule, for a non- parole period, or in 
State cases, minimum and additional terms, to be fixed in cases where a lengthy period of full-time custody is involved.

However, as indicated by the other members of the court, it would not be proper, in the absence of a Crown appeal, for this court to increase the sentence of five years to a larger period so as to permit the fixing of a non parole period of five years; which, likewise, for the reasons given by other members of the court, I regard as not inappropriate in the circumstances.

MAHONEY P: The orders of the Court, therefore, are that, having regard to the matters of substance that Mr Sides has raised, leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.
 * * * 
