

Thiess Contractors P/L versus Montgomery Watson Australia P/L [1996] NSWSC 71 (15 April 1996) 
THIESS CONTRACTORS P/L versus MONTGOMERY WATSON AUSTRALIA P/L /96 
Friday 15 March 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
CONSTRUCTION LIST 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings, commenced by way of summons, Thiess Contractors Pty Ltd (Thiess), pursuant to [s 47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s47.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), seeks an order for security for its costs of defending a cross-claim by Montgomery Watson Australia Pty Ltd (Montgomery Watson) in a commercial arbitration (the arbitration) instituted by Thiess in respect of a dispute arising out of a consultant agreement (the agreement) between Thiess and Montgomery Watson. Under the agreement Thiess engaged Montgomery Watson to furnish certain engineering services in relation to the construction by Thiess of the North Head Line Stabilisation Plant (the works) for Sydney Water as it is now known.

The hearing of the arbitration has been set down for 15 April 1996 for which twenty-five hearing days have been allocated. The arbitration had been previously set down for hearing on 20 November 1995 and, then, on 20 February each of which dates were vacated following delay in formulation of the issues to be arbitrated.

Thiess gave notice of dispute on 5 May 1995 following upon which a preliminary conference in the arbitration was held on 12 July 1995 at which the arbitrator directed the delivery of points of claim of Thiess by 26 July 1995. In the weeks which followed there was an exchange of correspondence concerning further particulars of the points of claim and a second conference was held on October 1995 at which Thiess was directed to file amended points of claim by 27 October 1995. That amended points of claim drew further requests for particulars which led to Thiess informing Montgomery Watson on 24 November of its intention to further amend its points of claim. On that date
Montgomery Watson served its points of defence and, on 15 December 1995, its cross-claim. In the week following the parties exchanged lists of documents.

On 15 January 1996, a third conference was held in the arbitration revising the previous timetable to provide for the furnishing of further particulars of the cross-claim and the completion of discovery. As at the date of hearing of these proceedings, a defence to the cross-claim has not been served by Thiess.
According to the affidavit of Glen Brian Crisp (Crisp) sworn 8 February 1996,
Thiess proposes to defend the cross-claim relying upon: [an] alleged failure of (Montgomery Watson) to provide its services properly or at all, in the alternative as in breach of the Consultant Agreement, negligence, negligent misstatement, innocent misrepresentation and breach of [s 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/); and ....
the repudiation of the Consultant Agreement by (Montgomery Watson).
 
Montgomery Watson accepts that there is jurisdiction pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s47.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), that the ambit of the power to order security lies in both <case> of the
Corporations Law and [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/index.html#p53) r 2 of the Supreme Court Rules and that nothing turns upon the basis upon which the jurisdiction is exercised.

As to the significance of the fact that security is sought in respect of a defence to a cross-claim, I have approached that question on the basis that the cross-claim is not simply a defensive action and that it is fortuitous that Montgomery Watson's claim is in the nature of a cross-claim. By the cross-claim, as further particularised, Montgomery Watson claims payment of $680,980 for services rendered by it pursuant to the agreement, extension of time, delay costs together with the value of variations under the agreement. I was invited by counsel for Montgomery Watson to treat the cross-claim as purely defensive and being in the nature of an equitable set-off. In my view that analogy is inappropriate. I think it is quite clear that, regardless of the institution of the arbitration by Thiess, Montgomery Watson would pursue its claimed entitlement pursuant to the agreement and that the cross-claim should be treated, in principle, as an independent action. In so describing the cross-claim, I do not intend to imply that the Court is thereby excused from comparing the issues raised by the claim of Thiess with the issues raised by the cross-claim and in particular from ascertaining whether, in practical terms, the cross-claim should be seen as having a significant effect on the duration and costs of the proceedings. However, I do not regard the case as one of the nature considered in Willey versus Synan <case>; [(1935) 54 CLR 175] in which the High Court regarded the plaintiff as being 'forced into legal proceedings ... to prevent his claim from being extinguished'. However, as Young J said in Classic Ceramic Importers Pty Ltd v Ceramica Antiga SA (unreported, 5 May 1994) Willey reflects the necessity to 'analyse the piece of litigation that is actually before the Court'.

I have no doubt that the ordering of security for costs in favour of a cross- defendant, in practice, may be found to be the exception rather than the rule, but, as a matter of principle, there is no reason, in my opinion, why the discretion to order security should be fettered simply by reason of the fact that security is sought against a defendant in respect of the costs of contesting that defendant's counter-claim. Clearly, there are circumstances where a cross-claim is in the nature of a defence to the plaintiff's action and in those circumstances it would be difficult to envisage a situation justifying the ordering of security for the costs of defending such a cross- claim. I think Ormiston J in Interwest Ltd (receivers & managers appointed) & Ors versus Tricontinental Corporation Ltd & Anor <case>; [(1991) 9 ACLC 1],218 at 1,229, with respect, expressed the exercise of the discretion in such circumstances correctly in the following passage: 
Principally it would appear necessary to characterise the proceedings in respect of which security is sought. If they are 'defensive' proceedings, either directly resisting proceedings already brought or seeking to 'halt self-help procedures', it would seem that to require security would be oppressive, or at least would provide serious grounds for refusing to make an order. At the least, it is a factor to be considered in the exercise of the discretion. In particular, it is a basis for reducing the amount of security ordered to a sum related to the costs of those claims which cannot be characterised as defensive.
 
I think the comparison of the issues raised in the cross-claim with those the subject of the points of claim of Thiess makes it plain that the claim of
Montgomery Watson is not simply defensive. Indeed, the only matter that is not so plain is the circumstance that led to Montgomery Watson being a defendant and not, as one would have expected, the plaintiff in the principal proceedings. Presumably the explanation lies in the fact that Thiess, in the vernacular, got in first.

The claim of Thiess in its amended points of claim of 27 October 1995, with the amendments foreshadowed in its solicitor's letter to the solicitors for
Montgomery Watson of 24 November 1995, claimed $1,523,243 in addition to unquantified additional related claims. The points of claim assert several causes of action which can be summarised as being based upon extra-agreement representations by Montgomery Watson as to its level of expertise and the level and nature of services it would provide to Thiess, together with several alleged breaches of contract. It is not clear whether the agreement as identified in para 9 of the Crisp affidavit of 8 February 1996 is identical with the contract the subject of the contractual breaches alleged in the points of claim. I have not found it necessary to satisfy myself on that matter. Thiess alleged that a consequence of the actionable conduct of
Montgomery Watson was the provision of the works 'having gross design, performance and operational deficiencies'. It is accepted that the claim of
Thiess puts in issue the entirety of Montgomery Watson's performance of the agreement.

Of the relationship between the Thiess claim and that of Montgomery Watson,
Timothy Gerald Chadwick (Chadwick), the solicitor having the conduct of the arbitration on behalf of Montgomery Watson, in his affidavit sworn 22 February expressed the following opinion: 
In my opinion it is not possible to accurately estimate the degree of commonality of facts between the two claims. Similarly, it is not possible to accurately estimate the extent of the arbitration hearing which will be devoted solely to issues related to the claim and issues as solely related to the Cross-Claim. There is, however, a degree of commonality. Having regard to the pleadings filed herein, the particulars requested and provided by both parties and discovery and inspection of documents, in my opinion the Cross-
Claim, if it were to proceed for hearing on a 'stand alone' basis, would occupy approximately 5 hearing days.
 
In conformity with that estimate Chadwick provided his own estimate of the likely costs of Thiess in defending the cross-claim on a 'stand alone' basis, save for the fact that he allowed four days' hearing as distinct from the five days estimated in the passage quoted above. His estimate was approximately forty per cent of that assessed by Michelle Castle in her affidavit sworn 8 February 1996 in which she estimated the costs of defending the cross-claim in the sum of $201,607.50. I think it is permissible to draw from this material a recognition by Montgomery Watson that, although there may be considerable difficulty and an element of the impractical in separating out the costs of the cross-claim additional to and independent of the costs of litigating the issues raised in the principal proceedings, nevertheless, there is a quantifiable element of such separate costs which will be involved in the litigation of the cross-claim. I think that is a recognition of the inescapable. While both in preparation for hearing and in the conduct of the hearing there will be a very substantial intermingling of issues raised in the respective claims of Thiess and Montgomery Watson, it is inevitable, in my opinion, that, independently of that intermingling, there will be additional time of hearing and in preparation involved in the litigation of the cross- claim.

The question then arises whether the evidence establishes a reason to believe that Montgomery Watson will be unable to pay the costs of Thiess if unsuccessful on its cross-claim and, if so, whether in the exercise of the
Court's discretion Montgomery Watson should be ordered to give security for such costs. Those questions raise three related matters, namely: the financial condition of Montgomery Watson as disclosed in its statutory accounts for the year ended 30 September 1995; the effect of a professional indemnity policy of insurance (the professional indemnity policy) issued by General Accident Fire And Life
Assurance Corporation PLC (the insurer) indemnifying Montgomery Watson in respect of its practice as a consulting engineer; and the effect of an assurance of financial support of Montgomery Watson by
Montgomery Watson Asia Ltd (Montgomery Watson Asia).

Counsel on behalf of Montgomery Watson submits that on any view of the financial condition of Montgomery Watson it would not be reasonable to form the belief that it will be unable to pay the costs of Thiess if the cross- claim is unsuccessful. In my opinion this submission can only be made good if
Montgomery Watson is entitled to have regard to the support of Montgomery
Watson Asia or if it is entitled to be indemnified in respect of such costs under the professional indemnity policy. I think this is so because, although the auditor's opinion in relation to the statutory accounts for year ended 30
September 1995 is unqualified and although the current account of Montgomery
Watson with the National Australia Bank shows a credit of $357,991.90 as at 15
February 1996, it is clear that, in each case, this is the result of financial support to date provided by Montgomery Watson Asia. In the case of the account with National Australia Bank that credit is achieved only after a transfer to the account of $485,100.14 described as 'proceeds of overseas inward transfer' which I think may reasonably be inferred to be a transfer from
Montgomery Watson Asia. In the case of the statutory accounts note 18 to those accounts is as follows:
Going Concern 
The operations of the company during the period under review have principally been financed by the parent company, Montgomery Watson Asia
Limited, a company incorporated in Hong Kong, via the inter-company loan account. The operations of the company will continue to be dependent upon the financial support of the parent company until such time as the sales turnover provides adequate cash levels.
 
The directors of Montgomery Watson Asia Limited have guaranteed to provide continued financial support to Montgomery Watson Australia Pty Ltd and have undertaken not to call upon the loan to the company until such time as the company's financial position will allow.

I think that, without that guarantee and undertaking, the accounts, necessarily, would have been qualified. No one disputes that there has been a deterioration in Montgomery Watson's financial position reflected in the 1995 audited statutory accounts when compared with its position at the close of the preceding accounting period. There is a deficiency in shareholders' funds with total liabilities exceeding assets by $163,535. Built into that deficiency is over $1,300,000 of loans from related bodies corporate which are treated as non-current. I think that only by this treatment of related corporation loans is Montgomery Watson able to show an excess of current assets over current liabilities. This is in addition to approximately $760,000 in loans from such sources treated as current. I also note that current assets include receivables in the form of loans to related bodies corporate of approximately $567,000. I infer that the increase in trade debtors of some $500,000 when compared with receivables as at 30 September 1994 reflects in some measure the outstanding cross-claim. In all, I have little doubt that without the support of its 'ultimate chief entity', Montgomery Watson Incorporated, USA, or of
Montgomery Watson Asia, Montgomery Watson would not be able to continue as a going concern.

The guarantee referred to by the auditors in the statutory accounts for the period ended 30 September 1995 is reflected in the letter of the Chief
Operational Officer of Montgomery Watson Asia to the directors of Montgomery
Watson dated 9 October 1995 which was in the following terms: 
Provision of Financial Support 
In order that Montgomery Watson Australia Pty Ltd is in a position to meet the requirements of the Corporations Law and with a view to assuring the directors and officers of Montgomery Watson Australia Pty Ltd of a firm intention of Montgomery Watson Asia to support Montgomery Watson Australia Pty
Ltd in the future, it is hereby recorded that Montgomery Watson Asia will give or arrange any financial assistance with Montgomery Watson Australia Pty Ltd may need for fulfilment of its financial obligations now and in the future. To this end, Montgomery Watson Asia undertakes to place Montgomery Watson
Australia Pty Ltd in funds sufficient to ensure that all of its financial obligations can be met.
 
It is submitted on behalf of Montgomery Watson that this assurance is capable of enforcement at the hands of Thiess, relying upon Banque Brussels
Lambert SA versus Australian National Industries Ltd [(1989) 21 NSWLR 502] in which
Rogers CJ Comm D gave legal effect to an assurance contained in a 'letter of comfort' provided to a banking institution by the principal shareholder of a corporation which had applied for a line of credit from that bank. In that case, his Honour extracted from the terms of the letter of comfort legally enforceable contractual promises and also relied upon principles of estoppel to establish a claim of unconscionable conduct. Claims based on the [Trade
Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) and for unjust enrichment were considered and rejected. Upon the evidence before me, I am of the opinion that, whatever legal effect Montgomery Watson Asia's assurance may have at the hands of Montgomery Watson, it is not enforceable by
Thiess. There is nothing in the evidence before me which, in my opinion, would justify a finding that Montgomery Watson Asia was aware that its letter of 9
October 1995 was being proffered as an assurance of the provision of financial assistance to meet any order for costs in favour of Thiess on the cross-claim.
Indeed, the affidavit of Robert John McCourt sworn 1 March 1996 simply states in relation to that letter: 
Annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'A' is a copy letter dated 9
October 1995 provided to me by John Cormack of Price Waterhouse (Auditors for the Defendant) and being a letter from Montgomery Watson Asia to Montgomery
Watson Australia Pty Limited.
 
That description gives little confidence that the use of the letter in these proceedings was at the instance of Montgomery Watson Asia. Although it is unnecessary to pass any final judgment on its legal enforceability, it is reasonably clear, in my opinion, that the assurance of financial assistance to meet future needs of Montgomery Watson could not be construed literally to cover any manner of financial obligation no matter how incurred nor of whatever magnitude.

However, from the level of financial support received to date from those related corporations and from the level of operations of Montgomery Watson in
Australia that can be elicited from the statutory accounts, the chances are that financial support of Montgomery Watson from those sources will be ongoing. Consequently, although I regard the letter of Montgomery Watson Asia of 9 October 1995 unenforceable at the hands of Thiess, I think it is appropriate to take into account in the exercise of any discretion in this matter the prospect of Montgomery Watson receiving financial support sufficient to maintain its current operations in Australia and to meet any obligations it may incur in litigating the current arbitration and in particular its cross-claim. In this respect I think the protection to
Montgomery Watson afforded by the professional indemnity policy has some relevance.

Considerable reliance has been placed upon that indemnity by Montgomery
Watson. Thiess joins issue with the soundness of that reliance. It is an issue that attracted considerable attention by both parties. The correspondence relating to the subject matter goes back to January 1995. In large measure that correspondence was concerned with manoeuvrings in the arbitration rather than matters having particular relevance to these proceedings. For present purposes I think it is sufficient to say that at all relevant times Montgomery
Watson had in place the professional indemnity policy, that during the currency of that policy it notified the insurer of the claim made by Thiess and that the insurer accepts the claim as falling within the scope of its indemnity. I think this much must have been reasonably clear to Thiess since its receipt of a letter from Montgomery Watson's broker of 12 April 1995.
However, agreement between the parties on the proper construction of the professional indemnity policy has foundered upon the question of whether any liability of the insurer to indemnify Montgomery Watson in respect of the costs of Thiess on the cross-claim is subject to an excess of [sterling]100,000. In this respect I think the point in issue for me is not whether the professional indemnity policy indemnifies Montgomery Watson in respect of such liability for the costs of Thiess nor whether any such indemnity is subject to an excess, but rather what position has been taken up by the insurer in respect of any such indemnity or excess. Whatever view is formed of the proper construction of the professional indemnity policy, in one sense, is irrelevant if, in order to enforce that construction, action would be necessary against the insurer which is a United Kingdom entity.

The position of the insurer is to be found in its letter to the solicitor of
Montgomery Watson of 6 March 1996 and which, so far as is relevant, is as follows: 
We would firstly confirm that the documentation you have received from
Griffiths & Armour is all the documentation that is available relating to insurance cover. We would also confirm that under the terms of their policy with us, Montgomery Watson have a limit of indemnity of [sterling]5,000,000 each and every claim subject to an excess of [sterling]100,000 each and every claim. The excess does not apply to defence costs.
 
With regards to the policy document the position with regards to clause 4 is as follows. This clause only applies if the Insured commence legal proceedings for the recovery of outstanding fees. Under this clause if a counterclaim is received for which an indemnity would be provided under clause 1 then insurers will pay all costs incurred by the engineer up to [sterling]250,000. The intention of the clause is to pay for defence costs up to the point when a counterclaim is received. In affect (sic), when the counterclaim, (for which an indemnity is provided under clause 1,) is received then clause 4 becomes obsolete.
 
Therefore, as a counterclaim has been received, the Insured are entitled to an indemnity under clause 1 of the policy. As clause 4 only applies to defence costs up to the point when a counterclaim is received and is then obsolete, any costs order made against the Insured even in relation to the fee claim falls to be dealt with under clause 1 of the policy. Under clause 1, the
Insured have a [sterling]100,000 excess and hence would pay the first [sterling]100,000 of any award against them. Once the [sterling]100,000 was erroded (sic), insurers fund the balance. Therefore, a costs order would be paid by the Insured up to [sterling]100,000 and then insurers would fund the balance.
 
In order to provide some understanding of that stance there may be some benefit in identifying the clauses to which reference is made in the insurer's letter.

Insurance clause 1 indemnifies Montgomery Watson in respect of loss arising from any claim which may be made arising out of the conduct of its practice as consulting engineers. That indemnity is subject to an excess of [sterling]100,000.

Insurance clause 4 further indemnifies Montgomery Watson in respect of all costs incurred by it in connection with legal proceedings taken by it for the recovery of professional fees due. However, there is a proviso that no claim under the policy attaches 'unless and until' such proceedings are instituted and 'the party sued has intimated his intention to raise by way of answer a counter claim for which indemnity would be provided under Insurance Clause '. Liability under this clause is limited to [sterling]250,000.

I draw from the insurer's letter of 6 March 1996 that, although insurance clause 4 is expressed in terms of a claim for fees met by a counter claim, the reverse of the situation in the arbitration, the insurer regards insurance clause 4 as operating nevertheless in relation to Montgomery Watson's costs of the cross-claim. However, based upon its view that cl 4 would cease to operate 'when a counter claim is received' one presumes that the insurer takes the position that the 'fee claim falls to be dealt with under clause 1 of the policy' and thus attracts the [sterling]100,000 excess. I am far from comfortable with the construction placed upon the professional indemnity policy by the insurer and note that, apart from difficulties in the insurer's interpretation of insurance clause 4, no reference is made to insurance clause under which it indemnifies Montgomery Watson in respect of 'all other costs and expenses incurred with the Leading Insurer's written consent'. However, I think it is sufficient for me to say that the position taken by the insurer is, at least, arguable and, in those circumstances, having regard to the near coincidence in the amount of the excess and the amount of costs at issue in these proceedings, I take the view that, in the exercise of my discretion, little reliance should be placed upon the indemnity under the professional indemnity policy.

In many ways I am disinclined to order the giving of security for costs. There is something artificial in isolating the preparation for and the conduct of the hearing of the cross-claim from the issues raised by the claim of Thiess in the arbitration when there is such extensive intermingling of those issues.
Added to that, there is no mistaking the great breadth of issues that are involved in the case sought to be made by Thiess against Montgomery Watson and that it is the principal aggressor in competing claims. However, if Thiess is successful in its action and on the cross-claim, the capacity of Montgomery
Watson to satisfy any order as to costs on the cross-claim should not be the subject of speculation where, as I have found, the cross-claim is not one that has been forced upon Montgomery Watson by the claim of Thiess. Clearly, in my opinion, regardless of that claim, Montgomery Watson would be pursuing its claimed entitlements pursuant to the agreement and I consider it purely fortuitous that the enforcement of that entitlement is sought by way of cross- claim.

Accordingly, I think there is reason to believe that Montgomery Watson will be unable to pay the costs of Thiess on the cross-claim if ordered to do so.

Although the substantial operational losses reflected in the statutory accounts for the year ended 30 June 1995 were attributed by counsel for
Montgomery Watson to the alleged breaches by Thiess of the agreement, I did not understand counsel to assert that any inability of Montgomery Watson to satisfy an order for costs against it on the cross-claim was occasioned by those breaches or that the consequence of an order requiring the giving of security would operate to frustrate the cross-claim.

In any event, I think this is a case where the corporations related to
Montgomery Watson stand to benefit from the successful outcome of the cross- claim, at the same time having the benefit of any investment in Montgomery
Watson protected, in large measure, by the professional indemnity policy from the effect of any adverse outcome of the Thiess claim against Montgomery
Watson. I would not expect them to stand by and allow the cross-claim to be stayed for want of the provision of security.

The task of separating out the discrete costs of the cross-claim, though artificial in some respects, is amenable to some rational exercise, as evidenced by the affidavit material to which I earlier referred. That task, however, is not made any simpler by the absence of a defence to the cross- claim. It is evident that the defence of Thiess will repeat the allegations at the basis of its claim against Montgomery Watson, as evidenced by the intention of Thiess to rely upon an alleged failure by Montgomery Watson 'to provide its services properly or at all', in addition to an alleged repudiation of the agreement.

I do not regard myself as constrained to determining an amount in respect of which the giving of security should be ordered by a range represented by the assessment of approximately $200,000 on behalf of Thiess and of approximately $80,000 on behalf of Montgomery Watson.

The approach I have adopted to the determination of the appropriate amount for which security should be given is to accept as reasonable, in substance, the rates, but not in their entirety the times, allocated in respect of each cost item by Thiess. The main qualification on the estimate of times lies in my scepticism of the ability of either party to identify the discrete costs of the cross-claim having regard to the claim of Thiess which puts in issue all aspects of the performance of the agreement by Montgomery Watson. For the most part perusals and attendances will combine both the Thiess claim and the cross-claim. In this context, I note that the cross-claim has not resulted in a supplementary list of documents being served by Thiess. On the facts of this case, I do not regard my task as one requiring the fixing of an amount that will give Thiess a 'complete and certain indemnity ... it is not, of course, to be assumed that (the cross-claimant) will fail' adopting the terminology of Fullagar J in Brundza versus Robbie & Co <case>; [(1953) 88 CLR 171] at 175. Having regard to the matters to which I have adverted in these reasons I think this is a strong case, in the exercise of my discretion, for the application of that approach. In my opinion, if security is ordered to be given in the sum of $90,000 fairness in dealing with the respective interests of the parties will be served and I so order.

In my view, it would not be appropriate to order a stay of the cross-claim pending provision of the required security, having regard to the proximity of the time of bringing this application to the appointed day for the commencement of the hearing of the arbitration, namely, 15 April 1996. I am not aware of any circumstances relating to this application, save any failure on the part of Montgomery Watson to comply with the order for security, which would warrant vacating of that date for hearing. My orders have been framed accordingly. I order that:
The defendant provide security by way of bank guarantee in favour of the plaintiff in the sum of $90,000 for the costs of the plaintiff of and incidental to the defendant's cross-claim in the arbitration of their disputes by Mr.J.A.Morrisey.
The said security be provided within twenty-one days of the date of this order.
The said cross-claim be stayed in the event of any failure of the defendant to provide the said security within that period and to remain stayed until the said security is provided.
The defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of this summons.
 * * * 
