

Regina versus Ahmed Matter No 71939/98 [1998] NSWSC 720 (28 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
REGINA versus SAM AHMED /98 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for bail in respect of a charge of robbery whilst armed with an offensive weapon, to wit, in this case, a can of mace. 
The victim was employed as a driver for Mayne Logistics, driving a van containing a large amount of cigarettes of value approximately $80,000. It is alleged that the victim was approached by a robber who sprayed the victim in the face and eyes with a noxious substance thereby obtaining the keys to the van and, as a result, the van itself. The van was driven away from the victim and a metallic brown four-wheel-drive vehicle was seen by the victim to follow it.

The van was fitted with a security monitoring device. The victim contacted the employer. The van was tracked, found to be stationary a short distance away from where it was taken. It was then tracked leaving that location and driven to the car park of the Tempe railway station. The van was seen by police with the applicant driving into a car space. The applicant saw the police and attempted to drive away but collided with a garden bed. The applicant was arrested. In the applicant's left shorts pocket a black cased spray device with a wet nozzle that gave off a strong acidic smell was found.

Mr. Stanton, who appears for the applicant, has indicated there were no fingerprints of the applicant on the black can found in his pocket. One would hardly think fingerprints would be necessary in those circumstances to identify him with the can.

When questioned by police he said:- "I saw two blokes running from the van so I went over to have a look and the keys were still in it, I needed a lift home so I got in it." 
Apparently, the cigarettes had been stolen. The victim does not identify the person who assaulted him but, this being a bail application, there is strong circumstantial evidence to suggest that it was this applicant.

This is an offence for which I am informed by Mr. Stanton there is a presumption against bail. I am further informed that there is a plea of not guilty intended on arraignment.

At the time of the commission of this offence the applicant's first child was due in approximately two months. He had married. He has now, and I infer had then, no money, no property, no car and a baby on the way. He had no home except the one that he was permitted to live in. He seeks bail in order to go home to his wife and to assist her with the responsibilities of care for the new child. He informs me that she is having difficulty without the support of her husband but that she does have available family support from her family and in particular her brother who has attended court with her today.

He has informed me he has employment available and Mr. Stanton is right, on an examination of his record it does not indicate any deliberate and contemptuous attitude towards his responsibilities to appear at court when charged. It is, however, an extensive record and most recently includes two offences of robbery and attempted robbery for which the applicant has served imprisonment in New South Wales and then, having committed the ACT offence during the additional term of the New South Wales sentence, in the ACT, and then again in
New South Wales to complete that additional term. It was within quite a short period, a year perhaps of the expiry of those sentences, that it is alleged this offence was committed.

Bearing in mind the protection of the community, the seriousness of the charge, the strength of the Crown case and that arraignment is to be expected shortly, I am unable to conclude that bail should be granted in this case and indeed reach the conclusion that bail would not be justified.

Bail is refused.
 * * * 
