

New South Wales Crime Commission versus Ahmadi Matter No 12589/94 [1997] NSWSC (23 September 1997) 
New South Wales Crime Commission versus Ghulam Ahmadi /94 
Second Day 23 September 1997 
Smart J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /94 - NEW SOUTH WALES CRIME COMMISSION versus Ghulam AHMADI 
JUDGMENT (On question of defendant to give evidence - see p42 of transcript) 
HIS HONOUR: In this application by the Crime Commission for an assets forfeiture order involving some real property at 162 King Street, Mascot and a car of Mr Ahmadi the question has arisen as to whether Mr Ahmadi is to give evidence. 
Mr Ahmadi has made it abundantly plain that he does not wish to give evidence in advance of his trial on a charge of supplying heroin because he is concerned that any evidence might be used against him to incriminate him and to bear upon his credibility. After Mr Ahmadi's initial indication of his attitude I explained to him that the critical issue in these proceedings was whether he had heroin in his possession on the evening of 13 January, 1993. I explained to Mr Ahmadi that he could expect to be cross-examined about that and to have questions put to him as to where he had got the heroin and to be cross-examined about what he said to the police; namely, that a lady whom he had met in India had given him the heroin. It may be that it will be suggested that he and Mr Malki were acting together.

I explained to Mr Ahmadi that as the Crown case stood there was substantial evidence against him that he had heroin in his possession on 13 January, 1993 and that although the Crown had to prove that he had heroin in his possession, on the evidence it had certainly established a case which he had to answer and that, in practical terms, if he wanted to resist an assets forfeiture order being made he would have to give evidence either in denial of possession of heroin or perhaps a matter in explanation.

I interpolate that possession was critical because Mr Ahmadi denied having heroin in his possession, and consequently denied supplying heroin. He also denied knowing that the substance in the plastic bag was heroin.

Upon these explanations having been given Mr Ahmadi asked me whether the evidence which he gave in these proceedings could be used against him in his forthcoming trial. This has two aspects: firstly, the tender of any material by way of admissions; and secondly, cross-examination to the effect that Mr
Ahmadi's evidence was not credible.

Although the matter is open to some doubt on s128 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) I think that the correct position is that Mr Ahmadi will only be giving evidence after objection because of the matters I have indicated to him. Accordingly, s128(1) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) applies. I have preferred to give this section a broad interpretation. A narrower interpretation which would hold that the section does not apply to someone who has the option of refraining from giving evidence but gives evidence under objection would produce an anomalous and unreal result.

If I grant a certificate, the evidence which Mr Ahmadi gives could not be used in his trial against him. Nor do I think that the material could be used against him on a credibility issue. I would also give s128 (7) a broad interpretation.

I have had regard to some observations which I made in R v. A J Hood CCA , 13 February, 1997 and particularly at pages 15 to 16.

Questions in cross-examination are likely to have the two-fold purpose and effect of undermining the credibility of Mr Ahmadi and tending to incriminate him.

Accordingly, I propose to tell Mr Ahmadi that if he gives evidence in these proceedings and I grant a certificate of exclusion, as I am minded to do, then the evidence he gives will not be able to be tendered at his trial nor will he be able to be cross-examined upon it as to his credibility, the two aspects being so closely interwoven. I should add that Senior Counsel for the Crime
Commission has not dissented from the course which I am proposing to take, although the responsibility of course is mine.
 * * * 
